{"id": "16043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16043", "title": "Jerusalem", "text": "Jerusalem\n\nJerusalem (; ; ) is a city in the Middle East, located on a plateau in the Judaean Mountains between the Mediterranean and the Dead Sea. It is one of the oldest cities in the world, and is considered holy to the three major Abrahamic religions—Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Both Israel and the Palestinian Authority claim Jerusalem as their capital, as Israel maintains its primary governmental institutions there and the State of Palestine ultimately foresees it as its seat of power; however, neither claim is widely recognized internationally.\n\nDuring its long history, Jerusalem has been destroyed at least twice, besieged 23 times, captured and recaptured 44 times, and attacked 52 times. The part of Jerusalem called the City of David shows first signs of settlement in the 4th millennium BCE, in the shape of encampments of nomadic shepherds. Jerusalem was named as \"\"Urusalim\"\" on ancient Egyptian tablets, probably meaning \"City of Shalem\" after a Canaanite deity, during the Canaanite period (14th century BCE). During the Israelite period, significant construction activity in Jerusalem began in the 9th century BCE (Iron Age II), and in the 8th century the city developed into the religious and administrative center of the Kingdom of Judah. In 1538, the city walls were rebuilt for a last time around Jerusalem under Suleiman the Magnificent. Today those walls define the Old City, which has been traditionally divided into four quarters—known since the early 19th century as the Armenian, Christian, Jewish, and Muslim Quarters. The Old City became a World Heritage Site in 1981, and is on the List of World Heritage in Danger. Since 1860 Jerusalem has grown far beyond the Old City's boundaries. In 2015, Jerusalem had a population of some 850,000 residents, comprising approximately 200,000 secular Jewish Israelis, 350,000 Haredi Jews and 300,000 Palestinians. In 2016, the population was 882,700, of which Jews comprised 536,600 (60.8%), Muslims 319,800 (36.2%), Christians 15,800 (1.8%), and 10,300 unclassified (1.2%).\n\nAccording to the Bible, King David conquered the city from the Jebusites and established it as the capital of the united kingdom of Israel, and his son, King Solomon, commissioned the building of the First Temple. Modern scholars argue that Jews branched out of the Canaanite peoples and culture through the development of a distinct monolatrous — and later monotheistic — religion centered on El/Yahweh, one of the Ancient Canaanite deities. These foundational events, straddling the dawn of the 1st millennium BCE, assumed central symbolic importance for the Jewish people. The sobriquet of holy city (\"עיר הקודש\", transliterated \"'ir haqodesh\") was probably attached to Jerusalem in post-exilic times. The holiness of Jerusalem in Christianity, conserved in the Septuagint which Christians adopted as their own authority, was reinforced by the New Testament account of Jesus's crucifixion there. In Sunni Islam, Jerusalem is the third-holiest city, after Mecca and Medina. In Islamic tradition, in 610 CE it became the first qibla, the focal point for Muslim prayer (salat), and Muhammad made his Night Journey there ten years later, ascending to heaven where he speaks to God, according to the Quran. As a result, despite having an area of only , the Old City is home to many sites of seminal religious importance, among them the Temple Mount with its Western Wall, Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa Mosque, and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Outside the Old City stands the Garden Tomb.\n\nToday, the status of Jerusalem remains one of the core issues in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, West Jerusalem was among the areas captured and later annexed by Israel while East Jerusalem, including the Old City, was captured and later annexed by Jordan. Israel captured East Jerusalem from Jordan during the 1967 Six-Day War and subsequently annexed it into Jerusalem, together with additional surrounding territory. One of Israel's Basic Laws, the 1980 Jerusalem Law, refers to Jerusalem as the country's undivided capital. All branches of the Israeli government are located in Jerusalem, including the Knesset (Israel's parliament), the residences of the Prime Minister (Beit Aghion) and President (Beit HaNassi), and the Supreme Court. While the international community rejected the annexation as illegal and treats East Jerusalem as Palestinian territory occupied by Israel, Israel has a stronger claim to sovereignty over West Jerusalem.\n\nA city called \"Rušalim\" in the execration texts of the Middle Kingdom of Egypt (c. 19th century BCE) is widely, but not universally, identified as Jerusalem. Jerusalem is called \"Urušalim\" in the Amarna letters of Abdi-Heba (1330s BCE).\n\nThe name \"Jerusalem\" is variously etymologized to mean \"foundation (Sumerian \"yeru\", 'settlement'/Semitic \"yry\"' 'to found, to lay a cornerstone') of the god Shalem\"; the god Shalem was thus the original tutelary deity of the Bronze Age city.\n\nShalim or Shalem was the name of the god of dusk in the Canaanite religion, whose name is based on the same root S-L-M from which the Hebrew word for \"peace\" is derived (\"Salam\" or \"Shalom\" in modern Arabic and Hebrew).\nThe name thus offered itself to etymologizations such as \"The City of Peace\", \"Abode of Peace\", \"dwelling of peace\" (\"founded in safety\"), alternately \"Vision of Peace\" in some Christian authors.\n\nThe ending \"-ayim\" indicates the dual, thus leading to the suggestion that the name \"Yerushalayim\" refers to the fact that the city initially sat on two hills.\n\nThe form \"Yerushalem\" or \"Yerushalayim\" (Jerusalem) first appears in the Bible, in the Book of Joshua. According to a Midrash, the name is a combination of \"Yireh\" (\"The abiding place\", the name given by Abraham to the place where he began to sacrifice his son) and \"Shalem\" (\"Place of Peace\", given by high priest Shem), then the two names were united by God.\n\nThe earliest extra-biblical Hebrew writing of the word Jerusalem is dated to the sixth or seventh century BCE and was discovered in Khirbet Beit Lei near Beit Guvrin in 1961. The inscription states: \"I am Yahweh thy God, I will accept the cities of Judah and I will redeem Jerusalem\", or as other scholars suggest: \"Yahweh is the God of the whole earth. The mountains of Judah belong to him, to the God of Jerusalem\".\n\nAn ancient settlement of Jerusalem, founded as early as the Bronze Age on the hill above the Gihon Spring, was according to the Bible named Jebus (\"e.g.\", Judges 19:10:יְב֔וּס הִ֖יא יְרוּשָׁלִָ֑ם: \"Jebus, it [is] Jerusalem\"). Called the \"Fortress of Zion\" (\"metsudat Zion\"), it was renamed by David as the City of David, and was known by this name in antiquity. Another name, \"Zion\", initially referred to a distinct part of the city, but later came to signify the city as a whole and to represent the biblical Land of Israel.\n\nIn Greek and Latin the city's name was transliterated \"Hierosolyma\" (Greek: Ἱεροσόλυμα; in Greek \"hieròs\", \"ἱερός\", means holy), although the city was renamed Aelia Capitolina for part of the Roman period of its history.\n\nThe Aramaic Apocryphon of Genesis of the Dead Sea Scrolls (1QapGen 22:13) equates Jerusalem with the earlier \"Salem\" (שלם), said to be the kingdom of Melchizedek in Genesis 14:18. Other early Hebrew sources, early Christian renderings of the verse and \"targumim\", however, put Salem in Northern Israel near Shechem (or Sichem), now Nablus, a city of some importance in early sacred Hebrew writing. Possibly the redactor of the Apocryphon of Genesis wanted to dissociate Melchizedek from the area of Shechem, which at the time was in possession of the Samaritans. However that may be, later Rabbinic sources also equate Salem with Jerusalem, mainly to link Melchizedek to later Temple traditions.\n\nIn Arabic, Jerusalem is most commonly known as , transliterated as \"al-Quds\" and meaning \"The Holy\" or \"The Holy Sanctuary\". Official Israeli government policy mandates that , transliterated as \"Ūršalīm\", which is the cognate of the Hebrew and English names, be used as the Arabic language name for the city in conjunction with . . Palestinian Arab families who hail from this city are often called \"\"Qudsi\"\" or \"\"Maqdisi\"\", while Palestinian Muslim Jerusalemites may use these terms as a demonym.\n\nGiven the city's central position in both Jewish nationalism (Zionism) and Palestinian nationalism, the selectivity required to summarize some 5,000 years of inhabited history is often influenced by ideological bias or background (see Historiography and nationalism). Israeli/Jewish nationalists (Zionists) claim a right to the city based on Jewish indigeneity to the land, particularly their origins in and descent from the Israelites (see History of the Jews and Judaism in the Land of Israel), for whom Jerusalem is their capital, and their yearning for return. In contrast, Palestinian nationalists claim the right to the city based on modern Palestinians' longstanding presence and descent from many different peoples who have settled or lived in the region over the centuries. Both sides claim the history of the city has been politicized by the other in order to strengthen their relative claims to the city, and that this is borne out by the different focuses the different writers place on the various events and eras in the city's history.\n\nFor historians and archaeologists, it is Jerusalem's South-East Hill, known as the City of David, that is taken into consideration when discussing the age of Jerusalem, since it is the most widely accepted site considered to be where permanent settlement began in ancient Jerusalem.\n\nAfter the Six-Day War in 1967, Shuafat was incorporated into the Jerusalem municipal district, in a move not internationally recognized. Shuafat lies about 6 kilometres north of Jerusalem's oldest historical part, the so-called City of David, and about 5 kilometres north of the walled Old City. What is today Shuafat laid outside the settlement area of its neighbour, Jerusalem, throughout the Bronze Age and until Jerusalem's destruction in 70 CE, and even outside Jerusalem's main Second Temple period northern necropolis. Shuafat is officially described in archaeological terms as being \"in the vicinity of Jerusalem\". It has an intermittent settlement history, in part from periods other than Jerusalem's, with 7000-year-old architectural findings from the Chalcolithic, then from the Second Temple period (2nd–1st century BCE, a fortified agricultural settlement) and the short period between the end of the First Jewish–Roman War (66–70) and the Bar Kokhba revolt (132–135), being re-inhabited on a smaller scale during the 2nd–4th centuries CE.\n\nThe South-Eastern Hill, also known as the City of David, is the initial nucleus of historical Jerusalem. There, the Gihon Spring attracted shepherds who camped near the water between 6 and 7000 years ago, leaving behind ceramics and flint artifacts during the Chalcolithic, or Copper Age (c. 4500–3500 BCE).\n\nPermanent houses only appeared on the South-Eastern Hill several centuries later, with a small village emerging around 3000–2800 BCE, during the Early Bronze Age I or II. Some call the site of this first settlement, the Ophel ridge. The city's inhabitants at this time were Canaanites, who are believed by scholars to have evolved into the Israelites via the development of a distinct Yahweh-centric monotheistic belief system.\n\nThe Execration Texts (c. 19th century BCE), which refer to a city called \"rwš3lmm\", variously transcribed as \"Rušalimum\"/\"Urušalimum\"/\"Rôsh-ramen\" and the Amarna letters (c. 14th century BCE) may be the earliest mention of the city. Nadav Na'aman argues its fortification as the centre of a kingdom dates to around the 18th century BCE.\n\nIn the Late Bronze Age, Jerusalem was the capital of an Egyptian vassal city-state, a modest settlement governing a few outlying villages and pastoral areas, with a small Egyptian garrison and ruled by appointees such as king Abdi-Heba, At the time of Seti I (r. 1290–1279 BCE) and Ramesses II (r. 1279–1213 BCE), major construction took place as prosperity increased.\n\nArchaeological remains from the ancient Israelite period include the Siloam Tunnel, an aqueduct built by Judahite king Hezekiah and once containing an ancient Hebrew inscription, known as the Siloam Inscription; the so-called Broad Wall, a defensive fortification built in the 8th century BCE, also by Hezekiah; the Silwan necropolis with the Monolith of Silwan and the Tomb of the Royal Steward, which were decorated with monumental Hebrew inscriptions; and the so-called Israelite Tower, remnants of ancient fortifications, built from large, sturdy rocks with carved cornerstones. A huge water reservoir dating from this period was discovered in 2012 near Robinson's Arch, indicating the existence of a densely built-up quarter across the area west of the Temple Mount during the Kingdom of Judah.\n\nThe First Temple period ended around 586 BCE, as Nebuchadnezzar's Neo-Babylonian Empire conquered Judah and Jerusalem, and laid waste to Solomon's Temple and the city.\n\nThis period, when Canaan formed part of the Egyptian empire, corresponds in biblical accounts to Joshua's invasion, but almost all scholars agree that the Book of Joshua holds little historical value for early Israel.\n\nIn the Bible, Jerusalem is defined as lying within territory allocated to the tribe of Benjamin though occupied by Jebusites. David is said to have conquered these in the Siege of Jebus, and transferred his capital from Hebron to Jerusalem which then became the capital of a united Kingdom of Israel, and one of its several religious centres. The choice was perhaps dictated by the fact that Jerusalem did not form part of Israel's tribal system, and was thus suited to serve as the centre of its confederation. Opinion is divided over whether the so-called Large Stone Structure and the nearby Stepped Stone Structure may be identified with King David's palace, or dates to a later period.\nAccording to the Bible, King David reigned for 40 years and was succeeded by his son Solomon, who built the Holy Temple on Mount Moriah. Solomon's Temple (later known as the \"First Temple\"), went on to play a pivotal role in Jewish religion as the repository of the Ark of the Covenant. On Solomon's death, ten of the northern Tribes of Israel broke with the United Monarchy to form their own nation, with its kings, prophets, priests, traditions relating to religion, capitals and temples in northern Israel. The southern tribes, together with the Aaronid priesthood, remained in Jerusalem, with the city becoming the capital of the Kingdom of Judah.\n\nWhen the Assyrians conquered the Kingdom of Israel in 722 BCE, Jerusalem was strengthened by a great influx of refugees from the northern kingdom.\n\nIn 538 BCE, the Persian King Cyrus the Great invited the Jews of Babylon to return to Judah to rebuild the Temple. Construction of the Second Temple was completed in 516 BCE, during the reign of Darius the Great, 70 years after the destruction of the First Temple.\n\nSometime soon after 485 BCE Jerusalem was besieged, conquered and largely destroyed by a coalition of neighbouring states. In about 445 BCE, King Artaxerxes I of Persia issued a decree allowing the city (including its walls) to be rebuilt. Jerusalem resumed its role as capital of Judah and center of Jewish worship.\nMany Jewish tombs from the Second Temple period have been rediscovered in Jerusalem. One example, discovered north of the Old City, contains human remains in an ossuary decorated with the Aramaic inscription \"Simon the Temple Builder.\" The Tomb of Abba, also located north of the Old City, bears an Aramaic inscription with Paleo-Hebrew letters reading: \"I, Abba, son of the priest Eleaz(ar), son of Aaron the high (priest), Abba, the oppressed and the persecuted, who was born in Jerusalem, and went into exile into Babylonia and brought (back to Jerusalem) Mattathi(ah), son of Jud(ah), and buried him in a cave which I bought by deed.\" The Tomb of Benei Hezir located in Kidron Valley is decorated by monumental Doric columns and Hebrew inscription, identifying it as the burial site of Second Temple priests.\nThe Tombs of the Sanhedrin, an underground complex of 63 rock-cut tombs, is located in a public park in the northern Jerusalem neighborhood of Sanhedria. These tombs, probably reserved for members of the Sanhedrin and inscribed by ancient Hebrew and Aramaic writings, are dated to between 100 BCE and 100 CE.\n\nWhen Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire, Jerusalem and Judea came under Macedonian control, eventually falling to the Ptolemaic dynasty under Ptolemy I. In 198 BCE, Ptolemy V Epiphanes lost Jerusalem and Judea to the Seleucids under Antiochus III. The Seleucid attempt to recast Jerusalem as a Hellenized city-state came to a head in 168 BCE with the successful Maccabean revolt of Mattathias and his five sons against Antiochus IV Epiphanes, and their establishment of the Hasmonean Kingdom in 152 BCE with Jerusalem as its capital.\n\nIn 63 BCE, Pompey the Great intervened in a struggle for the Hasmonean throne and captured Jerusalem, extending the influence of the Roman Republic over Judea. Following a short invasion by Parthians, backing the rival Hasmonean rulers, Judea became a scene of struggle between pro-Roman and pro-Parthian forces, eventually leading to the emergence of an Edomite named Herod.\nAs Rome became stronger, it installed Herod as a Jewish client king. Herod the Great, as he was known, devoted himself to developing and beautifying the city. He built walls, towers and palaces, and expanded the Temple Mount, buttressing the courtyard with blocks of stone weighing up to 100 tons. Under Herod, the area of the Temple Mount doubled in size. Shortly after Herod's death, in 6 CE Judea came under direct Roman rule as the Iudaea Province, although the Herodian dynasty through Agrippa II remained client kings of neighbouring territories until 96 CE. Roman rule over Jerusalem and the region was challenged in the First Jewish–Roman War, which ended with a Roman victory. The Second Temple was destroyed in 70 CE, and the entire city was destroyed in the war. The contemporary Jewish historian Josephus wrote that the city \"was so thoroughly razed to the ground by those that demolished it to its foundations, that nothing was left that could ever persuade visitors that it had once been a place of habitation.\" Roman rule was again challenged during the Bar Kokhba revolt, beginning in 132 CE and suppressed by the Romans in 135 CE.\nFollowing the Bar Kokhba revolt, Emperor Hadrian combined Iudaea Province with neighboring provinces under the new name of \"Syria Palaestina\", replacing the name of Judea. The city was renamed Aelia Capitolina, and rebuilt it in the style of a typical Roman town. Jews were prohibited from entering the city on pain of death, except for one day each year, during the holiday of Tisha B'Av. Taken together, these measures (which also affected Jewish Christians) essentially \"secularized\" the city. The ban was maintained until the 7th century, though Christians would soon be granted an exemption: during the 4th century, the Roman Emperor Constantine I ordered the construction of Christian holy sites in the city, including the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Burial remains from the Byzantine period are exclusively Christian, suggesting that the population of Jerusalem in Byzantine times probably consisted only of Christians.\n\nIn the 5th century, the eastern continuation of the Roman Empire, ruled from the recently renamed Constantinople, maintained control of the city. Within the span of a few decades, Jerusalem shifted from Byzantine to Persian rule, then back to Roman-Byzantine dominion. Following Sassanid Khosrau II's early 7th century push through Syria, his generals Shahrbaraz and Shahin attacked Jerusalem () aided by the Jews of Palaestina Prima, who had risen up against the Byzantines.\n\nIn the Siege of Jerusalem of 614, after 21 days of relentless siege warfare, Jerusalem was captured. Byzantine chronicles relate that the Sassanids and Jews slaughtered tens of thousands of Christians in the city, many at the Mamilla Pool, and destroyed their monuments and churches, including the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. This episode has been the subject of much debate between historians. The conquered city would remain in Sassanid hands for some fifteen years until the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius reconquered it in 629.\n\nJerusalem reached a peak in size and population at the end of the Second Temple Period, when the city covered and had a population of 200,000.\n\nByzantine Jerusalem was conquered by the Arab armies of Umar ibn al-Khattab in 638 CE. Among Muslims of Islam's earliest era it was referred to as \"Madinat bayt al-Maqdis\" (\"City of the Temple\") which was restricted to the Temple Mount. The rest of the city \"... was called Iliya, reflecting the Roman name given the city following the destruction of 70 CE: \"Aelia Capitolina\"\". Later the Temple Mount became known as \"al-Haram al-Sharif\", \"The Noble Sanctuary\", while the city around it became known as \"Bayt al-Maqdis\", and later still, \"al-Quds al-Sharif\" \"The Holy, Noble\". The Islamization of Jerusalem began in the first year A.H. (623 CE), when Muslims were instructed to face the city while performing their daily prostrations and, according to Muslim religious tradition, Muhammad's night journey and ascension to heaven took place. After 13 years, the direction of prayer was changed to Mecca. In 638 CE the Islamic Caliphate extended its dominion to Jerusalem. With the Arab conquest, Jews were allowed back into the city. The Rashidun caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab signed a treaty with Christian Patriarch of Jerusalem Sophronius, assuring him that Jerusalem's Christian holy places and population would be protected under Muslim rule. Christian-Arab tradition records that, when led to pray at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, one of the holiest sites for Christians, the caliph Umar refused to pray in the church so that Muslims would not request conversion of the church to a mosque. He prayed outside the church, where the Mosque of Umar (Omar) stands to this day, opposite the entrance to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. According to the Gaullic bishop Arculf, who lived in Jerusalem from 679 to 688, the Mosque of Umar was a rectangular wooden structure built over ruins which could accommodate 3,000 worshipers.\n\nWhen the Arab armies under Umar went to \"Bayt Al-Maqdes\" in 637 CE, they searched for the site of the Al-Aqsa Mosque (\"The Farthest Mosque\") that was mentioned in Quran and Hadith according to Islamic beliefs. Contemporary Arabic and Hebrew sources say the site was full of rubbish, and that Arabs and Jews cleaned it. The Umayyad caliph Abd al-Malik commissioned the construction of a shrine on the Temple Mount, now known as the Dome of the Rock, in the late 7th century. Two of the city's most-distinguished Arab citizens of the 10th-century were Al-Muqaddasi, the geographer, and Al-Tamimi, the physician. Al-Muqaddasi writes that Abd al-Malik built the edifice on the Temple Mount in order to compete in grandeur with Jerusalem's monumental churches.\n\nOver the next four hundred years, Jerusalem's prominence diminished as Arab powers in the region jockeyed for control. Jerusalem was captured in 1073 by the Seljuk Turkish commander Atsız. After Atsız was killed, the Seljuk prince Tutush I granted the city to Artuk Bey, another Seljuk commander. After Artuk's death in 1091 his sons Sökmen and Ilghazi governed in the city up to 1098 when the Fatimids recaptured the city.\nA messianic Karaite movement to gather in Jerusalem took place at the turn of the millennium, leading to a \"Golden Age\" of Karaite scholarship there, which was only terminated by the Crusades. In 1099, the Fatimid ruler expelled the native Christian population before Jerusalem was besieged by the soldiers of the First Crusade. After taking the solidly defended city by assault, the Crusaders massacred most of its Muslim and Jewish inhabitants, and made it the capital of their Kingdom of Jerusalem. The city, which had been virtually emptied, was recolonized by a variegated inflow of Greeks, Bulgarians, Hungarians, Georgians, Armenians, Syrians, Egyptians, Nestorians, Maronites, Jacobite Miaphysites, Copts and others, to block the return of the surviving Muslims and Jews. The north-eastern quarter was repopulated with Eastern Christians from the Transjordan. As a result, by 1099 Jerusalem's population had climbed back to some 30,000.\n\nIn 1187, the city was wrested from the Crusaders by Saladin who permitted Jews and Muslims to return and settle in the city. Under the terms of surrender, once ransomed, 60,000 Franks were expelled. The Eastern Christian populace was permitted to stay. Under the Ayyubid dynasty of Saladin, a period of huge investment began in the construction of houses, markets, public baths, and pilgrim hostels as well as the establishment of religious endowments. However, for most of the 13th century, Jerusalem declined to the status of a village due to city's fall of strategic value and Ayyubid internecine struggles.\n\nFrom 1229 to 1244, Jerusalem peacefully reverted to Christian control as a result of a 1229 treaty agreed between the crusading Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II and al-Kamil, the Ayyubid sultan of Egypt, that ended the Sixth Crusade. The Ayyubids retained control of the Muslim holy places, and Arab sources suggest that Frederick was not permitted to restore Jerusalem's fortifications.\n\nIn 1244, Jerusalem was sacked by the Khwarezmian Tatars, who decimated the city's Christian population and drove out the Jews. The Khwarezmian Tatars were driven out by the Ayyubids in 1247. When Nachmanides visited in 1267 he found only two Jewish families, in a population of 2,000, 300 of whom were Christians, in the city. From 1260 to 1517, Jerusalem was ruled by the Mamluks. In the wider region and until around 1300, many clashes occurred between the Mamluks on one side, and the crusaders and the Mongols, on the other side. The area also suffered from many earthquakes and black plague.\n\nIn 1517, Jerusalem and environs fell to the Ottoman Turks, who generally remained in control until 1917. Jerusalem enjoyed a prosperous period of renewal and peace under Suleiman the Magnificent—including the rebuilding of magnificent walls around the Old City. Throughout much of Ottoman rule, Jerusalem remained a provincial, if religiously important center, and did not straddle the main trade route between Damascus and Cairo. The English reference book \"Modern history or the present state of all nations\", written in 1744, stated that \"Jerusalem is still reckoned the capital city of Palestine, though much fallen from its ancient grandeaur\".\n\nThe Ottomans brought many innovations: modern postal systems run by the various consulates and regular stagecoach and carriage services were among the first signs of modernization in the city. In the mid 19th century, the Ottomans constructed the first paved road from Jaffa to Jerusalem, and by 1892 the railroad had reached the city.\n\nWith the annexation of Jerusalem by Muhammad Ali of Egypt in 1831, foreign missions and consulates began to establish a foothold in the city. In 1836, Ibrahim Pasha allowed Jerusalem's Jewish residents to restore four major synagogues, among them the Hurva. In the countrywide Peasants' Revolt, Qasim al-Ahmad led his forces from Nablus and attacked Jerusalem, aided by the Abu Ghosh clan, and entered the city on 31 May 1834. The Christians and Jews of Jerusalem were subjected to attacks. Ibrahim's Egyptian army routed Qasim's forces in Jerusalem the following month.\n\nOttoman rule was reinstated in 1840, but many Egyptian Muslims remained in Jerusalem and Jews from Algiers and North Africa began to settle in the city in growing numbers. In the 1840s and 1850s, the international powers began a tug-of-war in Palestine as they sought to extend their protection over the region's religious minorities, a struggle carried out mainly through consular representatives in Jerusalem. According to the Prussian consul, the population in 1845 was 16,410, with 7,120 Jews, 5,000 Muslims, 3,390 Christians, 800 Turkish soldiers and 100 Europeans. The volume of Christian pilgrims increased under the Ottomans, doubling the city's population around Easter time.\n\nIn the 1860s, new neighborhoods began to develop outside the Old City walls to house pilgrims and relieve the intense overcrowding and poor sanitation inside the city. The Russian Compound and Mishkenot Sha'ananim were founded in 1860, followed by many others that included Mahane Israel (1868), Nahalat Shiv'a (1869), German Colony (1872), Beit David (1873), Mea Shearim (1874), Shimon HaZadiq (1876), Beit Ya'aqov (1877), Abu Tor (1880s), American-Swedish Colony (1882), Yemin Moshe (1891), and Mamilla, Wadi al-Joz around the turn of the century. In 1867 an American Missionary reports an estimated population of Jerusalem of 'above' 15,000, with 4,000 to 5,000 Jews and 6,000 Muslims. Every year there were 5,000 to 6,000 Russian Christian Pilgrims. In 1872 Jerusalem became the center of a special administrative district, independent of the Syria Vilayet and under the direct authority of Istanbul called the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem.\n\nUntil the 1880s there were no formal orphanages in Jerusalem, as families generally took care of each other. In 1881 the Diskin Orphanage was founded in Jerusalem with the arrival of Jewish children orphaned by a Russian pogrom. Other orphanages founded in Jerusalem at the beginning of the 20th century were Zion Blumenthal Orphanage (1900) and General Israel Orphan's Home for Girls (1902).\n\nIn 1917 after the Battle of Jerusalem, the British Army, led by General Edmund Allenby, captured the city. In 1922, the League of Nations at the Conference of Lausanne entrusted the United Kingdom to administer Palestine, neighbouring Transjordan, and Iraq beyond it.\n\nThe British had to deal with a conflicting demand that was rooted in Ottoman rule. Agreements for the supply of water, electricity, and the construction of a tramway system—all under concessions granted by the Ottoman authorities—had been signed by the city of Jerusalem and a Greek citizen, Euripides Mavromatis, on 27 January 1914. Work under these concessions had not begun and, by the end of the war the British occupying forces refused to recognize their validity. Mavromatis claimed that his concessions overlapped with the Auja Concession that the government had awarded to Rutenberg in 1921 and that he had been deprived of his legal rights. The Mavromatis concession, in effect despite earlier British attempts to abolish it, covered Jerusalem and other localities (e.g., Bethlehem) within a radius of around the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.\n\nFrom 1922 to 1948 the total population of the city rose from 52,000 to 165,000, comprised two-thirds of Jews and one-third of Arabs (Muslims and Christians). Relations between Arab Christians and Muslims and the growing Jewish population in Jerusalem deteriorated, resulting in recurring unrest. In Jerusalem, in particular, Arab riots occurred in 1920 and in 1929. Under the British, new garden suburbs were built in the western and northern parts of the city and institutions of higher learning such as the Hebrew University were founded.\n\nAs the British Mandate for Palestine was expiring, the 1947 UN Partition Plan recommended \"the creation of a special international regime in the City of Jerusalem, constituting it as a \"corpus separatum\" under the administration of the UN.\" The international regime (which also included the city of Bethlehem) was to remain in force for a period of ten years, whereupon a referendum was to be held in which the residents were to decide the future regime of their city. However, this plan was not implemented, as the 1948 war erupted, while the British withdrew from Palestine and Israel declared its independence.\n\nIn contradiction to the Partition Plan, which envisioned a city separated from the Arab state and the Jewish state, Israel took control of the area which later would become West Jerusalem, along with major parts of the Arab territory allotted to the future Arab State; Jordan took control of East Jerusalem, along with the West Bank. The war led to displacement of Arab and Jewish populations in the city. The 1,500 residents of the Jewish Quarter of the Old City were expelled and a few hundred taken prisoner when the Arab Legion captured the quarter on 28 May. Arab residents of Katamon, Talbiya, and the German Colony were driven from their homes. By the time of the armistice that ended active fighting, Israel had control of 12 of Jerusalem's 15 Arab residential quarters. An estimated minimum of 30,000 people had become refugees.\nThe war of 1948 resulted in the division of Jerusalem, so that the old walled city lay entirely on the Jordanian side of the line. A no-man's land between East and West Jerusalem came into being in November 1948: Moshe Dayan, commander of the Israeli forces in Jerusalem, met with his Jordanian counterpart Abdullah el-Tell in a deserted house in Jerusalem's Musrara neighborhood and marked out their respective positions: Israel's position in red and Jordan's in green. This rough map, which was not meant as an official one, became the final line in the 1949 Armistice Agreements, which divided the city and left Mount Scopus as an Israeli exclave inside East Jerusalem. Barbed wire and concrete barriers ran down the center of the city, passing close by Jaffa Gate on the western side of the old walled city, and a crossing point was established at Mandelbaum Gate slightly to the north of the old walled city. Military skirmishes frequently threatened the ceasefire.\n\nAfter the establishment of the state of Israel, Jerusalem was declared its capital city. Jordan formally annexed East Jerusalem in 1950, subjecting it to Jordanian law, and in 1953 declared it the \"second capital\" of Jordan. Only the United Kingdom and Pakistan formally recognized such annexation, which, in regard to Jerusalem, was on a \"de facto\" basis. Some scholars argue that the view that Pakistan recognized Jordan's annexation is dubious.\nAfter 1948, since the old walled city in its entirety was to the east of the armistice line, Jordan was able to take control of all the holy places therein. While Muslim holy sites were maintained and renovated, contrary to the terms of the armistice agreement, Jews were denied access to Jewish holy sites, many of which were destroyed or desecrated. Jordan allowed only very limited access to Christian holy sites, and restrictions were imposed on the Christian population that led many to leave the city. Of the 58 synagogues in the Old City, half were either razed or converted to stables and hen-houses over the course of the next 19 years, including the Hurva and the Tiferet Yisrael Synagogue. The 3,000-year-old Mount of Olives Jewish Cemetery was desecrated, with gravestones used to build roads, latrines and Jordanian army fortifications. 38,000 graves in the Jewish Cemetery were destroyed, and Jews were forbidden from being buried there. The Western Wall was transformed into an exclusively Muslim holy site associated with \"al-Buraq\". Israeli authorities neglected to protect the tombs in the Muslim Mamilla Cemetery in West Jerusalem, which contains the remains of figures from the early Islamic period, facilitating the creation of a parking lot and public lavatories in 1964. Many other historic and religiously significant buildings were demolished and replaced by modern structures during the Jordanian occupation. During this period, the Dome of the Rock and Al-Aqsa Mosque underwent major renovations.\n\nDuring the 1948 war, the Jewish residents of Eastern Jerusalem were expelled by Jordan's Arab Legion. Jordan allowed Arab Palestinian refugees from the war to settle in the vacated Jewish Quarter, which became known as \"Harat al-Sharaf\". In 1966 the Jordanian authorities relocated 500 of them to the Shua'fat refugee camp as part of plans to turn the Jewish quarter into a public park.\n\nIn 1967, despite Israeli pleas that Jordan remain neutral during the Six-Day War, Jordan, which had concluded a defense agreement with Egypt on 30 May 1967, attacked Israeli-held West Jerusalem on the war's second day. After hand-to-hand fighting between Israeli and Jordanian soldiers on the Temple Mount, the Israel Defense Forces captured East Jerusalem, along with the entire West Bank. On 27 June 1967, three weeks after the war ended, in the reunification of Jerusalem, Israel extended its law and jurisdiction to East Jerusalem, including the city's Christian and Muslim holy sites, along with some nearby West Bank territory which comprised 28 Palestinian villages, incorporating it into the Jerusalem Municipality, although it carefully avoided using the term annexation. On 10 July, Foreign Minister Abba Eban explained to the UN Secretary General: \"\"The term 'annexation' which was used by supporters of the vote is not accurate. The steps that were taken [by Israel] relate to the integration of Jerusalem in administrative and municipal areas, and served as a legal basis for the protection of the holy places of Jerusalem.\"\" Israel conducted a census of Arab residents in the areas annexed. Residents were given permanent residency status and the option of applying for Israeli citizenship. Since 1967, new Jewish residential areas have mushroomed in the eastern sector, while no new Palestinian neighbourhoods have been created.\n\nJewish and Christian access to the holy sites inside the old walled city was restored. Israel left the Temple Mount under the jurisdiction of an Islamic \"waqf\", but opened the Western Wall to Jewish access. The Moroccan Quarter, which was located adjacent to the Western Wall, was evacuated and razed to make way for a plaza for those visiting the wall. On 18 April 1968, an expropriation order by the Israeli Ministry of Finance more than doubled the size of the Jewish Quarter, evicting its Arab residents and seizing over 700 buildings of which 105 belonged to Jewish inhabitants prior to the Jordanian occupation of the city. The order designated these areas for public use, but they were intended for Jews alone. The government offered 200 Jordanian dinars to each displaced Arab family.\n\nAfter the Six-Day War the population of Jerusalem increased by 196%. The Jewish population grew by 155%, while the Arab population grew by 314%. The proportion of the Jewish population fell from 74% in 1967 to 72% in 1980, to 68% in 2000, and to 64% in 2010. Israeli Agriculture Minister Ariel Sharon proposed building a ring of Jewish neighborhoods around the city's eastern edges. The plan was intended to make East Jerusalem more Jewish and prevent it from becoming part of an urban Palestinian bloc stretching from Bethlehem to Ramallah. On 2 October 1977, the Israeli cabinet approved the plan, and seven neighborhoods were subsequently built on the city's eastern edges. They became known as the Ring Neighborhoods. Other Jewish neighborhoods were built within East Jerusalem, and Israeli Jews also settled in Arab neighborhoods.\n\nThe annexation of East Jerusalem was met with international criticism. The Israeli Foreign Ministry disputes that the annexation of Jerusalem was a violation of international law. The final status of Jerusalem has been one of the most important areas of discord between Palestinian and Israeli negotiators for peace. Areas of discord have included whether the Palestinian flag can be raised over areas of Palestinian custodianship and the specificity of Israeli and Palestinian territorial borders.\n\nPrior to the creation of the State of Israel, Jerusalem served as the administrative capital of Mandatory Palestine.\n\nFrom 1949 until 1967, West Jerusalem served as Israel's capital, but was not recognized as such internationally because UN General Assembly Resolution 194 envisaged Jerusalem as an international city. As a result of the Six-Day War in 1967, the whole of Jerusalem came under Israeli control. On 27 June 1967, the government of Levi Eshkol extended Israeli law and jurisdiction to East Jerusalem, but agreed that administration of the Temple Mount compound would be maintained by the Jordanian waqf, under the Jordanian Ministry of Religious Endowments.\n\nIn 1988, Israel ordered the closure of Orient House, home of the Arab Studies Society, but also the headquarters of the Palestine Liberation Organization, for security reasons. The building reopened in 1992 as a Palestinian guesthouse. The Oslo Accords stated that the final status of Jerusalem would be determined by negotiations with the Palestinian Authority. The accords banned any official Palestinian presence in the city until a final peace agreement, but provided for the opening of a Palestinian trade office in East Jerusalem. The Palestinian Authority regards East Jerusalem as the capital of a future Palestinian state. President Mahmoud Abbas has said that any agreement that did not include East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine would be unacceptable. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has similarly stated that Jerusalem would remain the undivided capital of Israel. Due to its proximity to the city, especially the Temple Mount, Abu Dis, a Palestinian suburb of Jerusalem, has been proposed as the future capital of a Palestinian state by Israel. Israel has not incorporated Abu Dis within its security wall around Jerusalem. The Palestinian Authority has built a possible future parliament building for the Palestinian Legislative Council in the town, and its Jerusalem Affairs Offices are all located in Abu Dis.\n\nWhile the international community regards East Jerusalem, including the entire Old City, as part of the occupied Palestinian territories, neither part, West or East Jerusalem, is recognized as part of the territory of Israel or the State of Palestine. Under the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1947, Jerusalem was envisaged to become a corpus separatum administered by the United Nations. In the war of 1948, the western part of the city was occupied by forces of the nascent state of Israel, while the eastern part was occupied by Jordan. The international community largely considers the legal status of Jerusalem to derive from the partition plan, and correspondingly refuses to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the city.\n\nFollowing the 1967 Six-Day War, Israel extended its jurisdiction and administration over East Jerusalem, establishing new municipal borders.\n\nIn 2010, Israel approved legislation giving Jerusalem the highest national priority status in Israel. The law prioritized construction throughout the city, and offered grants and tax benefits to residents to make housing, infrastructure, education, employment, business, tourism, and cultural events more affordable. Communications Minister Moshe Kahlon said that the bill sent \"a clear, unequivocal political message that Jerusalem will not be divided\", and that \"all those within the Palestinian and international community who expect the current Israeli government to accept any demands regarding Israel's sovereignty over its capital are mistaken and misleading\".\n\nThe status of the city, and especially its holy places, remains a core issue in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. The Israeli government has approved building plans in the Muslim Quarter of the Old City in order to expand the Jewish presence in East Jerusalem, while some Islamic leaders have made claims that Jews have no historical connection to Jerusalem, alleging that the 2,500-year-old Western Wall was constructed as part of a mosque. Palestinians regard Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine, and the city's borders have been the subject of bilateral talks. A team of experts assembled by the then Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak in 2000 concluded that the city must be divided, since Israel had failed to achieve any of its national aims there. However, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said in 2014 that \"Jerusalem will never be divided\". A poll conducted in June 2013 found that 74% of Israeli Jews reject the idea of a Palestinian capital in any portion of Jerusalem, though 72% of the public regarded it as a divided city. A poll conducted by Palestinian Center for Public Opinion and American Pechter Middle East Polls for the Council on Foreign Relations, among East Jerusalem Arab residents in 2011 revealed that 39% of East Jerusalem Arab residents would prefer Israeli citizenship contrary to 31% who opted for Palestinian citizenship. According to the poll, 40% of Palestinian residents would prefer to leave their neighborhoods if they would be placed under Palestinian rule.\n\nOn 5 December 1949, Israel's first Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, proclaimed Jerusalem as Israel's \"eternal\" and \"sacred\" capital, and eight days later specified that only the war had \"compelled\" the Israeli leadership \"to establish the seat of Government in Tel Aviv\", while \"for the State of Israel there has always been and always will be one capital only – Jerusalem the Eternal\", and that after the war, efforts had been ongoing for creating the conditions for \"the Knesset... returning to Jerusalem.\" This indeed took place, and since the beginning of 1950 all branches of the Israeli government—legislative, judicial, and executive—have resided there, except for the Ministry of Defense, which is located at HaKirya in Tel Aviv. At the time of Ben Gurion's proclamations and the ensuing Knesset vote of 24 January 1950, Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan, and thus the proclamation only applied to West Jerusalem.\n\nIn July 1980, Israel passed the Jerusalem Law as Basic Law. The law declared Jerusalem the \"complete and united\" capital of Israel. The Jerusalem Law was condemned by the international community, which did not recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. The United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 478 on 20 August 1980, which declared that the Jerusalem Law is \"\"a violation of international law\"\", is \"\"null and void and must be rescinded forthwith\"\". Member states were called upon to withdraw their diplomatic representation from Jerusalem. Following the resolution, 22 of the 24 countries that previously had their embassy in (West) Jerusalem relocated them in Tel Aviv, where many embassies already resided prior to Resolution 478. Costa Rica and El Salvador followed in 2006.\nCurrently, there are two embassies—United States and Guatemala—and two consulates located within the city limits of Jerusalem, and two Latin American states maintain embassies in the Jerusalem District town of Mevaseret Zion (Bolivia and Paraguay). There are a number of consulates-general located in Jerusalem, which work primarily either with Israel, or the Palestinian authorities.\n\nIn 1995, the United States Congress passed the Jerusalem Embassy Act, which required, subject to conditions, that its embassy be moved from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. On 6 December 2017 U.S. President Donald Trump officially recognized Jerusalem as Israel's capital and announced his intention to move the American embassy to Jerusalem, reversing decades of United States policy on the issue. The move was criticized by many nations. A resolution condemning the US decision was supported by all the 14 other members of the UN Security Council, but was vetoed by the US on 18 December 2017, and a subsequent resolution condemning the US decision was passed in the United Nations General Assembly. On 14 May 2018, the United States officially moved the location of its embassy to Jerusalem, transforming its Tel Aviv location into a consulate. Due to the general lack of international recognition of Jerusalem as Israel's capital, some non-Israeli media outlets use Tel Aviv as a metonym for Israel.\n\nIn April 2017, the Russian Foreign Ministry announced it viewed Western Jerusalem as Israel's capital in the context of UN-approved principles which include the status of East Jerusalem as the capital of the future Palestinian state. On 15 December 2018, Australia officially recognized West Jerusalem as Israel's capital, but said their embassy in Tel Aviv would stay until a two-state resolution was settled.\n\nMany national institutions of Israel are located in Kiryat HaMemshala in Givat Ram in Jerusalem as a part of the Kiryat HaLeom project which is intended to create a large district that will house most government agencies and national cultural institutions. Some government buildings are located in Kiryat Menachem Begin. The city is home to the Knesset, the Supreme Court, the Bank of Israel, the National Headquarters of the Israel Police, the official residences of the President and Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and all ministries except for the Ministry of Defense (which is located in central Tel Aviv's HaKirya district) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (which is located in Rishon LeZion, in the wider Tel Aviv metropolitan area, near Beit Dagan).\n\nThe Palestinian National Authority views East Jerusalem as occupied territory according to United Nations Security Council Resolution 242. The Palestinian Authority claims Jerusalem, including the Haram al-Sharif, as the capital of the State of Palestine, The PLO claims that West Jerusalem is also subject to permanent status negotiations. However, it has stated that it would be willing to consider alternative solutions, such as making Jerusalem an open city.\n\nThe PLO's current position is that East Jerusalem, as defined by the pre-1967 municipal boundaries, shall be the capital of Palestine and West Jerusalem the capital of Israel, with each state enjoying full sovereignty over its respective part of the city and with its own municipality. A joint \"development council\" would be responsible for coordinated development.\n\nSome states, such as Russia and China, recognize the Palestinian state with East Jerusalem as its capital. United Nations General Assembly Resolution 58/292 affirmed that the Palestinian people have the right to sovereignty over East Jerusalem.\n\nThe Jerusalem City Council is a body of 31 elected members headed by the mayor, who serves a five-year term and appoints eight deputies. The former mayor of Jerusalem, Uri Lupolianski, was elected in 2003. In the November 2008 city elections, Nir Barkat was elected. In November 2018, Moshe Lion was elected mayor.\n\nApart from the mayor and his deputies, City Council members receive no salaries and work on a voluntary basis. The longest-serving Jerusalem mayor was Teddy Kollek, who spent 28 years—-six consecutive terms-—in office. Most of the meetings of the Jerusalem City Council are private, but each month, it holds a session that is open to the public. Within the city council, religious political parties form an especially powerful faction, accounting for the majority of its seats.\nThe headquarters of the Jerusalem Municipality and the mayor's office are at Safra Square (\"Kikar Safra\") on Jaffa Road. The municipal complex, comprising two modern buildings and ten renovated historic buildings surrounding a large plaza, opened in 1993 moved from the Jerusalem Historical City Hall Building. The city falls under the Jerusalem District, with Jerusalem as the district's capital. 37% of the population is Palestinian, but only 10% of tax revenues are allocated for them. In East Jerusalem, 52% of the land is excluded from development, 35% designated for Jewish settlements, and 13% for Palestinian use, almost all of which is already built on.\n\nJerusalem is situated on the southern spur of a plateau in the Judaean Mountains, which include the Mount of Olives (East) and Mount Scopus (North East). The elevation of the Old City is approximately . The whole of Jerusalem is surrounded by valleys and dry riverbeds (\"wadis\"). The Kidron, Hinnom, and Tyropoeon Valleys intersect in an area just south of the Old City of Jerusalem. The Kidron Valley runs to the east of the Old City and separates the Mount of Olives from the city proper. Along the southern side of old Jerusalem is the Valley of Hinnom, a steep ravine associated in biblical eschatology with the concept of Gehenna or Hell. The Tyropoeon Valley commenced in the northwest near the Damascus Gate, ran south-southeasterly through the center of the Old City down to the Pool of Siloam, and divided the lower part into two hills, the Temple Mount to the east, and the rest of the city to the west (the lower and the upper cities described by Josephus). Today, this valley is hidden by debris that has accumulated over the centuries.\nIn biblical times, Jerusalem was surrounded by forests of almond, olive and pine trees. Over centuries of warfare and neglect, these forests were destroyed. Farmers in the Jerusalem region thus built stone terraces along the slopes to hold back the soil, a feature still very much in evidence in the Jerusalem landscape.\n\nWater supply has always been a major problem in Jerusalem, as attested to by the intricate network of ancient aqueducts, tunnels, pools and cisterns found in the city.\n\nJerusalem is east of Tel Aviv and the Mediterranean Sea. On the opposite side of the city, approximately away, is the Dead Sea, the lowest body of water on Earth. Neighboring cities and towns include Bethlehem and Beit Jala to the south, Abu Dis and Ma'ale Adumim to the east, Mevaseret Zion to the west, and Ramallah and Giv'at Ze'ev to the north.\n\nMount Herzl, at the western side of the city near the Jerusalem Forest, serves as the national cemetery of Israel.\n\nThe city is characterized by a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen: \"Csa \"), with hot, dry summers, and mild, wet winters. Snow flurries usually occur once or twice a winter, although the city experiences heavy snowfall every three to four years, on average, with short-lived accumulation.\n\nJanuary is the coldest month of the year, with an average temperature of ; July and August are the hottest months, with an average temperature of , and the summer months are usually rainless. The average annual precipitation is around , with rain occurring almost entirely between October and May. Snowfall is rare, and large snowfalls are even more rare. Jerusalem received over of snow on 13 December 2013, which nearly paralyzed the city. A day in Jerusalem has on average, 9.3 sunshine hours. With summers averaging similar temperatures as the coastline, the maritime influence from the Mediterranean Sea is strong, in particular given that Jerusalem is located on a similar latitude as scorching hot deserts not far to its east.\n\nThe highest recorded temperature in Jerusalem was on 28 and 30 August 1881, and the lowest temperature recorded was on 25 January 1907.\n\nMost of the air pollution in Jerusalem comes from vehicular traffic. Many main streets in Jerusalem were not built to accommodate such a large volume of traffic, leading to traffic congestion and more carbon monoxide released into the air. Industrial pollution inside the city is sparse, but emissions from factories on the Israeli Mediterranean coast can travel eastward and settle over the city.\n\nJerusalem's population size and composition has shifted many times over its 5,000 year history. Since medieval times, the Old City of Jerusalem has been divided into Jewish, Muslim, Christian, and Armenian quarters.\n\nMost population data pre-1905 is based on estimates, often from foreign travellers or organisations, since previous census data usually covered wider areas such as the Jerusalem District. These estimates suggest that since the end of the Crusades, Muslims formed the largest group in Jerusalem until the mid-nineteenth century.\n\nBetween 1838 and 1876, a number of estimates exist which conflict as to whether Jews or Muslims were the largest group during this period, and between 1882 and 1922 estimates conflict as to exactly when Jews became an absolute majority of the population.\n\nIn December 2007, Jerusalem had a population of 747,600–63.7% were Jewish, 33.1% Muslim, and 2% Christian. At the end of 2005, the population density was . According to a study published in 2000, the percentage of Jews in the city's population had been decreasing; this was attributed to a higher Muslim birth rate, and Jewish residents leaving. The study also found that about nine percent of the Old City's 32,488 people were Jews. Of the Jewish population, 200,000 live in East Jerusalem settlements which are considered illegal under international law.\n\nIn 2005, 2,850 new immigrants settled in Jerusalem, mostly from the United States, France and the former Soviet Union. In terms of the local population, the number of outgoing residents exceeds the number of incoming residents. In 2005, 16,000 left Jerusalem and only 10,000 moved in. Nevertheless, the population of Jerusalem continues to rise due to the high birth rate, especially in the Haredi Jewish and Arab communities. Consequently, the total fertility rate in Jerusalem (4.02) is higher than in Tel Aviv (1.98) and well above the national average of 2.90. The average size of Jerusalem's 180,000 households is 3.8 people.\n\nIn 2005, the total population grew by 13,000 (1.8%)—similar to the Israeli national average, but the religious and ethnic composition is shifting. While 31% of the Jewish population is made up of children below the age fifteen, the figure for the Arab population is 42%. This would seem to corroborate the observation that the percentage of Jews in Jerusalem has declined over the past four decades. In 1967, Jews accounted for 74 percent of the population, while the figure for 2006 is down nine percent. Possible factors are the high cost of housing, fewer job opportunities and the increasingly religious character of the city, although proportionally, young Haredim are leaving in higher numbers. The percentage of secular Jews, or those who 'wear their faith lightly' is dropping, with some 20,000 leaving the city over the past seven years (2012). They now number 31% of the population, the same percentage as the rising Haredi population. Many move to the suburbs and coastal cities in search of cheaper housing and a more secular lifestyle.\nIn 2009, the percentage of Haredim in the city was increasing. , out of 150,100 schoolchildren, 59,900 or 40% are in state-run secular and National Religious schools, while 90,200 or 60% are in Haredi schools. This correlates with the high number of children in Haredi families.\n\nWhile some Israelis avoid Jerusalem for its relative lack of development and religious and political tensions, the city has attracted Palestinians, offering more jobs and opportunity than any city in the West Bank or Gaza Strip. Palestinian officials have encouraged Arabs over the years to stay in the city to maintain their claim. Palestinians are attracted to the access to jobs, healthcare, social security, other benefits, and quality of life Israel provides to Jerusalem residents. Arab residents of Jerusalem who choose not to have Israeli citizenship are granted an Israeli identity card that allows them to pass through checkpoints with relative ease and to travel throughout Israel, making it easier to find work. Residents also are entitled to the subsidized healthcare and social security benefits Israel provides its citizens, and have the right to vote in municipal elections. Arabs in Jerusalem can send their children to Israeli-run schools, although not every neighborhood has one, and universities. Israeli doctors and highly regarded hospitals such as Hadassah Medical Center are available to residents.\n\nDemographics and the Jewish-Arab population divide play a major role in the dispute over Jerusalem. In 1998, the Jerusalem Development Authority proposed expanding city limits to the west to include more areas heavily populated with Jews.\n\nWithin the past few years, there has been a steady increase in the Jewish birthrate and a steady decrease in the Arab birthrate. In May 2012, it was reported that the Jewish birthrate had overtaken the Arab birthrate. Currently, the city's birthrate stands about 4.2 children per Jewish family and 3.9 children per Arab family. In addition, increasing numbers of Jewish immigrants chose to settle in Jerusalem. In the last few years, thousands of Palestinians have moved to previously fully Jewish neighborhoods of East Jerusalem, built after the 1967 Six-Day War. In 2007, 1,300 Palestinians lived in the previously exclusively Jewish neighborhood of Pisgat Ze'ev and constituted three percent of the population in Neve Ya'akov. In the French Hill neighborhood, Palestinians today constitute one-sixth of the overall population.\n\nAt the end of 2008, the population of East Jerusalem was 456,300, comprising 60% of Jerusalem's residents. Of these, 195,500 (43%) were Jews, (comprising 40% of the Jewish population of Jerusalem as a whole), and 260,800 (57%) were Muslim (comprising 98% of the Muslim population of Jerusalem). In 2008, the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics reported the number of Palestinians living in East Jerusalem was 208,000 according to a recently completed census.\n\nJerusalem's Jewish population is overwhelmingly religious. Only 21% of Jewish residents are secular. In addition, Haredi Jews comprise 30% of the city's adult Jewish population. In a phenomenon seen rarely around the world, the percentage of Jewish men who work, 47%, is exceeded by the percentage of Jewish women who work, 50%. The young and less religious continue to leave according to a 2016 Central Bureau of Statistics report which noted 6,740 people left. The opening of high speed rail transit to Tel Aviv in 2018 and the New Jerusalem Gateway Business District currently under construction is designed to alter business, tourism, and hopefully reverse the population exodus.\n\nJerusalem had a population of 804,400 in 2011, of which Jews comprised 499,400 (62.1%), Muslims 281,100 (34.9%), Christians 14,700 (1.8%), and 9,000 (1.1%) were not classified by religion.\n\nJerusalem had a population of 882,700 in 2016, of which Jews comprised 536,600 (60.8%), Muslims 319,800 (36.2%), Christians 15,800 (1.8%), and 10,300 unclassified (1.2%).\n\nAccording to Peace Now, approvals for building in Israeli settlements in East Jerusalem has expanded by 60% since Trump became U.S. president in 2017. Since 1991, Palestinians who make up the majority of the residents in the area have only received 30% of the building permits.\n\nCritics of efforts to promote a Jewish majority in Jerusalem say that government planning policies are motivated by demographic considerations and seek to limit Arab construction while promoting Jewish construction. According to a World Bank report, the number of recorded building violations between 1996 and 2000 was four and half times higher in Jewish neighborhoods but four times fewer demolition orders were issued in West Jerusalem than in East Jerusalem; Arabs in Jerusalem were less likely to receive construction permits than Jews, and \"the authorities are much more likely to take action against Palestinian violators\" than Jewish violators of the permit process. In recent years, private Jewish foundations have received permission from the government to develop projects on disputed lands, such as the City of David archaeological park in the 60% Arab neighborhood of Silwan (adjacent to the Old City), and the Museum of Tolerance on Mamilla Cemetery (adjacent to Zion Square).\n\nJerusalem has been sacred to Judaism for roughly 3000 years, to Christianity for around 2000 years, and to Islam for approximately 1400 years. The 2000 Statistical Yearbook of Jerusalem lists 1204 synagogues, 158 churches, and 73 mosques within the city. Despite efforts to maintain peaceful religious coexistence, some sites, such as the Temple Mount, have been a continuous source of friction and controversy.\n\nJerusalem has been sacred to the Jews since King David proclaimed it his capital in the 10th century BCE. Jerusalem was the site of Solomon's Temple and the Second Temple. Although not mentioned in the Torah / Pentateuch, it is mentioned in the Bible 632 times. Today, the Western Wall, a remnant of the wall surrounding the Second Temple, is a Jewish holy site second only to the \"Holy of Holies\" on the Temple Mount itself. Synagogues around the world are traditionally built with the Holy Ark facing Jerusalem, and Arks within Jerusalem face the Holy of Holies. As prescribed in the Mishna and codified in the \"Shulchan Aruch\", daily prayers are recited while facing towards Jerusalem and the Temple Mount. Many Jews have \"Mizrach\" plaques hung on a wall of their homes to indicate the direction of prayer.\n\nChristianity reveres Jerusalem for its Old Testament history, and also for its significance in the life of Jesus. According to the New Testament, Jesus was brought to Jerusalem soon after his birth and later in his life cleansed the Second Temple. The Cenacle, believed to be the site of Jesus' Last Supper, is located on Mount Zion in the same building that houses the Tomb of King David. Another prominent Christian site in Jerusalem is Golgotha, the site of the crucifixion. The Gospel of John describes it as being located outside Jerusalem, but recent archaeological evidence suggests Golgotha is a short distance from the Old City walls, within the present-day confines of the city. The land currently occupied by the Church of the Holy Sepulchre is considered one of the top candidates for Golgotha and thus has been a Christian pilgrimage site for the past 2000 years.\n\nJerusalem is the third-holiest city in Sunni Islam. For approximately a year, before it was permanently switched to the Kaaba in Mecca, the \"qibla\" (direction of prayer) for Muslims was Jerusalem. The city's lasting place in Islam, however, is primarily due to Muhammad's Night of Ascension (c. CE 620). Muslims believe Muhammad was miraculously transported one night from Mecca to the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, whereupon he ascended to Heaven to meet previous prophets of Islam. The first verse in the Qur'an's \"Surat al-Isra\" notes the destination of Muhammad's journey as \"al-Aqsa\" (the farthest) mosque, in reference to the location in Jerusalem. The hadith, the recorded sayings of the Prophet Mohammad, name Jerusalem as the location of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The al-Aqsa Mosque, derived from the name mentioned in the Qur'an, was built on the Temple Mount under the Umayyad Caliph Al-Walid to commemorate the place from which Muslims believe Muhammad ascended to Heaven.\n\nHistorically, Jerusalem's economy was supported almost exclusively by religious pilgrims, as it was located far from the major ports of Jaffa and Gaza. Jerusalem's religious and cultural landmarks today remain the top draw for foreign visitors, with the majority of tourists visiting the Western Wall and the Old City, In 2010, Jerusalem was named the top leisure travel city in Africa and the Middle East by \"Travel + Leisure magazine\".\nin 2013, 75% of the 3.5 million tourists to Israel visited Jerusalem.\nSince the establishment of the State of Israel, the national government has remained a major player in Jerusalem's economy. The government, centered in Jerusalem, generates a large number of jobs, and offers subsidies and incentives for new business initiatives and start-ups. Although Tel Aviv remains Israel's financial center, a growing number of high tech companies are moving to Jerusalem, providing 12,000 jobs in 2006. Northern Jerusalem's Har Hotzvim industrial park and the Jerusalem Technology Park in south Jerusalem are home to large Research and Development centers of international tech companies, among them Intel, Cisco, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, IBM, Mobileye, Johnson & Johnson, Medtronic and more . In April 2015, Time Magazine picked Jerusalem as one of the five emerging tech hubs in the world, proclaiming that \"The city has become a flourishing center for biomed, cleantech, Internet/mobile startups, accelerators, investors and supporting service providers.\"\n\nHigher than average percentages are employed in education (17.9% vs. 12.7%); health and welfare (12.6% vs. 10.7%); community and social services (6.4% vs. 4.7%); hotels and restaurants (6.1% vs. 4.7%); and public administration (8.2% vs. 4.7%). During the British Mandate, a law was passed requiring all buildings to be constructed of Jerusalem stone in order to preserve the unique historic and aesthetic character of the city. Complementing this building code, which is still in force, is the discouragement of heavy industry in Jerusalem; only about 2.2% of Jerusalem's land is zoned for \"industry and infrastructure.\" By comparison, the percentage of land in Tel Aviv zoned for industry and infrastructure is twice as high, and in Haifa, seven times as high. Only 8.5% of the Jerusalem District work force is employed in the manufacturing sector, which is half the national average (15.8%).\n\nAlthough many statistics indicate economic growth in the city, since 1967, East Jerusalem has lagged behind the development of West Jerusalem. Nevertheless, the percentage of households with employed persons is higher for Arab households (76.1%) than for Jewish households (66.8%). The unemployment rate in Jerusalem (8.3%) is slightly better than the national average (9.0%), although the civilian labor force accounted for less than half of all persons fifteen years or older—lower in comparison to that of Tel Aviv (58.0%) and Haifa (52.4%). Poverty remains a problem in the city as 37% of the families in Jerusalem lived in 2011 below the poverty line. According to a report by the Association for Civil Rights in Israel (ACRI), 78% of Arabs in Jerusalem lived in poverty in 2012, up from 64% in 2006. While the ACRI attributes the increase to the lack of employment opportunities, infrastructure and a worsening educational system, Ir Amim blames the legal status of Palestinians in Jerusalem.\n\nJerusalem has traditionally had a low-rise skyline. About 18 tall buildings were built at different times in the downtown area when there was no clear policy over the matter. One of them, Holyland Tower 1, Jerusalem's tallest building, is a skyscraper by international standards, rising 32 stories. Holyland Tower 2, which has been approved for construction, will reach the same height.\n\nA new master plan for the city will see many high-rise buildings, including skyscrapers, built in certain, designated areas of downtown Jerusalem. Under the plan, towers will line Jaffa Road and King George Street. One of the proposed towers along King George Street, the Migdal Merkaz HaYekum, is planned as a 65-story building, which would make it one of the tallest buildings in Israel. At the entrance to the city, near the Jerusalem Chords Bridge and the Central Bus Station, twelve towers rising between 24 and 33 stories will be built, as part of a complex that will also include an open square and an underground train station serving a new express line between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, and will be connected by bridges and tunnels. Eleven of the skyscrapers will be either office or apartment buildings, and one will be a 2,000-room hotel. The complex is expected to attract many businesses from Tel Aviv, and become the city's main business hub. In addition, a complex for the city's courts and the prosecutor's office will be built, as well as new buildings for Central Zionist Archives and Israel State Archives. The skyscrapers built throughout the city are expected to contain public space, shops, restaurants, and entertainment venues, and it has been speculated that this may lead to a revitalization of downtown Jerusalem. In August 2015, the city council approved construction of a 344-foot pyramid-shaped skyscraper designed by Daniel Libeskind and Yigal Levi, in place of a rejected previous design by Libeskind; it is set to break ground by 2019.\n\nJerusalem is served by highly developed communication infrastructures, making it a leading logistics hub for Israel.\n\nThe Jerusalem Central Bus Station, located on Jaffa Road, is the busiest bus station in Israel. It is served by Egged Bus Cooperative, which is the second-largest bus company in the world, The Dan serves the Bnei Brak-Jerusalem route along with Egged, and Superbus serves the routes between Jerusalem, Modi'in Illit, and Modi'in-Maccabim-Re'ut. The companies operate from Jerusalem Central Bus Station. Arab neighborhoods in East Jerusalem and routes between Jerusalem and locations in the West Bank are served by the East Jerusalem Central Bus Station, a transportation hub located near the Old City's Damascus Gate. The Jerusalem Light Rail initiated service in August 2011. According to plans, the first rail line will be capable of transporting an estimated 200,000 people daily, and has 23 stops. The route is from Pisgat Ze'ev in the north via the Old City and city center to Mt. Herzl in the south.\nAnother work in progress is a new high-speed rail line from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, which became partially operational in 2018 and is expected to be completed in 2019. Its terminus will be a new underground station ( deep) serving the International Convention Center and the Central Bus Station, and is planned to be extended eventually to Malha station. Israel Railways operates train services to Malha train station from Tel Aviv via Beit Shemesh.\n\nBegin Expressway is one of Jerusalem's major north-south thoroughfares; it runs on the western side of the city, merging in the north with Route 443, which continues toward Tel Aviv. Route 60 runs through the center of the city near the Green Line between East and West Jerusalem. Construction is progressing on parts of a ring road around the city, fostering faster connection between the suburbs. The eastern half of the project was conceptualized decades ago, but reaction to the proposed highway is still mixed.\n\nJerusalem is served by Ben Gurion Airport, some northwest of the Jerusalem, on the route to Tel Aviv. The Tel Aviv–Jerusalem railway runs non-stop from Jerusalem–Yitzhak Navon railway station to the airport and began operation in 2018.\n\nIn the past, Jerusalem was also served by the local Atarot Airport. Atarot ceased operation in 2000.\n\nJerusalem is home to several prestigious universities offering courses in Hebrew, Arabic and English.\n\nFounded in 1925, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem has been ranked among the top 100 schools in the world. The Board of Governors has included such prominent Jewish intellectuals as Albert Einstein and Sigmund Freud. The university has produced several Nobel laureates; recent winners associated with Hebrew University include Avram Hershko, David Gross, and Daniel Kahneman. One of the university's major assets is the Jewish National and University Library, which houses over five million books. The library opened in 1892, over three decades before the university was established, and is one of the world's largest repositories of books on Jewish subjects. Today it is both the central library of the university and the national library of Israel. The Hebrew University operates three campuses in Jerusalem, on Mount Scopus, on Giv'at Ram and a medical campus at the Hadassah Ein Kerem hospital. The Academy of the Hebrew Language are located in the Hebrew university in Givat Ram and the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities located near the Presidents House.\nThe Jerusalem College of Technology, founded in 1969, combines training in engineering and other high-tech industries with a Jewish studies program. It is one of many schools in Jerusalem, from elementary school and up, that combine secular and religious studies. Numerous religious educational institutions and \"Yeshivot\", including some of the most prestigious yeshivas, among them the Brisk, Chevron, Midrash Shmuel and Mir, are based in the city, with the Mir Yeshiva claiming to be the largest. There were nearly 8,000 twelfth-grade students in Hebrew-language schools during the 2003–2004 school year. However, due to the large portion of students in Haredi Jewish frameworks, only fifty-five percent of twelfth graders took matriculation exams (\"Bagrut\") and only thirty-seven percent were eligible to graduate. Unlike public schools, many Haredi schools do not prepare students to take standardized tests. To attract more university students to Jerusalem, the city has begun to offer a special package of financial incentives and housing subsidies to students who rent apartments in downtown Jerusalem.\n\nAl-Quds University was established in 1984 to serve as a flagship university for the Arab and Palestinian peoples. It describes itself as the \"only Arab university in Jerusalem\". New York Bard College and Al-Quds University agreed to open a joint college in a building originally built to house the Palestinian Legislative Council and Yasser Arafat's office. The college gives Master of Arts in Teaching degrees. Al-Quds University resides southeast of the city proper on a Abu Dis campus.\n\nOther institutions of higher learning in Jerusalem are the Jerusalem Academy of Music and Dance and Bezalel Academy of Art and Design, whose buildings are located on the campuses of the Hebrew University.\n\nSchools for Arabs in Jerusalem and other parts of Israel have been criticized for offering a lower quality education than those catering to Israeli Jewish students. While many schools in the heavily Arab East Jerusalem are filled to capacity and there have been complaints of overcrowding, the Jerusalem Municipality is currently building over a dozen new schools in the city's Arab neighborhoods. Schools in Ras el-Amud and Umm Lison opened in 2008. In March 2007, the Israeli government approved a 5-year plan to build 8,000 new classrooms in the city, 40 percent in the Arab sector and 28 percent in the Haredi sector. A budget of 4.6 billion shekels was allocated for this project. In 2008, Jewish British philanthropists donated $3 million for the construction of schools for Arabs in East Jerusalem. Arab high school students take the \"Bagrut\" matriculation exams, so that much of their curriculum parallels that of other Israeli high schools and includes certain Jewish subjects.\n\nAlthough Jerusalem is known primarily for its religious significance, the city is also home to many artistic and cultural venues. The Israel Museum attracts nearly one million visitors a year, approximately one-third of them tourists. The museum complex comprises several buildings featuring special exhibits and extensive collections of Judaica, archaeological findings, and Israeli and European art. The Dead Sea scrolls, discovered in the mid-20th century in the Qumran Caves near the Dead Sea, are housed in the Museum's Shrine of the Book. The Youth Wing, which mounts changing exhibits and runs an extensive art education program, is visited by 100,000 children a year. The museum has a large outdoor sculpture garden and a scale-model of the Second Temple. The Ticho House in downtown Jerusalem houses the paintings of Anna Ticho and the Judaica collections of her husband, an ophthalmologist who opened Jerusalem's first eye clinic in this building in 1912.\nNext to the Israel Museum is the Bible Lands Museum, near The National Campus for the Archaeology of Israel, which includes the Israel Antiquities Authority offices. A World Bible Center is planned to be built adjacent to Mount Zion at a site called the \"Bible Hill\". A planned World Kabbalah Center is to be located on the nearby promenade, overlooking the Old City. The Rockefeller Museum, located in East Jerusalem, was the first archaeological museum in the Middle East. It was built in 1938 during the British Mandate. In 2006, a Jerusalem Trail was opened, a hiking trail that goes to many cultural sites and national parks in and around Jerusalem. The Jerusalem Biblical Zoo has ranked consistently as Israel's top tourist attraction for Israelis.\n\nThe national cemetery of Israel is located at the city's western edge, near the Jerusalem Forest on Mount Herzl. The western extension of Mount Herzl is the Mount of Remembrance, where the main Holocaust museum of Israel is located. Yad Vashem, Israel's national memorial to the victims of the Holocaust, houses the world's largest library of Holocaust-related information. It houses an estimated 100,000 books and articles. The complex contains a state-of-the-art museum that explores the genocide of the Jews through exhibits that focus on the personal stories of individuals and families killed in the Holocaust. An art gallery featuring the work of artists who perished is also present. Further, Yad Vashem commemorates the 1.5 million Jewish children murdered by the Nazis, and honors the Righteous among the Nations.\nThe Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra, established in the 1940s, has appeared around the world. The International Convention Center (\"Binyanei HaUma\") near the entrance to city houses the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra. The Jerusalem Cinemateque, the Gerard Behar Center (formerly Beit Ha'Am) in downtown Jerusalem, the Jerusalem Music Center in Yemin Moshe, and the Targ Music Center in Ein Kerem also present the arts. The Israel Festival, featuring indoor and outdoor performances by local and international singers, concerts, plays, and street theater has been held annually since 1961, and Jerusalem has been the major organizer of this event. The Jerusalem Theater in the Talbiya neighborhood hosts over 150 concerts a year, as well as theater and dance companies and performing artists from overseas. The Khan Theater, located in a caravanserai opposite the old Jerusalem train station, is the city's only repertoire theater. The station itself has become a venue for cultural events in recent years as the site of \"Shav'ua Hasefer\" (an annual week-long book fair) and outdoor music performances. The Jerusalem Film Festival is held annually, screening Israeli and international films. In 1974 the Jerusalem Cinematheque was founded. In 1981 it was moved to a new building on Hebron Road near the Valley of Hinnom and the Old City.\n\nJerusalem was declared the Capital of Arab Culture in 2009. Jerusalem is home to the Palestinian National Theatre, which engages in cultural preservation as well as innovation, working to rekindle Palestinian interest in the arts. The Edward Said National Conservatory of Music sponsors the Palestine Youth Orchestra\nwhich toured Arab states of the Persian Gulf and other Middle East countries in 2009. The Islamic Museum on the Temple Mount, established in 1923, houses many Islamic artifacts, from tiny kohl flasks and rare manuscripts to giant marble columns. Al-Hoash, established in 2004, is a gallery for the preservation of Palestinian art. While Israel approves and financially supports some Arab cultural activities, Arab Capital of Culture events were banned because they were sponsored by the Palestine National Authority. In 2009, a four-day culture festival was held in the Beit 'Anan suburb of Jerusalem, attended by more than 15,000 people\n\nThe Museum on the Seam, which explores issues of coexistence through art, is situated on the road dividing eastern and western Jerusalem. The Abraham Fund and the Jerusalem Intercultural Center (JICC) promote joint Jewish-Palestinian cultural projects. The Jerusalem Center for Middle Eastern Music and Dance is open to Arabs and Jews and offers workshops on Jewish-Arab dialogue through the arts. The Jewish-Arab Youth Orchestra performs both European classical and Middle Eastern music. In 2008, the Tolerance Monument, an outdoor sculpture by Czesław Dźwigaj, was erected on a hill between Jewish Armon HaNetziv and Arab Jebl Mukaber as a symbol of Jerusalem's quest for peace.\n\nJerusalem is the state broadcasting center of Israel. The Israel Broadcasting Authority's main office is located in Jerusalem, as well as the TV and radio studios for Israel Radio, Channel 2, Channel 10, and part of the radio studios of BBC News. The Jerusalem Post and The Times of Israel are also headquartered in Jerusalem. Local newspapers include Kol Ha'Ir and The Jerusalem Times. God TV, an international Christian television network is also based in the city.\n\nThe two most popular sports are football (soccer) and basketball. Beitar Jerusalem Football Club is one of the most well known in Israel. Fans include political figures who often attend its games. Jerusalem's other major football team, and one of Beitar's top rivals, is Hapoel Jerusalem F.C. Whereas Beitar has been Israel State Cup champion seven times, Hapoel has won the Cup only once. Beitar has won the top league six times, while Hapoel has never succeeded. Beitar plays in the more prestigious Ligat HaAl, while Hapoel is in the second division Liga Leumit. Since its opening in 1992, Teddy Stadium has been Jerusalem's primary football stadium, with a capacity of 31,733. The most popular Palestinian football club is Jabal Al Mukaber (since 1976) which plays in West Bank Premier League. The club hails from Mount Scopus at Jerusalem, part of the Asian Football Confederation, and plays at the Faisal Al-Husseini International Stadium at Al-Ram, across the West Bank Barrier.\n\nIn basketball, Hapoel Jerusalem is one of the top teams in the top division. The club has won Israel's championship in 2015, the State Cup four times, and the ULEB Cup in 2004.\n\nThe Jerusalem Marathon, established in 2011, is an international marathon race held annually in Jerusalem in the month of March. The full 42-kilometer race begins at the Knesset, passes through Mount Scopus and the Old City's Armenian Quarter, and concludes at Sacher Park. In 2012, the Jerusalem Marathon drew 15,000 runners, including 1,500 from fifty countries outside Israel.\n\nA popular non-competitive sports event is the Jerusalem March, held annually during the Sukkot festival.\n\nBULLET::::- Prague, Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- Ayabe, Japan\nBULLET::::- New York City, United States \"(since 1993)\"\n\nBULLET::::- Partner city\nBULLET::::- Marseille, France\n\nBULLET::::- Greater Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- List of people from Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- List of places in Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- List of songs about Jerusalem\n\nBULLET::::- Cheshin, Amir S.; Bill Hutman and Avi Melamed (1999). \"Separate and Unequal: the Inside Story of Israeli Rule in East Jerusalem\" Harvard University Press\nBULLET::::- Cline, Eric (2004) \"Jerusalem Besieged: From Ancient Canaan to Modern Israel\". Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .\nBULLET::::- Collins, Larry, and La Pierre, Dominique (1988). \"O Jerusalem!\". New York: Simon & Schuster\nBULLET::::- Gold, Dore (2007) \"The Fight for Jerusalem: Radical Islam, The West, and the Future of the Holy City\". International Publishing Company J-M, Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Köchler, Hans (1981) \"The Legal Aspects of the Palestine Problem with Special Regard to the Question of Jerusalem\" Vienna: Braumüller\nBULLET::::- \"The Holy Cities: Jerusalem\" produced by Danae Film Production, distributed by HDH Communications; 2006\nBULLET::::- Wasserstein, Bernard (2002) \"Divided Jerusalem: The Struggle for the Holy City\" New Haven and London: Yale University Press.\nBULLET::::- \"Keys to Jerusalem: A Brief Overview\", The Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Center, Amman, Jordan, 2010. http://www.rissc.jo/docs/J101-10-10-10.pdf\nBULLET::::- Sebag Montefiore, Simon (2011) \"\", London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,\nBULLET::::- Young, Robb A (2012) \"Hezekiah in History and Tradition\" Brill Global Oriental Hotei Publishing, Netherlands\n\nBULLET::::- of the Jerusalem Municipality\nBULLET::::- What makes Jerusalem so holy? BBC\nBULLET::::- The Status of Jerusalem. United Nations document related to the dispute over the city\nBULLET::::- English translation of the Jerusalem Law, the Israeli law making Jerusalem the capital of Israel\nBULLET::::- Jerusalem Virtual Library, joint project by Al-Quds University and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- Official website of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, the city's foremost institution of higher education\nBULLET::::- Official website of Al-Quds University, the only Palestinian university in Jerusalem\n"}
{"id": "16044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16044", "title": "J. Edgar Hoover", "text": "J. Edgar Hoover\n\nJohn Edgar Hoover (January 1, 1895 – May 2, 1972) was the first Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) of the United States and an American law enforcement administrator. He was appointed as the director of the Bureau of Investigation – the FBI's predecessor – in 1924 and was instrumental in founding the FBI in 1935, where he remained director for another 37 years until his death in 1972 at the age of 77. Hoover has been credited with building the FBI into a larger crime-fighting agency than it was at its inception and with instituting a number of modernizations to police technology, such as a centralized fingerprint file and forensic laboratories.\n\nLater in life and after his death, Hoover became a controversial figure as evidence of his secretive abuses of power began to surface. He was found to have exceeded the jurisdiction of the FBI, and to have used the FBI to harass political dissenters and activists, to amass secret files on political leaders, and to collect evidence using illegal methods. Hoover consequently amassed a great deal of power and was in a position to intimidate and threaten others, including sitting presidents of the United States.\n\nJohn Edgar Hoover was born on New Year's Day 1895 in Washington, D.C., to Anna Marie (\"née\" Scheitlin; 1860–1938), who was of Swiss-German descent, and Dickerson Naylor Hoover Sr. (1856–1921), chief of the printing division of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, formerly a plate maker for the same organization. Dickerson Hoover was of English and German ancestry. Hoover's maternal great-uncle, John Hitz, was a Swiss honorary consul general to the United States. Among his family, he was the closest to his mother, who was their moral guide and disciplinarian.\n\nHoover was born in a house on the present site of Capitol Hill United Methodist Church, located on Seward Square near Eastern Market in Washington's Capitol Hill neighborhood. A stained glass window in the church is dedicated to him. Hoover did not have a birth certificate filed upon his birth, although it was required in 1895 in Washington. Two of his siblings did have certificates, but Hoover's was not filed until 1938 when he was 43.\n\nHoover lived in Washington, D.C. his entire life. He attended Central High School, where he sang in the school choir, participated in the Reserve Officers' Training Corps program, and competed on the debate team. During debates, he argued against women getting the right to vote and against the abolition of the death penalty. The school newspaper applauded his \"cool, relentless logic.\" Hoover stuttered as a boy, which he overcame by teaching himself to talk quickly—a style that he carried through his adult career. He eventually spoke with such ferocious speed that stenographers had a hard time following him.\n\nHoover was 18 years old when he accepted his first job, an entry-level position as messenger in the orders department, at the Library of Congress. The library was a half mile from his house. The experience shaped both Hoover and the creation of the FBI profiles; as Hoover noted in a 1951 letter: \"This job ... trained me in the value of collating material. It gave me an excellent foundation for my work in the FBI where it has been necessary to collate information and evidence.\"\n\nHoover obtained a Bachelor of Laws from The George Washington University Law School in 1916, where he was a member of the Alpha Nu Chapter of the Kappa Alpha Order, and an LL.M. in 1917 from the same university. While a law student, Hoover became interested in the career of Anthony Comstock, the New York City U.S. Postal Inspector, who waged prolonged campaigns against fraud, vice, pornography, and birth control.\n\nImmediately after getting his LL.M. degree, Hoover was hired by the Justice Department to work in the War Emergency Division. He accepted the clerkship on July 27, 1917, when he was just 22 years old. The job paid $990 a year ($ in 2019) and was exempt from the draft.\n\nIn 1920, Edgar Hoover was initiated at D.C.'s Federal Lodge No. 1 in Washington D.C., becoming a Master Mason by age 25 and a 33rd Degree Inspector General Honorary in 1955.\n\nHe soon became the head of the Division's Alien Enemy Bureau, authorized by President Woodrow Wilson at the beginning of World War I to arrest and jail allegedly disloyal foreigners without trial. He received additional authority from the 1917 Espionage Act. Out of a list of 1,400 suspicious Germans living in the U.S., the Bureau arrested 98 and designated 1,172 as arrestable.\n\nIn August 1919, the 24-year-old Hoover became head of the Bureau of Investigation's new General Intelligence Division, also known as the Radical Division because its goal was to monitor and disrupt the work of domestic radicals. America's First Red Scare was beginning, and one of Hoover's first assignments was to carry out the Palmer Raids.\n\nHoover and his chosen assistant, George Ruch, monitored a variety of U.S. radicals with the intent to punish, arrest, or deport those whose politics they decided were dangerous. Targets during this period included Marcus Garvey; Rose Pastor Stokes and Cyril Briggs; Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman; and future Supreme Court justice Felix Frankfurter, who, Hoover maintained, was \"the most dangerous man in the United States.\"\n\nIn 1921, Hoover rose in the Bureau of Investigation to deputy head and, in 1924, the Attorney General made him the acting director. On May 10, 1924, President Calvin Coolidge appointed Hoover as the fifth Director of the Bureau of Investigation, partly in response to allegations that the prior director, William J. Burns, was involved in the Teapot Dome scandal. When Hoover took over the Bureau of Investigation, it had approximately 650 employees, including 441 Special Agents.\nHoover fired all female agents and banned the future hiring of them.\n\nHoover was sometimes unpredictable in his leadership. He frequently fired Bureau agents, singling out those he thought \"looked stupid like truck drivers,\" or whom he considered \"pinheads.\" He also relocated agents who had displeased him to career-ending assignments and locations. Melvin Purvis was a prime example: Purvis was one of the most effective agents in capturing and breaking up 1930s gangs, and it is alleged that Hoover maneuvered him out of the Bureau because he was envious of the substantial public recognition Purvis received.\n\nHoover often praised local law-enforcement officers around the country, and built up a national network of supporters and admirers in the process. One whom he often commended for particular effectiveness was the conservative sheriff of Caddo Parish, Louisiana, J. Howell Flournoy.\n\nIn the early 1930s, criminal gangs carried out large numbers of bank robberies in the Midwest. They used their superior firepower and fast getaway cars to elude local law enforcement agencies and avoid arrest. Many of these criminals frequently made newspaper headlines across the United States, particularly John Dillinger, who became famous for leaping over bank cages, and repeatedly escaping from jails and police traps. The gangsters enjoyed a level of sympathy in the Midwest, as banks and bankers were widely seen as oppressors of common people during the Great Depression.\n\nThe robbers operated across state lines, and Hoover pressed to have their crimes recognized as federal offenses so that he and his men would have the authority to pursue them and get the credit for capturing them. Initially, the Bureau suffered some embarrassing foul-ups, in particular with Dillinger and his conspirators. A raid on a summer lodge in Manitowish Waters, Wisconsin, called \"Little Bohemia,\" left a Bureau agent and a civilian bystander dead and others wounded; all the gangsters escaped.\nHoover realized that his job was then on the line, and he pulled out all stops to capture the culprits. In late July 1934, Special Agent Melvin Purvis, the Director of Operations in the Chicago office, received a tip on Dillinger's whereabouts that paid off when Dillinger was located, ambushed, and killed by Bureau agents outside the Biograph Theater.\n\nHoover was credited with several highly publicized captures or shootings of outlaws and bank robbers, even though he was not present at the events. These included those of Machine Gun Kelly in 1933, of Dillinger in 1934, and of Alvin Karpis in 1936, which led to the Bureau's powers being broadened.\n\nIn 1935, the \"Bureau of Investigation\" was renamed the \"Federal Bureau of Investigation\" (FBI). In 1939, the FBI became pre-eminent in the field of domestic intelligence, thanks in large part to changes made by Hoover, such as expanding and combining fingerprint files in the Identification Division, to compile the largest collection of fingerprints to date, and Hoover's help to expand the FBI's recruitment and create the FBI Laboratory, a division established in 1932 to examine and analyze evidence found by the FBI.\n\nDuring the 1930s Hoover persistently denied the existence of organized crime, even while there were numerous shootings as a result of Mafia control of and competition over the Prohibition-created black market. Gangster Frank Costello helped encourage this view by feeding Hoover tips on sure winners through their mutual friend, gossip columnist Walter Winchell. Hoover had a reputation as \"an inveterate horseplayer\" known to send Special Agents to place $100 bets for him. Hoover said the Bureau had \"much more important functions\" than arresting bookmakers and gamblers. However it is widely believed that Hoover's reticence to use the full force of the FBI to investigate “the Mafia” was due to the existence of compromising photographs of Hoover and his colleague, FBI Deputy Director and long-time intimate partner Clyde Tolson, which were in the possession of, and controlled by, the gangsters Myer Lansky and Frank Costello.\n\nWhile Hoover had fought bank-robbing gangsters in the 1930s, anti-communism was a bigger focus for him after World War II as the Cold War developed. During the 1940s through mid-1950s, he seemed to ignore organized crime of the type that ran vice rackets such as drugs, prostitution, and extortion. He denied that any Mafia operated in the United States. In the 1950s, evidence of Hoover's unwillingness to focus FBI resources on the Mafia became grist for the media and his many detractors.\n\nAfter the Apalachin meeting in 1957, Hoover could no longer deny the syndicate's existence and its influence on the North American underworld, as well as Cosa Nostra's overall control and influence of the Syndicate's many branches throughout North America and abroad. Hoover created the \"Top Hoodlum Program\" and went after the syndicate's top bosses throughout the country.\n\nHoover was concerned about what he claimed was subversion, and under his leadership, the FBI investigated tens of thousands of suspected subversives and radicals. According to critics, Hoover tended to exaggerate the dangers of these alleged subversives and many times overstepped his bounds in his pursuit of eliminating that perceived threat.\nWilliam G. Hundley, a Justice Department prosecutor, said Hoover may have inadvertently kept alive the concern over communist infiltration into the government, quipping that Hoover's \"informants were nearly the only ones that paid the party dues.\"\n\nThe FBI investigated rings of German saboteurs and spies starting in the late 1930s, and had primary responsibility for counterespionage. The first arrests of German agents were made in 1938 and continued throughout World War II. In the Quirin affair, during World War II, German U-boats set two small groups of Nazi agents ashore in Florida and Long Island to cause acts of sabotage within the country. The two teams were apprehended after one of the men contacted the FBI and told them everything. He was also charged and convicted.\n\nDuring this time period President Franklin D. Roosevelt, out of concern over Nazi agents in the United States, gave \"qualified permission\" to wiretap persons \"suspected ... [of] subversive activities\". He went on to add, in 1941, that the United States Attorney General had to be informed of its use in each case.\n\nThe Attorney General Robert H. Jackson left it to Hoover to decide how and when to use wiretaps, as he found the \"whole business\" distasteful. Jackson's successor at the post of Attorney General, Francis Biddle, did turn down Hoover's requests on occasion.\n\nThe FBI participated in the Venona Project, a pre-World War II joint project with the British to eavesdrop on Soviet spies in the UK and the United States. They did not initially realize that espionage was being committed, but the Soviet's multiple use of one-time pad ciphers (which with single use are unbreakable) created redundancies that allowed some intercepts to be decoded. These established that espionage was being carried out.\n\nHoover kept the intercepts – America's greatest counterintelligence secret – in a locked safe in his office. He chose to not inform President Truman, Attorney General J. Howard McGrath, or Secretaries of State Dean Acheson and General George Marshall while they held office. He informed the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of the Venona Project in 1952.\n\nIn 1946, Attorney General Tom C. Clark authorized Hoover to compile a list of potentially disloyal Americans who might be detained during a wartime national emergency. In 1950, at the outbreak of the Korean War, Hoover submitted to President Truman a plan to suspend the writ of \"habeas corpus\" and detain 12,000 Americans suspected of disloyalty. Truman did not act on the plan.\n\nIn 1956, Hoover was becoming increasingly frustrated by U.S. Supreme Court decisions that limited the Justice Department's ability to prosecute people for their political opinions, most notably communists. Some of his aides reported that he purposely exaggerated the threat of communism to \"ensure financial and public support for the FBI.\" At this time he formalized a covert \"dirty tricks\" program under the name COINTELPRO. COINTELPRO was first used to disrupt the Communist Party USA, where Hoover ordered observation and pursuit of targets that ranged from suspected citizen spies to larger celebrity figures such as Charlie Chaplin that he saw as spreading Communist Party propaganda.\n\nCOINTELPRO's methods included infiltration, burglaries, illegal wiretaps, planting forged documents, and spreading false rumors about key members of target organizations. Some authors have charged that COINTELPRO methods also included inciting violence and arranging murders.\n\nThis program remained in place until it was exposed to the public in 1971, after the burglary by a group of eight activists of many internal documents from an office in Media, Pennsylvania, and COINTELPRO became the cause of some of the harshest criticism of Hoover and the FBI. COINTELPRO's activities were investigated in 1975 by the United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, called the \"Church Committee\" after its chairman, Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho); the committee declared COINTELPRO's activities were illegal and contrary to the Constitution.\n\nHoover amassed significant power by collecting files containing large amounts of compromising and potentially embarrassing information on many powerful people, especially politicians. According to Laurence Silberman, appointed Deputy Attorney General in early 1974, FBI Director Clarence M. Kelley thought such files either did not exist or had been destroyed. After \"The Washington Post\" broke a story in January 1975, Kelley searched and found them in his outer office. The House Judiciary Committee then demanded that Silberman testify about them.\n\nIn 1956, several years before he targeted King, Hoover had a public showdown with T. R. M. Howard, a civil rights leader from Mound Bayou, Mississippi. During a national speaking tour, Howard had criticized the FBI's failure to thoroughly investigate the racially motivated murders of George W. Lee, Lamar Smith, and Emmett Till. Hoover wrote an open letter to the press singling out these statements as \"irresponsible.\"\n\nIn 1960s, Hoover's FBI monitored John Lennon, Malcolm X, and Muhammad Ali. The COINTELPRO tactics were later extended to organizations such as the Nation of Islam, Black Panther Party, Martin Luther King Jr.'s Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and others. Hoover's moves against people who maintained contacts with subversive elements, some of whom were members of the civil rights movement, also led to accusations of trying to undermine their reputations.\n\nThe treatment of Martin Luther King Jr. and actress Jean Seberg are two examples: Jacqueline Kennedy recalled that Hoover told President John F. Kennedy that King tried to arrange a sex party while in the capital for the March on Washington and told Robert Kennedy that King made derogatory comments during the President's funeral. Under Hoover's leadership, the FBI sent an anonymous blackmail letter to King in 1964, urging him to commit suicide.\nKing aide Andrew Young later claimed in a 2013 interview with the Academy of Achievement that the main source of tension between the SCLC and FBI was the government agency's lack of black agents, and that both parties were willing to cooperate with each other by the time the Selma to Montgomery marches had taken place.\n\nIn one particularly controversial 1965 incident, white civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo was murdered by Ku Klux Klansmen, who gave chase and fired shots into her car after noticing that her passenger was a young black man; one of the Klansmen was Gary Thomas Rowe, an acknowledged FBI informant. The FBI spread rumors that Liuzzo was a member of the Communist Party and had abandoned her children to have sexual relationships with African Americans involved in the civil rights movement. FBI records show that J. Edgar Hoover personally communicated these insinuations to President Johnson.\n\nHoover also personally intervened to prevent federal prosecutions against the Ku Klux Klan members responsible for the terrorist bombing attack against the 16th Street Baptist Church. By May 1965, local investigators and the FBI had identified the perpetrators of the bombing, and this information was relayed to Hoover; however, no prosecutions of the four suspects ensued, even though the evidence was reportedly \"so strong that even a white Alabama jury would convict.\" There had been a history of mistrust between local and federal investigators. Later the same year, J. Edgar Hoover formally blocked any impending federal prosecutions against the suspects, and refused to disclose any evidence his agents had obtained with state or federal prosecutors. In 1968, the FBI formally closed their investigation into the bombing without filing charges against any of their named suspects. The files were sealed by order of Hoover.\n\nOne of his biographers, Kenneth Ackerman, wrote that the allegation that Hoover's secret files kept presidents from firing him is \"a myth.\" However, Richard Nixon was recorded in 1971 stating that one of the reasons he did not fire Hoover was that he was afraid of Hoover's reprisals against him. Similarly, Presidents Harry Truman and John F. Kennedy considered dismissing Hoover as FBI Director, but ultimately concluded that the political cost of doing so would be too great.\n\nIn 1964, Hoover's FBI investigated Jack Valenti, a special assistant and confidant of President Lyndon Johnson. Despite Valenti's two-year marriage to Johnson's personal secretary, the investigation focused on rumors that he was having a gay relationship with a commercial photographer friend.\n\nHoover personally directed the FBI investigation of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. In 1964, just days before Hoover testified in the earliest stages of the Warren Commission hearings, President Lyndon B. Johnson waived the then-mandatory U.S. Government Service Retirement Age of 70, allowing Hoover to remain the FBI Director \"for an indefinite period of time.\" The House Select Committee on Assassinations issued a report in 1979 critical of the performance by the FBI, the Warren Commission, and other agencies. The report criticized the FBI's (Hoover's) reluctance to thoroughly investigate the possibility of a conspiracy to assassinate the President.\n\nWhen Richard Nixon took office in January 1969, Hoover had just turned 74. There was a growing sentiment in Washington, D.C., that the aging FBI chief needed to go, but Hoover's power and friends in Congress remained too strong for him to be forced into retirement.\n\nHoover remained director of the FBI until he died of a heart attack in his Washington home, on May 2, 1972. Operational command of the Bureau passed to Associate Director Clyde Tolson. On May 3, 1972, Nixon appointed L. Patrick Gray – a Justice Department official with no FBI experience – as Acting Director of the FBI, with W. Mark Felt becoming Associate Director.\n\nHoover's body lay in state in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol, where Chief Justice Warren Burger eulogized him. Hoover is the only civil servant to have lain in state. President Nixon delivered another eulogy at the funeral service in the National Presbyterian Church, and called Hoover \"one of the Giants, [whose] long life brimmed over with magnificent achievement and dedicated service to this country which he loved so well\". Hoover was buried in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C., next to the graves of his parents and a sister who died in infancy.\n\nBiographer Kenneth D. Ackerman summarizes Hoover's legacy thus:\nFor better or worse, he built the FBI into a modern, national organization stressing professionalism and scientific crime-fighting. For most of his life, Americans considered him a hero. He made the G-Man brand so popular that, at its height, it was harder to become an FBI agent than to be accepted into an Ivy League college.\n\nHoover worked to groom the image of the FBI in American media; he was a consultant to Warner Brothers for a theatrical film about the FBI, \"The FBI Story\" (1959), and in 1965 on Warner's long-running spin-off television series, \"The F.B.I.\" Hoover personally made sure Warner Brothers portrayed the FBI more favorably than other crime dramas of the times.\n\nIn 1979 there was a large increase in conflict in the House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) under Senator Richard Schweiker, which had re-opened the investigation of the assassination of President Kennedy and reported that Hoover's FBI \"failed to investigate adequately the possibility of a conspiracy to assassinate the President\". The HSCA further reported that Hoover's FBI \"was deficient in its sharing of information with other agencies and departments\".\n\nU.S. President Harry S Truman said that Hoover transformed the FBI into his private secret police force:\n... we want no Gestapo or secret police. The FBI is tending in that direction. They are dabbling in sex-life scandals and plain blackmail. J. Edgar Hoover would give his right eye to take over, and all congressmen and senators are afraid of him.\n\nBecause Hoover's actions came to be seen as abuses of power, FBI directors are now limited to one 10-year term, subject to extension by the United States Senate.\n\nThe FBI Headquarters in Washington, DC is named the J. Edgar Hoover Building, after Hoover. Because of the controversial nature of Hoover's legacy, there have been periodic proposals to rename it by legislation proposed by both Republicans and Democrats in the House and Senate. The first such proposal came just two months after the building's inauguration. On December 12, 1979, Gilbert Gude – a Republican congressman from Maryland – introduced H.R. 11137, which would have changed the name of the edifice from the \"J. Edgar Hoover F.B.I. Building\" to simply the \"F.B.I. Building.\" However, that bill never made it out of committee, nor did two subsequent attempts by Gude fare any better. Another notable attempt came in 1993, when Senator Howard Metzenbaum pushed for a name change following a new report about Hoover's ordered \"loyalty investigation\" of future Senator Quentin Burdick. In 1998, Senator Harry Reid sponsored an amendment to strip Hoover's name from the building, stating that \"J. Edgar Hoover's name on the FBI building is a stain on the building.\" The Senate did not adopt the amendment.\n\nHoover's practice of violating civil liberties for the sake of national security has been questioned in reference to recent national surveillance programs. An example is a lecture titled \"Civil Liberties and National Security: Did Hoover Get it Right?\", given at The Institute of World Politics on April 21, 2015.\n\nHoover received his first dog from his parents when he was a child, after which he was never without one. He owned many throughout his lifetime and became an aficionado especially knowledgeable in breeding of pedigrees, particularly Cairn Terriers and Beagles. He gave many dogs to notable people, such as Presidents Herbert Hoover (no relation) and Lyndon B. Johnson, and buried seven canine pets, including a Cairn Terrier named Spee De Bozo, at Aspen Hill Memorial Park, in Silver Spring, Maryland.\n\nFrom the 1940s, rumors circulated that Hoover, who was still living with his mother in his early 40s, was homosexual. The historians John Stuart Cox and Athan G. Theoharis speculated that Clyde Tolson, who became an assistant director to Hoover in his mid 40s, was a homosexual lover to Hoover (and became his primary heir) until his death. Hoover reportedly hunted down and threatened anyone who made insinuations about his sexuality. Truman Capote, who enjoyed repeating rumors about Hoover, once remarked that he was more interested in making Hoover angry than determining whether the rumors were true.\n\nSome associates and scholars dismiss rumors about Hoover's sexuality, and rumors about his relationship with Tolson in particular, as unlikely, while others have described them as probable or even \"confirmed\". Still other scholars have reported the rumors without expressing an opinion.\n\nCox and Theoharis concluded that \"the strange likelihood is that Hoover never knew sexual desire at all.\"\n\nHoover described Tolson as his alter ego: the men worked closely together during the day and, both single, frequently took meals, went to night clubs, and vacationed together. This closeness between the two men is often cited as evidence that they were lovers. Some FBI employees who knew them, such as W. Mark Felt, say the relationship was \"brotherly\"; however former FBI official Mike Mason suggested that some of Hoover's colleagues denied that he had a sexual relationship with Tolson in an effort to protect Hoover's image.\n\nThe novelist William Styron told Summers that he once saw Hoover and Tolson in a California beach house, where the director was painting his friend's toenails. Harry Hay, founder of the Mattachine Society, one of the first gay rights organizations, said Hoover and Tolson sat in boxes owned by and used exclusively by gay men at the Del Mar racetrack in California.\n\nHoover bequeathed his estate to Tolson, who moved into Hoover's house after Hoover died. Tolson accepted the American flag that draped Hoover's casket. Tolson is buried a few yards away from Hoover in the Congressional Cemetery.\n\nHoover's biographer Richard Hack does not believe the director was gay. Hack notes that Hoover was romantically linked to actress Dorothy Lamour in the late 1930s and early 1940s and that after Hoover's death, Lamour did not deny rumors that she had had an affair with him.\n\nHack further reported that, during the 1940s and 1950s, Hoover attended social events with Lela Rogers, the divorced mother of dancer and actress Ginger Rogers, so often that many of their mutual friends assumed the pair would eventually marry.\n\nUnder Hoover, agents were directed to seize all pornographic materials uncovered in their investigations and forward them to Hoover personally. He kept a large collection, possibly the world's largest, of films, photographs, and written materials, with particular emphasis on nude photos of celebrities. Hoover reportedly used these for his own titillation, as well as holding them for blackmail purposes.\n\nIn his biography \"Official and Confidential: The Secret Life of J. Edgar Hoover\" (1993), journalist Anthony Summers quoted \"society divorcee\" Susan Rosenstiel as claiming to have seen Hoover engaging in cross-dressing in the 1950s, at all-male parties.\n\nSummers alleged the Mafia had blackmail material on Hoover, which made Hoover reluctant to pursue organized crime aggressively. According to Summers, organized crime figures Meyer Lansky and Frank Costello obtained photos of Hoover's alleged homosexual activity with Tolson and used them to ensure that the FBI did not target their illegal activities. Additionally, Summers claimed that Hoover was friends with Billy Byars, Jr., an alleged child pornographer and producer of the film \"The Genesis Children\". \n\nAnother Hoover biographer who heard the rumors of homosexuality and blackmail, however, said he was unable to corroborate them, though it has been acknowledged that Lansky and other organized crime figures had frequently been allowed to visit the Del Charro Hotel in La Jolla, California, which was owned by Hoover's friend, and staunch Lyndon Johnson supporter, Clint Murchison Sr. Hoover and Tolson also frequently visited the Del Charro Hotel. Summers quoted a source named Charles Krebs as saying, \"on three occasions that I knew about, maybe four, boys were driven down to La Jolla at Hoover's request.\"\n\nSkeptics of the cross-dressing story point to Susan Rosenstiel's lack of credibility (she pleaded guilty to attempted perjury in a 1971 case and later served time in a New York City jail). Recklessly indiscreet behavior by Hoover would have been totally out of character, whatever his sexuality. Most biographers consider the story of Mafia blackmail unlikely in light of the FBI's continuing investigations of the Mafia.\n\nIn his book \"The Bureau: The Secret History of the FBI\", journalist Ronald Kessler exposed as false the claim by Susan S. Rosenstiel, a former wife of Lewis S. Rosenstiel, chairman of Schenley Industries Inc., that she saw Hoover engaging in cross-dressing at a party in 1958 at the Plaza Hotel in New York. Kessler, a former \"Washington Post\" reporter, wrote that Rosenstiel had served time at Rikers Prison in 1971 for perjuring herself in a 1971 case.\n\nAlthough never corroborated, the allegation of cross-dressing has been widely repeated. In the words of author Thomas Doherty, \"For American popular culture, the image of the zaftig FBI director as a Christine Jorgensen wanna-be was too delicious not to savor.\" Biographer Kenneth Ackerman says that Summers' accusations have been \"widely debunked by historians\".\n\nThe attorney Roy Cohn served as general counsel on the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations during Senator Joseph McCarthy's tenure as chairman and assisted Hoover during the 1950s investigations of Communists and was generally known to be a closeted homosexual. Cohn's opinion was that Hoover was too frightened of his own sexuality to have anything approaching a normal sexual or romantic relationship.\n\nDuring the Lavender scare, Cohn and McCarthy further enhanced anti-Communist fervor by suggesting that Communists overseas had convinced several closeted homosexuals within the U.S. government to leak important government information in exchange for the assurance that their sexual identity would remain a secret. A federal investigation that followed convinced President Dwight D. Eisenhower to sign an Executive Order on April 29, 1953, that barred homosexuals from obtaining jobs at the federal level.\n\nIn his 2004 study of the event, historian David K. Johnson attacked the speculations about Hoover's homosexuality as relying on \"the kind of tactics Hoover and the security program he oversaw perfected: guilt by association, rumor, and unverified gossip.\" He views Rosenstiel as a liar who was paid for her story, whose \"description of Hoover in drag engaging in sex with young blond boys in leather while desecrating the Bible is clearly a homophobic fantasy.\" He believes only those who have forgotten the virulence of the decades-long campaign against homosexuals in government can believe reports that Hoover appeared in compromising situations.\n\nSome people associated with Hoover have supported the rumors about his homosexuality. According to Anthony Summers, Hoover often frequented New York City's Stork Club. Luisa Stuart, a model who was 18 or 19 at the time, told Summers that she had seen Hoover holding hands with Tolson as they all rode in a limo uptown to the Cotton Club in 1936.\n\nActress and singer Ethel Merman was a friend of Hoover's from 1938, and familiar with all parties during his alleged romance of Lela Rogers. In a 1978 interview she said: \"Some of my best friends are homosexual: Everybody knew about J. Edgar Hoover, but he was the best chief the FBI ever had.\"\n\nJ. Edgar Hoover was the nominal author of a number of books and articles, although it is widely believed that all of these were ghostwritten by FBI employees. Hoover received the credit and royalties.\n\nBULLET::::- 1938: Oklahoma Baptist University awarded Hoover an honorary doctorate during commencement exercises, at which he spoke.\nBULLET::::- 1939: the National Academy of Sciences awarded Hoover its Public Welfare Medal.\nBULLET::::- 1950: King George VI of the United Kingdom appoints Hoover Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire.\nBULLET::::- 1955: President Dwight D. Eisenhower awarded Hoover the National Security Medal.\nBULLET::::- 1966: President Lyndon B. Johnson bestowed the State Department's Distinguished Service Award on Hoover for his service as director of the FBI.\nBULLET::::- 1973: The newly built FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., is named the J. Edgar Hoover Building.\nBULLET::::- 1974: Congress voted to honor Hoover's memory by publishing a memorial book, \"J. Edgar Hoover: Memorial Tributes in the Congress of the United States and Various Articles and Editorials Relating to His Life and Work\".\nBULLET::::- 1974: In Schaumburg, Illinois, a grade school was named after J. Edgar Hoover. However, in 1994, after information about Hoover's illegal activities was released, the school's name was changed to commemorate Herbert Hoover instead.\n\nJ. Edgar Hoover has been portrayed by numerous actors in films and stage productions featuring him as FBI Director. The first known portrayal was by Kent Rogers in the 1941 Looney Tunes short \"Hollywood Steps Out\". Some notable portrayals (listed chronologically) include:\nBULLET::::- Dorothi Fox \"portrayed\" Hoover in disguise in the 1971 film \"Bananas\".\nBULLET::::- Broderick Crawford and James Wainwright in the Larry Cohen film \"The Private Files of J. Edgar Hoover\" (1977).\nBULLET::::- Dolph Sweet in the television miniseries \"King\" (1978).\nBULLET::::- Ernest Borgnine in the television film \"Blood Feud\" (1983).\nBULLET::::- Vincent Gardenia in the television miniseries \"Kennedy\" (1983).\nBULLET::::- Jack Warden in the television film \"Hoover vs. The Kennedys\" (1987).\nBULLET::::- Treat Williams in the television film \"J. Edgar Hoover\" (1987).\nBULLET::::- Kevin Dunn in the film \"Chaplin\" (1992).\nBULLET::::- Pat Hingle in the television film \"Citizen Cohn\" (1992).\nBULLET::::- Richard Dysart in the television film \"Marilyn & Bobby: Her Final Affair\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- Richard Dysart in the theatrical film \"Panther\" (1995).\nBULLET::::- Bob Hoskins in the Oliver Stone drama \"Nixon\" (1995).\nBULLET::::- Wayne Tippit in two episodes of \"Dark Skies\" (1996) and (1997).\nBULLET::::- David Fredericks in the episodes \"Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man\" (1996) and \"Travelers\" (1998) of \"The X-Files\".\nBULLET::::- David Fredericks in the episode \"Matryoshka\" (1999) of \"Millennium\".\nBULLET::::- Ernest Borgnine in the theatrical film \"Hoover\" (2000).\nBULLET::::- Kelsey Grammer portrayed Hoover, with John Goodman as Tolson, in the Harry Shearer comic musical \"J. Edgar!\" on L.A. Theatre Works' \"The Play's the Thing\" (2001).\nBULLET::::- Larry Drake in the Robert Dyke film \"Timequest\" (2002).\nBULLET::::- Ryan Drummond voiced him in the Bethesda Softworks game \"\" (2005).\nBULLET::::- Billy Crudup in the Michael Mann film \"Public Enemies\" (2009).\nBULLET::::- Enrico Colantoni in the television miniseries \"The Kennedys\" (2011).\nBULLET::::- Leonardo DiCaprio in the Clint Eastwood biopic \"J. Edgar\" (2011).\nBULLET::::- William Harrison-Wallace in the Dollar Baby 2012 screen adaptation of Stephen King's short story, \"The Death of Jack Hamilton\" (2001).\nBULLET::::- Rob Riggle in the \"Atlanta\" (2013) episode of Comedy Central's \"Drunk History\".\nBULLET::::- Eric Ladin in the HBO series \"Boardwalk Empire\", season 4 (2013).\nBULLET::::- Michael McKean in Robert Schenkkan's play \"All the Way\" at the American Repertory Theater (2013).\nBULLET::::- Sean McNall in the movie \"No God, No Master\" (2014).\nBULLET::::- Dylan Baker in Ava DuVernay's Martin Luther King biopic \"Selma\" (2014).\nBULLET::::- Stephen Root in the HBO television film \"All the Way\" (2016).\nBULLET::::- T.R. Knight in the National Geographic television series \"Genius\" (2017).\nBULLET::::- William Forsythe in the Amazon television series \"The Man in the High Castle\" (2018).\n\nBULLET::::- G-Man (slang)\nBULLET::::- Harry Anslinger\nBULLET::::- Helen Gandy\nBULLET::::- McCarthyism\n\nFrontline (1993) The Secret File on J. Edgar Hoover (#11.4)\nBULLET::::- Caballero, Raymond. \"McCarthyism vs. Clinton Jencks.\" Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2019.\nBULLET::::- Cecil, Matthew (2016). \"Branding Hoover's FBI; How the Boss's PR Men Sold the Bureau to America.\" Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2016.\n\n"}
{"id": "16045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16045", "title": "James Thurber", "text": "James Thurber\n\nJames Grover Thurber (December 8, 1894 – November 2, 1961) was an American cartoonist, author, humorist, journalist, playwright, children's book author, and celebrated wit. He was best known for his cartoons and short stories published mainly in \"The New Yorker\" magazine, such as \"The Catbird Seat\", and collected in his numerous books. He was one of the most popular humorists of his time, as he celebrated the comic frustrations and eccentricities of ordinary people. He wrote the Broadway comedy \"The Male Animal\" in collaboration with his college friend Elliott Nugent; it was later adapted into a film starring Henry Fonda and Olivia de Havilland. His short story \"The Secret Life of Walter Mitty\" has been adapted for film twice, once in 1947 and again in 2013.\n\nThurber was born in Columbus, Ohio, to Charles L. Thurber and Mary Agnes \"Mame\" (née Fisher) Thurber on December 8, 1894. Both of his parents greatly influenced his work. His father was a sporadically employed clerk and minor politician who dreamed of being a lawyer or an actor. Thurber described his mother as a \"born comedian\" and \"one of the finest comic talents I think I have ever known.\" She was a practical joker and, on one occasion, pretended to be crippled and attended a faith healer revival, only to jump up and proclaim herself healed.\nWhen Thurber was seven years old, he and one of his brothers were playing a game of William Tell, when his brother shot James in the eye with an arrow. He lost that eye, and the injury later caused him to become almost entirely blind. He was unable to participate in sports and other activities in his childhood because of this injury, but he developed a creative mind which he used to express himself in writings. Neurologist V .S. Ramachandran suggests that Thurber's imagination may be partly explained by Charles Bonnet syndrome, a neurological condition which causes complex visual hallucinations in people who have suffered some level of visual loss. (This was the basis for the piece \"The Admiral on the Wheel\".)\n\nFrom 1913 to 1918, Thurber attended Ohio State University where he was a member of the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity. It was during this time he rented the house on 77 Jefferson Avenue, which became Thurber House in 1984. He never graduated from the university because his poor eyesight prevented him from taking a mandatory Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) course. In 1995 he was posthumously awarded a degree.\n\nFrom 1918 to 1920, Thurber worked as a code clerk for the United States Department of State, first in Washington, D.C. and then at the embassy in Paris. On returning to Columbus, he began his career as a reporter for \"The Columbus Dispatch\" from 1921 to 1924. During part of this time, he reviewed books, films, and plays in a weekly column called \"Credos and Curios\", a title that was given to a posthumous collection of his work. Thurber returned to Paris during this period, where he wrote for the \"Chicago Tribune\" and other newspapers.\n\nIn 1925, Thurber moved to Greenwich Village in New York City, getting a job as a reporter for the \"New York Evening Post\". He joined the staff of \"The New Yorker\" in 1927 as an editor, with the help of E.B. White, his friend and fellow \"New Yorker\" contributor. His career as a cartoonist began in 1930 after White found some of Thurber's drawings in a trash can and submitted them for publication; White inked-in some of these earlier drawings to make them reproduce better for the magazine, and years later expressed deep regret that he had done such a thing. Thurber contributed both his writings and his drawings to \"The New Yorker\" until the 1950s.\n\nThurber married Althea Adams in 1922, but the marriage, as he later wrote to a friend, devolved into “a relationship charming, fine, and hurting.” The marriage ended in divorce in May 1935. They lived in Fairfield County, Connecticut, with their daughter Rosemary (b. 1931). He married Helen Wismer (1902–1986) in June 1935.\n\nThurber's behavior became erratic and unpredictable in his last year. At a party hosted by Noël Coward, Thurber was taken back to the Algonquin Hotel at six in the morning. Thurber was stricken with a blood clot on the brain on October 4, 1961, and underwent emergency surgery, drifting in and out of consciousness. The operation was initially successful, but Thurber died a few weeks later, on November 2, aged 66, due to complications from pneumonia. The doctors said his brain was senescent from several small strokes and hardening of the arteries. His last words, aside from the repeated word \"God\", were \"God bless... God damn\", according to his wife, Helen.\n\nBULLET::::- Established in 1997, the annual Thurber Prize honors outstanding examples of American humor.\nBULLET::::- In 2008, The Library of America selected Thurber's story, \"A Sort of Genius,\" first published in \"The New Yorker\", for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American True Crime.\nBULLET::::- Two of his residences have been listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places: his childhood Thurber House in Ohio and the Sanford-Curtis-Thurber House in Fairfield County, Connecticut.\n\nUniquely among major American literary figures, he became equally well known for his simple, surrealistic drawings and cartoons. Both his skills were helped along by the support of, and collaboration with, fellow \"New Yorker\" staff member E. B. White, who insisted that Thurber's sketches could stand on their own as artistic expressions. Thurber drew six covers and numerous classic illustrations for \"The New Yorker\".\n\nThe last twenty years of Thurber's life were filled with material and professional success in spite of his blindness. He published at least fourteen more books, including \"The Thurber Carnival\" (1945), \"Thurber Country\" (1953), and the extremely popular account of the life of \"New Yorker\" editor Harold Ross, \"The Years with Ross\" (1959). A number of his short stories were made into movies, including The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (1947). Many of his short stories are humorous fictional memoirs from his life, but he also wrote darker material, such as \"The Whip-Poor-Will\", a story of madness and murder. His best-known short stories are \"The Dog That Bit People\" and \"The Night the Bed Fell\"; they can be found in \"My Life and Hard Times\", which was his \"break-out\" book. Among his other classics are \"The Secret Life of Walter Mitty\", \"The Catbird Seat\", \"A Couple of Hamburgers\", \"The Greatest Man in the World\", \"If Grant Had Been Drinking at Appomattox\". \"The Middle-Aged Man on the Flying Trapeze\" has several short stories with a tense undercurrent of marital discord. The book was published the year of his divorce and remarriage.\nHis 1941 story \"You Could Look It Up\", about a three-foot adult being brought in to take a walk in a baseball game, is said to have inspired Bill Veeck's stunt with Eddie Gaedel with the St. Louis Browns in 1951. Veeck claimed an older provenance for the stunt, but was certainly aware of the Thurber story.\n\nIn addition to his other fiction, Thurber wrote over seventy-five fables, some of which were first published in \"The New Yorker\" (1939), then collected in \"Fables for Our Time & Famous Poems Illustrated\" (1940) and \"Further Fables for Our Time\" (1956). These were short stories that featured anthropomorphic animals (e.g. \"The Little Girl and the Wolf\", his version of \"Little Red Riding Hood\") as main characters, and ended with a moral as a tagline. An exception to this format was his most famous fable, \"The Unicorn in the Garden\", which featured an all-human cast except for the unicorn, which doesn't speak. Thurber's fables were satirical, and the morals served as punchlines as well as advice to the reader, demonstrating \"the complexity of life by depicting the world as an uncertain, precarious place, where few reliable guidelines exist.\"\n\nHis stories also included several book-length fairy tales, such as \"The White Deer\" (1945), \"The 13 Clocks\" (1950) and \"The Wonderful O\" (1957). The latter was one of several of Thurber's works illustrated by Marc Simont. Thurber's prose for \"The New Yorker\" and other venues included numerous humorous essays. A favorite subject, especially toward the end of his life, was the English language. Pieces on this subject included \"The Spreading 'You Know',\" which decried the overuse of that pair of words in conversation, \"The New Vocabularianism\", \"What Do You Mean It \"Was\" Brillig?\", and many others. His short pieces – whether stories, essays or something in between – were referred to as \"casuals\" by Thurber and the staff of \"The New Yorker\".\n\nThurber wrote a biographical memoir about the founder/publisher of \"The New Yorker\", Harold Ross, entitled \"The Years with Ross\" (1958). He wrote a five-part \"New Yorker\" series, between 1947 and 1948, examining in depth the radio soap opera phenomenon, based on near-constant listening and researching over the same period. Leaving nearly no element of these programs unexamined, including their writers, producers, sponsors, performers, and listeners alike, Thurber republished the series in his anthology, \"The Beast in Me and Other Animals\" (1948), under the section title \"Soapland.\" The series was one of the first to examine such a pop-culture phenomenon in depth.\n\nWhile Thurber drew his cartoons in the usual fashion in the 1920s and 1930s, his failing eyesight later required changes. He drew them on very large sheets of paper using a thick black crayon (or on black paper using white chalk, from which they were photographed and the colors reversed for publication). Regardless of method, his cartoons became as noted as his writings; they possessed an eerie, wobbly feel that seems to mirror his idiosyncratic view on life. He once wrote that people said it looked like he drew them under water. Dorothy Parker, a contemporary and friend of Thurber, referred to his cartoons as having the \"semblance of unbaked cookies\". The last drawing Thurber completed was a self-portrait in yellow crayon on black paper, which was featured as the cover of \"Time\" magazine on July 9, 1951. The same drawing was used for the dust jacket of \"The Thurber Album\" (1952).\n\nBULLET::::- Thurber teamed with college schoolmate (and actor/director) Elliott Nugent to write \"The Male Animal,\" a comic drama that became a major Broadway hit in 1939. The play was adapted as a film by the same name in 1942, starring Henry Fonda, Olivia de Havilland and Jack Carson.\nBULLET::::- In 1947 his short story \"The Secret Life of Walter Mitty\", was loosely adapted as a film by the same name. Danny Kaye played the title character.\nBULLET::::- In 1951 United Productions of America announced an animated feature to be based on Thurber's work, titled \"Men, Women and Dogs\". The only part of the ambitious project that was eventually released was the UPA cartoon \"The Unicorn in the Garden\" (1953).\nBULLET::::- In 1960, Thurber fulfilled a long-standing desire to be on the professional stage and played himself in 88 performances of the revue \"A Thurber Carnival\" (which echoes the title of his 1945 book, \"The Thurber Carnival\"). It was based on a selection of Thurber's stories and cartoon captions. Thurber appeared in the sketch \"File and Forget\". The sketch consists of Thurber dictating a series of letters in a vain attempt to keep one of his publishers from sending him books he did not order, and the escalating confusion of the replies. Thurber won a special Tony Award for the adapted script of the \"Carnival\".\nBULLET::::- In 1961, \"The Secret Life of James Thurber\" aired on \"The DuPont Show with June Allyson\". Adolphe Menjou appeared in the program as Fitch, and Orson Bean and Sue Randall portrayed John and Ellen Monroe.\nBULLET::::- In 1969-70, a full series based on Thurber's writings and life, titled \"My World... and Welcome to It,\" was broadcast on NBC. It starred William Windom as the Thurber figure. Featuring animated portions in addition to live actors, the show won a 1970 Emmy Award as the year's best comedy series. Windom won an Emmy as well. He went on to perform Thurber material in a one-man stage show.\nBULLET::::- In 1972 another film adaptation, \"The War Between Men and Women\", starring Jack Lemmon, concludes with an animated version of Thurber's classic anti-war work \"The Last Flower\".\nBULLET::::- In 2013, a new adaptation of \"The Secret Life of Walter Mitty\", starring Ben Stiller as the title character.\n\nBULLET::::- Beginning during his own father's terminal illness, television broadcaster Keith Olbermann read excerpts from Thurber's short stories during the closing segment of his MSNBC program \"Countdown with Keith Olbermann\" on Fridays, which he called \"Fridays with Thurber.\"\nBULLET::::- On an episode of Norm Macdonald's video podcast, \"Norm Macdonald Live\", Norm tells a story in which comedian Larry Miller acknowledges that his biggest influence in comedy was Thurber.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Is Sex Necessary? or, Why You Feel the Way You Do,\" (1929 with E. B. White), 75th anniv. edition (2004) with foreword by John Updike,\nBULLET::::- \"The Owl in the Attic and Other Perplexities\", 1931\nBULLET::::- \"The Seal in the Bedroom and Other Predicaments\", 1932\nBULLET::::- \"My Life and Hard Times\", 1933\nBULLET::::- \"The Middle-Aged Man on the Flying Trapeze\", 1935\nBULLET::::- \"Let Your Mind Alone! and Other More Or Less Inspirational Pieces\", 1937\nBULLET::::- \"The Last Flower\", 1939, reissued 2007\nBULLET::::- \"Fables for Our Time and Famous Poems Illustrated\", 1940\nBULLET::::- \"My World—And Welcome to It\", 1942\nBULLET::::- \"Men, Women and Dogs\", 1943\nBULLET::::- \"The Thurber Carnival\" (anthology), 1945, , (Modern Library Edition)\nBULLET::::- \"The Beast in Me and Other Animals\", 1948\nBULLET::::- \"The Thurber Album\", 1952\nBULLET::::- \"Thurber Country\", 1953\nBULLET::::- \"Thurber's Dogs\", 1955\nBULLET::::- \"Further Fables for Our Time\", 1956\nBULLET::::- \"Alarms and Diversions\" (anthology), 1957\nBULLET::::- \"The Years with Ross\", 1959\nBULLET::::- \"Lanterns and Lances\", 1961\n\nBULLET::::- \"Many Moons\", (children) 1943 (later condensed as \"The Princess Who Wanted The Moon\")\nBULLET::::- \"The Great Quillow\", (children) 1944\nBULLET::::- \"The White Deer\", (children) 1945\nBULLET::::- \"The 13 Clocks\", (children) 1950\nBULLET::::- \"The Wonderful O\", (children) 1957\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Male Animal\", 1940 (with Elliott Nugent)\nBULLET::::- \"A Thurber Carnival\", 1960\n\nBULLET::::- \"Credos and Curios\", 1962 (ed. Helen W. Thurber)\nBULLET::::- \"Thurber & Company\", 1966 (ed. Helen W. Thurber)\nBULLET::::- \"Selected Letters of James Thurber\", 1981 (ed. Helen W. Thurber & Edward Weeks)\nBULLET::::- \"Collecting Himself: James Thurber on Writing and Writers, Humor and Himself\", 1989 (ed. Michael J. Rosen)\nBULLET::::- \"Thurber on Crime\", 1991 (ed. Robert Lopresti)\nBULLET::::- \"People Have More Fun Than Anybody: A Centennial Celebration of Drawings and Writings by James Thurber\", 1994 (ed. Michael J. Rosen)\nBULLET::::- \"James Thurber: Writings and Drawings\" (anthology), 1996, (ed. Garrison Keillor), Library of America,\nBULLET::::- \"The Dog Department: James Thurber on Hounds, Scotties, and Talking Poodles\", 2001 (ed. Michael J. Rosen)\nBULLET::::- \"The Thurber Letters: The Wit, Wisdom, and Surprising Life of James Thurber\", 2002 (ed. Harrison Kinney, with Rosemary A. Thurber)\nBULLET::::- Collected Fables, 2019 (ed. Michael J. Rosen), ISBN\nBULLET::::- A Mile and a Half of Lines: The Art of James Thurber, 2019 (ed. Michael J. Rosen)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Man Who Hated Moonbaum\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Black Magic of Barney Haller\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Secret Life of Walter Mitty\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Night the Bed Fell\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Unicorn in the Garden\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Moth and the Star\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Rabbits Who Caused All the Trouble\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Macbeth Murder Mystery\", 1937 (printed in The New Yorker)\nBULLET::::- \"You Could Look It Up\", 1941\nBULLET::::- \"The Catbird Seat\", 1942\nBULLET::::- \"The Secret Life of James Thurber\", 1943\nBULLET::::- \"The Breaking up of the Winships\", 1945\nBULLET::::- \"A Couple of Hamburgers\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Greatest Man in the World\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Cane in the Corridor\"\nBULLET::::- \"If Grant Had Been Drinking at Appomattox\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Bear Who Let It Alone\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Princess and the Tin Box\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Dog That Bit People\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Lady on 142\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Remarkable Case of Mr.Bruhl\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Scotty Who Knew Too Much\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Night the Ghost Got In\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Car We Had to Push\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Day the Dam Broke\"\nBULLET::::- \"More Alarms at Night\"\nBULLET::::- \"A Sequence of Servants\"\nBULLET::::- \"University Days\"\nBULLET::::- \"Draft Board Nights\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Wood Duck\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Tiger Who Was to Be King\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Owl Who Was God\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Peacelike Mongoose\"\nBULLET::::- \"File and Forget\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Whip-Poor-Will\"\nBULLET::::- \"Mr. Preble Gets Rid of His Wife\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Evening's at Seven\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Battle of the Sexes\" (1959 film) based on \"The Catbird Seat\"\nBULLET::::- Walter Mitty, expression\n\nBULLET::::- Bernstein, Burton. 1975. \"Thurber\". William Morrow & Co.\nBULLET::::- Fensch, Thomas. 2001. \"The Man Who Was Walter Mitty: The Life and Work of James Thurber\".\nBULLET::::- Grauer, Neil A. 1994. \"Remember Laughter: A Life of James Thurber\". University of Nebraska Press.\nBULLET::::- Kinney, Harrison. 1995. \"James Thurber: His Life and Times\". Henry Holt & Co.\n\nBULLET::::- Holmes, Charles S. 1972. \"The Clocks Of Columbus: The Literary Career of James Thurber\" Atheneum.\n\nBULLET::::- Official Website of James Thurber Overseen by the Thurber estate and editor Michael J. Rosen\nBULLET::::- (The James Thurber Papers The Ohio State University Libraries Rare Books and Manuscripts Collection\nBULLET::::- Charles S. Holmes Research for The Clocks of Columbus The Ohio State University Libraries Rare Books and Manuscripts Collection\nBULLET::::- The Harrison Kinney Archive for James Thurber: His Life and Times The Ohio State University Libraries Rare Books and Manuscripts Collection\nBULLET::::- The \"Paris Review\" Interview\nBULLET::::- The Thurber House website\nBULLET::::- \"Thurber's World (and Welcome To it)\" by Bill Ervolino, \"The Record\" (Bergen County, NJ), December 17, 1995\nBULLET::::- Pathfinder: James Grover Thurber – Thurber links portal\nBULLET::::- \"The Last Flower\" – ballet after an idea by James Thurber; 1975\nBULLET::::- Origins of \"the Thurber Dog\"\nBULLET::::- James Thurber Biography, \"Encyclopedia of World Biography\"\nBULLET::::- \"New Yorker\" magazine digital archive—Abstracts of 1,758 Thurber short stories, poems, cartoons and commentaries\nBULLET::::- a list of James Thurber books\nBULLET::::- an alphabetical list of James Thurber short stories\nBULLET::::- - 1982 Dramatization of the James Thurber short story.\n"}
{"id": "16046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16046", "title": "James Cagney", "text": "James Cagney\n\nJames Francis Cagney Jr. (July 17, 1899March 30, 1986) was an American actor and dancer, both on stage and in film. Known for his consistently energetic performances, distinctive vocal style, and deadpan comic timing, he won acclaim and major awards for a wide variety of performances. He is remembered by some for playing multifaceted tough guys in films such as \"The Public Enemy\" (1931), \"Taxi!\" (1932), \"Angels with Dirty Faces\" (1938), \"The Roaring Twenties\" (1939) and \"White Heat\" (1949), finding himself typecast or limited by this reputation earlier in his career. He was able to negotiate dancing opportunities in his films and ended up winning the Academy Award for his role in a musical (“Yankee Doodle Dandy”). In 1999 the American Film Institute ranked him eighth among its list of greatest male stars of the Golden Age of Hollywood. Orson Welles described Cagney as \"maybe the greatest actor who ever appeared in front of a camera\".\n\nCagney’s first appearance on stage was as a stand in for his brother in a community theater production. Cagney had terrible stage fright and always had to keep a bucket with him.\n\nIn his first professional acting performance in 1919, Cagney was costumed as a woman when he danced in the chorus line of the revue \"Every Sailor\". He spent several years in vaudeville as a dancer and comedian, until he got his first major acting part in 1925. He secured several other roles, receiving good notices, before landing the lead in the 1929 play \"Penny Arcade\". Al Jolson saw Cagney in the play. Jolson bought the movie rights to the play and then sold the rights to Warner Brothers with the proviso that James Cagney and Joan Blondell be able to reprise their stage roles in the movie. After rave reviews, Warner Bros. signed him for an initial $500-a-week, three-week contract to reprise his role; when the executives at the studio saw the first dailies for the film, Cagney’s contract was immediately extended.\n\nCagney's seventh film, \"The Public Enemy\", became one of the most influential gangster movies of the period. Notable for a famous scene in which Cagney pushes a grapefruit against Mae Clarke's face, the film thrust him into the spotlight. He became one of Hollywood's leading stars and one of Warner Bros.' biggest contracts. In 1938 he received his first Academy Award for Best Actor nomination for his subtle portrayal of the tough guy/man-child Rocky Sullivan in \"Angels with Dirty Faces\". In 1942 Cagney won the Oscar for his energetic portrayal of George M. Cohan in \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\". He was nominated a third time in 1955 for \"Love Me or Leave Me\". Cagney retired from acting and dancing in 1961 to spend time on his farm with his family. He came out of retirement 20 years later for a part in the movie \"Ragtime\" (1981), mainly to aid his recovery from a stroke.\n\nCagney walked out on Warner Bros. several times over the course of his career, each time returning on much improved personal and artistic terms. In 1935 he sued Warner for breach of contract and won. This was one of the first times an actor prevailed over a studio on a contract issue. He worked for an independent film company for a year while the suit was being settled, establishing his own production company, Cagney Productions, in 1942 before returning to Warner four years later. In reference to Cagney's refusal to be pushed around, Jack L. Warner called him \"the Professional Againster\". Cagney also made numerous morale-boosting troop tours before and during World War II and served as president of the Screen Actors Guild for two years.\n\nJames Francis \"Jimmy\" Cagney was born in 1899 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City. His biographers disagree as to the actual location: either on the corner of Avenue D and 8th Street, or in a top-floor apartment at 391 East 8th Street, the address that is on his birth certificate. His father, James Francis Cagney Sr. (1875–1918), was of Irish descent. At the time of his son's birth, he was a bartender and amateur boxer, although on Cagney's birth certificate, he is listed as a telegraphist. His mother was Carolyn Elizabeth (née Nelson; 1877–1945); her father was a Norwegian ship’s captain, and her mother was Irish.\n\nCagney was the second of seven children, two of whom died within months of their births. He was sickly as an infant—so much so that his mother feared he would die before he could be baptized. He later attributed his sickly health to the poverty his family endured. The family moved twice while he was still young, first to East 79th Street, and then to East 96th Street. He was confirmed at St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan; his funeral service would eventually be held in the same church.\n\nThe red-haired, blue-eyed Cagney graduated from Stuyvesant High School in New York City, in 1918, and attended Columbia College, where he intended to major in Art. He also took German and joined the Student Army Training Corps, but he dropped out after one semester, returning home upon the death of his father during the 1918 flu pandemic.\n\nCagney held a variety of jobs early in his life: junior architect, copy boy for the \"New York Sun\", book custodian at the New York Public Library, bellhop, draughtsman, and night doorkeeper. He gave all his earnings to his family. While Cagney was working for the New York Public Library, he met Florence James, who helped him into an acting career. Cagney believed in hard work, later stating, \"It was good for me. I feel sorry for the kid who has too cushy a time of it. Suddenly he has to come face-to-face with the realities of life without any mama or papa to do his thinking for him.\"\n\nHe started tap dancing as a boy (a skill that eventually contributed to his Academy Award) and was nicknamed \"Cellar-Door Cagney\" after his habit of dancing on slanted cellar doors. He was a good street fighter, defending his older brother Harry, a medical student, when necessary. He engaged in amateur boxing, and was a runner-up for the New York state lightweight title. His coaches encouraged him to turn professional, but his mother would not allow it. He also played semiprofessional baseball for a local team, and entertained dreams of playing in the Major Leagues.\n\nHis introduction to films was unusual. When visiting an aunt who lived in Brooklyn, opposite Vitagraph Studios, Cagney would climb over the fence to watch the filming of John Bunny movies. He became involved in amateur dramatics, starting as a scenery boy for a Chinese pantomime at Lenox Hill Neighborhood House, one of the first settlement houses in the nation, where his brother Harry performed and his soon-to-be friend, Florence James, directed. He was initially content working behind the scenes and had no interest in performing. One night, however, Harry became ill, and although Cagney was not an understudy, his photographic memory of rehearsals enabled him to stand in for his brother without making a single mistake. \n\nFlorence James has the distinction of being the first director to put him on stage. Afterward, he joined a number of companies as a performer in a variety of roles.\n\nWhile working at Wanamaker's Department Store in 1919, Cagney learned, from a colleague who had seen him dance, of a role in the upcoming production, \"Every Sailor\". A wartime play in which the chorus was made up of servicemen dressed as women, it was originally titled \"Every Woman\". Cagney auditioned for the role of a chorus girl, although considering it a waste of time. He knew only one dance step, the complicated Peabody, but he knew it perfectly. This was enough to convince the producers that he could dance, and he copied the other dancers' moves and added them to his repertoire while waiting to go on. He did not find it odd to play a woman, nor was he embarrassed. He later recalled how he was able to shed his own naturally shy persona when he stepped onto the stage: \"For there I am not myself. I am not that fellow, Jim Cagney, at all. I certainly lost all consciousness of him when I put on skirts, wig, paint, powder, feathers and spangles.\"\n\nHad Cagney's mother had her way, his stage career would have ended when he quit \"Every Sailor\" after two months; proud as she was of his performance, she preferred that he get an education. Cagney appreciated the $35 a week he was paid, which he remembrances as \"a mountain of money for me in those worrisome days.\" In deference to his mother's worries, he got a job as a brokerage house runner. This did not stop him from looking for more stage work, however, and he went on to audition successfully for a chorus part in the William B. Friedlander musical \"Pitter Patter\", for which he earned $55 a week. (He sent $40 to his mother each week.) So strong was his habit of holding down more than one job at a time, he also worked as a dresser for one of the leads, portered the casts' luggage, and understudied for the lead. Among the chorus line performers was 16-year-old Frances Willard \"Billie\" Vernon; they married in 1922.\n\nThe show began Cagney's 10-year association with vaudeville and Broadway. The Cagneys were among the early residents of Free Acres, a social experiment established by Bolton Hall in Berkeley Heights, New Jersey.\n\n\"Pitter Patter\" was not hugely successful, but it did well enough to run for 32 weeks, making it possible for Cagney to join the vaudeville circuit. He and Vernon toured separately with a number of different troupes, reuniting as \"Vernon and Nye\" to do simple comedy routines and musical numbers. \"Nye\" was a rearrangement of the last syllable of Cagney's surname. One of the troupes Cagney joined was Parker, Rand, and Leach, taking over the spot vacated when Archie Leach—who later changed his name to Cary Grant—left.\n\nIn 1924, after years of touring and struggling to make money, Cagney and Vernon moved to Hawthorne, California, partly for Cagney to meet his new mother-in-law, who had just moved there from Chicago, and partly to investigate breaking into the movies. Their train fares were paid for by a friend, the press officer of \"Pitter Patter\", who was also desperate to act. They were not successful at first; the dance studio Cagney set up had few clients and folded, and Vernon and he toured the studios, but there was no interest. Eventually, they borrowed some money and headed back to New York via Chicago and Milwaukee, enduring failure along the way when they attempted to make money on the stage.\nCagney secured his first significant nondancing role in 1925. He played a young tough guy in the three-act play \"Outside Looking In\" by Maxwell Anderson, earning $200 a week. As with \"Pitter Patter\", Cagney went to the audition with little confidence he would get the part. At this point, he had had no experience with drama. Cagney felt that he only got the role because his hair was redder than that of Alan Bunce, the only other red-headed performer in New York. Both the play and Cagney received good reviews; \"Life\" magazine wrote, \"Mr. Cagney, in a less spectacular role [than his co-star] makes a few minutes silence during his mock-trial scene something that many a more established actor might watch with profit.\" Burns Mantle wrote that it \"...contained the most honest acting now to be seen in New York.\"\n\nFollowing the show's four-month run, Cagney went back to vaudeville for the next few years. He achieved varied success, but after appearing in \"Outside Looking In\", the Cagneys were more financially secure. During this period, he met George M. Cohan, whom he later portrayed in \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\", though they never spoke.\n\nCagney secured the lead role in the 1926–27 season West End production of \"Broadway\" by George Abbott. The show's management insisted that he copy Broadway lead Lee Tracy's performance, despite Cagney's discomfort in doing so, but the day before the show sailed for England, they decided to replace him. This was a devastating turn of events for Cagney; apart from the logistical difficulties this presented—the couple's luggage was in the hold of the ship and they had given up their apartment. He almost quit show business. As Vernon recalled, \"Jimmy said that it was all over. He made up his mind that he would get a job doing something else.\"\n\nThe Cagneys had run-of-the-play contracts, which lasted as long as the play did. Vernon was in the chorus line of the show, and with help from the Actors' Equity Association, Cagney understudied Tracy on the Broadway show, providing them with a desperately needed steady income. Cagney also established a dance school for professionals, and then landed a part in the play \"Women Go On Forever\", directed by John Cromwell, which ran for four months. By the end of the run, Cagney was exhausted from acting and running the dance school. \n\nCagney had built a reputation as an innovative teacher; when he was cast as the lead in \"Grand Street Follies of 1928\", he was also appointed choreographer. The show received rave reviews and was followed by \"Grand Street Follies of 1929\". These roles led to a part in George Kelly's \"Maggie the Magnificent\", a play the critics disliked, though they liked Cagney's performance. Cagney saw this role (and \"Women Go on Forever\") as significant because of the talented directors he met. He learned \"...what a director was for and what a director could do. They were directors who could play all the parts in the play better than the actors cast for them.\"\n\nPlaying opposite Cagney in \"Maggie the Magnificent\" was Joan Blondell, who starred again with him a few months later in Marie Baumer's new play, \"Penny Arcade\". While the critics panned \"Penny Arcade\", they praised Cagney and Blondell. Al Jolson, sensing film potential, bought the rights for $20,000. He then sold the play to Warner Bros., with the stipulation that they cast Cagney and Blondell in the film version. Retitled \"Sinners' Holiday\", the film was released in 1930. It starred Grant Withers and Evalyn Knapp. Joan Blondell recalled that when they were casting the film studio head Jack Warner believed that she and Cagney had no future and that Withers and Knapp were destined for stardom. Cagney was given a $500-a-week, three-week contract with Warner Bros.\n\nIn the film, he portrayed Harry Delano, a tough guy who becomes a killer but generates sympathy because of his unfortunate upbringing. This role of the sympathetic \"bad\" guy was to become a recurring character type for Cagney throughout his career. During filming of \"Sinners' Holiday\", he also demonstrated the stubbornness that characterized his attitude toward the work. He later recalled an argument he had with director John Adolfi about a line: \"There was a line in the show where I was supposed to be crying on my mother's breast... [The line] was 'I'm your baby, ain't I?' I refused to say it. Adolfi said 'I'm going to tell Zanuck.' I said 'I don't give a shit what you tell him, I'm not going to say that line.'\" They took the line out.\n\nDespite this outburst, the studio liked him, and before his three-week contract was up—while the film was still shooting—they gave Cagney a three-week extension, which was followed by a full seven-year contract at $400 a week. However, the contract allowed Warners to drop him at the end of any 40-week period, effectively guaranteeing him only 40 weeks’ income at a time. As he did when he was growing up, Cagney shared his income with his family. Cagney received good reviews and immediately starred in another gangster role in \"The Doorway to Hell\". The film was a financial hit and helped to cement Cagney's growing reputation. He made four more movies before his breakthrough role.\n\nWarner Brothers' succession of gangster movie hits, in particular \"Little Caesar\" with Edward G. Robinson, culminated in the 1931 film \"The Public Enemy\". Due to the strong reviews he had receiy in his short film career, Cagney was cast as nice-guy Matt Doyle, opposite Edward Woods as Tom Powers. However, after the initial rushes, the actors switched roles. Years later, Joan Blondell recalled that a few days into the filming, Director William Wellman turned to Cagney and said “Now you’re the lead, kid!” “Jimmy’s charisma was so outstanding,” she added. The film cost only $151,000 to make, but it became one of the first low-budget films to gross $1 million.\n\nCagney received widespread praise for his performance. The \"New York Herald Tribune\" described his interpretation as \"...the most ruthless, unsentimental appraisal of the meanness of a petty killer the cinema has yet devised.\" He received top billing after the film, but while he acknowledged the importance of the role to his career, he always disputed the suggestion that it changed the way heroes and leading men were portrayed: He cited Clark Gable's slapping of Barbara Stanwyck six months earlier (in \"Night Nurse\") as more important. \"Night Nurse\" was actually released three months after \"The Public Enemy.\" Gable punched Stanwyck’s character in the film, knocking the nurse unconscious.\n\nMany critics view the scene in which Cagney pushes half a grapefruit into Mae Clarke's face as one of the most famous moments in movie history. The scene itself was a late addition, and the origin of the idea is a matter of debate. Producer Darryl Zanuck claimed he thought of it in a script conference; director William Wellman said the idea came to him when he saw the grapefruit on the table during the shoot; and writers Glasmon and Bright claimed it was based on the real life of gangster Hymie Weiss, who threw an omelette into his girlfriend's face. Joan Blondell recalled that the change was made when Cagney decided the omelette wouldn’t work. Cagney himself usually cited the writers' version, but the fruit's victim, Clarke, agreed that it was Wellman's idea, saying, \"I'm sorry I ever agreed to do the grapefruit bit. I never dreamed it would be shown in the movie. Director Bill Wellman thought of the idea suddenly. It wasn't even written into the script.\".\n\nHowever, according to Turner Classic Movies (TCM), the grapefruit scene was a practical joke that Cagney and costar Mae Clarke decided to play on the crew while the cameras were rolling. Wellman liked it so much that he left it in. TCM also notes that the scene made Clarke's ex-husband, Lew Brice, very happy. \"He saw the film repeatedly just to see that scene, and was often shushed by angry patrons when his delighted laughter got too loud.\"\n\nCagney's stubbornness became well known behind the scenes, especially after he refused to join in a 100% participation-free charity drive pushed by Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. Cagney did not object to donating money to charity, but he did object to being forced to give. Already he had acquired the nickname \"The Professional Againster\".\n\nWarner Bros. was quick to team its two rising gangster stars—Edward G. Robinson and Cagney—for the 1931 film \"Smart Money\". So keen was the studio to follow up the success of Robinson's \"Little Caesar\" that Cagney actually shot \"Smart Money\" (for which he received second billing in a supporting role) at the same time as \"The Public Enemy\". As in \"The Public Enemy\", Cagney was required to be physically violent to a woman on screen, a signal that Warner Bros. was keen to keep Cagney in the public eye. This time, he slapped co-star Evalyn Knapp.\n\nWith the introduction of the United States Motion Picture Production Code of 1930, and particularly its edicts concerning on-screen violence, Warners allowed Cagney a change of pace. They cast him in the comedy \"Blonde Crazy\", again opposite Blondell. As he completed filming, \"The Public Enemy\" was filling cinemas with all-night showings. Cagney began to compare his pay with his peers, thinking his contract allowed for salary adjustments based on the success of his films. Warner Bros. disagreed, however, and refused to give him a raise. The studio heads also insisted that Cagney continue promoting their films, even ones he was not in, which he opposed. Cagney moved back to New York, leaving his brother Bill to look after his apartment.\n\nWhile Cagney was in New York, his brother, who had effectively become his agent, angled for a substantial pay raise and more personal freedom for his brother. The success of \"The Public Enemy\" and \"Blonde Crazy\" forced Warner Bros.' hand. They eventually offered Cagney a contract for $1000 a week. Cagney's first film upon returning from New York was 1932's \"Taxi!\". The film is notable for not only being the first time that Cagney danced on screen, but it was also the last time he allowed himself to be shot at with live ammunition (a relatively common occurrence at the time, as blank cartridges and squibs were considered too expensive and hard to find to use in most motion picture filming). He had been shot at in \"The Public Enemy\", but during filming for \"Taxi!\", he was almost hit.\n\nIn his opening scene, Cagney spoke fluent Yiddish, a language he had picked up during his boyhood in New York City. Critics praised the film. \"Taxi!\" was the source of one of Cagney's most misquoted lines; he never actually said, \"MMMmmm, you dirty rat!\", a line commonly used by impressionists. The closest he got to it in the film was, \"Come out and take it, you dirty, yellow-bellied rat, or I'll give it to you through the door!\" The film was swiftly followed by \"The Crowd Roars\" and \"Winner Take All\".\n\nDespite his success, Cagney remained dissatisfied with his contract. He wanted more money for his successful films, but he also offered to take a smaller salary should his star wane. Warner Bros. refused, so Cagney once again walked out. He held out for $4000 a week, the same salary as Edward G. Robinson, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., and Kay Francis. Warner Bros. refused to cave in this time, and suspended him. Cagney announced that he would do his next three pictures for free if they canceled the five years remaining on his contract. He also threatened to quit Hollywood and go back to Columbia University to follow his brothers into medicine. After six months of suspension, Frank Capra brokered a deal that increased Cagney's salary to around $3000 a week, and guaranteed top billing and no more than four films a year.\n\nHaving learned about the block-booking studio system that virtually guaranteed the studios huge profits, Cagney was determined to spread the wealth. He regularly sent money and goods to old friends from his neighborhood, though he did not generally make this known. His insistence on no more than four films a year was based on his having witnessed actors—even teenagers—regularly being worked 100 hours a week to turn out more films. This experience was an integral reason for his involvement in forming the Screen Actors Guild in 1933.\nCagney returned to the studio and made \"Hard to Handle\" in 1933. This was followed by a steady stream of films, including the highly regarded \"Footlight Parade\", which gave Cagney the chance to return to his song-and-dance roots. The film includes show-stopping scenes with Busby Berkeley-choreographed routines. His next notable film was 1934's \"Here Comes the Navy\", which paired him with Pat O'Brien for the first time. The two would have an enduring friendship.\n\nIn 1935 Cagney was listed as one of the Top Ten Moneymakers in Hollywood for the first time, and was cast more frequently in non-gangster roles; he played a lawyer who joins the FBI in \"G-Men\", and he also took on his first, and only, Shakespearean role, as top-billed Nick Bottom in \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" alongside Joe E. Brown as Flute and Mickey Rooney as Puck\n\nCagney's last movie in 1935 was \"Ceiling Zero\", his third film with Pat O'Brien. O'Brien received top billing, which was a clear breach of Cagney's contract. This, combined with the fact that Cagney had made five movies in 1934, again against his contract terms, caused him to bring legal proceedings against Warner Bros. for breach of contract. The dispute dragged on for several months. Cagney received calls from David Selznick and Sam Goldwyn, but neither felt in a position to offer him work while the dispute went on. Meanwhile, while being represented by his brother William in court, Cagney went back to New York to search for a country property where he could indulge his passion for farming.\n\nCagney spent most of the next year on his farm, and went back to work only when Edward L. Alperson from Grand National Films, a newly established, independent studio, approached him to make movies for $100,000 a film and 10% of the profits. Cagney made two films for Grand National: \"Great Guy\" and \"Something to Sing About\". He received good reviews for both, but overall the production quality was not up to Warner Bros. standards, and the films did not do well. A third film, \"Dynamite\", was planned, but Grand National ran out of money.\n\nCagney also became involved in political causes, and in 1936, agreed to sponsor the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League. Unknown to Cagney, the League was in fact a front organization for the Communist International (Comintern), which sought to enlist support for the Soviet Union and its foreign policies.\nThe courts eventually decided the Warner Bros. lawsuit in Cagney's favor. He had done what many thought unthinkable: taking on the studios and winning. Not only did he win, but Warner Bros. also knew that he was still their foremost box office draw and invited him back for a five-year, $150,000-a-film deal, with no more than two pictures a year. Cagney also had full say over what films he did and did not make. Additionally, William Cagney was guaranteed the position of assistant producer for the movies in which his brother starred.\n\nCagney had demonstrated the power of the walkout in keeping the studios to their word. He later explained his reasons, saying, \"I walked out because I depended on the studio heads to keep their word on this, that or other promise, and when the promise was not kept, my only recourse was to deprive them of my services.\" Cagney himself acknowledged the importance of the walkout for other actors in breaking the dominance of the studio system. Normally, when a star walked out, the time he or she was absent was added onto the end of an already long contract, as happened with Olivia de Havilland and Bette Davis. Cagney, however, walked out and came back to a better contract. Many in Hollywood watched the case closely for hints of how future contracts might be handled.\n\nArtistically, the Grand National experiment was a success for Cagney, who was able to move away from his traditional Warner Bros. tough guy roles to more sympathetic characters. How far he could have experimented and developed will never be known, but back in the Warner fold, he was once again playing tough guys.\n\nCagney's two films of 1938, \"Boy Meets Girl\" and \"Angels with Dirty Faces\", both costarred Pat O'Brien. The former had Cagney in a comedy role, and received mixed reviews. Warner Bros. had allowed Cagney his change of pace, but was keen to get him back to playing tough guys, which was more lucrative. Ironically, the script for \"Angels\" was one that Cagney had hoped to do while with Grand National, but the studio had been unable to secure funding.\n\nCagney starred as Rocky Sullivan, a gangster fresh out of jail and looking for his former associate, played by Humphrey Bogart, who owes him money. While revisiting his old haunts, he runs into his old friend Jerry Connolly, played by O'Brien, who is now a priest concerned about the Dead End Kids' futures, particularly as they idolize Rocky. After a messy shootout, Sullivan is eventually captured by the police and sentenced to death in the electric chair. Connolly pleads with Rocky to \"turn yellow\" on his way to the chair so the Kids will lose their admiration for him, and hopefully avoid turning to crime. Sullivan refuses, but on his way to his execution, he breaks down and begs for his life. It is unclear whether this cowardice is real or just feigned for the Kids' benefit. Cagney himself refused to say, insisting he liked the ambiguity. The film is regarded by many as one of Cagney's finest, and garnered him an Academy Award for Best Actor nomination for 1938. He lost to Spencer Tracy in \"Boys Town\". Cagney had been considered for the role, but lost out on it due to his typecasting. (He also lost the role of Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne in \"Knute Rockne, All American\" to his friend Pat O'Brien for the same reason.) Cagney did, however, win that year's New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor.\n\nHis earlier insistence on not filming with live ammunition proved to be a good decision. Having been told while filming \"Angels with Dirty Faces\" that he would be doing a scene with real machine gun bullets (a common practice in the Hollywood of the time), Cagney refused and insisted the shots be added afterwards. As it turned out, a ricocheting bullet passed through exactly where his head would have been.\n\nDuring his first year back at Warner Bros., Cagney became the studio's highest earner, making $324,000. He completed his first decade of movie-making in 1939 with \"The Roaring Twenties\", his first film with Raoul Walsh and his last with Bogart. After \"The Roaring Twenties\", it would be a decade before Cagney made another gangster film. Cagney again received good reviews; Graham Greene stated, \"Mr. Cagney, of the bull-calf brow, is as always a superb and witty actor\". \"The Roaring Twenties\" was the last film in which Cagney's character's violence was explained by poor upbringing, or his environment, as was the case in \"The Public Enemy\". From that point on, violence was attached to mania, as in \"White Heat\". In 1939 Cagney was second to only Gary Cooper in the national acting wage stakes, earning $368,333.\nHis next notable role was as George M. Cohan in \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\", a film Cagney \"took great pride in\" and considered his best. Producer Hal Wallis said that having seen Cohan in \"I'd Rather Be Right\", he never considered anyone other than Cagney for the part. Cagney, though, insisted that Fred Astaire had been the first choice, but turned it down.\n\nFilming began the day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the cast and crew worked in a \"patriotic frenzy\" as the United States' involvement in World War II gave the cast and crew a feeling that \"they might be sending the last message from the free world\", according to actress Rosemary DeCamp. Cohan was given a private showing of the film shortly before his death, and thanked Cagney \"for a wonderful job\". A paid première, with seats ranging from $25 to $25,000, raised $5,750,000 for war bonds for the US treasury.\nMany critics of the time and since have declared it Cagney's best film, drawing parallels between Cohan and Cagney; they both began their careers in vaudeville, struggled for years before reaching the peak of their profession, were surrounded with family and married early, and both had a wife who was happy to sit back while he went on to stardom. The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards and won three, including Cagney's for Best Actor. In his acceptance speech, Cagney said, \"I've always maintained that in this business, you're only as good as the other fellow thinks you are. It's nice to know that you people thought I did a good job. And don't forget that it was a good part, too.\"\n\nCagney announced in March 1942 that his brother William and he were setting up Cagney Productions to release films though United Artists. Free of Warner Bros. again, Cagney spent some time relaxing on his farm in Martha's Vineyard before volunteering to join the USO. He spent several weeks touring the US, entertaining troops with vaudeville routines and scenes from \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\". In September 1942, he was elected president of the Screen Actors Guild.\n\nAlmost a year after its creation, Cagney Productions produced its first film, \"Johnny Come Lately\", in 1943. While the major studios were producing patriotic war movies, Cagney was determined to continue dispelling his tough-guy image, so he produced a movie that was a \"complete and exhilarating exposition of the Cagney 'alter-ego' on film\". According to Cagney, the film \"made money but it was no great winner\", and reviews varied from excellent (\"Time\") to poor (New York's \"PM\").\nFollowing the film's completion, Cagney went back to the USO and toured US military bases in the UK. He refused to give interviews to the British press, preferring to concentrate on rehearsals and performances. He gave several performances a day for the Army Signal Corps of \"The American Cavalcade of Dance\", which consisted of a history of American dance, from the earliest days to Fred Astaire, and culminated with dances from \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\".\n\nThe second movie Cagney's company produced was \"Blood on the Sun\". Insisting on doing his own stunts, Cagney required judo training from expert Ken Kuniyuki and Jack Halloran, a former policeman. The Cagneys had hoped that an action film would appeal more to audiences, but it fared worse at the box office than \"Johnny Come Lately\". At this time, Cagney heard of young war hero Audie Murphy, who had appeared on the cover of \"Life\" magazine. Cagney thought that Murphy had the looks to be a movie star, and suggested that he come to Hollywood. Cagney felt, however, that Murphy could not act, and his contract was loaned out and then sold.\n\nWhile negotiating the rights for his third independent film, Cagney starred in 20th Century Fox's \"13 Rue Madeleine\" for $300,000 for two months of work. The wartime spy film was a success, and Cagney was keen to begin production of his new project, an adaptation of William Saroyan's Broadway play \"The Time of Your Life\". Saroyan himself loved the film, but it was a commercial disaster, costing the company half a million dollars to make; audiences again struggled to accept Cagney in a nontough-guy role.\n\nCagney Productions was in serious trouble; poor returns from the produced films, and a legal dispute with Sam Goldwyn Studio over a rental agreement forced Cagney back to Warner Bros. He signed a distribution-production deal with the studio for the film \"White Heat\", effectively making Cagney Productions a unit of Warner Bros.\n\nCagney's portrayal of Cody Jarrett in the 1949 film \"White Heat\" is one of his most memorable. Cinema had changed in the 10 years since Walsh last directed Cagney (in \"The Strawberry Blonde\"), and the actor's portrayal of gangsters had also changed. Unlike Tom Powers in \"The Public Enemy\", Jarrett was portrayed as a raging lunatic with few if any sympathetic qualities. In the 18 intervening years, Cagney's hair had begun to gray, and he developed a paunch for the first time. He was no longer a romantic commodity, and this was reflected in his performance. Cagney himself had the idea of playing Jarrett as psychotic; he later stated, \"it was essentially a cheapie one-two-three-four kind of thing, so I suggested we make him nuts. It was agreed so we put in all those fits and headaches.\"\n\nCagney's final lines in the film – \"Made it, Ma! Top of the world!\" – was voted the 18th-greatest movie line by the American Film Institute. Likewise, Jarrett's explosion of rage in prison on being told of his mother's death is widely hailed as one of Cagney's most memorable performances. Some of the extras on set actually became terrified of the actor because of his violent portrayal. Cagney attributed the performance to his father's alcoholic rages, which he had witnessed as a child, as well as someone that he had seen on a visit to a mental hospital.\nThe film was a critical success, though some critics wondered about the social impact of a character that they saw as sympathetic. Cagney was still struggling against his gangster typecasting. He said to a journalist, \"It's what the people want me to do. Some day, though, I'd like to make another movie that kids could go and see.\" However, Warner Bros., perhaps searching for another \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\", assigned Cagney a musical for his next picture, 1950's \"The West Point Story\" with Doris Day, an actress he admired.\n\nHis next film, \"Kiss Tomorrow Goodbye\", was another gangster movie, which was the first by Cagney Productions since its acquisition. While compared unfavorably to \"White Heat\" by critics, it was fairly successful at the box office, with $500,000 going straight to Cagney Productions' bankers to pay off their losses. Cagney Productions was not a great success, however, and in 1953, after William Cagney produced his last film, \"A Lion Is in the Streets\", the company came to an end.\n\nCagney's next notable role was the 1955 film \"Love Me or Leave Me\", his third with Day. Cagney played Martin \"Moe the Gimp\" Snyder, a lame Jewish-American gangster from Chicago, a part Spencer Tracy had turned down. Cagney described the script as \"that extremely rare thing, the perfect script\". When the film was released, Snyder reportedly asked how Cagney had so accurately copied his limp, but Cagney himself insisted he had not, having based it on personal observation of other people when they limped: \"What I did was very simple. I just slapped my foot down as I turned it out while walking. That's all\".\n\nHis performance earned him another Best Actor Academy Award nomination, 17 years after his first. Reviews were strong, and the film is considered one of the best of his later career. In Day, he found a co-star with whom he could build a rapport, such as he had had with Blondell at the start of his career. Day herself was full of praise for Cagney, stating that he was \"the most professional actor I've ever known. He was always 'real'. I simply forgot we were making a picture. His eyes would actually fill up when we were working on a tender scene. And you never needed drops to make your eyes shine when Jimmy was on the set.\"\n\nCagney's next film was \"Mister Roberts\", directed by John Ford and slated to star Spencer Tracy. Tracy's involvement ensured that Cagney accepted a supporting role, although in the end, Tracy did not take part. Cagney had worked with Ford before on \"What Price Glory?\", and they had gotten along fairly well. However, as soon as Ford met Cagney at the airport, the director warned him that they would \"tangle asses\", which caught Cagney by surprise. He later said, \"I would have kicked his brains out. He was so goddamned mean to everybody. He was truly a nasty old man.\" The next day, Cagney was slightly late on set, incensing Ford. Cagney cut short his imminent tirade, saying \"When I started this picture, you said that we would tangle asses before this was over. I'm ready now – are you?\" Ford walked away, and they had no more problems, though Cagney never particularly liked Ford.\n\nCagney's skill at noticing tiny details in other actors' performances became apparent during the shooting of \"Mister Roberts\". While watching the \"Kraft Music Hall\" anthology television show some months before, Cagney had noticed Jack Lemmon performing left-handed. The first thing that Cagney asked Lemmon when they met was if he was still using his left hand. Lemmon was shocked; he had done it on a whim, and thought no one else had noticed. He said of his co-star, \"his powers of observation must be absolutely incredible, in addition to the fact that he remembered it. I was very flattered.\"\n\nThe film was a success, securing three Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Sound Recording and Best Supporting Actor for Lemmon, who won. While Cagney was not nominated, he had thoroughly enjoyed the production. Filming on Midway Island and in a more minor role meant that he had time to relax and engage in his hobby of painting. He also drew caricatures of the cast and crew.\n\nIn 1955 Cagney replaced Spencer Tracy on the Western film \"Tribute to a Bad Man\" for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. He received praise for his performance, and the studio liked his work enough to offer him \"These Wilder Years\" with Barbara Stanwyck. The two stars got on well; they had both previously worked in vaudeville, and they entertained the cast and crew off-screen by singing and dancing.\n\nIn 1956 Cagney undertook one of his very rare television roles, starring in Robert Montgomery's \"Soldiers From the War Returning\". This was a favor to Montgomery, who needed a strong fall season opener to stop the network from dropping his series. Cagney's appearance ensured that it was a success. The actor made it clear to reporters afterwards that television was not his medium: \"I do enough work in movies. This is a high-tension business. I have tremendous admiration for the people who go through this sort of thing every week, but it's not for me.\"\n\nThe following year, Cagney appeared in \"Man of a Thousand Faces\", in which he played Lon Chaney. He received excellent reviews, with the \"New York Journal American\" rating it one of his best performances, and the film, made for Universal, was a box office hit. Cagney's skill at mimicry, combined with a physical similarity to Chaney, helped him generate empathy for his character.\n\nLater in 1957, Cagney ventured behind the camera for the first and only time to direct \"Short Cut to Hell\", a remake of the 1941 Alan Ladd film \"This Gun for Hire\", which in turn was based on the Graham Greene novel \"A Gun for Sale\". Cagney had long been told by friends that he would make an excellent director, so when he was approached by his friend, producer A. C. Lyles, he instinctively said yes. He refused all offers of payment, saying he was an actor, not a director. The film was low budget, and shot quickly. As Cagney recalled, \"We shot it in twenty days, and that was long enough for me. I find directing a bore, I have no desire to tell other people their business\".\n\nIn 1959 Cagney played a labor leader in what proved to be his final musical, \"Never Steal Anything Small\", which featured a comical song and dance duet with Cara Williams, who played his girlfriend.\n\nFor Cagney's next film, he traveled to Ireland for \"Shake Hands with the Devil\", directed by Michael Anderson. Cagney had hoped to spend some time tracing his Irish ancestry, but time constraints and poor weather meant that he was unable to do so. The overriding message of violence inevitably leading to more violence attracted Cagney to the role of an Irish Republican Army commander, and resulted in what some critics would regard as the finest performance of his final years.\n\nCagney's career began winding down, and he made only one film in 1960, the critically acclaimed \"The Gallant Hours\", in which he played Admiral William F. \"Bull\" Halsey. The film, although set during the Guadalcanal Campaign in the Pacific Theater during World War II, was not a war film, but instead focused on the impact of command. Cagney Productions, which shared the production credit with Robert Montgomery's company, made a brief return, though in name only. The film was a success, and \"The New York Times\"' Bosley Crowther singled its star out for praise: \"It is Mr. Cagney's performance, controlled to the last detail, that gives life and strong, heroic stature to the principal figure in the film. There is no braggadocio in it, no straining for bold or sharp effects. It is one of the quietest, most reflective, subtlest jobs that Mr. Cagney has ever done.\"\nCagney's penultimate film was a comedy. He was hand-picked by Billy Wilder to play a hard-driving Coca-Cola executive in the film \"One, Two, Three\". Cagney had concerns with the script, remembering back 23 years to \"Boy Meets Girl\", in which scenes were reshot to try to make them funnier by speeding up the pacing, with the opposite effect. Cagney received assurances from Wilder that the script was balanced. Filming did not go well, though, with one scene requiring 50 takes, something to which Cagney was unaccustomed. In fact, it was one of the worst experiences of his long career. For the first time, Cagney considered walking out of a film. He felt he had worked too many years inside studios, and combined with a visit to Dachau concentration camp during filming, he decided that he had had enough, and retired afterward. One of the few positive aspects was his friendship with Pamela Tiffin, to whom he gave acting guidance, including the secret that he had learned over his career: \"You walk in, plant yourself squarely on both feet, look the other fella in the eye, and tell the truth.\"\n\nCagney remained in retirement for 20 years, conjuring up images of Jack L. Warner every time he was tempted to return, which soon dispelled the notion. After he had turned down an offer to play Alfred Doolittle in \"My Fair Lady\", he found it easier to rebuff others, including a part in \"The Godfather Part II\". He made few public appearances, preferring to spend winters in Los Angeles, and summers either at his Martha's Vineyard farm or at Verney Farms in New York. When in New York, Billie Vernon and he held numerous parties at the Silver Horn restaurant, where they got to know Marge Zimmermann, the proprietress.\n\nCagney was diagnosed with glaucoma and began taking eye drops, but continued to have vision problems. On Zimmermann's recommendation, he visited a different doctor, who determined that glaucoma had been a misdiagnosis, and that Cagney was actually diabetic. Zimmermann then took it upon herself to look after Cagney, preparing his meals to reduce his blood triglycerides, which had reached alarming levels. Such was her success that, by the time Cagney made a rare public appearance at his American Film Institute Lifetime Achievement award ceremony in 1974, he had lost and his vision had improved. Charlton Heston opened the ceremony, and Frank Sinatra introduced Cagney. So many Hollywood stars attended—said to be more than for any event in history—that one columnist wrote at the time that a bomb in the dining room would have ended the movie industry. In his acceptance speech, Cagney lightly chastised the impressionist Frank Gorshin, saying, \"Oh, Frankie, just in passing, I never said 'MMMMmmmm, you dirty rat!' What I actually did say was 'Judy, Judy, Judy!'\"—a joking reference to a similar misquotation attributed to Cary Grant.\nWhile at Coldwater Canyon in 1977, Cagney had a minor stroke. After he spent two weeks in the hospital, Zimmermann became his full-time caregiver, traveling with Billie Vernon and him wherever they went. After the stroke, Cagney was no longer able to undertake many of his favorite pastimes, including horseback riding and dancing, and as he became more depressed, he even gave up painting. Encouraged by his wife and Zimmermann, Cagney accepted an offer from the director Miloš Forman to star in a small but pivotal role in the film \"Ragtime\" (1981).\n\nThis film was shot mainly at Shepperton Studios in Surrey, England, and on his arrival at Southampton aboard the \"Queen Elizabeth 2\", Cagney was mobbed by hundreds of fans. Cunard Line officials, who were responsible for the security at the dock, said they had never seen anything like it, although they had experienced past visits by Marlon Brando and Robert Redford.\n\nDespite the fact that \"Ragtime\" was his first film in 20 years, Cagney was immediately at ease: Flubbed lines and miscues were committed by his co-stars, often simply through sheer awe. Howard Rollins, who received a Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination for his performance, said, \"I was frightened to meet Mr. Cagney. I asked him how to die in front of the camera. He said 'Just die!' It worked. Who would know more about dying than him?\" Cagney also repeated the advice he had given to Pamela Tiffin, Joan Leslie, and Lemmon. As filming progressed, Cagney's sciatica worsened, but he finished the nine-week filming, and reportedly stayed on the set after completing his scenes to help the other actors with their dialogue.\n\nCagney's frequent co-star, Pat O'Brien, appeared with him on the British chat show \"Parkinson\" in the early 1980s and they both made a surprise appearance at the Queen Mother's command birthday performance at the London Palladium in 1980. His appearance on stage prompted the Queen Mother to rise to her feet, the only time she did so during the whole show, and she later broke protocol to go backstage to speak with Cagney directly.\n\nCagney made a rare TV appearance in the lead role of the movie \"Terrible Joe Moran\" in 1984. This was his last role. Cagney's health was fragile and more strokes had confined him to a wheelchair, but the producers worked his real-life mobility problem into the story. They also decided to dub his impaired speech, using the impersonator Rich Little. The film made use of fight clips from Cagney's boxing movie \"Winner Take All\" (1932), despite the fact that the TV movie is about an entirely different character.\n\nIn 1920, Cagney was a member of the chorus for the show \"Pitter Patter\", where he met Frances Willard \"Billie\" Vernon. They married on September 28, 1922, and the marriage lasted until his death in 1986. Frances Cagney died in 1994. In 1941 they adopted a son whom they named James Francis Cagney III, and later a daughter, Cathleen \"Casey\" Cagney. Cagney was a very private man, and while he was willing to give the press opportunities for photographs, he generally spent his personal time out of the public eye.\n\nCagney's son married Jill Lisbeth Inness in 1962. The couple had two children, James IV and Cindy. James Cagney III died from a heart attack on January 27, 1984 in Washington, D.C, two years before his father's death. He had become estranged from his father and had not seen or talked to him since 1982.\n\nCagney's daughter Cathleen married Jack W. Thomas in 1962. She, too, was estranged from her father during the final years of his life. She died on August 11, 2004.\n\nAs a young man, Cagney became interested in farming – sparked by a soil conservation lecture he had attended – to the extent that during his first walkout from Warner Bros., he helped to found a farm in Martha's Vineyard. Cagney loved that no concrete roads surrounded the property, only dirt tracks. The house was rather run-down and ramshackle, and Billie was initially reluctant to move in, but soon came to love the place as well. After being inundated by movie fans, Cagney sent out a rumor that he had hired a gunman for security. The ruse proved so successful that when Spencer Tracy came to visit, his taxi driver refused to drive up to the house, saying, \"I hear they shoot!\" Tracy had to go the rest of the way on foot.\n\nIn 1955, having shot three films, Cagney bought a farm in Stanford, Dutchess County, New York, for $100,000. Cagney named it Verney Farm, taking the first syllable from Billie's maiden name and the second from his own surname. He turned it into a working farm, selling some of the dairy cattle and replacing them with beef cattle. He expanded it over the years to . Such was Cagney's enthusiasm for agriculture and farming that his diligence and efforts were rewarded by an honorary degree from Florida's Rollins College. Rather than just \"turning up with Ava Gardner on my arm\" to accept his honorary degree, Cagney turned the tables upon the college's faculty by writing and submitting a paper on soil conservation.\n\nCagney was born in 1899 (prior to the widespread use of automobiles) and loved horses from childhood. As a child, he often sat on the horses of local deliverymen and rode in horse-drawn streetcars with his mother. As an adult, well after horses were replaced by automobiles as the primary mode of transportation, Cagney raised horses on his farms, specializing in Morgans, a breed of which he was particularly fond.\n\nCagney was a keen sailor and owned boats that were harbored on both coasts of the U.S. His joy in sailing, however, did not protect him from occasional seasickness—becoming ill, sometimes, on a calm day while weathering rougher, heavier seas at other times. Cagney greatly enjoyed painting, and claimed in his autobiography that he might have been happier, if somewhat poorer, as a painter than a movie star. The renowned painter Sergei Bongart taught Cagney in his later life and owned two of Cagney's works. Cagney often gave away his work but refused to sell his paintings, considering himself an amateur. He signed and sold only one painting, purchased by Johnny Carson to benefit a charity.\n\nIn his autobiography, Cagney said that as a young man, he had no political views, since he was more concerned with where the next meal was coming from. However, the emerging labor movement of the 1920s and 1930s soon forced him to take sides. The first version of the National Labor Relations Act was passed in 1935 and growing tensions between labor and management fueled the movement. Fanzines in the 1930s, however, described his politics as \"radical\".\n\nThis somewhat exaggerated view was enhanced by his public contractual wranglings with Warner Bros. at the time, his joining of the Screen Actors Guild in 1933, and his involvement in the revolt against the so-called \"Merriam tax\". The \"Merriam tax\" was an underhanded method of funnelling studio funds to politicians; during the 1934 Californian gubernatorial campaign, the studio executives would 'tax' their actors, automatically taking a day's pay from their biggest-earners, ultimately sending nearly half a million dollars to the gubernatorial campaign of Frank Merriam. Cagney (as well as Jean Harlow) publicly refused to pay and Cagney even threatened that, if the studios took a day's pay for Merriam's campaign, he would give a week's pay to Upton Sinclair, Merriam's opponent in the race.\n\nHe supported political activist and labor leader Thomas Mooney's defense fund, but was repelled by the behavior of some of Mooney's supporters at a rally. Around the same time, he gave money for a Spanish Republican Army ambulance during the Spanish Civil War, which he put down to being \"a soft touch\". This donation enhanced his liberal reputation. He also became involved in a \"liberal group...with a leftist slant,\" along with Ronald Reagan. However, when Reagan and he saw the direction the group was heading, they resigned on the same night.\nCagney was accused of being a communist sympathizer in 1934, and again in 1940. The accusation in 1934 stemmed from a letter police found from a local Communist official that alleged that Cagney would bring other Hollywood stars to meetings. Cagney denied this, and Lincoln Steffens, husband of the letter's writer, backed up this denial, asserting that the accusation stemmed solely from Cagney's donation to striking cotton workers in the San Joaquin Valley. William Cagney claimed this donation was the root of the charges in 1940. Cagney was cleared by U.S. Representative Martin Dies Jr., on the House Un-American Activities Committee.\n\nCagney became president of the Screen Actors Guild in 1942 for a two-year term. He took a role in the Guild's fight against the Mafia, which had begun to take an active interest in the movie industry. His wife, Billie Vernon, once received a phone call telling her that Cagney was dead. Cagney alleged that, having failed to scare off the Guild and him, they sent a hitman to kill him by dropping a heavy light onto his head. Upon hearing of the rumor of a hit, George Raft made a call, and the hit was supposedly canceled.\n\nDuring World War II, Cagney raised money for war bonds by taking part in racing exhibitions at the Roosevelt Raceway and selling seats for the premiere of \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\". He also let the Army practice maneuvers at his Martha's Vineyard farm.\n\nAfter the war, Cagney's politics started to change. He had worked on Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt's presidential campaigns, including the 1940 presidential election against Wendell Willkie. However, by the time of the 1948 election, he had become disillusioned with Harry S. Truman, and voted for Thomas E. Dewey, his first non-Democratic vote.\n\nBy 1980, Cagney was contributing financially to the Republican Party, supporting his friend Ronald Reagan's bid for the presidency in the 1980 election. As he got older, he became more and more conservative, referring to himself in his autobiography as \"arch-conservative\". He regarded his move away from liberal politics as \"a totally natural reaction once I began to see undisciplined elements in our country stimulating a breakdown of our system... Those functionless creatures, the hippies ... just didn't appear out of a vacuum.\"\n\nCagney died of a heart attack at his Dutchess County farm in Stanford, New York, on Easter Sunday 1986; he was 86 years old. A funeral Mass was held at St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan. The eulogy was delivered by his close friend, Ronald Reagan, who was also the President of the United States at the time. His pallbearers included boxer Floyd Patterson, dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov (who had hoped to play Cagney on Broadway), actor Ralph Bellamy, and director Miloš Forman. Governor Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Edward I. Koch were also in attendance at the service.\n\nCagney was interred in a crypt in the Garden Mausoleum at Cemetery of the Gate of Heaven in Hawthorne, New York.\n\nCagney won the Academy Award in 1943 for his performance as George M. Cohan in \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\".\n\nFor his contributions to the film industry, Cagney was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960 with a motion pictures star located at 6504 Hollywood Boulevard.\n\nIn 1974 Cagney received the American Film Institute's Life Achievement Award. Charlton Heston, in announcing that Cagney was to be honored, called him \"...one of the most significant figures of a generation when American film was dominant, Cagney, that most American of actors, somehow communicated eloquently to audiences all over the world ...and to actors as well.\"\n\nHe received the Kennedy Center Honors in 1980, and a Career Achievement Award from the U.S. National Board of Review in 1981. In 1984 Ronald Reagan awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\n\nIn 1999 the U.S. Postal Service issued a 33-cent stamp honoring Cagney.\n\nCagney was among the most favored actors for director Stanley Kubrick and actor Marlon Brando, and was considered by Orson Welles to be \"maybe the greatest actor to ever appear in front of a camera.\" Warner Bros. arranged private screenings of Cagney films for Winston Churchill.\n\nOn May 19, 2015, a new musical celebrating Cagney, and dramatizing his relationship with Warner Bros., opened off-Broadway in New York City at the York Theatre. \"Cagney, The Musical\" then moved to the Westside Theatre until May 28, 2017.\n\n style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"\n! Year\n! Film\n! Role\n! Notes\nrowspan=\"2\"1930\n\"Sinners' Holiday\"\nHarry Delano\nFilm debut\nSteve Mileaway\n\nrowspan=\"5\" 1931\n\"Blonde Crazy\"\nBert Harris\n\n\"Smart Money\"\nJack\n\n\"The Millionaire\"\nSchofield, Insurance Salesman\n\n\"The Public Enemy\"\nTom Powers\nThe movie along with his character and voice was used in The Great Movie Ride at Disney's Hollywood Studios\n\"Other Men's Women\"\nEd \"Eddie\" Bailey\nOriginally Titled: \"The Steel Highway\" \nrowspan=\"3\"1932\nJim \"Jimmy\" Kane\n\nJoe Greer\n\nMatt Nolan\n\nrowspan=\"5\" 1933\nDan Quigley\n\nChester Kent\n\nRichard \"Patsy\" Gargan\n\nDanny Kean\n\nMyron C. \"Lefty\" Merrill\n\nrowspan=\"4\" 1934\nEddie Kennedy\n\nChester \"Chesty\" J. O'Conner\n\nFlicker Hayes, a.k.a. Jerry Allen\n\n\"Jimmy\" Corrigan\n\nrowspan=\"5\" 1935\nNick Bottom\n\nDanny O'Hara\n\n\"Brick\" Davis\n\nThomas Jefferson \"Tommy\" O'Toole\n\n\"Frisco Kid\"\nBat Morgan\n\nrowspan=\"2\" 1936\nJohnny \"Red\" Cave\n\nDizzy Davis\n\nTerrence \"Terry\" Rooney\nstage name of Thadeus McGillicuddy\nrowspan=\"2\" 1938\nRocky Sullivan\nNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor<br>Nominated – Academy Award for Best Actor\nRobert Law\n\nrowspan=\"3\" 1939\nEddie Bartlett\n\nFrank Ross\n\nJim Kincaid\n\nrowspan=\"3\" 1940\nDanny Kenny (Young Samson)\n\nNick \"Nicky\" Butler\n\nJerry Plunkett\n\nrowspan=\"2\" 1941\nSteve Collins\n\nT. L. \"Biff\" Grimes\n\nrowspan=\"2\" 1942\nGeorge M. Cohan\nAcademy Award for Best Actor<br>New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor\nBrian MacLean\n\nTom Richards\n\nNick Condon\n\n\"13 Rue Madeleine\"\nRobert Emmett \"Bob\" Sharkey a.k.a. Gabriel Chavat\n\nJoseph T. (who observes people)\n\nArthur \"Cody\" Jarrett\n\nrowspan=\"2\" 1950\nElwin \"Bix\" Bixby\n\nRalph Cotter\n\nLew Marsh\n\nCapt. Flagg\n\nHank Martin\n\nrowspan=\"4\" 1955\nCapt. Morton\n\nGeorge M. Cohan\n\nMartin Snyder\nNominated – Academy Award for Best Actor\nMatt Dow\n\nrowspan=\"2\" 1956\nSteve Bradford\n\nJeremy Rodock\n\nrowspan=\"2\" 1957\nLon Chaney\n\nNone\nDirector only\nrowspan=\"2\" 1959\nJake MacIllaney\n\nSean Lenihan\n\nrowspan=\"1\" 1960\nAdmiral William F. \"Bull\" Halsey\n\nC.R. MacNamara\nNominated — Laurel Award for Top Male Comedy Performance<br>Nominated — New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor\nNarrator (voice)\n\n\"Ragtime\"\nCommissioner Rhinelander Waldo\n\n style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"\n! Year\n! Show\n! Role\n! Notes\nrowspan=\"1\"1960\n\"What's My Line?\"\n\nrowspan=\"1\"1966\n\"The Ballad of Smokey the Bear\"\n\nrowspan=\"1\"1984\n\"Terrible Joe Moran\"\nJoe Moran (Final role)\n\n! Year !! Program !! Episode/source\n\n\nBULLET::::- FBI Records: The Vault - James Cagney at fbi.gov\nBULLET::::- Photographs and literature\nBULLET::::- James Cagney in the 1900 US Census, 1905 NY Census, 1910 US Census, 1920 US Census, 1930 US Census, and the Social Security Death Index.\n"}
{"id": "16053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16053", "title": "Jonathan Richman", "text": "Jonathan Richman\n\nJonathan Michael Richman (born May 16, 1951) is an American singer, songwriter and guitarist. In 1970, he founded the Modern Lovers, an influential proto-punk band. Since the mid-1970s, Richman has worked either solo or with low-key, acoustic and electric, backing. Currently, he plays only acoustic to protect his hearing. He is known for his wide-eyed, unaffected, and childlike outlook, and music that, while rooted in rock and roll, is influenced by music from around the world.\n\nBorn in Natick, Massachusetts, into a Jewish family, Richman began playing music and writing his own songs in the mid-1960s. He became infatuated with the Velvet Underground, and in 1969, he moved to New York City, lived on the couch of their manager, Steve Sesnick, worked odd jobs and tried to break in as a professional musician. Failing at this, he returned to Boston.\n\nWhile in Boston, Richman formed the Modern Lovers, a proto-punk garage rock band. Other notable members of the group were keyboard player Jerry Harrison and drummer David Robinson, who later joined Talking Heads and the Cars, respectively.\n\nIn 1972, they recorded a series of demos with producer John Cale (formerly of the Velvet Underground). Among these songs were the seminal \"Roadrunner\" and \"Pablo Picasso\" which were eventually released on the group's post-breakup album, \"The Modern Lovers\" (August 1976). The album was strange for its time, featuring Velvets-influenced basic three-chord rock (\"Roadrunner\" — based on just two chords – is an homage to \"Sister Ray\") at a time when glam and progressive rock were the norm.\n\nLater in 1972, the group also recorded with producer Kim Fowley; these demos were eventually released in 1981 as \"The Original Modern Lovers\". Despite playing live regularly, the Modern Lovers had a difficult time securing a recording contract. By late 1973, Richman wanted to scrap the recorded tracks and start again with a mellower, more lyrical sound, influenced by the laid-back local music he had heard when the band had a residency at the Inverurie Hotel in Bermuda earlier in the year. These stymied efforts to complete a debut album led to the breakup of the original Modern Lovers in February 1974.\n\nIn 1975, Richman moved to California to record as a solo singer/songwriter with the independent Beserkley Records label. His first released recordings appeared on 1975's \"Beserkley Chartbusters\" compilation, where he was backed by members of Earth Quake and the Rubinoos. The four songs on the compilation also appeared on singles released by Beserkley.\n\nIn January 1976, Richman put together a new version of the Modern Lovers, which included original Modern Lovers drummer, David Robinson, former Rubinoos bassist Greg 'Curly' Keranen and Leroy Radcliffe on guitar. The new group, now billed as Jonathan Richman and The Modern Lovers, found Richman turning away from the harder, Velvet Underground-influenced electric rock of the original Modern Lovers, toward gentler sound mixing pop with 1950s rock and roll, and including a bigger emphasis on harmony vocals. During this period, Richman recorded a mix of original songs and material by other writers, such as Chuck Berry's \"Back in the USA\", the traditional spiritual songs \"Amazing Grace\" and \"Angels Watching Over Me\", and older pop songs like \"Emaline\", \"Buzz, Buzz, Buzz\", and \"Lydia\".\n\nRichman's own songs continued to mix straightforward love themes with more whimsical themes like Martians (\"Here Come the Martian Martians\"), Leprechauns (\"Rockin' Rockin' Leprechauns\"), the Abominable Snowman (\"Abominable Snowman in the Market\"), and mosquitoes (\"I'm Nature's Moquito\"). Richman's 1977 recording of the children's music standard \"The Wheels on the Bus\" made explicit his interest in making music for listeners of all ages.\n\nThe album \"Jonathan Richman and the Modern Lovers\" was released in May 1976, three months before the older \"The Modern Lovers\" sessions were finally released. Drummer David Robinson left the group soon thereafter, due to frustration with Richman's quest for lower volume levels, and joined with Ric Ocasek in forming the band the Cars.\n\nAfter several months as a trio, Richman found a new drummer, D. Sharpe, an avant-garde jazz player on the Boston scene, who later went on to become a member of pianist Carla Bley's band.\n\n\"Rock and Roll with the Modern Lovers\" was released in 1977 and, just as this record began to climb the charts in Europe, Keranen left the group to attend college. A subsequent live album, \"Modern Lovers Live\", was released in 1978, with Asa Brebner on bass.\nIn the United Kingdom, Richman was recognised as a progenitor of the punk rock scene, and several of his singles became hits. \"Roadrunner\" reached Number 11 in the UK Singles Chart, and its follow-up, the instrumental \"Egyptian Reggae\", made Number 5 in late 1977. \"Egyptian Reggae\" was a version of Jamaican musician Earl Zero's reggae song \"None Shall Escape the Judgment\"; Zero was credited as co-writer on Richman's later versions of the track.\n\n\"Back in Your Life\" was released in 1979 under the \"Jonathan Richman and the Modern Lovers\" moniker, but only about half the disc featured a backup band. The balance of the album was Richman playing solo. Following this version of The Modern Lovers' final breakup, Richman went on sabbatical for a few years, staying in Appleton, Maine, and playing at local bars in Belfast, Maine.\n\nBy 1981, Richman was recording and touring once again with various combinations of musicians under the band name Jonathan Richman and the Modern Lovers. The touring band was as large as five backup musicians during parts of 1981, when the group had bassist Curly Keranen once again, along with drummer Michael Guardabascio, keyboard player Ken Forfia, vocalist and guitarist Ellie Marshall, and vocalist Beth Harrington for a gig at New York's Bottom Line. This expanded Modern Lovers group would go on to record much of the music on the \"Jonathan Sings\" (1983), \"Rockin' & Romance\" (1985), and \"It's Time for Jonathan Richman and the Modern Lovers\" (1986) albums.\n\nFrom 1981 to 1984, Richman most often played live in a trio with Keranen and Marshall. In 1985, the group was reconfigured, and consisted of bassist Asa Brebner and drummer Andy Paley. From 1986 to 1988, most of Richman's concerts were played with guitarist Brennan Totten and drummer Johnny Avila. Signing with Rounder Records in 1987, Richaman recorded his final album using the \"Modern Lovers\" group name (\"Modern Lovers 88\"). After this, the \"Modern Lovers\" moniker was retired.\n\nFrom 1988 to 1992, Richman performed mostly as a solo act to support his Rounder albums \"Jonathan Richman\" (1989), \"Jonathan Goes Country\" (1990), and \"Having a Party with Jonathan Richman\" (1991). Around the time of his \"I, Jonathan\" album (1992), he formed his performance duo with drummer Tommy Larkin, who would continue to play and record with Richman for more than 25 years.\n\nIn 1993, he contributed the track \"Hot Nights\" to the AIDS-Benefit Album \"No Alternative\" produced by the Red Hot Organization.\n\nAlways possessing an ardent cult following, Richman has become better known in recent years thanks to a series of appearances on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\".\n\nAnother career boost came in the form of the Farrelly Brothers' 1998 film \"There's Something About Mary\", where Richman played half of a two-man Greek chorus with Tommy Larkins, commenting on the plot while performing in the framed action itself. He also appeared briefly in a bar scene in a previous Farrelly Brothers film, \"Kingpin\", and performed the song \"As We Walk to Fenway Park\" for their 2005 comedy, \"Fever Pitch\".\n\nRichman has continued his release schedule all along, with the Spanish-language \"¡Jonathan, Te Vas a Emocionar!\" (1994), \"You Must Ask the Heart\" (1995), \"Surrender to Jonathan\" (1996), \"I'm So Confused\" (1998), \"Her Mystery Not of High Heels and Eye Shadow\" (2001), and \"Not So Much to Be Loved as to Love\" (2004). In 1998, a live album of Modern Lovers recordings from the early 1970s was released, \"Live at the Long Branch & More\". A live filmed performance, \"Take Me to the Plaza\", was released on DVD in 2002.\n\nHis most recent albums are on the Cleveland, Ohio based Blue Arrow Records: 2016's \"Ishkode! Ishkode!\" and 2018's \"SA\".\n\nRichman's minimalist songwriting style has been described as whimsical and childlike. He himself has stated, \"I don’t write, really. I just make up songs.\"\n\nRichman has played a variety of electric and acoustic guitars throughout his career. In promotional and concert photos from the early 1970s (such as those reproduced in the album \"Precise Modern Lovers Order\"), Richman is frequently seen using a white Fender Stratocaster. He later wrote a song (\"Fender Stratocaster\") expressing his affection for the Stratocaster design.\n\nIn the late 1970s, working with his group The Modern Lovers, Richman often played a Fender Jazzmaster. He can be seen playing this guitar in the Dutch \"TopPop\" TV program filmed on September 16, 1978. A contemporaneous stage photo used on the cover of the \"Egyptian Reggae\" single shows Richman playing sunburst Stratocaster.\n\nLate-1970s studio recordings, such as the \"Rock and Roll with the Modern Lovers\" album, also featured Richman playing nylon-stringed acoustic guitar. On a 1979 performance on French television, and in the cover photo of \"The Best of Jonathan Richman and The Modern Lovers\", Richman plays a late-1970s Ibanez model 2453CW hollow-body electric guitar, a guitar similar in style to the Epiphone he would use extensively a decade later.\n\nIn the early- and mid-1980s, working with The Modern Lovers, Richman was frequently photographed playing a Harmony Hollywood hollow-body electric guitar. This guitar is seen on the back cover of Richman's \"It's Time For\" album. By the late 1980s, Richman was frequently performing solo concerts using a blonde 1980s Epiphone Regent hollow-body electric guitar. He can be seen holding this guitar on the back cover of the \"Having a Party with Jonathan Richman\" CD.\n\nRichman was still using his Ephiphone Regent on stage when he began performing as a duo with drummer Tommy Larkin in 1992. After a short stint playing other electric guitars on stage including a Gibson SG, Richman switched to exclusively playing nylon-stringed acoustic guitars (of the classical and flamenco styles) in concert. Richman has played a number of different nylon-stringed guitars since the mid-1990s.\n\nAfter switching to nylon-stringed acoustic guitars, Richman initially used a pick and played in a style close to that of his electric guitar playing. Eventually, he stopped using both a guitar pick and a guitar strap in concert, preferring to play only with his fingers, and to move frequently between playing guitar, dancing, and playing percussion instruments.\n\nRichman has also been photographed playing a Fender Telecaster and other electric and acoustic guitars, and he does not consider any specific instrument to be essential to his sound. In a 2006 interview with musician Chuck Prophet, Richman said \"It's not the guitar, it's the player. In fact, my most recent Flamenco guitar isn't even a real Flamenco guitar. It's not made out of the right woods. Made out of walnut. It's twangy. I bought it and I like it.\"\n\nDuring the early- and mid-1980s, Richman frequently played tenor saxophone during his concerts with The Modern Lovers. He can be heard playing the instrument on \"California Desert Party\", a song on his \"Modern Lovers 88\" album. The album also shows him holding the instrument in the cover photograph.\n\nHis first marriage was to Gail Clook of Vermont, in 1982, with whom he has a daughter, Jenny Rae, and son, Jason (Gail's son from a previous relationship). This marriage ended in divorce sometime shortly before the release of \"Surrender to Jonathan\" (1996).\n\nIn 2003, Richman married Nicole Montalbano of Chico, California. She contributed backing vocals to the album \"Not So Much to Be Loved as to Love\" (2004).\n\nRichman's work with the first incarnation of Modern Lovers is a major influence on punk rock. One critic called him the \"Godfather of Punk\". Artists as diverse as the Sex Pistols and Joan Jett have covered \"Roadrunner\". Boston ska-punk band Big D and the Kids Table have covered \"New England\" live and on their \"Gypsy Hill\" EP. A version of \"Pablo Picasso\" performed by Burning Sensations was included in the 1984 cult film, \"Repo Man\". David Bowie covered \"Pablo Picasso\" on his album \"Reality\". Velvet Underground founding member John Cale has a version of the song on his 1975 album, \"Helen of Troy\", and continues to include the song in his live shows. Iggy Pop has performed \"Pablo Picasso\" live and wrote an extra verse for it. Echo and the Bunnymen covered \"She Cracked\" in concert in 1984 and 1985 and Siouxsie and the Banshees have a version of the song on \"Downside Up\".\n\nRichman's music has set the tone for many alternative rock bands, such as Violent Femmes, Galaxie 500, They Might Be Giants (\"Roadrunner\" reportedly inspired John Flansburgh to become a musician), Weezer, Tullycraft, Jens Lekman, singer Frank Black (who composed the tribute song \"The Man Who Was Too Loud\"), Brandon Flowers, Art Brut, Craig Finn of the Hold Steady & Lifter Puller, Mac DeMarco and Nerf Herder who composed a song about him, titled \"Jonathan\", which appeared on the band's second album \"How To Meet Girls\". British country rock band the Rockingbirds released the single \"Jonathan, Jonathan\" in tribute to Richman in 1992. The Silos also covered the Modern Lovers' \"I'm Straight\".\n\nAs a producer himself, Richman and drummer Tommy Larkins produced Vic Chesnutt's final album \"Skitter on Take-Off\" in 2009 which appeared on Vapor Records. Chesnutt opened for Richman at concerts many times during his later years.\n\n\"Roadrunner\" is on the \"School of Rock\" soundtrack. In the commentary, director Richard Linklater mentions it is often called \"the first punk song\" and wanted to include it for that reason, along with all the other seminal rock songs in that film.\n\nA tribute album, \"If I Were a Richman: a Tribute to the Music of Jonathan Richman\", was released by Wampus Multimedia in 2001.\n\nRapper M.I.A. featured the opening lyrics from \"Roadrunner\" in the song \"Bamboo Banga\" on her 2007 album, \"Kala\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Modern Lovers\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"The Original Modern Lovers\" (1981)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Jonathan Richman and the Modern Lovers\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Rock 'n' Roll with the Modern Lovers\" (1977) UK No. 50\nBULLET::::- \"Back in Your Life\" (1979)\nBULLET::::- \"Jonathan Sings!\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Rockin' and Romance\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"It's Time For\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Modern Lovers 88\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"The Best Of Jonathan Richman & the Modern Lovers\" (1999)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Jonathan Richman\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Jonathan Goes Country\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Having a Party with Jonathan Richman\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"I, Jonathan\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"¡Jonathan, Te Vas a Emocionar!\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"You Must Ask the Heart\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Surrender to Jonathan\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm So Confused\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Radio On/Stop And Shop with the Modern Lovers (2 on 1)\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Her Mystery Not of High Heels and Eye Shadow\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Not So Much to Be Loved as to Love\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Revolution Summer\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Because Her Beauty Is Raw and Wild\" (2008)\nBULLET::::- \"¿A qué venimos sino a caer?\" (2008)\nBULLET::::- \"O Moon, Queen of Night on Earth\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Ishkode! Ishkode!\" (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"SA\" (2018)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Modern Lovers 'Live\"' (1977)\nBULLET::::- \"Live at the Longbranch Saloon\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Precise Modern Lovers Order\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Live at the Longbranch and More\" (1998)\n(These last three live albums are from the same three 1971-3 performances, but add and subtract a few different songs. The last two, combined, contain all the songs.)\n\nBULLET::::- Alternate versions of \"Roadrunner\" and \"Government Center\", along with \"The New Teller\", and \"It Will Stand\", first appeared on the \"Beserkley Chartbusters Vol. 1\" compilation (1975)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm Straight\" and \"Government Center\", from the Modern Lovers' Kim Fowley-produced Beserkley sessions, first appeared on the Warner Bros. Records compilation \"Troublemakers\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"I Like Gumby\"; On the \"Gumby\" compilation album – Jonathan Richman\nBULLET::::- 1993, contributed \"Hot Nights\" (live) to the AIDS-Benefit Album No Alternative produced by the Red Hot Organization.\nBULLET::::- Performs \"Stop Your Sobbing\" on the 2002 Kinks tribute album \"This Is Where I Belong\".\nBULLET::::- \"Action Packed: The Best Of Jonathan Richman\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"The Origin of Love\" on \"Wig in a Box\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Our Dog Is Getting Older Now\" on the charity album \"Colours Are Brighter\" (October 2006)\nBULLET::::- Think About Mustapha (2 songs) (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"No Me Quejo De Mi Estrella \" (2014)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Roadrunner\" / \"It Will Stand\" (United Artists UP36006, 1975)\nBULLET::::- \"Roadrunner\" / (\"Friday on My Mind\" by Earth Quake) (Beserkley B-4701, 1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Roadrunner (Once)\" / \"Roadrunner (Twice)\" (Beserkley BZZ 1, UK, 1976) UK No. 11\nBULLET::::- \"Roadrunner\" / \"Pablo Picasso\" (Beserkley PA-205, 1976)\nBULLET::::- \"New England\" / \"Here Come The Martian Martians\" (Beserkley B-5743, 1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Egyptian Reggae\" / \"Ice Cream Man\" (Beserkley 6.12 217, 1977)\nBULLET::::- \"Egyptian Reggae\" / \"Rollercoaster by the Sea\" (Beserkley BZZ 2, UK, 1977) UK No. 5\nBULLET::::- \"The Morning of Our Lives (Live)\" / \"Roadrunner (Thrice) (Live)\" (Beserkley BZZ 7, UK, 1977) UK No. 29\nBULLET::::- \"New England (Live)\" / \"Astral Plane (Live)\" (Beserkley BZZ 14, UK, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Abdul and Cleopatra\" / \"Astral Plane (Live)\" (Beserkley 11813, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Abdul and Cleopatra\" / \"Oh Carol\" (Beserkley BZZ 19, UK, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Buzz, Buzz, Buzz\" / \"Abdul and Cleopatra\" (Beserkley 6.12 311, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Buzz, Buzz, Buzz\" / \"Hospital (Live)\" (BZZ 25, UK, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"My Little Kookenhaken\" / \"Roadrunner (Thrice) (Live)\" (Beserkley 11819, 1978)\nBULLET::::- \"South American Folk Song (Live)\" / \"Ice Cream Man (Live)\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Lydia\" / \"Important in Your Life\" (BZZ 28, UK, 1979)\nBULLET::::- \"That Summer Feeling\" / \"This Kind of Music\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"That Summer Feeling\" / \"This Kind of Music\" / \"Tag Game\" (Rough Trade RTT 152, UK, 1984)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm Just Beginning To Live\" / \"Circle I\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"I'm Just Beginning To Live\" / \"Circle I\" / \"Shirin and Fahrad\" (Rough Trade RTT 154, UK, 1985)\nBULLET::::- \"California Desert Party\" / \"When Harpo Played His Harp\" (DRD 1D474, Spain, 1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Egyptian Reggae\" / \"Roadrunner\" (1989)\n\nBULLET::::- Tim Mitchell, \"There's Something About Jonathan\", London: Peter Owen Publishers, 1999,\n\nBULLET::::- Jojo Blog – long running community-authored blog\nBULLET::::- Live recordings of rare songs not found on studio albums\n"}
{"id": "16060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16060", "title": "Japanese", "text": "Japanese\n\nJapanese may refer to: \n\nBULLET::::- Something from or related to Japan, an island country in East Asia\nBULLET::::- Japanese language, spoken mainly in Japan\nBULLET::::- Japanese people, the ethnic group that identifies with Japan through culture or ancestry\nBULLET::::- Japanese diaspora, Japanese emigrants and their descendants around the world\nBULLET::::- Foreign-born Japanese, naturalized citizens of Japan\nBULLET::::- Japanese writing system, consisting of kanji and kana\nBULLET::::- Japanese cuisine, the food and food culture of Japan\n\nBULLET::::- List of Japanese people\nBULLET::::- Japonica (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Japonicum\nBULLET::::- Japonicus\nBULLET::::- Japanese studies\n"}
{"id": "16061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16061", "title": "Johann Bayer", "text": "Johann Bayer\n\nJohann Bayer (1572 – 7 March 1625) was a German lawyer and uranographer (celestial cartographer). He was born in Rain, Lower Bavaria, in 1572. At twenty, in 1592 he began his study of philosophy and law at the University of Ingolstadt, after which he moved to Augsburg to begin work as a lawyer, becoming legal adviser to the city council in 1612. \n\nBayer had several interests outside his work, including archaeology and mathematics. However, he is primarily known for his work in astronomy; particularly for his work on determining the positions of objects on the celestial sphere. He remained unmarried and died in 1625.\n\nBayer is most famous for his star atlas \"Uranometria Omnium Asterismorum\" (\"Uranometry of all the asterisms\"), which was first published in 1603 in Augsburg and dedicated to two prominent local citizens. This was the first atlas to cover the entire celestial sphere. It was based upon the work of Tycho Brahe and may have borrowed from Alessandro Piccolomini's 1540 star atlas, \"De le stelle fisse\" (\"Of the fixed stars\"), although Bayer included an additional 1,000 stars. The \"Uranometria\" introduced a new system of star designation which has become known as the Bayer designation. Bayer's atlas included twelve new constellations invented a few years earlier to fill in the far south of the night sky, which was unknown to ancient Greece and Rome.\n\nThe crater Bayer on the Moon is named after him.\n\nBULLET::::- Julius Schiller\nBULLET::::- Bayer designation\n\nBULLET::::- Full digital facsimile, Linda Hall Library\n"}
{"id": "16069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16069", "title": "Jonathan Demme", "text": "Jonathan Demme\n\nRobert Jonathan Demme ( ; February 22, 1944 – April 26, 2017) was an American director, producer, and screenwriter. He is best known for directing the psychological horror \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (1991), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Director. He also directed \"Melvin and Howard\" (1980), \"Swing Shift\" (1984), \"Something Wild\" (1986), \"Married to the Mob\" (1988), the concert film \"Stop Making Sense\" (1984), \"Philadelphia\" (1993) and \"Rachel Getting Married\" (2008).\n\nDemme was born on February 22, 1944 in Baldwin, New York, the son of Dorothy Louise (\"née\" Rogers) and Robert Eugene Demme, a public relations executive. He was raised in Rockville Centre, New York and Miami, where he graduated from Southwest Miami High School before attending the University of Florida.\n\nDemme broke into feature film working for exploitation film producer Roger Corman early in his career, co-writing and producing \"Angels Hard as They Come\" (1971), a motorcycle movie very loosely based on \"Rashomon\", and \"The Hot Box\" (1972). He then moved on to directing three films for Corman's studio New World Pictures: \"Caged Heat\" (1974), \"Crazy Mama\" (1975), and \"Fighting Mad\" (1976). After \"Fighting Mad\", Demme directed the comedy film \"Handle with Care\" (originally titled \"Citizens Band\", 1977) for Paramount Pictures. The film was well received by critics, but received little promotion, and performed poorly at the box office.\n\nDemme's next film, \"Melvin and Howard\" (1980), did not get a wide release, but received a groundswell of critical acclaim, and led to the signing of Demme to direct the Goldie Hawn and Kurt Russell star vehicle \"Swing Shift\" (1984). Intended as a prestige picture for Warner Bros. as well as a major commercial vehicle for Demme, it instead became a troubled production due to the conflicting visions of Demme and star Hawn. Demme ended up renouncing the finished product, and when the film was released in May 1984, it was generally panned by critics and neglected by moviegoers. After \"Swing Shift\", Demme stepped back from Hollywood to make the Talking Heads concert film \"Stop Making Sense\" (also 1984) which won the National Society of Film Critics Award for best documentary; the eclectic screwball action-romantic comedy \"Something Wild\" (1986); a film-version of the stage production \"Swimming to Cambodia\" (1987), by monologist Spalding Gray; and the New York Mafia-by-way-of Downtown comedy \"Married to the Mob\" (1988).\n\nDemme formed his production company, Clinica Estetico, with producers Edward Saxon and Peter Saraf in 1987. They were based out of New York City for fifteen years.\n\nDemme won the Academy Award for \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (1991)—one of only three films to win all the major categories (Best Picture, Best Director, Best Screenplay, Best Actor, and Best Actress). Inspired by his friend Juan Suárez Botas's illness with AIDS and fueled by his own moral convictions, Demme then used his influence to make \"Philadelphia\" (1993), one of the first major films to address the AIDS crisis and which garnered star Tom Hanks his first Best Actor Oscar. He also co-directed (with his nephew Ted) the music video for Bruce Springsteen's Best Song Oscar-winning \"Streets of Philadelphia\" from the film's soundtrack.\n\nSubsequently, his films included an adaptation of Toni Morrison's \"Beloved\" (1998), and remakes of two films from the 1960s: \"The Truth About Charlie\" (2002), based on \"Charade\", that starred Mark Wahlberg in the Cary Grant role; and \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (2004), with Denzel Washington and Meryl Streep. Demme's documentary film \"Man from Plains\" (2007), a documentary about former U.S. President Jimmy Carter's promotional tour publicizing his book \"\", had its premiere at the Venice Film Festival and Toronto International Film Festival.\n\nHis art-house hit \"Rachel Getting Married\" (2008) was compared by many critics to Demme's films of the late 1970s and 1980s. It was included in many 2008 \"best of\" lists, and received numerous awards and nominations, including an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress by lead Anne Hathaway. In 2010, Demme made his first foray into theater, directing \"Family Week\", a play by Beth Henley. The play was produced by MCC Theater and co-starred Rosemarie DeWitt and Kathleen Chalfant.\n\nAt one time, Demme was signed on to direct, produce, and write an adaptation of Stephen King's sci-fi novel \"11/22/63\", but later left due to disagreements with King on what should be included in the script.\n\nHe returned to the concert documentary format with \"Justin Timberlake + the Tennessee Kids\" (2016), which he described as a \"performance film, but also a portrait of an artist at a certain moment in the arc of his career\", and his last project was a history of rock & roll for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame compiled from footage from Hall of Fame induction ceremonies set to debut in summer 2017.\n\nDemme directed music videos for artists such as Suburban Lawns, New Order, KRS-One's H.E.A.L. project and Bruce Springsteen. He also produced a compilation of Haitian music called \"Konbit: Burning Rhythms of Haiti\" that was released in 1989. (Lou Reed selected \"Konbit...\" as one of his 'picks of 1989').\n\nDemme was on the board of directors at Jacob Burns Film Center in Pleasantville, New York. In addition to his role on the board, he curated and hosted a monthly series called \"Rarely Seen Cinema\".\n\nThroughout 1986–2004, Demme was known for his dramatic close-ups in films. This style of close-ups involves the character looking directly into the camera during crucial moments, particularly in the \"Quid pro quo\" scene in \"Silence of the Lambs\". According to Demme, this was done to put the viewer into the character's shoes. Beginning with \"Rachel Getting Married\" (2008), Demme adopted a documentary style of filmmaking.\n\nWriter/director Paul Thomas Anderson has paid homage to Demme in his films and has cited him as a major influence in his work. In an interview, Anderson jokingly stated that the three filmmakers who inspired him the most are \"Jonathan Demme, Jonathan Demme and Jonathan Demme.\" Other directors such as Alexander Payne and Wes Anderson have been known to copy his close-ups in their own work.\n\nDemme was involved in various political projects. In 1981, he directed a series of commercials for the liberal advocacy group People for the American Way. The spots, titled \"Eggs\", \"Music\", and \"Sports\", were produced by Norman Lear and featured Muhammad Ali, Carol Burnett, and Goldie Hawn celebrating Freedom of Expression. In 1985, he directed a video for Artists United Against Apartheid. The short, featured various international musicians including Afrika Bambaataa, Rubén Blades, Jimmy Cliff, Herbie Hancock, Little Steven, Run–D.M.C., and Bruce Springsteen, calling for a boycott of the South African luxury resort Sun City during Apartheid. His documentary \"Haiti Dreams of Democracy\" (1988) captured Haiti's era of democratic rebuilding after dictatorship, while his documentary \"The Agronomist\" (2008) profiled Haitian journalist and human rights activist Jean Dominique. Demme spent six years on the documentary \"I'm Carolyn Parker\" (2011), which highlighted rebuilding efforts in New Orleans Lower Ninth Ward after Hurricane Katrina.\n\nDemme was married twice, first to Evelyn Purcell and then Joanne Howard, with whom he had three children: Ramona, Brooklyn, and Jos. He was the uncle of film director Ted Demme, who died in 2002. Demme's cousin was the Rev. Robert Wilkinson Castle Jr., an Episcopal priest who appeared in some of Demme's films.\n\nDemme was a member of the steering committee of the Friends of the Apollo Theater, Oberlin, Ohio, along with Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman. In 2013, he returned to Oberlin as part of an alumni reunion during the class of 2013 graduation ceremony and received the award for Honorary Doctor of Fine Arts.\n\nDemme was an avid collector and devotee of Haitian art; in particular of Hector Hyppolite; so much so that he called it \"an addiction\". In 2014, he held an auction in Philadelphia selling thousands from his collection, much of which was donated to a cultural center in Port-au-Prince.\n\nDemme died at his home in Manhattan on April 26, 2017, from complications from esophageal cancer and heart disease; he was 73.\nDirector Brady Corbet dedicated his 2018 film, \"Vox Lux\" to Demme's memory, as did Luca Guadagnino with his 2018 film \"Suspiria\" and Paul Thomas Anderson with his 2017 film \"Phantom Thread.\"\n\n!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Title !!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Year !! colspan=\"4\" scope=\"col\"  Credited as !! rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes\n! Director!!  Writer!!  Producer!!  Other\n!scope=\"row\"\"Angels Hard as They Come\"\n1971\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Hot Box\"\n1972\n\nSecond unit director\n!scope=\"row\"\"Black Mama White Mama\"\n1973\n\nStory\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Caged Heat\"\n1974\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Crazy Mama\"\n1975\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Fighting Mad\"\n1976\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Handle with Care\"\n1977\n\nA.K.A. \"Citizen's Band\"\n!scope=\"row\"\"Last Embrace\"\n1979\n\nActor\nRole: Man on Train\n!scope=\"row\"\"Melvin and Howard\"\n1980\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Swing Shift\"\n1984\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Something Wild\"\n1986\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Swimming to Cambodia\"\n1987\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Married to the Mob\"\n1988\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Silence of the Lambs\"\n1991\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Philadelphia\"\n1993\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Beloved\"\n1998\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Adaptation.\"\nrowspan=\"2\"2002\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Truth About Charlie\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Manchurian Candidate\"\n2004\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Rachel Getting Married\"\n2008\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"A Master Builder\"\n2013\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Ricki and the Flash\"\n2015\n\n!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Title !!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Year!! colspan=\"3\" scope=\"col\"  Credited as !! rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes\n! Director!!  Writer!! Producer\n!scope=\"row\"\"Stop Making Sense\"\n1984\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Haiti: Dreams of Democracy\"\n1987\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Cousin Bobby\"\n1992\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Complex Sessions\"\n1994\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Storefront Hitchcock\"\n1998\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Agronomist\"\n2003\n\nCinematographer\n!scope=\"row\"\"\"\n2006\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Man from Plains\"\nrowspan=22007\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Right to Return: New Home Movies From the Lower 9th Ward\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Neil Young Trunk Show\"\n2009\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"I'm Carolyn Parker\"\n2011\n\nCinematographer\n!scope=\"row\"\"Neil Young Journeys\"\nrowspan=22012\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Enzo Avitabile Music Life\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"What's Motivating Hayes\"\n2015\n\nShort film\n!scope=\"row\"\"Justin Timberlake + The Tennessee Kids\"\n2016\n\n!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Title !!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Year!! colspan=\"3\" scope=\"col\"  Credited as !! rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes\n! Director!!  Writer!! Producer\n!scope=\"row\"\"Columbo\"\n1978\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Saturday Night Live\"\n1980–86\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"American Playhouse\"\n1982\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Trying Times\"\n1987\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Subway Stories\"\n1997\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Enlightened\"\nrowspan=22011\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"A Gifted Man\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Killing\"\n2013–14\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Shots Fired\"\n2017\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Seven Seconds\"\n2018\n\n!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Title !!rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\"  Year!! colspan=\"3\" scope=\"col\"  Credited as !! rowspan=\"2\" scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes\n! Director!!  Producer!! Other\n!scope=\"row\"\"Fly Me\"\n1972\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Incredible Melting Man\"\n1977\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Perfect Kiss\"\nrowspan=21985\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Into the Night\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Away\"\n1988\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Miami Blues\"\n1990\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Women & Men 2\"\n1991\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Amos & Andrew\"\nrowspan=21993\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Household Saints\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"One Foot on a Banana Peel, the OtherFoot in the Grave:Secrets from the Dolly Madison Room 1994\"\n1994\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Murder Incorporated\"\nrowspan=21995\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Devil in a Blue Dress\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"That Thing You Do!\"\nrowspan=21996\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Mandela\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Shadrach\"\n1998\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Oz\"\nrowspan=22000\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Opportunists\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"\"\n2001\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"\"\n2003\n!scope=\"row\"\"Crude Independence\"\n2009\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Gimme the Loot\"\n2012\n!scope=\"row\"\"Song One\"\n2014\n!scope=\"row\"\"I Thought I Told You To Shut Up\"\nrowspan=32015\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"The Center\"\n\n!scope=\"row\"\"Deep Time\"\n\nBULLET::::- Academy Award\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (won – Best Director)\nBULLET::::- Golden Globe Award\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (nomination – Best Director)\nBULLET::::- BAFTA Award\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (nomination – Best Film)\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (nomination – Best Director)\nBULLET::::- Saturn Award\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (won – Best Horror Film)\nBULLET::::- Berlin International Film Festival\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (won – Silver Bear for Best Director)\nBULLET::::- 1991: \"The Silence of the Lambs\" (nomination – Golden Bear)\nBULLET::::- 1994: \"Philadelphia\" (nomination – Golden Bear)\n\nBULLET::::- Storefront Demme\n"}
{"id": "16073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16073", "title": "Juan Gris", "text": "Juan Gris\n\nJosé Victoriano (Carmelo Carlos) González-Pérez (23 March 1887 – 11 May 1927), better known as Juan Gris (; ), was a Spanish painter born in Madrid who lived and worked in France most of his life. Closely connected to the innovative artistic genre Cubism, his works are among the movement's most distinctive.\n\nGris was born in Madrid and later studied engineering at the Madrid School of Arts and Sciences. There, from 1902 to 1904, he contributed drawings to local periodicals. From 1904 to 1905, he studied painting with the academic artist José Moreno Carbonero. It was in 1905 that José Victoriano González adopted the more distinctive name Juan Gris.\n\nIn 1909 Lucie Belin (1891–1942)—Gris' first wife—gave birth to Georges Gonzalez-Gris (1909–2003), the artists only child. The three lived at the Bateau-Lavoir, 13 Rue Ravignan, Paris, from 1909 to 1911. In 1912 Gris met Charlotte Augusta Fernande Herpin (1894–1983), also known as Josette. Late 1913 or early 1914 they lived together at the Bateau-Lavoir until 1922. Josette Gris was Juan Gris' second companion and unofficial wife.\n\nIn 1906 he moved to Paris and became friends with the poets Guillaume Apollinaire, Max Jacob, and artists Henri Matisse, Georges Braque, Fernand Léger and Jean Metzinger. He submitted darkly humorous illustrations to journals such as the anarchist satirical magazine \"L'Assiette au Beurre\", and also \"Le Rire\", \"Le Charivari\", and \"Le Cri de Paris\". In Paris, Gris followed the lead of Metzinger and another friend and fellow countryman, Pablo Picasso.\n\nGris began to paint seriously in 1911 (when he gave up working as a satirical cartoonist), developing at this time a personal Cubist style. In \"A Life of Picasso\", John Richardson writes that Jean Metzinger's 1911 work, \"Le goûter (Tea Time)\", persuaded Juan Gris of the importance of mathematics in painting. Gris exhibited for the first time at the 1912 Salon des Indépendants (a painting entitled \"Hommage à Pablo Picasso\").\n\n\"He appears with two styles\", writes art historian Peter Brooke, \"In one of them a grid structure appears that is clearly reminiscent of the \"Goûter\" and of Metzinger's later work in 1912.\" In the other, Brooke continues, \"the grid is still present but the lines are not stated and their continuity is broken. Their presence is suggested by the heavy, often triangular, shading of the angles between them... Both styles are distinguished from the work of Picasso and Braque by their clear, rational and measurable quality.\" Although Gris regarded Picasso as a teacher, Gertrude Stein wrote in \"The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas\" that \"Juan Gris was the only person whom Picasso wished away\".\nIn 1912 Gris exhibited at the \"Exposicío d'art cubista\", Galeries Dalmau in Barcelona, the first declared group exhibition of Cubism worldwide; the gallery Der Sturm in Berlin; the \"Salon de la Société Normande de Peinture Moderne\" in Rouen; and the Salon de la Section d'Or in Paris. Gris, in that same year, signed a contract that gave Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler exclusive rights to his work.\n\nAt first Gris painted in the style of \"Analytical Cubism\", a term he himself later coined, but after 1913 he began his conversion to \"Synthetic Cubism\", of which he became a steadfast interpreter, with extensive use of papier collé or, collage. Unlike Picasso and Braque, whose Cubist works were practically monochromatic, Gris painted with bright harmonious colors in daring, novel combinations in the manner of his friend Matisse. Gris exhibited with the painters of the Puteaux Group in the Salon de \"la Section d'Or\" in 1912. His preference for clarity and order influenced the Purist style of Amédée Ozenfant and Charles Edouard Jeanneret (Le Corbusier), and made Gris an important exemplar of the post-war \"return to order\" movement. In 1915 he was painted by his friend, Amedeo Modigliani. In November 1917 he made one of his few sculptures, the polychrome plaster \"Harlequin\".\n\nGris's works from late 1916 through 1917 exhibit a greater simplification of geometric structure, a blurring of the distinction between objects and setting, between subject matter and background. The oblique overlapping planar constructions, tending away from equilibrium, can best be seen in \"Woman with Mandolin, after Corot\" (September 1916) and in its epilogue, \"Portrait of Josette Gris\" (October 1916; Museo Reina Sofia).\n\nThe clear-cut underlying geometric framework of these works seemingly controls the finer elements of the compositions; the constituent components, including the small planes of the faces, become part of the unified whole. Though Gris certainly had planned the representation of his chosen subject matter, the abstract armature serves as the starting point.\n\nThe geometric structure of Juan Gris's Crystal period is already palpable in \"Still Life before an Open Window, Place Ravignan\" (June 1915; Philadelphia Museum of Art). The overlapping elemental planar structure of the composition serves as a foundation to flatten the individual elements onto a unifying surface, foretelling the shape of things to come.\n\nIn 1919 and particularly 1920, artists and critics began to write conspicuously about this 'synthetic' approach, and to assert its importance in the overall scheme of advanced Cubism.\n\nIn 1924, he designed ballet sets and costumes for Sergei Diaghilev and the famous Ballets Russes.\n\nGris articulated most of his aesthetic theories during 1924 and 1925. He delivered his definitive lecture, \"Des possibilités de la peinture\", at the Sorbonne in 1924. Major Gris exhibitions took place at the Galerie Simon in Paris and the Galerie Flechtheim in Berlin in 1923 and at the Galerie Flechtheim in Düsseldorf in 1925.\n\nAfter October 1925, Gris was frequently ill with bouts of uremia and cardiac problems. He died of renal failure in Boulogne-sur-Seine (Paris) on 11 May 1927, at the age of 40, leaving a wife, Josette, and a son, Georges.\n\nThe top auction price for a Gris work is $57.1 million (£34.8 million), achieved for his 1915 painting \"Nature morte à la nappe à carreaux (Still Life with Checked Tablecloth)\". This surpassed previous records of $20.8 million for his 1915 still life \"Livre, pipe et verres\", $28.6 million for the 1913 artwork \"Violon et guitare\" and $31.8 million for \"The musician's table\", now in the Met. \n\nBULLET::::- \"Violin Hanging on a Wall (Le violon accroché)\", (1913). Guggenheim Museum, New York\nBULLET::::- \"Pears and Grapes on a Table\", (autumn 1913). Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.\nBULLET::::- \"Bottle of Rum and Newspaper (Bouteille de rhum et journal)\", (June 1914). Guggenheim Museum, New York\nBULLET::::- \"Cherries (Les cerises)\", (1915). Guggenheim Museum, New York\nBULLET::::- \"Fruit Dish on a Checkered Tablecloth (Compotier et nappe à carreaux)\", (November 1917). Guggenheim Museum, New York\n\nBULLET::::- Cowling, Elizabeth; Mundy, Jennifer. 1990. \"On Classic Ground: Picasso, Léger, de Chirico and the New Classicism 1910–1930\". London: Tate Gallery.\nBULLET::::- Green, Christopher. \"Gris, Juan.\" \"Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online\". Oxford University Press. Web.\nBULLET::::- Gris, Juan. 1998. \"Juan Gris: peintures et dessins, 1887–1927\". [Marseille]: Musées de Marseille. . (French language)\n\nBULLET::::- Juan Gris, Joconde, Portail des collections des musées de France\nBULLET::::- Juan Gris, Culture.gouv.fr, le site du Ministère de la culture – base Mémoire\nBULLET::::- Artcyclopedia – Links to Gris' works\nBULLET::::- The Athenaeum – Extensive list and images of Gris' works\nBULLET::::- Juan Gris in Artfacts.Net See actual exhibitions and related galleries and museums for Juan Gris\nBULLET::::- Juan Gris, L'Esprit nouveau: revue internationale d'esthétique, 1920. Gallica, Bibliothèque nationale de France\n"}
{"id": "16074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16074", "title": "James Whale", "text": "James Whale\n\nJames Whale (22 July 1889 – 29 May 1957) was an English film director, theater director and actor, who spent the greater part of his career in Hollywood. He is best remembered for several horror films: \"Frankenstein\" (1931), \"The Old Dark House\" (1932), \"The Invisible Man\" (1933) and \"Bride of Frankenstein\" (1935), all considered classics. Whale also directed films in other genres, including the 1936 film version of the musical \"Show Boat\". He became increasingly disenchanted with his association with horror, and many of his non-horror films have fallen into obscurity.\n\nWhale was born into a large family in Dudley, Worcestershire. He discovered his artistic talent early on and studied art. With the outbreak of World War I he enlisted in the British Army and became an officer. He was captured by the Germans and during his time as a prisoner of war he realized he was interested in drama. Following his release at the end of the war he became an actor, set designer and director. His success directing the 1928 play \"Journey's End\" led to his move to the US, first to direct the play on Broadway and then to Hollywood, California, to direct films. He lived in Hollywood for the rest of his life, most of that time with his longtime companion, producer David Lewis. Apart from \"Journey's End\" (1930), which was released by Tiffany Films, and \"Hell's Angels\" (1930), released by United Artists, he directed a dozen films for Universal Pictures between 1931 and 1937, developing a style characterized by the influence of German Expressionism and a highly mobile camera.\n\nAt the height of his career as a director Whale directed \"The Road Back\" (1937), a sequel to \"All Quiet on the Western Front\". Studio interference, possibly spurred by political pressure from Nazi Germany, led to the film's being altered from Whale's vision and it was a critical and commercial failure. A run of similar box-office disappointments followed and, while he would make one final short film in 1950, by 1941 his film directing career was effectively over. He continued to direct for the stage and also rediscovered his love for painting and travel. His investments made him wealthy and he lived a comfortable retirement until suffering strokes in 1956 that robbed him of his vigor and left him in pain. He committed suicide on 29 May 1957 by drowning himself in his swimming pool.\n\nWhale was openly gay throughout his career, something that was very unusual in the 1920s and 1930s. As knowledge of his sexual orientation has become more common, some of his films, \"Bride of Frankenstein\" in particular, have been interpreted as having a gay subtext and it has been claimed that his refusal to remain in the closet led to the end of his career.\n\nWhale was born in Dudley, Worcestershire, at the heart of the Black Country, the sixth of seven children of William, a blast furnaceman, and Sarah, a nurse. He attended Kates Hill Board School, followed by Bayliss Charity School and finally Dudley Blue Coat School. His attendance stopped in his teenage years because the cost would have been prohibitive and his labor was needed to help support the family. Thought not physically strong enough to follow his brothers into the local heavy industries, Whale started work as a cobbler, reclaiming the nails he recovered from replaced soles and selling them for scrap for extra money. He discovered he had some artistic ability and earned additional money lettering signs and price tags for his neighbors. He used his additional income to pay for evening classes at the Dudley School of Arts and Crafts.\n\nWorld War I broke out in early August 1914. Although Whale had little interest in the politics behind the war, he realized that conscription was inevitable so he voluntarily enlisted just before it was introduced into the British Army's Inns of Court Officer Training Corps in October 1915, and was stationed initially at Bristol. He was subsequently commissioned as a second lieutenant into the Worcestershire Regiment in July 1916. He was taken prisoner of war in battle on the Western Front in Flanders in August 1917, and was held at Holzminden Officers' Camp, where he remained until the war's end, being repatriated to England in December 1918. While imprisoned he became actively involved, as an actor, writer, producer and set-designer, in the amateur theatrical productions that took place in the camp, finding them \"a source of great pleasure and amusement\". He also developed a talent for poker, and after the war he cashed in the chits and IOUs from his fellow prisoners that he had amassed in gambling to provide himself with finances for re-entry into civilian life.\n\nAfter the armistice, he returned to Birmingham and tried to find work as a cartoonist. He sold two cartoons to the \"Bystander\" in 1919 but was unable to secure a permanent position. Later that year he embarked on a professional stage career. Under the tutelage of actor-manager Nigel Playfair, he worked as an actor, set designer and builder, \"stage director\" (akin to a stage manager) and director. In 1922, while with Playfair, he met Doris Zinkeisen. They were considered a couple for some two years, despite Whale's living as an openly gay man. They were reportedly engaged in 1924, but by 1925 the engagement was off.\n\nIn 1928 Whale was offered the opportunity to direct two private performances of R. C. Sherriff's then-unknown play \"Journey's End\" for the Incorporated Stage Society, a theatre society that mounted private Sunday performances of plays. Set over a four-day period in March 1918 in the trenches at Saint-Quentin, France, \"Journey's End\" gives a glimpse into the experiences of the officers of a British infantry company in World War I. The key conflict is between Capt. Stanhope, the company commander, and Lt. Raleigh, the brother of Stanhope's fiancée. Whale offered the part of Stanhope to the then barely known Laurence Olivier. Olivier initially declined the role, but after meeting the playwright agreed to take it on. Maurice Evans was cast as Raleigh. The play was well received and transferred to the Savoy Theatre in London's West End, opening on 21 January 1929. A young Colin Clive was now in the lead role, Olivier having accepted an offer to take the lead in a production of \"Beau Geste\". The play was a tremendous success, with critics uniform and effusive in their praise and with audiences sometimes sitting in stunned silence following its conclusion only to burst into thunderous ovations. As Whale biographer James Curtis wrote, the play \"managed to coalesce, at the right time and in the right manner, the impressions of a whole generation of men who were in the war and who had found it impossible, through words or deeds, to adequately express to their friends and families what the trenches had been like\". After three weeks at the Savoy, \"Journey's End\" transferred to the Prince of Wales Theatre, where it ran for the next two years.\n\nWith the success of \"Journey's End\" at home, Broadway producer Gilbert Miller acquired the rights to mount a New York production with an all-British cast headed by Colin Keith-Johnston as Stanhope and Derek Williams as Raleigh. Whale also directed this version, which premiered at Henry Miller's Theatre on 22 March 1929. The play ran for over a year and cemented its reputation as the greatest play about World War I.\n\nThe success of the various productions of \"Journey's End\" brought Whale to the attention of movie producers. Coming at a time when motion pictures were making the transition from silent to talking, producers were interested in hiring actors and directors with experience with dialogue. Whale traveled to Hollywood in 1929 and signed a contract with Paramount Pictures. He was assigned as \"dialogue director\" for a film called \"The Love Doctor\" (1929). He completed work on the film in 15 days and his contract was allowed to expire. It was at around this time that he met David Lewis.\n\nWhale was hired by independent film producer and aviation pioneer Howard Hughes, who planned to turn the previously silent Hughes production \"Hell's Angels\" (1930) into a talkie. Whale directed the dialogue sequences. When his work for Hughes was completed, he headed to Chicago to direct another production of \"Journey's End\".\n\nHaving purchased the film rights to \"Journey's End\", British producers Michael Balcon and Thomas Welsh agreed that Whale's experience directing the London and Broadway productions of the play made him the best choice to direct the film. The two partnered with a small American studio, Tiffany-Stahl, to shoot it in New York. Colin Clive reprised his role as Stanhope, and David Manners was cast as Raleigh. Filming got underway on 6 December 1929 and wrapped on 22 January 1930. \"Journey's End\" was released in Great Britain on 14 April and in the United States on 15 April. On both sides of the Atlantic the film was a tremendous critical and commercial success.\n\nUniversal Studios signed Whale to a five-year contract in 1931 and his first project was \"Waterloo Bridge\". Based on the Broadway play by Robert E. Sherwood, the film stars Mae Clarke as Myra, a chorus girl in World War I London who becomes a prostitute. It too was a critical and popular success. At around this time, Whale and Lewis began living together.\n\nIn 1931, Universal chief Carl Laemmle, Jr. offered Whale his choice of any property the studio owned. He chose \"Frankenstein\", mostly because none of Universal's other properties particularly interested him and he wanted to make something other than a war picture. While the novel itself was in the public domain, Universal owned the filming rights to a stage adaptation by Peggy Webling. Whale cast Colin Clive as Henry Frankenstein and Mae Clarke as his fiancée Elizabeth. For the Monster, he turned to an unknown actor named Boris Karloff. Shooting began on 24 August 1931 and wrapped on 3 October. Previews were held 29 October, with wide release on 21 November. \"Frankenstein\" was an instant hit with critics and the public. The film received glowing reviews and shattered box office records across the United States, earning Universal $12 million on first release.\n\nNext from Whale were \"The Impatient Maiden\" and \"The Old Dark House\" (both 1932). \"The Impatient Maiden\" made little impression but \"The Old Dark House\" is credited with reinventing the \"dark house\" subgenre of horror films. Thought lost for some years, a print was found by filmmaker Curtis Harrington in the Universal vaults in 1968. It was restored by George Eastman House, and released on Blu-ray disk in 2017.\n\nWhale's next film was \"The Kiss Before the Mirror\" (1933), a critical success but a box-office failure. He returned to horror with \"The Invisible Man\" (1933). Shot from a script approved by H. G. Wells, the film blended horror with humor and confounding visual effects. Much admired, \"The New York Times\" placed it in their list of the ten best films of the year, and the film broke box-office records in cities across America. So highly regarded was the film that France, which restricted the number of theatres in which undubbed American films could play, granted it a special waiver because of its \"extraordinary artistic merit\".\n\nAlso in 1933 Whale directed the romantic comedy \"By Candlelight\" which gained good reviews and was a modest box office hit. In 1934 he directed \"One More River\", an adaptation of the novel of the same name by John Galsworthy. The film tells the story of a woman desperate to escape her abusive marriage to a member of the British aristocracy. This was the first of Whale's films for which Production Code Administration approval was required and Universal had a difficult time securing that approval because of the elements of sexual sadism implicit in the husband's abusive behavior.\n\"Bride of Frankenstein\" (1935) was Whale's next project. He had resisted making a sequel to \"Frankenstein\" as he feared being pigeonholed as a horror director. \"Bride\" hearkened back to an episode from Mary Shelley's original novel in which the Monster promises to leave Frankenstein and humanity alone if Frankenstein makes him a mate. He does, but the mate is repelled by the monster who then, setting Frankenstein and his wife free to live, chooses to destroy himself and his \"bride.\" The film was a critical and box office success, having earned some $2 million for Universal by 1943. Lauded as \"the finest of all gothic horror movies\", \"Bride\" is frequently hailed as Whale's masterpiece.\n\nWith the success of \"Bride\", Laemmle was eager to put Whale to work on \"Dracula's Daughter\" (1936), the sequel to Universal's first big horror hit of the sound era. Whale, wary of doing two horror films in a row and concerned that directing \"Dracula's Daughter\" could interfere with his plans for the first all-sound version of \"Show Boat\" (previously filmed as a part-talkie by Harry A. Pollard), instead convinced Laemmle to buy the rights to a novel called \"The Hangover Murders\". The novel is a comedy-mystery in the style of \"The Thin Man\", about a group of friends who were so drunk the night one of them was murdered that none can remember anything. Retitled \"Remember Last Night?\", the film was one of Whale's personal favorites, but met with sharply divided reviews and commercial disinterest.\n\nWith the completion of \"Remember Last Night?\" Whale immediately went to work on \"Show Boat\" (1936). Whale gathered as many of those as he could who had been involved in one production or another of the musical, including Helen Morgan, Paul Robeson, Charles Winninger, Sammy White, conductor Victor Baravalle, orchestrator Robert Russell Bennett, and, as Magnolia, Irene Dunne, who believed that Whale was the wrong director for the piece. The 1936 version of \"Show Boat\", faithfully adapted from the original stage production, is believed to be the definitive film version of the musical by many critics. but became unavailable following the 1951 remake. In February 2014, a restoration of the film became available on DVD in the U.S. as part of Warner Home Video's Archive Collection line. The initial inventory will be filled by manufactured DVDs; subsequent inventory will be filled by DVDs-on-demand (DVD-Rs).\n\nThis was the last of Whale's films to be produced under the Laemmle family. The studio was now bankrupt, and the Laemmles lost control to J. Cheever Cowdin, head of the Standard Capital Corporation, and Charles R. Rogers, who was installed in Junior Laemmle's old job.\n\nWhale's career went into sharp decline following the release of his next film, \"The Road Back\" (1937). The sequel to Erich Maria Remarque's \"All Quiet on the Western Front\", which Universal had filmed in 1930, the novel and film follow the lives of several young German men who have returned from the trenches of World War I and their struggles to re-integrate into society. The Los Angeles consul for Nazi Germany, George Gyssling, learned that the film was in production. He protested to PCA enforcer Joseph Breen, arguing that the film gave an \"untrue and distorted picture of the German people\". Gyssling eventually met Whale, but nothing came of it. Gyssling then sent letters to members of the cast, threatening that their participation in the film might lead to difficulties in obtaining German filming permits for them and for anyone associated in a film with them. While the low volume of business conducted by Universal in Germany made such threats largely hollow, the State Department, under pressure from the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League and the Screen Actors Guild, stepped in and the German government backed down. Whale's original cut of the film was given generally positive reviews, but sometime between preview screenings and the film's general release, Rogers capitulated to the Germans, ordering that cuts be made and additional scenes be shot and inserted. Whale was furious, and the altered film was banned in Germany anyway. The Germans were successful in persuading China, Greece, Italy and Switzerland to ban the film as well.\n\nFollowing the debacle of \"The Road Back\", Charles Rogers tried to get out of his contract with Whale; Whale refused. Rogers then assigned him to a string of B movies to run out his contractual obligation. Whale only made one additional successful feature film, \"The Man in the Iron Mask\" (1939), before retiring from the film industry in 1941.\n\nWith his film career behind him, Whale found himself at a loose end. He was offered the occasional job, including the opportunity to direct \"Since You Went Away\" for David O. Selznick, but turned them down. Lewis, meanwhile, was busier than ever with his production duties and often worked late hours, leaving Whale lonely and bored. Lewis bought him a supply of paint and canvasses and Whale re-discovered his love of painting. Eventually he built a large studio for himself.\n\nWith the outbreak of World War II, Whale volunteered his services to make a training film for the United States Army. He shot the film, called \"Personnel Placement in the Army\", in February 1942. Later that year, in association with actress Claire DuBrey, he created the Brentwood Service Players. The Players took over a 100–seat theatre. Sixty seats were provided free of charge to service personnel; the remaining were sold to the public, with the box office proceeds donated to wartime charities. The group expanded to the Playtime Theatre during the summer, where a series of shows ran through October.\n\nWhale returned to Broadway in 1944 to direct the psychological thriller \"Hand in Glove\". It was his first return to Broadway since his failed \"One, Two, Three!\" in 1930. \"Hand in Glove\" would fare no better than his earlier play, running the same number of performances, 40.\n\nWhale directed his final film in 1950, a short subject based on the William Saroyan one-act play \"Hello Out There\". The film, financed by supermarket heir Huntington Hartford, was the story of a man in a Texas jail falsely accused of rape and the woman who cleans the jail. Hartford intended for the short to be part of an anthology film along the lines of \"Quartet\". However, attempts to find appropriate short fiction companion pieces to adapt were unsuccessful and \"Hello Out There\" was never commercially released.\n\nWhale's last professional engagement was directing \"Pagan in the Parlour\", a farce about two New England spinster sisters who are visited by a Polynesian whom their father, when shipwrecked years earlier, had married. The production was mounted in Pasadena for two weeks in 1951. Plans were made to take it to New York, but Whale suggested taking the play to London first. Before opening the play in England, Whale decided to tour the art museums of Europe. In France he renewed his acquaintanceship with Curtis Harrington, whom he had met in 1947. While visiting Harrington in Paris, he went to some gay bars. At one he met a 25-year-old bartender named Pierre Foegel, whom Harrington believed was nothing but \"a hustler out for what he could get\". The 62-year-old Whale was smitten with the younger man and hired him as his chauffeur.\n\nA provincial tour of \"Pagan in the Parlour\" began in September 1952 and it appeared that the play would be a hit. However, Hermione Baddeley, starring in the play as the cannibal \"Noo-ga\", was drinking heavily and began engaging in bizarre antics and disrupting performances. Because she had a run of the play contract she could not be replaced and so producers were forced to close the show.\n\nWhale returned to California in November 1952 and advised David Lewis that he planned to bring Foegel over early the following year. Appalled, Lewis moved out of their home. While this ended their 23-year romantic relationship, the two men remained friends. Lewis bought a small house and dug a swimming pool, prompting Whale to have his own pool dug, although he did not himself swim in it. He began throwing all-male swim parties and would watch the young men cavort in and around the pool. Foegel moved in with Whale in early 1953 and remained there for several months before returning to France. He returned in 1954 permanently, and Whale installed him as manager of a gas station that he owned.\n\nWhale and Foegel settled into a quiet routine until the spring of 1956, when Whale suffered a small stroke. A few months later he suffered a larger stroke and was hospitalized. While in the hospital he was treated for depression with shock treatments.\n\nUpon his release, Whale hired one of the male nurses from the hospital to be his personal live-in nurse. A jealous Foegel maneuvered the nurse out of the house and hired a female nurse as a non live-in replacement. Whale suffered from mood swings and grew increasingly and frustratingly more dependent on others as his mental faculties were diminishing.\n\nWhale committed suicide by drowning himself in his Pacific Palisades swimming pool on 29 May 1957 at the age of 67. He left a suicide note, which Lewis withheld until shortly before his own death decades later. Because the note was suppressed, the death was initially ruled accidental. The note read in part:\nWhale's body was cremated as per his request, and his ashes were interred in the Columbarium of Memory at Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale. Because of his habit of periodically revising his date of birth, his niche lists the incorrect date of 1893. When his longtime companion David Lewis died in 1987, his executor and Whale biographer James Curtis had his ashes interred in a niche across from Whale's.\n\nJames Whale lived as an openly gay man throughout his career in the British theatre and in Hollywood, something that was virtually unheard of in the 1920s and 1930s. He and David Lewis lived together as a couple from around 1930 to 1952. While he did not go out of his way to publicize his homosexuality, he did not do anything to conceal it either. As filmmaker Curtis Harrington, a friend and confidant of Whale's, put it, \"Not in the sense of screaming it from the rooftops or coming out. But yes, he was openly homosexual. Any sophisticated person who knew him knew he was gay.\" While there have been suggestions that Whale's career was terminated because of homophobia, and Whale was supposedly dubbed \"The Queen of Hollywood\", Harrington states that \"nobody made a thing out of it as far as I could perceive\".\n\nWith knowledge of his sexuality becoming more common beginning in the 1970s, some film historians and gay studies scholars have detected homosexual themes in Whale's work, particularly in \"Bride of Frankenstein\" in which a number of the creative people associated with the cast, including Ernest Thesiger and Colin Clive, were alleged to be gay or bisexual. Scholars have identified a gay sensibility suffused through the film, especially a camp sensibility, particularly embodied in the character of Pretorius (Thesiger) and his relationship with Henry Frankenstein (Clive).\n\nGay film historian Vito Russo, in considering Pretorius, stops short of identifying the character as gay, instead referring to him as \"sissified\" (\"sissy\" itself being Hollywood code for \"homosexual\"). Pretorius serves as a \"gay Mephistopheles\", a figure of seduction and temptation, going so far as to pull Frankenstein away from his bride on their wedding night to engage in the unnatural act of non-procreative life. A novelisation of the film published in England made the implication clear, having Pretorius say to Frankenstein \"'Be fruitful and multiply.' Let us obey the Biblical injunction: you of course, have the choice of natural means; but as for me, I am afraid that there is no course open to me but the scientific way.\" Russo goes so far as to suggest that Whale's homosexuality is expressed in both \"Frankenstein\" and \"Bride\" as \"a vision both films had of the monster as an antisocial figure in the same way that gay people were 'things' that should not have happened\".\n\nThe Monster, whose affections for the male hermit and the female Bride he discusses with identical language (\"friend\"), has been read as sexually \"unsettled\" and bisexual. Writes gender studies author Elizabeth Young: \"He has no innate understanding that the male-female bond he is to forge with the bride is assumed to be the primary one or that it carries a different sexual valence from his relationships with [Pretorius and the hermit]: all affective relationships are as easily 'friendships' as 'marriages'.\" Indeed, his relationship with the hermit has been interpreted as a same-sex marriage that heterosexual society will not tolerate: \"No mistake—this is a marriage, and a viable one\", writes cultural critic Gary Morris for \"Bright Lights Film Journal\". \"But Whale reminds us quickly that society does not approve. The monster—the outsider—is driven from his scene of domestic pleasure by two gun-toting rubes who happen upon this startling alliance and quickly, instinctively, proceed to destroy it.\" The creation of the Bride scene has been called \"Whale's reminder to the audience—his Hollywood bosses, peers, and everyone watching—of the majesty and power of the homosexual creator\".\n\nHowever, Harrington dismisses this as \"a younger critic's evaluation. All artists do work that comes out of the unconscious mind and later on you can analyze it and say the symbolism may mean something, but artists don't think that way and I would bet my life that James Whale would never have had such concepts in mind.\" Specifically in response to the \"majesty and power\" reading, Harrington states \"My opinion is that's just pure bullshit. That's a critical interpretation that has nothing to do with the original inspiration.\" He concludes, \"I think the closest you can come to a homosexual metaphor in his films is to identify that certain sort of camp humor.\"\n\nWhale's companion David Lewis stated flatly that Whale's sexual orientation was \"not germane\" to his filmmaking. \"Jimmy was first and foremost an artist, and his films represent the work of an artist—not a gay artist, but an artist.\" Whale's biographer Curtis rejects the notion that Whale would have identified with the Monster from a homosexual perspective, stating that if the highly class-conscious Whale felt himself to be an antisocial figure, it would have been based not in his sexuality but in his origin in the lower classes.\n\nWhale was heavily influenced by German Expressionism. He was a particular admirer of the films of Paul Leni, combining as they did elements of gothic horror and comedy. This influence was most evident in \"Bride of Frankenstein\". Expressionist influence is also in evidence in \"Frankenstein\", drawn in part from the work of Paul Wegener and his films \"The Golem\" (1915) and \"\" (1920) along with \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920) from Robert Wiene, which Whale reportedly screened repeatedly while preparing to shoot \"Frankenstein\". \"Frankenstein\" roughly alternates between distorted expressionistic shots and more conventional styles, with the character of Dr. Waldman serving as \"a bridge between everyday and expressionist spaces\". Expressionist influence is also evident in the acting, costuming and the design of the Monster. Whale and makeup artist Jack Pierce may also have been influenced by the Bauhaus school of design. The expressionist influence lasted throughout Whale's career, with Whale's final film, \"Hello Out There\", praised by \"Sight & Sound\" as \"a virtuoso pattern of light and shade, a piece of fully blown expressionist filmmaking plonked down unceremoniously in the midst of neo-realism's heyday\".\n\nWhale was known for his use of camera movement. He is credited with being the first director to use a 360-degree panning shot in a feature film, included in \"Frankenstein\". Whale used a similar technique during the \"Ol' Man River\" sequence in \"Show Boat\", in which the camera tracked around Paul Robeson as he sang the song. (The sequence also uses expressionist montages illustrating some of the lyrics.) Often singled out for praise in \"Frankenstein\" is the series of shots used to introduce the Monster: \"Nothing can ever quite efface the thrill of watching the successive views Whale's mobile camera allows us of the lumbering figure\". These shots, starting with a medium shot and culminating in two close-ups of the Monster's face, were repeated by Whale to introduce Griffin in \"The Invisible Man\" and the abusive husband in \"One More River\". Modified to a single cut rather than two, Whale uses the same technique in \"The Road Back\" to signal the instability of a returning World War I veteran.\n\nInfluential film critic Andrew Sarris, in his 1968 ranking of directors, lists Whale as \"lightly likable\". Noting that Whale's reputation has been subsumed by the \"Karloff cult\", Sarris cites \"Bride of Frankenstein\" as the \"true gem\" of the Frankenstein series and concludes that Whale's career \"reflects the stylistic ambitions and dramatic disappointments of an expressionist in the studio-controlled Hollywood of the thirties\".\n\nWhale's final months are the subject of the novel \"Father of Frankenstein\" (1995) by Christopher Bram. The novel focuses on the relationship between Whale and a fictional gardener named Clayton Boone. \"Father of Frankenstein\" served as the basis of the 1998 film \"Gods and Monsters\" with Ian McKellen as Whale and Brendan Fraser as Boone. McKellen was nominated for an Academy Award for his portrayal of Whale. Bram's novel has also been adapted as a play which premiered in London at the Southwark Playhouse in February 2015.\n\nOnly two of Whale's films received Oscar nominations: \"The Man in the Iron Mask\" (for its musical score), and \"Bride of Frankenstein\" (for its sound recording).\n\nA memorial statue was erected for Whale in September 2001 on the grounds of a new multiplex cinema in his home town of Dudley. The statue, by Charles Hadcock, depicts a roll of film with the face of Frankenstein's monster engraved into the frames, and the names of his most famous films etched into a cast concrete base in the shape of film canisters. Other sculptures related to Whale's cinema career were planned, referencing his early work in a local sheet metal factory, but none had been installed as of 2019.\n\n\"Horror in Hollywood: The James Whale Story\", a retrospective of Whale's artwork, opened at the Dudley Museum and Art Gallery in October 2012 and ran through to January 2013.\n\n! Title\n! Year\n! Notes\n\"Journey's End\"\n1930\ndirectorial debut\n\"Waterloo Bridge\"\n1931\n\n\"Frankenstein\"\n1931\n\n\"The Impatient Maiden\" \n1932\n\n\"The Old Dark House\" \n1932\n\n\"The Kiss Before the Mirror\" \n1933\n\n\"The Invisible Man\" \n1933\n\n\"By Candlelight\" \n1933\n\n\"One More River\" \n1934\n\n\"Bride of Frankenstein\" \n1935\n\n\"Remember Last Night?\" \n1935\n\n\"Show Boat\" \n1936\n\n\"The Road Back\" \n1937\n\n\"The Great Garrick\" \n1937\n\n\"Port of Seven Seas\" \n1938\n\n\"Sinners in Paradise\" \n1938\n\n\"Wives Under Suspicion\" \n1938\n\n\"The Man in the Iron Mask\" \n1939\n\n\"Green Hell\" \n1940\n\n\"They Dare Not Love\" \n1941\n\nBULLET::::- Anger, Kenneth (1984). \"Hollywood Babylon II\". Dutton.\nBULLET::::- Bansak, Edmund G. and Robert Wise (2003). \"Fearing the Dark: The Val Lewton Career\". McFarland. .\nBULLET::::- Benshoff, Harry M. (1997). \"Monsters in the Closet: Homosexuality and the Horror Film\". Manchester University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Bordman, Gerald Martin (1995). \"American Theatre: A Chronicle of Comedy and Drama, 1914–1930\". Oxford University Press US. .\nBULLET::::- Bryant, Wayne (1997). \"Bisexual Characters in Film: From Anaïs to Zee\". Haworth Press. .\nBULLET::::- Buehrer, Beverly Bare (1993). \"Boris Karloff: A Bio-bibliography\". Greenwood Publishing Group. .\nBULLET::::- Coleman, Terry (2005). \"Olivier\". Macmillan. .\nBULLET::::- Curtis, James (1998). \"James Whale: A New World of Gods and Monsters\". Boston, Faber and Faber. .\nBULLET::::- Early, Emmett (2003). \"The War Veteran in Film\". McFarland. .\nBULLET::::- Ellis, Reed (1979). \"A Journey Into Darkness: The Art of James Whale's Horror Films\". University of Florida.\nBULLET::::- Gifford, Denis (1973) \"Karloff: The Man, The Monster, The Movies\". Film Fan Monthly.\nBULLET::::- Glancy, Mark (1999). \"When Hollywood Loved Britain: The Hollywood \"British\" Film 1939–1945\" Manchester University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Green, S. J. D. and R. C. Whiting (2002). \"The Boundaries of the State in Modern Britain\". Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Hofler, Robert (2006). \"The Man Who Invented Rock Hudson: The Pretty Boys and Dirty Deals of Henry Willson\". Carroll & Graf Publishers. .\nBULLET::::- Kelly, Andrew (1997) \"Cinema and the Great War\". Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- Kelly, Andrew (2001) \"<nowiki>'</nowiki>All Quiet on the Western Front': The Story of a Film\". I.B.Tauris. .\nBULLET::::- Low, Rachael, Roger Manvell and Jeffrey Richards (2005). \"History of British Film\". Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- Noszlopy, George Thomas and Fiona Waterhouse (2005). \"Public Sculpture of Staffordshire and the Black Country\". Liverpool, Liverpool University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Prawer, Siegbert Salomon (1989). \"Caligari's Children: The Film as Tale of Terror\". Da Capo Press. .\nBULLET::::- Robertson, Patrick (2001). \"Film Facts\". Watson-Guptill. .\nBULLET::::- Russo, Vito (1987). \"The Celluloid Closet: Homosexuality in the Movies\" (revised edition). New York, HarperCollins. .\nBULLET::::- Sarris, Andrew (1996). \"The American Cinema: Directors and Directions 1929–1968\". Da Capo Press. .\nBULLET::::- Skal, David J. (1993). \"The Monster Show: A Cultural History of Horror\". Penguin Books. .\nBULLET::::- Skal, David J. and Jessica Rains (2008). \"Claude Rains: An Actor's Voice\". University Press of Kentucky. .\nBULLET::::- Williamson, Audrey (1951). \"Theatre of two decades\". Rockliff.\nBULLET::::- Worland, Rick (2007). \"The Horror Film: An Introduction\". Blackwell Publishing. .\nBULLET::::- Young, Elizabeth. \"Here Comes The Bride\". Collected in Gelder, Ken (ed.) (2000). \"The Horror Reader\". Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- Young, William H. and Nancy K. Young (2007). \"The Great Depression in America: A Cultural Encyclopedia\". Greenwood Publishing Group. .\n\n"}
{"id": "16075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16075", "title": "January 9", "text": "January 9\n\nBULLET::::- 475 – Byzantine Emperor Zeno is forced to flee his capital at Constantinople, and his general, Basiliscus gains control of the empire.\nBULLET::::- 681 – Twelfth Council of Toledo: King Erwig of the Visigoths initiates a council in which he implements diverse measures against the Jews in Spain.\nBULLET::::- 1127 – Jin–Song Wars: Invading Jurchen soldiers from the Jin dynasty besiege and sack Bianjing (Kaifeng), the capital of the Song dynasty of China, and abduct Emperor Qinzong of Song and others, ending the Northern Song dynasty.\nBULLET::::- 1150 – Wanyan Liang and other court officials murder Emperor Xizong of Jin. Wanyan Liang succeeds him as emperor.\nBULLET::::- 1349 – The Jewish population of Basel, believed by the residents to be the cause of the ongoing Black Death, is rounded up and incinerated.\nBULLET::::- 1431 – Judges' investigations for the trial of Joan of Arc begin in Rouen.\nBULLET::::- 1760 – Ahmad Shah Durrani defeats the Marathas in the Battle of Barari Ghat.\nBULLET::::- 1788 – Connecticut becomes the fifth state to ratify the Constitution.\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Treaty of Jassy between Russian and Ottoman Empire is signed.\nBULLET::::- 1793 – Jean-Pierre Blanchard becomes the first person to fly in a balloon in the United States.\nBULLET::::- 1799 – British Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger introduces an income tax of two shillings to the pound to raise funds for Great Britain's war effort in the Napoleonic Wars.\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Admiral Horatio Lord Nelson receives a state funeral and is interred in St Paul's Cathedral.\nBULLET::::- 1816 – Sir Humphry Davy tests his safety lamp for miners at Hebburn Colliery.\nBULLET::::- 1822 – The Portuguese prince Pedro I of Brazil decides to stay in Brazil against the orders of the Portuguese King João VI, beginning the Brazilian independence process.\nBULLET::::- 1839 – The French Academy of Sciences announces the Daguerreotype photography process.\nBULLET::::- 1857 – The 7.9 Fort Tejon earthquake shakes Central and Southern California with a maximum Mercalli intensity of IX (\"Violent\").\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Anson Jones, the last President of the Republic of Texas, commits suicide.\nBULLET::::- 1861 – American Civil War: \"Star of the West\" incident occurs near Charleston, South Carolina.\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Mississippi becomes the second state to secede from the Union before the outbreak of the American Civil War.\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Umberto I becomes King of Italy.\nBULLET::::- 1894 – New England Telephone and Telegraph installs the first battery-operated telephone switchboard in Lexington, Massachusetts.\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Hallam Tennyson, 2nd Baron Tennyson, son of the poet Alfred Tennyson, becomes the second Governor-General of Australia.\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Ernest Shackleton, leading the Nimrod Expedition to the South Pole, plants the British flag from the South Pole, the farthest anyone had ever reached at that time.\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity Inc., the first historically black intercollegiate Greek-letter fraternity to be officially recognized at Howard University, is founded.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – World War I: The Battle of Gallipoli concludes with an Ottoman Empire victory when the last Allied forces are evacuated from the peninsula.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – World War I: The Battle of Rafa is fought near the Egyptian border with Palestine.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Battle of Bear Valley: The last battle of the American Indian Wars.\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Greco-Turkish War: The First Battle of İnönü, the first battle of the war, begins near Eskişehir in Anatolia.\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Juan de la Cierva makes the first autogyro flight.\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Lithuanian residents of the Memel Territory rebel against the League of Nations' decision to leave the area as a mandated region under French control.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – A fire at the Laurier Palace movie theatre in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, kills 78 children.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – World War II: First flight of the Avro Lancaster.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – World War II: The Sixth United States Army begins the invasion of Lingayen Gulf.\nBULLET::::- 1957 – British Prime Minister Sir Anthony Eden resigns from office following his failure to retake the Suez Canal from Egyptian sovereignty.\nBULLET::::- 1960 – President of Egypt Gamal Abdel Nasser opens construction on the Aswan Dam by detonating ten tons of dynamite to demolish twenty tons of granite on the east bank of the Nile.\nBULLET::::- 1961 – British authorities announce they have uncovered the Soviet Portland Spy Ring in London.\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Martyrs' Day: Several Panamanian youths try to raise the Panamanian flag in the U.S.-controlled Panama Canal Zone, leading to fighting between U.S. military and Panamanian civilians.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – The Mirzapur Cadet College formally opens for academic activities in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh).\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Representatives from the United States and Iraq meet at the Geneva Peace Conference to try to find a peaceful resolution to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – The Assembly of the Serb People in Bosnia and Herzegovina proclaims the creation of Republika Srpska, a new state within Yugoslavia.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – The first discoveries of extrasolar planets are announced by astronomers Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail. They discovered two planets orbiting the pulsar PSR 1257+12.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – First Chechen War: Chechen separatists launch a raid against the helicopter airfield and later a civilian hospital in the city of Kizlyar in the neighboring Dagestan, which turns into a massive hostage crisis involving thousands of civilians.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – An inflatable boat carrying illegal Albanian emigrants stalls near the Karaburun Peninsula en route to Brindisi, Italy; exposure to the elements kills 28. This is the second deadliest marine disaster in Albanian history.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Mahmoud Abbas wins the election to succeed Yasser Arafat as President of the Palestinian National Authority, replacing interim president Rawhi Fattouh.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – The Sudan People's Liberation Movement and the Government of Sudan sign the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to end the Second Sudanese Civil War.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Apple CEO Steve Jobs introduces the original iPhone at a Macworld keynote in San Francisco.\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Iran Air Flight 277 crashes near Orumiyeh in the northwest of the country, killing 77 people.\nBULLET::::- 2014 – An explosion at a Mitsubishi Materials chemical plant in Yokkaichi, Japan, kills at least five people and injures 17 others.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – The perpetrators of the \"Charlie Hebdo\" shooting in Paris two days earlier are both killed after a hostage situation; a second hostage situation, related to the \"Charlie Hebdo\" shooting, occurs at a Jewish market in Vincennes.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – A mass poisoning at a funeral in Mozambique involving beer that was contaminated with \"Burkholderia gladioli\" leaves 75 dead and over 230 people ill.\n\nBULLET::::- 727 – Emperor Daizong of Tang (d. 779)\nBULLET::::- 1418 – Juan Ramón Folch III de Cardona, Aragonese admiral (d. 1485)\nBULLET::::- 1475 – Crinitus, Italian scholar and author (d. 1507)\nBULLET::::- 1554 – Pope Gregory XV (d. 1623)\nBULLET::::- 1571 – Charles Bonaventure de Longueval, Count of Bucquoy, French commander (d. 1621)\nBULLET::::- 1590 – Simon Vouet, French painter (d. 1649)\nBULLET::::- 1606 – William Dugard, English printer (d. 1662)\nBULLET::::- 1624 – Empress Meishō of Japan (d. 1696)\nBULLET::::- 1645 – Sir William Villiers, 3rd Baronet, English noble and politician (d. 1712)\nBULLET::::- 1674 – Reinhard Keiser, German composer (d. 1739)\nBULLET::::- 1685 – Tiberius Hemsterhuis, Dutch philologist and critic (d. 1766)\nBULLET::::- 1728 – Thomas Warton, English poet, historian, and critic (d. 1790)\nBULLET::::- 1735 – John Jervis, 1st Earl of St Vincent, English admiral and politician (d. 1823)\nBULLET::::- 1745 – Caleb Strong, American lawyer and politician, 6th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1819)\nBULLET::::- 1753 – Luísa Todi, Portuguese soprano and actress (d. 1833)\nBULLET::::- 1773 – Cassandra Austen, English painter and illustrator (d. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1778 – Hammamizade İsmail Dede Efendi, Turkish Ney player and composer (d. 1846)\nBULLET::::- 1811 – Gilbert Abbott à Beckett, English journalist and author (d. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1818 – Antoine Samuel Adam-Salomon, French sculptor and photographer (d. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1819 – James Francis, English-Australian businessman and politician, 9th Premier of Victoria (d. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1822 – Carol Benesch, Czech-Romanian architect, designed the Peleș Castle (d. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1823 – Friedrich von Esmarch, German surgeon and academic (d. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Thomas William Robertson, English director and playwright (d. 1871)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Adolf Schlagintweit, German botanist and explorer (d. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1832 – Félix-Gabriel Marchand, Canadian journalist and politician, 11th Premier of Quebec (d. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1839 – John Knowles Paine, American composer and academic (d. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Princess Frederica of Hanover (d. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – John Hartley, English tennis player (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1854 – Lady Randolph Churchill, American-born wife of Lord Randolph Churchill, mother of Sir Winston Churchill (d. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – Anton Aškerc, Slovenian priest and poet (d. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1859 – Carrie Chapman Catt, American activist, founded the League of Women Voters and International Alliance of Women (d. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Vladimir Steklov, Russian mathematician and physicist (d. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1868 – S. P. L. Sørensen, Danish chemist and academic (d. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Joseph Strauss, American engineer, co-designed the Golden Gate Bridge (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Hayim Nahman Bialik, Ukrainian-Austrian journalist, author, and poet (d. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Thomas Curtis, American sprinter and hurdler (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – John Flanagan, Irish-American hammer thrower (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, American sculptor and art collector, founded the Whitney Museum of American Art (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – John B. Watson, American psychologist and academic (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Lascelles Abercrombie, English poet and critic (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Giovanni Papini, Italian journalist, author, and poet (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Charles Bacon, American runner and hurdler (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Lloyd Loar, American sound engineer and instrument designer (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Vrindavan Lal Verma, Indian author and playwright (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Karel Čapek, Czech author and playwright (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Kurt Tucholsky, German-Swedish journalist and author (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – August Gailit, Estonian journalist and author (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Eva Bowring, American lawyer and politician (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Edwin Baker, Canadian soldier and educator, co-founded the Canadian National Institute for the Blind (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Warwick Braithwaite, New Zealand-English conductor and director (d. 1971)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Karl Löwith, German philosopher, author, and academic (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Gracie Fields, English actress and singer (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Harald Tammer, Estonian journalist and weightlifter (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Richard Halliburton, American journalist and author (d. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Vilma Bánky, Hungarian-American actress (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Chic Young, American cartoonist (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Rudolf Bing, American impresario and businessman (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Josemaría Escrivá, Spanish priest and saint, founded Opus Dei (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Eldred G. Smith, American patriarch (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Earl W. Renfroe, African American orthodontist, educator, and activist (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Simone de Beauvoir, French philosopher and author (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Anthony Mamo, Maltese lawyer and politician, 1st President of Malta (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Patrick Peyton, Irish-American priest, television personality, and activist (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Tom Evenson, English runner (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Ralph Tubbs, English architect, designed the Dome of Discovery (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Richard Nixon, American commander, lawyer, and politician, 37th President of the United States (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Kenny Clarke, American jazz drummer and bandleader (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Anita Louise, American actress (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Fernando Lamas, Argentinian-American actor, singer, and director (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Vic Mizzy, American soldier, pianist, and composer (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Peter Twinn, English mathematician and entomologist (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Alma Ziegler, American baseball player and golfer (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – William Morris Meredith, Jr., American poet and academic (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Clive Dunn, English actor (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Hakim Said, Pakistani scholar and politician, 20th Governor of Sindh (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Ágnes Keleti, Hungarian Olympic gymnast\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Lister Sinclair, Indian-Canadian broadcaster and playwright (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – John Sperling, American businessman, founded the University of Phoenix (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Har Gobind Khorana, Indian-American biochemist and academic, Nobel laureate (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Ahmed Sékou Touré, Guinean politician, 1st President of Guinea (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Sergei Parajanov, Georgian-Armenian director and screenwriter (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Len Quested, English footballer and manager (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Lee Van Cleef, American actor (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Jean-Pierre Côté, Canadian lawyer and politician, 23rd Lieutenant Governor of Quebec (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Judith Krantz, American novelist\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Domenico Modugno, Italian singer-songwriter, actor, and politician (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Brian Friel, Irish author, playwright, and director (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Heiner Müller, German poet, playwright, and director (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Tom Riley, American lawyer and politician (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Algis Budrys, Lithuanian-American author and critic (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Robert García, American soldier and politician (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Wilbur Smith, Zambian-English journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Bart Starr, American football player and coach (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Bob Denver, American actor (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Dick Enberg, American sportscaster (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – John Graham, New Zealand rugby player and educator (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Earl G. Graves Sr., American businessman and publisher\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Brian Harradine, Australian politician (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Anne Rivers Siddons, American author\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Marko Veselica, Croatian academic and politician (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Michael Nicholson, English journalist and author (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Claudette Boyer, Canadian educator and politician (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Peter Edelman, American lawyer and educator\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Stuart Woods, American author and critic\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Susannah York, English actress and activist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Barbara Buczek, Polish composer (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Ruth Dreifuss, Swiss journalist and politician, 86th President of the Swiss Confederation\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Joan Baez, American singer-songwriter, guitarist and activist\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Roy Head, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Gilles Vaillancourt, Canadian politician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – John Dunning, American author\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Judy Malloy, American poet and author\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Robert Drewe, Australian author and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Elmer MacFadyen, Canadian lawyer and politician (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Scott Walker, American singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Harun Farocki, German filmmaker (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Jimmy Page, English guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Mihalis Violaris, Cypriot singer-songwriter and actor\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Levon Ter-Petrosyan, Syrian-Armenian scholar and politician, 1st President of Armenia\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Mohammad Ishaq Khan, Indian historian and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Mogens Lykketoft, Danish politician, 45th Danish Minister of Foreign Affairs\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Ronnie Landfield, American painter and educator\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Bill Cowsill, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Jan Tomaszewski, Polish footballer, manager, and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Alec Jeffreys, English geneticist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – David Johansen, American musician and actor\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Sandy Martin, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Crystal Gayle, American singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Kaushik Basu, Indian economist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Hugh Bayley, English politician\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Mike Capuano, American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Javad Alizadeh, Iranian cartoonist and painter\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Philippa Gregory, Kenyan-English author and academic\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Michiko Kakutani, American journalist and critic\nBULLET::::- 1955 – J.K. Simmons, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Waltraud Meier, German soprano and actress\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Imelda Staunton, English actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Stephen Neale, English philosopher and academic\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Mark Martin, American race car driver and coach\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Rigoberta Menchú, Guatemalan activist and politician, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Otis Nixon, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Lisa Walters, Canadian golfer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Didier Camberabero, French rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Oliver Goldstick, American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Henry Omaga-Diaz, Filipino journalist\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Irwin McLean, Northern Irish biologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Stan Javier, Dominican baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Iain Dowie, English-Northern Irish footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Eric Erlandson, American guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Haddaway, Trinidadian-German singer and musician\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Andrei Nazarov, Estonian decathlete and coach\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Joely Richardson, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Stephen Metcalfe, English politician\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Matt Bevin, American politician, 62nd governor of Kentucky\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Claudio Caniggia, Argentinian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Dave Matthews, South African-American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Gary Teichmann, South African rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Jimmy Adams, Jamaican cricketer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Joey Lauren Adams, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Mardi Lunn, Australian golfer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Giorgos Theofanous, Greek-Cypriot composer and producer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Carl Bell, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Lara Fabian, Belgian-Italian singer-songwriter and actress\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Alex Staropoli, Italian keyboard player and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Angie Martinez, American rapper, actress, and radio host\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Hal Niedzviecki, Canadian author and critic\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Scott Thornton, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Jay Powell, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Rawson Stovall, American video game producer and author\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Sean Paul, Jamaican rapper, singer-songwriter, musician, record producer, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1975 – James Beckford, Jamaican long jumper\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Radek Bonk, Czech ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Hayes Carll, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Mathieu Garon, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Gennaro Gattuso, Italian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Chad Johnson, American football player and actor\nBULLET::::- 1978 – AJ McLean, American singer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Édgar Álvarez, Honduran footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Sergio García, Spanish golfer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Luke Patten, Australian rugby league player and referee\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Francisco Pavón, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Wang Zulan, Hong Kong singer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Euzebiusz Smolarek, Polish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Drew Brown, American musician and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Benjamin Danso, German rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Juan Francisco Torres, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Jéferson Gomes, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Uwe Hünemeier, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Amanda Mynhardt, South African netball player\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Sam Bird, English race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Lucas Leiva, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Paolo Nutini, Scottish singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Jami Puustinen, Finnish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Katherine Copely, American ice dancer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Marc Crosas, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Lee Yeon-hee, South Korean actress\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Michael Beasley, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Nina Dobrev, Bulgarian-Canadian actress\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Michaëlla Krajicek, Dutch tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Yana Maksimava, Belarusian heptathlete\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Chris Sandow, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Jordan Turner, English rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Justin Blackmon, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Edon Hasani, Albanian football player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Alvaro Soler, Spanish singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Katarina Johnson-Thompson, English long jumper and heptathlete\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Marcus Peters, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Kevin Korjus, Estonian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Braden Uele, New Zealand rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 710 – Adrian of Canterbury, abbot and scholar\nBULLET::::- 1150 – Emperor Xizong of Jin (b. 1119)\nBULLET::::- 1202 – Birger Brosa, Jarl of Sweden\nBULLET::::- 1282 – Abû 'Uthmân Sa'îd ibn Hakam al Qurashi, Minorcan ruler (b. 1204)\nBULLET::::- 1283 – Wen Tianxiang, Chinese general and scholar (b. 1236)\nBULLET::::- 1367 – Giulia della Rena, Italian saint (b. 1319)\nBULLET::::- 1450 – Adam Moleyns, Bishop of Chichester\nBULLET::::- 1463 – William Neville, 1st Earl of Kent, English soldier (b. 1405)\nBULLET::::- 1499 – John Cicero, Elector of Brandenburg (b. 1455)\nBULLET::::- 1511 – Demetrios Chalkokondyles, Greek scholar and academic (b. 1423)\nBULLET::::- 1514 – Anne of Brittany, queen of Charles VIII of France and Louis XII of France (b. 1477)\nBULLET::::- 1529 – Wang Yangming, Chinese Neo-Confucian scholar (b. 1472)\nBULLET::::- 1534 – Johannes Aventinus, Bavarian historian and philologist (b. 1477)\nBULLET::::- 1543 – Guillaume du Bellay, French general and diplomat (b. 1491)\nBULLET::::- 1561 – Amago Haruhisa, Japanese warlord (b. 1514)\nBULLET::::- 1571 – Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon, French admiral (b. 1510)\nBULLET::::- 1598 – Jasper Heywood, English poet and scholar (b. 1553)\nBULLET::::- 1612 – Leonard Holliday, Lord Mayor of London (b. 1550)\nBULLET::::- 1622 – Alix Le Clerc, French Canoness Regular and foundress (b. 1576)\nBULLET::::- 1757 – Louis Bertrand Castel, French mathematician and philosopher (b. 1688)\nBULLET::::- 1757 – Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle, French author, poet, and playwright (b. 1657)\nBULLET::::- 1766 – Thomas Birch, English historian and author (b. 1705)\nBULLET::::- 1799 – Maria Gaetana Agnesi, Italian mathematician and philosopher (b. 1718)\nBULLET::::- 1800 – Jean Étienne Championnet, French general (b. 1762)\nBULLET::::- 1805 – Noble Wimberly Jones, American physician and politician (b. 1723)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – William Hedley, English engineer (b. 1773)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Caroline Herschel, German-English astronomer (b. 1750)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – Neophytos Vamvas, Greek cleric and educator (b. 1770)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Anson Jones, American physician and politician; 4th President of the Republic of Texas (b. 1798)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Napoleon III, French politician, 1st President of France (b. 1808)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Samuel Gridley Howe, American physician and activist (b. 1801)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Victor Emmanuel II of Italy (b. 1820)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Aaron Lufkin Dennison, American-English businessman (b. 1812)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Richard Copley Christie, English lawyer and academic (b. 1830)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Wilhelm Busch, German poet, illustrator, and painter (b. 1832)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Abraham Goldfaden, Russian actor, playwright, and author (b. 1840)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Edwin Arthur Jones, American violinist and composer (b. 1853)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Edvard Rusjan, Italian-Slovene pilot and engineer (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Luther D. Bradley, American cartoonist (b. 1853)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Charles-Émile Reynaud, French scientist and educator, invented the Praxinoscope (b. 1844)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Katherine Mansfield, New Zealand novelist, short story writer, and essayist (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ponnambalam Arunachalam, Sri Lankan civil servant and politician (b. 1853)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Houston Stewart Chamberlain, English-German philosopher and author (b. 1855)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Edward Bok, Dutch-American journalist and author (b. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Wayne Munn, American football player and wrestler (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – John Gilbert, American actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Johann Strauss III, Austrian violinist, composer, and conductor (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Dimitrios Golemis, Greek runner (b. 1874)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Shigekazu Shimazaki, Japanese admiral and pilot (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Jüri Uluots, Estonian journalist and politician, 7th Prime Minister of Estonia (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Osman Cemal Kaygılı, Turkish journalist, author, and playwright (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Countee Cullen, American poet and playwright (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Karl Mannheim, Hungarian-English sociologist and academic (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Elsie J. Oxenham, English author and educator (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Emily Greene Balch, American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Halide Edib Adıvar, Turkish author and academic (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Elmer Flick, American baseball player and scout (b. 1876)\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Ted Shawn, American dancer and choreographer (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Pierre Fresnay, French actor and screenwriter (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Pyotr Novikov, Russian mathematician and theorist (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Pier Luigi Nervi, Italian engineer and architect, designed the Tour de la Bourse and Pirelli Tower (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Kazimierz Serocki, Polish pianist and composer (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Bob Dyer, American-Australian radio and television host (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Robert Mayer, German-English businessman and philanthropist (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Arthur Lake, American actor (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Peter L. Rypdal, Norwegian fiddler and composer (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Bill Terry, American baseball player and manager (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Spud Chandler, American baseball player, coach, and manager (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Cemal Süreya, Turkish poet and journalist (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Steve Brodie, American actor (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Bill Naughton, English playwright and screenwriter (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Paul Hasluck, Australian historian and politician, 17th Governor-General of Australia (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Johnny Temple, American baseball player and sportscaster (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Souphanouvong, Laotian politician, 1st President of Laos (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Peter Cook, English actor and screenwriter (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Walter M. Miller, Jr., American soldier and author (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Abdullah al-Qasemi, Saudi atheist, writer, and intellectual (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Edward Osóbka-Morawski, Polish politician, Prime Minister of Poland (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Jesse White, American actor (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Kenichi Fukui, Japanese chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Imi Lichtenfeld, Slovakian-Israeli martial artist, founded Krav Maga (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Arnold Alexander Hall, English engineer and academic (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Nigel Tranter, Scottish historian and author (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Maurice Prather, American photographer and director (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Will McDonough, American journalist (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Norberto Bobbio, Italian philosopher and academic (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Andy Caldecott, Australian motorcycle racer (b. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – W. Cleon Skousen, American author and academic (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Elmer Symons, South African motorcycle racer (b. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Jean-Pierre Vernant, French anthropologist and historian (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Johnny Grant, American radio host and producer (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – John Harvey-Jones, English businessman and television host (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Rob Gauntlett, English mountaineer and explorer (b. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – T. Llew Jones, Welsh author and poet (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Makinti Napanangka, Australian painter (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Brian Curvis, Welsh boxer (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Augusto Gansser-Biaggi, Swiss geologist and academic (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – William G. Roll, German-American psychologist and parapsychologist (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Malam Bacai Sanhá, Guinea-Bissau politician, President of Guinea-Bissau (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – László Szekeres, Hungarian physician and academic (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Brigitte Askonas, Austrian-English immunologist and academic (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – James M. Buchanan, American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Robert L. Rock, American businessman and politician, 42nd Lieutenant Governor of Indiana (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – John Wise, Canadian farmer and politician, 23rd Canadian Minister of Agriculture (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Amiri Baraka, American poet, playwright, and academic (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Josep Maria Castellet, Spanish poet and critic (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Paul du Toit, South African painter and sculptor (b. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Dale T. Mortensen, American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Michel Jeury, French author (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Robert V. Keeley, Lebanese-American soldier and diplomat, United States Ambassador to Greece (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Józef Oleksy, Polish economist and politician, 7th Prime Minister of Poland (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Bud Paxson, American broadcaster and businessman, founded the Home Shopping Network and Pax TV (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Abdul Rahman Ya'kub, Malaysian politician, 3rd Chief Minister of Sarawak (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Roy Tarpley, American basketball player (b. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – John Harvard, Canadian journalist and politician, 23rd Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Angus Scrimm, American actor and author (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Zygmunt Bauman, Polish sociologist (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Kato Ottio, Papua New Guinean rugby league player (b. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Verna Bloom, American actress (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Paul Koslo, German-Canadian actor (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Adrian of Canterbury\nBULLET::::- Berhtwald\nBULLET::::- Translation of the Black Nazarene (Manila, Philippines)\nBULLET::::- Philip II, Metropolitan of Moscow\nBULLET::::- Julia Chester Emery (Episcopal Church (USA))\nBULLET::::- Stephen (old calendar Eastern Orthodox)\nBULLET::::- January 9 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Start of Hōonkō (Nishi Honganji) January 9–16 (Jōdo Shinshū Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Martyrs' Day (Panama)\nBULLET::::- Non-Resident Indian Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Peace Agreement Day (South Sudan)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "16076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16076", "title": "January 10", "text": "January 10\n\nBULLET::::- 49 BC – Julius Caesar crosses the Rubicon, signalling the start of civil war.\nBULLET::::- AD 9 – The Western Han dynasty ends when Wang Mang claims that the divine Mandate of Heaven called for the end of the dynasty and the beginning of his own, the Xin dynasty.\nBULLET::::- AD 69 – Lucius Calpurnius Piso Licinianus is appointed by Galba as deputy Roman Emperor.\nBULLET::::- 236 – Pope Fabian succeeds Anterus to become the twentieth pope of Rome.\nBULLET::::- 1072 – Robert Guiscard conquers Palermo in Sicily.\nBULLET::::- 1430 – Philip the Good, the Duke of Burgundy, establishes the Order of the Golden Fleece, the most prestigious, exclusive, and expensive order of chivalry in the world.\nBULLET::::- 1475 – Stephen III of Moldavia defeats the Ottoman Empire at the Battle of Vaslui.\nBULLET::::- 1645 – Archbishop William Laud is beheaded for treason at the Tower of London.\nBULLET::::- 1776 – American Revolution : Thomas Paine publishes his pamphlet \"Common Sense\".\nBULLET::::- 1791 – The Siege of Dunlap's Station begins near Cincinnati during the Northwest Indian War.\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Two British brigades occupy Cape Town after the Battle of Blaauwberg.\nBULLET::::- 1812 – The first steamboat on the Ohio River or the Mississippi River arrives in New Orleans, 82 days after departing from Pittsburgh.\nBULLET::::- 1861 – American Civil War: Florida becomes the third state to secede from the Union.\nBULLET::::- 1863 – The Metropolitan Railway, the world's oldest underground railway, opens between Paddington and Farringdon, marking the beginning of the London Underground.\nBULLET::::- 1870 – John D. Rockefeller incorporates Standard Oil.\nBULLET::::- 1901 – The first great Texas oil gusher is discovered at Spindletop in Beaumont, Texas.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – World War I: In the Erzurum Offensive, Russia defeats the Ottoman Empire.\nBULLET::::- 1920 – The Treaty of Versailles takes effect, officially ending World War I.\nBULLET::::- 1920 – League of Nations Covenant enters into force. On January 16 the organization holds its first council meeting, in Paris.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Fritz Lang's futuristic film \"Metropolis\" is released in Germany.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – World War II: The Greek army captures Kleisoura.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – The first General Assembly of the United Nations opens in London. Fifty-one nations are represented.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – The United States Army Signal Corps successfully conducts Project Diana, bouncing radio waves off the Moon and receiving the reflected signals.\nBULLET::::- 1954 – BOAC Flight 781, a de Havilland DH.106 Comet 1, explodes and falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea killing 35 people.\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Apollo program: NASA announces plans to build the C-5 rocket launch vehicle, which became known as the Saturn V Moon rocket, which launched every Apollo Moon mission.\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Tashkent Declaration, a peace agreement between India and Pakistan signed that resolved the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Sheikh Mujibur Rahman returns to the newly independent Bangladesh as president after spending over nine months in prison in Pakistan.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Salvadoran Civil War: The FMLN launches its first major offensive, gaining control of most of Morazán and Chalatenango departments\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Holy See–United States relations: The United States and Holy See (Vatican City) re-establish full diplomatic relations after almost 117 years, overturning the United States Congress's 1867 ban on public funding for such a diplomatic envoy.\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Sandinista Daniel Ortega becomes president of Nicaragua and vows to continue the transformation to socialism and alliance with the Soviet Union and Cuba; American policy continues to support the Contras in their revolt against the Nicaraguan government.\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Time Warner is formed by the merger of Time Inc. and Warner Communications.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – A general strike begins in Guinea in an attempt to get President Lansana Conté to resign.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – A bombing in Khyber Agency, Pakistan, kills at least 30 people and 78 others injured.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – More than 100 people are killed and 270 injured in several bomb blasts in Pakistan.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – A traffic accident between an oil tanker truck and passenger coach en route to Shikarpur from Karachi on the Pakistan National Highway Link Road near Gulshan-e-Hadeed, Karachi, killing at least 62 people.\n\nBULLET::::- 626 – Husayn ibn Ali the third Shia Imam (d.680 )\nBULLET::::- 1392 – Johanna van Polanen, Dutch noblewoman (d. 1445)\nBULLET::::- 1480 – Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy (d. 1530)\nBULLET::::- 1538 – Louis of Nassau (d. 1574)\nBULLET::::- 1607 – Isaac Jogues, French priest and missionary (d. 1646)\nBULLET::::- 1644 – Louis François, duc de Boufflers, French general (d. 1711)\nBULLET::::- 1654 – Joshua Barnes, English historian and scholar (d. 1712)\nBULLET::::- 1702 – Johannes Zick, German painter (d. 1762)\nBULLET::::- 1715 – Christian August Crusius, German philosopher and theologian (d. 1775)\nBULLET::::- 1729 – Lazzaro Spallanzani, Italian priest, biologist, and physiologist (d. 1799)\nBULLET::::- 1745 – Isaac Titsingh, Dutch surgeon, scholar, and diplomat (d. 1812)\nBULLET::::- 1750 – Thomas Erskine, 1st Baron Erskine, Scottish-English lawyer and politician, Lord Chancellor of Great Britain (d. 1823)\nBULLET::::- 1760 – Johann Rudolf Zumsteeg, German composer and conductor (d. 1802)\nBULLET::::- 1769 – Michel Ney, French general (d. 1815)\nBULLET::::- 1776 – George Birkbeck, English physician and academic, founded Birkbeck, University of London (d. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1780 – Martin Lichtenstein, German physician and explorer (d. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1802 – Carl Ritter von Ghega, Italian-Austrian engineer, designed the Semmering railway (d. 1860)\nBULLET::::- 1810 – Ferdinand Barbedienne, French engineer (d. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1810 – Jeremiah S. Black, American jurist and politician, 23rd United States Secretary of State (d. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1810 – William Haines, English-Australian politician, 1st Premier of Victoria (d. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1812 – Georg Hermann Nicolai, German architect and academic (d. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1828 – Herman Koeckemann, German bishop and missionary (d. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Epameinondas Deligeorgis, Greek lawyer, journalist and politician, Prime Minister of Greece (d. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1834 – John Dalberg-Acton, 1st Baron Acton, Italian-English historian and politician (d. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1836 – Charles Ingalls, American farmer and carpenter (d. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1840 – Louis-Nazaire Bégin, Canadian cardinal (d. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1842 – Luigi Pigorini, Italian paleontologist, archaeologist, and ethnographer (d. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Frank James, American soldier and criminal (d. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Reinhold Sadler, American merchant and politician, 9th Governor of Nevada (d. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Robert Crosbie, Canadian theosophist, founded the United Lodge of Theosophists (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – John Wellborn Root, American architect, designed the Rookery Building and Monadnock Building (d. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1854 – Ramón Corral, Mexican general and politician, 6th Vice President of Mexico (d. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Heinrich Zille, German illustrator and photographer (d. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1859 – Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia, Spanish philosopher and academic (d. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1860 – Charles G. D. Roberts, Canadian poet and author (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Grand Duke Peter Nikolaevich of Russia (d. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Algernon Maudslay, English sailor (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Jack O'Neill, Irish-American baseball player (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – George Orton, Canadian runner and hurdler (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – Issai Schur, German mathematician and academic (d. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Frederick Gardner Cottrell, American physical chemist, inventor and philanthropist (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – John McLean, American hurdler, football player, and coach (d. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Manuel Azaña, Spanish jurist and politician, 7th President of Spain (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Leslie Rainey, Australian cricketer and footballer (d. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Francis X. Bushman, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Alfred Saalwächter, German admiral (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy, Russian journalist, author, and poet (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Robinson Jeffers, American poet and philosopher (d. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Pina Menichelli, Italian actress (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Heinrich Behmann, German mathematician and academic (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Ann Shoemaker, American actress (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Dumas Malone, American historian and author (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Melchior Wańkowicz, Polish soldier, journalist, and author (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Albert Jacka, Australian captain, Victoria Cross recipient (d. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Pingali Lakshmikantam, Indian poet and author (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Percy Cerutty, Australian athletics coach (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Yong Mun Sen, Malaysian watercolour painter (d. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Katharine Burr Blodgett, American physicist and engineer (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Violette Cordery, English race car driver (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Dobriša Cesarić, Croatian poet and translator (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Barbara Hepworth, English sculptor (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Pud Thurlow, Australian cricketer (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Voldemar Väli, Estonian wrestler (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Ray Bolger, American actor and dancer (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Albert Arlen, Australian pianist, composer, actor, and playwright (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Gordon Kidd Teal, American engineer and inventor (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Paul Henreid, Italian-American actor and director (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Jean Martinon, French conductor and composer (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Binod Bihari Chowdhury, Bangladeshi activist (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Norman Heatley, English biologist and chemist (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Maria Mandl, Austrian SS guard (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Franco Bordoni, Italian race car driver and pilot (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Gustáv Husák, Slovak politician, 9th President of Czechoslovakia (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Mehmet Shehu, Albanian soldier and politician, 22nd Prime Minister of Albania (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Pierre Cogan, French cyclist (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Yu Kuo-hwa, Chinese politician, 23rd Premier of the Republic of China (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Dean Dixon, American-Swiss conductor (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Cynthia Freeman, American author (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Sune Bergström, Swedish biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Eldzier Cortor, American painter (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Don Metz, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Jerry Wexler, American journalist and producer (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Les Bennett, English footballer and manager (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Arthur Chung, Guyanese lawyer and politician, 1st President of Guyana (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Harry Merkel, German race car driver (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Terukuni Manzō, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 38th Yokozuna (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Milton Parker, American businessman, co-founded the Carnegie Deli (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Rosella Hightower, American ballerina (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Roberto M. Levingston, Argentinian general and politician, 36th President of Argentina (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Max Patkin, American baseball player and clown (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Rodger Ward, American race car driver and sportscaster (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Billy Liddell, Scottish-English footballer (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Earl Bakken, American inventor (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ludmilla Chiriaeff, Canadian ballerina, choreographer, and director (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Max Roach, American drummer and composer (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Billie Sol Estes, American financier and businessman (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Musallam Bseiso, Palestinian journalist and politician (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Gisele MacKenzie, Canadian-American singer and actress (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Johnnie Ray, American singer-songwriter and pianist (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Otto Stich, Swiss lawyer and politician, 140th President of the Swiss Confederation (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Philip Levine, American poet and academic (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Peter Mathias, English historian and academic (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Tony Soper, English ornithologist and author\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Roy E. Disney, American businessman (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Peter Barnes, English playwright and screenwriter (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Rosalind Howells, Baroness Howells of St Davids, Grenadian-English academic and politician\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Nik Abdul Aziz Nik Mat, Malaysian cleric and politician, 12th Menteri Besar of Kelantan (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – John Zizioulas, Greek metropolitan\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Leonid Kravchuk, Ukrainian politician, 1st President of Ukraine\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Ronnie Hawkins, American rockabilly singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Sherrill Milnes, American opera singer and educator\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Stephen E. Ambrose, American historian and author (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Walter Bodmer, German-English geneticist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Al Goldstein, American publisher and pornographer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Robert Woodrow Wilson, American physicist and astronomer, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Daniel Walker Howe, American historian and academic\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Thomas Penfield Jackson, American soldier, lawyer, and judge (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Donald Knuth, American computer scientist and mathematician\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Frank Mahovlich, Canadian ice hockey player and politician\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Willie McCovey, American baseball player (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Jared Carter, American poet and author\nBULLET::::- 1939 – David Horowitz, American activist and author\nBULLET::::- 1939 – William Levy, American-Dutch journalist, author, and poet\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Scott McKenzie, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Sal Mineo, American actor (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Michaela Odone, American journalist who, along with her husband, invented Lorenzo's oil (d. 2000).\nBULLET::::- 1940 – K. J. Yesudas, Indian singer and music director\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Godfrey Hewitt, English geneticist and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Walter Hill, American director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Tom Clarke, Scottish politician, Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Graeme Gahan, Australian footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Jim Croce, American singer-songwriter (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Jeffrey Catherine Jones, American comics and fantasy artist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Frank Sinatra, Jr., American singer and actor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – John Fahey, New Zealand-Australian lawyer and politician, 38th Premier of New South Wales\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Rod Stewart, English singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Gunther von Hagens, German anatomist, invented plastination\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Aynsley Dunbar, English drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1947 – George Alec Effinger, American author (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – James Morris, American opera singer\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Peer Steinbrück, German politician, German Minister of Finance\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Tiit Vähi, Estonian engineer and politician, 11th Prime Minister of Estonia\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Donald Fagen, American singer-songwriter and musician\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Bernard Thévenet, French cyclist and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Kemal Derviş, Turkish economist and politician, Turkish Minister of Economy\nBULLET::::- 1949 – George Foreman, American boxer, actor, and businessman\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Linda Lovelace, American porn actress and activist (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Roy Blunt, American academic and politician\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Scott Thurston, American guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Pat Benatar, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Bobby Rahal, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1954 – John Gidman, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Greg Towns, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Michael Schenker, German guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Franco Tancredi, Italian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Shawn Colvin, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – George Merrill, American singer-songwriter and keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Antonio Muñoz Molina, Spanish author\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Eddie Cheever, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Caroline Langrishe, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Anatoly Pisarenko, Ukrainian weightlifter and trainer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Chandra Cheeseborough, American sprinter and coach\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Bernhard Hoff, German sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Chris Van Hollen, American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Fran Walsh, New Zealand screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Gurinder Chadha, Kenyan-English director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Brian Cowen, Irish lawyer and politician, 12th Taoiseach of Ireland\nBULLET::::- 1960 – John Mann, English lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Benoît Pelletier, Canadian lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Janet Jones, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg, Italian-American violinist, author, and educator\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Michael Fortier, Canadian lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Kathryn S. McKinley, American computer scientist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Malcolm Dunford, New Zealand-Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Kira Ivanova, Russian figure skater (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Mark Pryor, American lawyer and politician, 53rd Arkansas Attorney General\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Brad Roberts, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Maciej Śliwowski, Polish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Simone Bagel-Trah, German businessperson\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Buff Bagwell, American wrestler and actor\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Alisa Marić, Serbian chess player and politician, Serbian Minister of Youth and Sports\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Mohammed Benzakour, Moroccan-Dutch journalist, poet, and author\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Glenn Robinson, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Félix Trinidad, Puerto Rican-American boxer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Jemaine Clement, New Zealand comedian, actor, and musician\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Davide Dionigi, Italian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Bob Peeters, Belgian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Hrithik Roshan, Indian actor\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Jake Delhomme, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Adam Kennedy, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Ian Poulter, English golfer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Johan van der Wath, South African cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Simone Cavalli, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Sarah Shahi, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1980 – DeShaun Foster, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – James Coppinger, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Jared Kushner, American real estate investor and political figure\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Julien Brellier, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Tomasz Brzyski, Polish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Marouane Chamakh, Moroccan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Trent Cutler, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Ariane Friedrich, German high jumper\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Kalki Koechlin, Indian actress\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Kirsten Flipkens, Belgian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Hideaki Ikematsu, Japanese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Kenneth Vermeer, Dutch footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – César Cielo, Brazilian swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Vicente Guaita, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Leonard Patrick Komon, Kenyan runner\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Vladimir Zharkov, Russian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Emily Meade, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Kyle Reimers, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Mirko Bortolotti, Italian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Ishiura Masakatsu, Japanese sumo wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Cody Walker, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – John Carlson, American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Chad Townsend, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 259 – Polyeuctus, Roman saint\nBULLET::::- 314 – Miltiades, pope of the Catholic Church\nBULLET::::- 681 – Agatho, pope of the Catholic Church\nBULLET::::- 976 – John I Tzimiskes, Byzantine emperor (b. 925)\nBULLET::::- 987 – Pietro I Orseolo, doge of Venice (b. 928)\nBULLET::::- 1055 – Bretislav I, duke of Bohemia\nBULLET::::- 1094 – Al-Mustansir Billah, Egyptian caliph (b. 1029)\nBULLET::::- 1218 – Hugh I, king of Cyprus\nBULLET::::- 1276 – Gregory X, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1210)\nBULLET::::- 1322 – Petrus Aureolus, scholastic philosopher\nBULLET::::- 1358 – Abu Inan Faris, Marinid ruler of Morocco (b. 1329)\nBULLET::::- 1552 – Johann Cochlaeus, German humanist and controversialist (b. 1479)\nBULLET::::- 1645 – William Laud, English archbishop and academic (b. 1573)\nBULLET::::- 1654 – Nicholas Culpeper, English botanist, physician, and astrologer (b. 1616)\nBULLET::::- 1698 – Louis-Sébastien Le Nain de Tillemont, French priest and historian (b. 1637)\nBULLET::::- 1754 – Edward Cave, English publisher, founded \"The Gentleman's Magazine\" (b. 1691)\nBULLET::::- 1761 – Edward Boscawen, English admiral and politician (b. 1711)\nBULLET::::- 1778 – Carl Linnaeus, Swedish botanist and physician (b. 1707)\nBULLET::::- 1794 – Georg Forster, German-Polish ethnologist and journalist (b. 1754)\nBULLET::::- 1811 – Joseph Chénier, French poet, playwright, and politician (b. 1764)\nBULLET::::- 1824 – Victor Emmanuel I, duke of Savoy and king of Sardinia (b. 1759)\nBULLET::::- 1828 – François de Neufchâteau, French poet, academic, and politician, French Minister of the Interior (b. 1750)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Gregorio Funes, Argentinian clergyman, historian, and educator (b. 1749)\nBULLET::::- 1833 – Adrien-Marie Legendre, French mathematician and theorist (b. 1752)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Dimitrie Macedonski, Greek-Romanian captain and politician (b. 1780)\nBULLET::::- 1851 – Karl Freiherr von Müffling, Prussian field marshal (b. 1775)\nBULLET::::- 1855 – Mary Russell Mitford, English author and playwright (b. 1787)\nBULLET::::- 1862 – Samuel Colt, American engineer and businessman, founded Colt's Manufacturing Company (b. 1814)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Lyman Beecher, American minister and activist, co-founded the American Temperance Society (b. 1775)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Eli Whitney Blake, Jr., American chemist, physicist, and academic (b. 1836)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Benjamin Godard, French violinist and composer (b. 1849)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – James Robert Dickson, English-Australian businessman and politician, 1st Australian Minister for Defence (b. 1832)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Jean-Léon Gérôme, French painter and sculptor (b. 1824)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Kārlis Baumanis, Latvian composer (b. 1835)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Buffalo Bill, American soldier and hunter (b. 1846)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Feliks Leparsky, Russian fencer and captain (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Sali Nivica, Albanian journalist and politician (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Frank Tudor, Australian politician, 6th Australian Minister for Trade and Investment (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Eino Leino, Finnish poet and journalist (b. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Edwin Flack, Australian tennis player and runner (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Charlie McGahey, English cricketer and footballer (b. 1871)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Frank Bridge, English viola player and composer (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – John Lavery, Irish painter and academic (b. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Joe Penner, Hungarian-American actor (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Issai Schur, Belarusian-German mathematician and academic (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Erich von Drygalski, German geographer and geophysicist (b. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Sinclair Lewis, American novelist, short-story writer, and playwright, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Yoshio Nishina, Japanese physicist and academic (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Chester Wilmot, American journalist and historian (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Zonia Baber, American geographer and geologist (b. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Gabriela Mistral, Chilean poet and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Şükrü Kaya, Turkish jurist and politician, Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs (b. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Jack Laviolette, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Dashiell Hammett, American detective novelist and screenwriter (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Charles E. Burchfield, American painter (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Ali Fuat Cebesoy, Turkish general and politician, 6th Speaker of the Parliament of Turkey (b. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Sampurnanand, Indian educator and politician, 2nd Governor of Rajasthan (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Pavel Belyayev, Russian pilot and astronaut (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Coco Chanel, French fashion designer, founded Chanel (b. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Ignazio Giunti, Italian race car driver (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Aksel Larsen, Danish lawyer and politician (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Howlin' Wolf, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Pedro Joaquín Chamorro Cardenal, Nicaraguan journalist and author (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Don Gillis, American composer and conductor (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Hannah Gluckstein, British painter (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Hughie Critz, American baseball player and scout (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – George Meany, American plumber and trade union leader (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Bo Rein, American football player and coach (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Fawn M. Brodie, American historian and author (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Souvanna Phouma, Laotian politician, 8th Prime Minister of Laos (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Jaroslav Seifert, Czech journalist and poet, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Marion Hutton, American singer (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – David Robinson, English businessman and philanthropist (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Herbert Morrison, American journalist and producer (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Tochinishiki Kiyotaka, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 44th Yokozuna (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Roberto Bonomi, Argentinian race car driver (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Kathleen Tynan, Canadian-English journalist, author, and screenwriter (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Elspeth Huxley, Kenyan-English journalist and author (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Sheldon Leonard, American actor, director, and producer (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Alexander R. Todd, Baron Todd, Scottish-English biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Edward Williams, Australian lieutenant, pilot, and judge (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Sam Jaffe, American screenwriter and producer (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Spalding Gray, American actor and screenwriter (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Wasyly, Ukrainian-Canadian bishop (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Jack Horner, American journalist (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Princess Joséphine Charlotte of Belgium (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Carlo Ponti, Italian film producer (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Bradford Washburn, American explorer, photographer, and cartographer (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Christopher Bowman, American figure skater and actor (b. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Maila Nurmi, Finnish-American actress, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Patcha Ramachandra Rao, Indian metallurgist, educator and administrator (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Margaret Whiting, American singer (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Jean Pigott, Canadian businesswoman and politician (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Gevork Vartanian, Russian intelligence agent (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – George Gruntz, Swiss pianist and composer (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Claude Nobs, Swiss businessman, founded the Montreux Jazz Festival (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Petr Hlaváček, Czech shoemaker and academic (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Zbigniew Messner, Polish economist and politician, 9th Prime Minister of the Republic of Poland (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Larry Speakes, American journalist, 16th White House Press Secretary (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Junior Malanda, Belgian footballer (b. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Taylor Negron, American actor, playwright, and painter (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Francesco Rosi, Italian director and screenwriter (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Robert Stone, American novelist and short story writer (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Wim Bleijenberg, Dutch footballer and manager (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – David Bowie, English singer-songwriter, producer, and actor (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – George Jonas, Hungarian-Canadian journalist, author, and poet (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Buddy Greco, American jazz and pop singer and pianist (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Clare Hollingworth, English journalist (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Gregory of Nyssa\nBULLET::::- Leonie Aviat\nBULLET::::- Obadiah (Coptic Church)\nBULLET::::- Peter Orseolo\nBULLET::::- Pope Agatho (Roman Catholic)\nBULLET::::- William Laud (Anglican Communion)\nBULLET::::- William of Donjeon\nBULLET::::- January 10 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Fête du Vodoun (Benin)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Thatcher Day (Falkland Islands)\nBULLET::::- Majority Rule Day (Bahamas)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "16077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16077", "title": "John Hagelin", "text": "John Hagelin\n\nJohn Samuel Hagelin (born June 9, 1954) is the leader of the Transcendental Meditation (TM) movement in the United States. He is president of the Maharishi University of Management (MUM) in Fairfield, Iowa, and honorary chair of its board of trustees. The university was established in 1973 by the TM movement's founder, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, to deliver a \"consciousness-based education\".\n\nHagelin graduated in physics in 1981, and began post-doctoral research at the CERN for less than a year, then at the SLAC). He vanished in 1983 in the midst of personal problems and reappeared a year later as physics professor at the Maharishi University of Management (MUM), then became its president. Hagelin believes that his extended version of unified field theory is identified with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's \"unified field of consciousness\", a view that is rejected by \"virtually every theoretical physicist in the world\".\n\nHagelin stood as a candidate for President of the United States for the Natural Law Party, a party founded by the TM movement, in the 1992, 1996 and 2000 elections. He is the author of \"Manual for a Perfect Government\" (1998), which sets out how to apply \"natural law\" to matters of governance. Hagelin is also president of the David Lynch Foundation, which promotes TM.\n\nHagelin was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the second of four sons, to Mary Lee Hagelin, née Stephenson, a school teacher, and Carl William Hagelin, a businessman. He was raised in Connecticut, and won a scholarship to the Taft School for boys in Watertown. In July 1970, while at Taft, he was involved in a motorcycle crash that led to a long stay, in a body cast, in the school infirmary. During his time there, he began reading about quantum mechanics and was introduced to TM by a practitioner, Rick Archer, who had been invited to the school to talk about it.\n\nAfter Taft, Hagelin attended Dartmouth College, and at the end of his freshman year studied TM in Vittel, France, and returned as a qualified TM teacher. In 1975 he obtained his A.B. in physics with highest honors (\"summa cum laude\") from Dartmouth. He went on to study physics at Harvard University under Howard Georgi, earning a master's degree in 1976 and a Ph.D. in 1981. By the time he had received his Ph.D., he had published several papers on particle theory.\n\nPreviously divorced, Hagelin married Kara Anastasio, the former vice-chair of the Natural Law Party of Ohio, in 2010. The couple live in Fairfield, Iowa.\n\nIn 1981 Hagelin became a postdoctoral researcher for few months at the European Center for Particle Physics (CERN) in Switzerland, and in 1982 he moved to the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) in California. He left SLAC in 1983, reportedly because of personal problems. A year later he joined Maharishi International University (MIU), later named the Maharishi University of Management (MUM), as chair of its physics department. Two of Hagelin's previous collaborators, Dimitri Nanopoulos and John Ellis, were uncomfortable with his move to MIU, but they continued to work with him. While at MIU, Hagelin received funding from the National Science Foundation.\n\nHagelin became a trustee of MUM and, in 2016, its president. It was intended that he become president of Maharishi Central University, which was under construction in Smith Center, Kansas, until early 2008, when, according to Hagelin, the project was put on hold while the TM organization dealt with the death of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.\n\nDuring his time at CERN, SLAC and MUM, Hagelin worked on supersymmetric extensions of the standard model and grand unification theories. His work on the flipped SU(5) heterotic superstring theory is considered one of the more successful unified field theories, or \"theories of everything\", and was highlighted in 1991 in a cover story in \"Discover\" magazine.\n\nIn the years 1979–1996, Hagelin published over 70 papers about particle physics, electroweak unification, grand unification, supersymmetry and cosmology, most of them in academic scientific journals. He co-authored a 1983 paper in \"Physics Letters B\", \"Weak symmetry breaking by radiative corrections in broken supergravity\", that became one of the 103 most-cited articles in the physical sciences in 1983 and 1984. In a 2012 interview in \"Science Watch\", co-author Keith Olive said that his work for the 1984 study was one of the areas that had given him the greatest sense of accomplishment. A 1984 paper by Hagelin and John Ellis in \"Nuclear Physics B\", \"Supersymmetric relics from the big bang\", had been cited over 500 times by 2007.\n\nIn 1987 and 1989 Hagelin published two papers in the Maharishi University of Management's \"Journal of Modern Science and Vedic Science\" in which he claimed that superstring theory's \"unified field\" was identical to what Maharishi Mahesh Yogi called the \"unified field of consciousness\". Hagelin argued that consciousness is a fundamental property of the natural world, and that TM practitioners can experience a state of consciousness \"in which the observer, the process of observation, and the observed are unified\". This, he argued, is the experience of the unified field of physics.\n\nHagelin's arguments at times invoked numerology and critical interpretation of ancient Hindu scriptures, the Vedas. For instance he linked five different spin types in quantum mechanics to the five tanmatras; he also linked the name of the theory he favors—\"superstring\" theory—with a Vedic passage that he translated as: \"My body is called a string.\" More central to his argument was his claim that quantum mechanics permits identifying the physical with the mental, an idea he found echoed in the Vedas. A theory linking consciousness to the unified field would be the only natural explanation for purported phenomena exhibited by advanced TM practitioners, he argued, such as the Maharishi effect, levitation and invisibility. Philosopher Evan Fales and sociologist Barry Markovsky remarked that, because no such phenomena have been validated, Hagelin's \"far-fetched explanation lacks purpose\". They went on to say that the parallels Hagelin highlighted rest on ambiguity, obscurity and vague analogy, supported by the construction of arbitrary similarities.\n\nIn a 1992 news article for \"Nature\" about Hagelin's first presidential campaign, Chris Anderson wrote that Hagelin was \"by all accounts a gifted scientist, well-known and respected by his colleagues\", but that his effort to link the flipped SU(5) unified field theory to TM \"infuriates his former collaborators\", who feared it might taint their own work and requests for funding. John Ellis, then director of CERN's department of theoretical physics—who worked with Hagelin on SU(5)—reportedly asked Hagelin to stop comparing it to TM. Anderson wrote that two-page advertisements containing rows of partial differential equations had been appearing in the U.S. media, purporting to show how TM affected distant events. In his book, \"Not Even Wrong: The Failure of String Theory and The Search for Unity In Physical Law\" (2007), the physicist Peter Woit wrote that identification of a unified field of consciousness with a unified field of superstring theory was wishful thinking, and that \"[v]irtually every theoretical physicist in the world rejects all of this as nonsense and the work of a crackpot\".\n\nHagelin was featured in the movies \"What the Bleep Do We Know!?\" (2004) and \"The Secret\" (2006). João Magueijo, professor of theoretical physics at Imperial College London, described \"What the Bleep Do We Know!?\" as \"horrendously tedious\", consisting of deliberate misrepresention of science and \"ludicrous extrapolations\".\n\nIn the summer of 1993, Hagelin directed a project aimed at demonstrating what TM practitioners call the Maharishi effect, the purported ability of a large group to affect the behavior of others by practising TM. The TM movement believes that the square root of one percent of the population of a country meditating can bring about peace. However, critics point to a lack of credible supporting evidence.\n\nApproximately 4,000 people from 82 countries gathered in Washington, D.C. and practiced TM for six hours a day from June 7 to July 30. The meditation included \"yogic flying\", an advanced technique taught through the TM-Sidhi program in which practitioners engage in a series of hops while seated in the lotus position. Using data obtained from the District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department for 1993 and the preceding five years (1988–1992), Hagelin and collaborators followed the changes in crime rates for the area—before, during and after the six weeks of the gathering. According to their study homicides, assaults and rape (HRA crimes) decreased up to 23,3% when compared to previous years. Additional data used for control purposes included weather variables (temperature, precipitation, humidity), daylight hours, changes in police and community anti-crime activities, prior crime trends in the District of Columbia, and concurrent crime trends in neighboring cities.\n\nAccording to Hagelin, the analysis was examined by an \"independent review board\", although all members of the board were TM practitioners. Robert L. Park, research professor and former chair of the Physics Department at the University of Maryland, called the study a \"clinic in data distortion\". In 1994 a science satire magazine, \"Annals of Improbable Research\", \"awarded\" Hagelin the Ig Nobel Prize for Peace, \"for his experimental conclusion that 4,000 trained meditators caused an 18 percent decrease in violent crime in Washington, D.C.\"\n\nIn 1999 Hagelin held a press conference in Washington, D.C. to announce that the TM movement could end the Kosovo War with yogic flying. He suggested that NATO set up an elite corps of 7,000 yogic flyers at a cost of $33 million.\n\nIn 1990 Hagelin founded Enlightened Audio Designs Corporation (EAD) with Alastair Roxburgh. The company designed and manufactured high-end digital-to-analog converters. EAD was sold in 2001 to Alpha Digital Technologies in Oregon.\n\nHagelin and 12 others founded the Natural Law Party in April 1992 in Fairfeld, based on the view that problems of governance could be solved more effectively by following \"natural law\", the organizing principle of the universe. The party platform included preventive health care, sustainable agriculture and renewable energy technologies. Hagelin favored abortion rights without public financing, campaign-finance law reform, more restrictive gun control, and a flat tax, with no tax for families earning less than $34,000 per year. He campaigned to eradicate PACs and soft money campaign contributions, and advocated safety locks on guns, school vouchers, and efforts to prevent war in the Middle East by reducing \"people's tension\".\n\nThe party chose Hagelin and Mike Tompkins as its presidential and vice-presidential candidates in 1992 and 1996. Hagelin received 39,212 votes from 32 states in 1992 (and 23 percent of the vote in Jefferson County, where MUM is located), and 113,659 votes from 43 states in 1996 (21 percent in Jefferson County).\n\nHagelin ran for president again in 2000, nominated both by the NLP and by the Perot wing of the Reform Party, which disputed the nomination of Pat Buchanan. Hagelin's running mate was Nat Goldhaber. A dispute over the Reform Party's nomination generated legal action between the Hagelin and Buchanan campaigns. In September 2000 the Federal Election Commission ruled that Buchanan was the official candidate of the Reform Party, and hence eligible to receive federal election funds. The Reform Party convention that nominated Hagelin was declared invalid. In spite of the ruling, Hagelin remained on several state ballots as the Reform Party nominee because of the independent nature of some state affiliates; he was also the national nominee of the Natural Law Party, and in New York was the Independence Party nominee. He received 83,714 votes from 39 states. During the 2004 primary elections, Hagelin endorsed Democratic candidate Dennis Kucinich, and in April that year the Executive Committee of the NLP dissolved the NLP as a national organization.\n\nHagelin is the Director of the Institute of Science, Technology and Public Policy (ISTPP), a MUM think tank. According to the ISTPP's website, he has met with members of Congress and officials at the Department of State and Department of Defense to discuss terrorism. In 1993 he helped draft a paragraph in Hillary Rodham Clinton's 10,000-page health care plan; according to Hagelin, his was the only paragraph that addressed preventive health care. In 1998 the ISTPP testified about germ-line technologies to the DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health; Hagelin's report to the committee said that \"recombinant DNA technology is inherently risky because of the high probability of unexpected side-effects\".\n\nHagelin established the US Peace Government (USPG) in July 2003, as an affiliate of the Global Country of World Peace and served as the latter's minister of science and technology. According to USPG's website, the TM movement created US Peace Government and the Global Country of World Peace to promote evidence-based, sustainable problem-solving and governance policies that align with \"natural law\".\n\nMaharishi Mahesh Yogi appointed Hagelin the \"Raja of Invincible America\" in November 2007. Hagelin organized the Invincible America Assembly in Fairfield in July 2006. The assembly comprised individuals practicing TM and TM-Sidhi techniques twice daily. Hagelin predicted that as the number of Yogic flyers increased towards 3500, \"[p]eace and prosperity will reign [in America], and violence and conflict will subside completely\". In July 2007 he said that the assembly was responsible for the Dow Jones Industrial Average reaching a record high of 14,022 and predicted that it would top 17,000 within a year.\n\nHagelin is also president of the Global Union of Scientists for Peace, an organization of scientists opposed to nuclear proliferation and war, and president of the David Lynch Foundation, which promotes TM.\n\nIn 1992 Hagelin received a Kilby International Award from the North Dallas Chamber of Commerce \"for his promising work in particle physics in the development of supersymmetric grand unified field theory\". According to a member of the selection committee, Hagelin's nomination was proposed by another selection-committee member who was a fellow TM practitioner. Chris Anderson, in a 1992 \"Nature\" article about Hagelin's first presidential campaign, questioned the value of the award.\n\nHagelin's first marriage, to Margaret Hagelin, ended in divorce. He married Kara Anastasio, the former vice-chair of the Natural Law Party of Ohio, in 2010.\n\nBULLET::::- (1999) John S. Hagelin, et al. \"Effects of Group Practice of the Transcendental Meditation Program on Preventing Violent Crime in Washington, D.C.\", \"Social Indicators Research\", 47(2), June, 153–201.\nBULLET::::- (1998) John S. Hagelin. \"Manual for a Perfect Government: How to harness the laws of nature to bring maximum success to governmental administration\", Fairfield: Maharishi University of Management Press.\nBULLET::::- (1994) John S. Hagelin, S. Kelley, Toshiaki Tanaka. \"Supersymmetric flavor-changing neutral currents: exact amplitudes and phenomenological analysis\", \"Nuclear Physics B\", 415(2), 7 March, 293–331.\nBULLET::::- (1993) Lawrence Connors, Ashley J. Deans, and John S. Hagelin. \"Supersymmetry mechanism for naturally small density perturbations and baryogenesis, \"Physical Review Letters D\", 71, 27 December, 4291.\nBULLET::::- (1992) Alon E. Faraggi, John S. Hagelin, et al. \"Sparticle spectroscopy\", \"Physical Review D\", 45(9), 1 May, 3272.\nBULLET::::- (1990) John S. Hagelin, Stephen Kelley. \"Sparticle masses as a probe of GUT physics\", \"Nuclear Physics B\", 342(1), 24 September, 95–107.\nBULLET::::- (1989) John S. Hagelin. \"Restructuring Physics from its Foundation in Light of Maharishi's Vedic Science\", \"Modern Science and Vedic Science\", 3(1), 3–72.\nBULLET::::- (1988) I. Antoniadis, John Ellis, J. S. Hagelin, D. V. Nanopoulos. \"GUT model-building with fermionic four-dimensional strings\", \"Physics Letters B\", 205(4), 5 May, 459–465.\nBULLET::::- (1987) John S. Hagelin. \"Is Consciousness the Unified Field? A Field Theorist's Perspective\", \"Modern Science and Vedic Science\", 1, 29–87.\nBULLET::::- (1986) John S. Hagelin, Gordon L. Kane. \"Cosmic ray antimatter from supersymmetric dark matter\", \"Nuclear Physics B\", 263(2), 20 January, 399–412.\nBULLET::::- (1985) John Ellis, John S. Hagelin. \"Cosmological constraints on supergravity models\", \"Physics Letters B\", 159(1), 12 September, 26–31.\nBULLET::::- (1984) John Ellis, John S. Hagelin, et al. \"Search for violations of quantum mechanics\", \"Nuclear Physics B\", 241(2), 23 July, 381–405.\nBULLET::::- (1984) John Ellis, J. S. Hagelin. \"Supersymmetric relics from the big bang\", \"Nuclear Physics B\", 238(2), 11 June, 453–476.\nBULLET::::- (1983) John Ellis, John S. Hagelin. \"Weak symmetry breaking by radiative corrections in broken supergravity\", \"Physics Letters B\", 125(4), 2 June, 275–281.\nBULLET::::- (1982) John Ellis, John Hagelin, D. V. Nanopoulos. \"Spin-zero leptons and the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon\", \"Physics Letters B\", 116(4), 14 October, 283–286.\nBULLET::::- (1981) John S. Hagelin. \"Mass mixing and CP violation in the B0-B0 system\", \"Nuclear Physics B\", 193(1), 21 December, 123–149.\nBULLET::::- (1981) Sally Dawson, John S. Hagelin, Lawrence Hall. \"Radiative corrections to sin2θW to leading logarithm in the W-boson mass\", \"Physical Review D\", 23, 1 June, 2666.\nBULLET::::- (1979) John S. Hagelin. \"Weak mass mixing, CP violation, and the decay of b-quark mesons\", \"Physical Review D\", 20(11), 2893, 1 December.\nBULLET::::- Official site\n"}
{"id": "16078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16078", "title": "Javelin throw", "text": "Javelin throw\n\nThe javelin throw is a track and field event where the javelin, a spear about in length, is thrown. The javelin thrower gains momentum by running within a predetermined area. Javelin throwing is an event of both the men's decathlon and the women's heptathlon.\n\nThe javelin was part of the pentathlon of the Ancient Olympic Games beginning in 708 BC in two disciplines, distance and target throw. The javelin was thrown with the aid of a thong, called \"ankyle\" wound around the middle of the shaft. Athletes would hold the javelin by the thong and when the javelin was released this thong unwound giving the javelin a spiraled flight.\n\nThrowing javelin-like poles into targets was revived in Germany and Sweden in the early 1870s. In Sweden, these poles developed into the modern javelin, and throwing them for distance became a common event there and in Finland in the 1880s. The rules continued to evolve over the next decades; originally, javelins were thrown with no run-up, and holding them by the grip at the center of gravity was not always mandatory. Limited run-ups were introduced in the late 1890s, and soon developed into the modern unlimited run-up.\n\nSweden's Eric Lemming, who threw his first world best (49.32 meters) in 1899 and ruled the event from 1902 to 1912, was the first dominant javelin thrower. When the men's javelin was introduced as an Olympic discipline at the 1906 Intercalated Games, Lemming won by almost nine metres and broke his own world record; Sweden swept the first four places, as Finland's best throwers were absent and the event had yet to become popular in any other country. Though challenged by younger talents, Lemming repeated as Olympic champion in 1908 and 1912; his eventual best mark (62.32 m, thrown after the 1912 Olympics) was the first javelin world record to be officially ratified by the International Association of Athletics Federations.\n\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, most javelin competitions were two-handed; the implement was thrown with the right hand and separately with the left hand, and the best marks for each hand were added together. Competitions for the better hand only were less common, though not unknown. At the Olympics a both-hands contest was held only once, in 1912; Finland swept the medals, ahead of Lemming. After that, this version of the javelin rapidly faded into obscurity, together with similar variations of the shot and the discus; Sweden's Yngve Häckner, with his total of 114.28 m from 1917, was the last official both-hands world record holder.\n\nAnother early variant was the freestyle javelin, in which holding the javelin by the grip at the center of gravity was not mandatory; such a freestyle competition was held at the 1908 Olympics, but was dropped from the program after that. Hungary's Mór Kóczán used a freestyle end grip to break the 60-meter barrier in 1911, a year before Lemming and Julius Saaristo first did so with a regular grip.\n\nThe first known women's javelin marks were recorded in Finland in 1909. Originally, women threw the same implement as men; a lighter, shorter javelin for women was introduced in the 1920s. Women's javelin throw was added to the Olympic program in 1932; Mildred \"Babe\" Didrikson of the United States became the first champion.\n\nFor a long time, javelins were made of solid wood, typically birch, with a steel tip. The hollow, highly aerodynamic Held javelin, invented by American thrower Bud Held and developed and manufactured by his brother Dick, was introduced in the 1950s; the first Held javelins were also wooden with steel tips, but later models were made entirely of metal. These new javelins flew further, but were also less likely to land neatly point first; as a response to the increasingly frequent flat or ambiguously flat landings, experiments with modified javelins started in the early 1980s. The resulting designs, which made flat landings much less common and reduced the distances thrown, became official for men starting in April 1986 and for women in April 1999, and the world records (then 104.80 m by Uwe Hohn, and 80.00 m by Petra Felke) were reset. The current () men's world record is held by Jan Železný at 98.48 m (1996); Barbora Špotáková holds the women's world record at 72.28 m (2008).\n\nOf the 69 Olympic medals that have been awarded in the men's javelin, 32 have gone to competitors from Norway, Sweden or Finland. Finland is the only nation to have swept the medals at a currently recognized official Olympics, and has done so twice, in 1920 and 1932, in addition to its 1912 sweep in the two-handed javelin; in 1920 Finland swept the first four places, which is no longer possible as only three entrants per country are allowed. Finland has, however, never been nearly as successful in the women's javelin.\n\nThe javelin throw has been part of the decathlon since the decathlon was introduced in the early 1910s; the all-around, an earlier ten-event contest of American origin, did not include the javelin throw. The javelin was also part of some (though not all) of the many early forms of women's pentathlon, and has always been included in the heptathlon after it replaced the pentathlon in 1981.\n\nThe size, shape, minimum weight, and center of gravity of the javelin are all defined by IAAF rules. In international competition, men throw a javelin between in length and in weight, and women throw a javelin between in length and in weight. The javelin has a grip, about wide, made of cord and located at the javelin's center of gravity ( from the javelin tip for the men's javelin and from the javelin tip for the women's javelin).\n\nUnlike the other throwing events (shot put, discus, and hammer), the technique used to throw the javelin is dictated by IAAF rules and \"non-orthodox\" techniques are not permitted. The javelin must be held at its grip and thrown overhand, over the athlete's shoulder or upper arm. Further, the athlete is prohibited from turning completely around such that his back faces the direction of throw. In practice, this prevents athletes from attempting to spin and hurl the javelin sidearm in the style of a discus throw. This rule was put in place when a group of athletes began experimenting with a spin technique referred to as \"free style\". On 24 October 1956, Pentti Saarikoski threw using the technique holding the end of the javelin. Officials were so afraid of the out of control nature of the technique that the practice was banned through these rule specifications.\n\nInstead of being confined to a circle, javelin throwers have a runway wide and at least in length, ending in a curved arc from which their throw will be measured; athletes typically use this distance to gain momentum in a \"run-up\" to their throw. Like the other throwing events, the competitor may not leave the throwing area (the runway) until after the implement lands. The need to come to a stop behind the throwing arc limits both how close the athlete can come to the line before the release as well as the maximum speed achieved at the time of release.\n\nThe javelin is thrown towards a \"sector\" covering an angle of 28.96 degrees extending outwards from the arc at the end of the runway. A throw is legal only if the tip of the javelin lands within this sector, and the tip strikes the ground before any other part of the javelin. The distance of the throw is measured from the throwing arc to the point where the tip of the javelin landed, rounded down to the nearest centimeter.\n\nCompetition rules are similar to other throwing events: a round consists of one attempt by each competitor in turn, and competitions typically consist of three to six rounds. The competitor with the longest single legal throw (over all rounds) is the winner; in the case of a tie the competitors' second-longest throws are also considered. Competitions involving large numbers of athletes sometimes use a \"cut\": all competitors compete in the first three rounds, but only athletes who are currently among the top eight or have achieved some minimum distances are permitted to attempt to improve on their distance in additional rounds (typically three).\n\nOn 1 April 1986, the men's javelin () was redesigned by the governing body (the IAAF Technical Committee). They decided to change the rules for javelin design because of the increasingly frequent flat landings and the resulting discussions and protests when these attempts were declared valid or invalid by competition judges. The world record had also crept up to a potentially dangerous level, by Uwe Hohn. With throws exceeding 100 meters, it was becoming difficult to safely stage the competition within the confines of a stadium infield. The javelin was redesigned so that the centre of gravity was moved forward. In addition, the surface area in front of centre of gravity was reduced, while the surface area behind the centre of gravity was increased. This had an effect similar to that produced by the feathers on an arrow. The javelin turns into the relative wind. This relative wind appears to originate from the ground as the javelin descends, thus the javelin turns to face the ground. As the javelin turns into the wind less lift is generated, reducing the flight distance by around 10% but also causing the javelin to stick in the ground more consistently. In 1999, the women's javelin () was similarly redesigned.\n\nModifications that manufacturers made to recover some of the lost distance, by increasing tail drag (using holes, rough paint or dimples), were forbidden at the end of 1991 and marks made using implements with such modifications removed from the record books. Seppo Räty had achieved a world record of in 1991 with such a design, but this record was nullified.\n\nThe weight of the javelin in the Under-20 category is the same as the senior level.\n\nAge Group  Weight  Weight\nU13 400g  400g\nU15 600g  500g\nU18 700g  500g\nJunior (U20)  800g  600g\nSenior  800g  600g\n35-49  800g  600g\n50-74  bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=1  500g\n50-59  700g  bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=1\n60-69  600g  bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=1\n70-79  500g  bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=1 \n75+  bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=1  400g\n80+  400g  bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=1 \n\nUnlike other throwing events, javelin allows the competitor to build speed over a considerable distance. In addition to the core and upper body strength necessary to deliver the implement, javelin throwers benefit from the agility and athleticism typically associated with running and jumping events. Thus, the athletes share more physical characteristics with sprinters than with others, although they still need the skill of heavier throwing athletes.\n\nTraditional free-weight training is often used by javelin throwers. Metal-rod exercises and resistance band exercises can be used to train a similar action to the javelin throw to increase power and intensity. Without proper strength and flexibility, throwers can become extremely injury prone, especially in the shoulder and elbow. Core stability can help in the transference of physical power and force from the ground through the body to the javelin. Stretching and sprint training are used to enhance the speed of the athlete at the point of release, and subsequently, the speed of the javelin. At release, a javelin can reach speeds approaching 113 km/h (70 mph).\n\nThe javelin throw consists of three separate phases: the run-up, the transition, and the delivery. During each phase, the position of the javelin changes while the thrower changes his or her muscle recruitment. In the run-up phase as Luann Voza states, \"your arm is bent and kept close to your head, keeping the javelin in alignment with little to no arm movement\". This allows the thrower's bicep to contract, flexing the elbow. In order for the javelin to stay up high, the thrower's deltoid flexes. In the transition phase, the thrower's \"back muscles contract\" as \"the javelin is brought back in alignment with the shoulder with the thrower's palm up\". This, according to Voza, \"stretches your pectoral, or chest, muscles. From there, a stretch reflex, an involuntary contraction of your chest, helps bring your throwing arm forward with increased force\". During the final phase, the rotation of the shoulders initiates the release, which then “transfers movement through the triceps muscles, wrists and fingers to extend the throwing arm forward to release the javelin\".\n\nDue to the fear of liability, the javelin throw is not an event in NFHS high school competition in 36 states, though USATF youth competitions for the same aged athletes do hold javelin competitions. At various points in time, high schools have attempted to create substitute events, including the softball throw, football throw and the grenade throw, throwing different objects under rules similar to javelin throw rules. In those states that do allow high school javelin competition, a few specify that the tip must be of rubber. Further, in age group track meets in the U.S., and in particular with elementary-school children in the Northeast, the Turbojav—a smaller plastic implement with a rubber tip but with similar flying characteristics as a real javelin—is a popular alternative.\n\nJavelin throwers have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins. One of the recent samples is the €5 Finnish 10th IAAF World Championships in Athletics commemorative coin, minted in 2005 to commemorate the 2005 World Championships in Athletics. On the obverse of the coin, a javelin thrower is depicted. On the reverse, legs of hurdle runners with the Helsinki Olympic Stadium tower in the background can be seen.\n\nBULLET::::- Correct as of July 2019.\n{ class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n\nBULLET::::- Jan Železný also threw 95.66 m (1993), 95.54 m (1993), 94.64 m (1996), 94.02 m (1997), 92.80 m (2001), 92.42 m (1997), 92.28 m (1995), 92.12 m (1995), 91.82 m (1994), 91.68 m (1994), 91.50 m (1994, 1996), 91.40 m (1993), 91.34 m (1997), 91.30 m (1995), 91.28 m (1994), 91.23 m (2001) and 91.04 m (1996).\nBULLET::::- Johannes Vetter also threw 93.88 m (2017), 93.06 m (2017), 92.70 m (2018), 91.67 m (2017), 91.56 m (2018), 91.22 m (2018), 91.20 m (2017) and 91.06 m (2017).\nBULLET::::- Aki Parviainen also threw 92.41 m (2001), 91.31 m (2001).\nBULLET::::- Thomas Röhler also threw 91.78 m (2018), 91.28 m (2016).\nBULLET::::- Raymond Hecht also threw 91.50 m (1996).\nBULLET::::- Andreas Hofmann also threw 91.44 m (2018) and 91.07 m (2017).\nBULLET::::- Julius Yego also threw 91.39 m (2015).\nBULLET::::- Tero Pitkämäki also threw 91.33 m (2005), 91.23 m (2007) and 91.11 m (2006).\nBULLET::::- Andreas Thorkildsen also threw 91.28 m (2009).\nBULLET::::- Konstadinos Gatsioudis also threw 91.27 m (2001) and 91.23 (2002).\n\nBULLET::::- Correct as of August 2019.\n{ class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n\nBULLET::::- Barbora Spotáková also threw 71.58 m (2011), 71.42 m (2008), 69.55 m (2012).\nBULLET::::- Osleidys Menéndez also threw 71.54 m (2001), 71.53 m (2004), 69.82 m (2001), 69.53 m (2001).\nBULLET::::- Mariya Abakumova also threw 70.53 m (2013), 69.75 m (2013).\nBULLET::::- Christina Obergföll also threw 70.03 m (2005), 69.81 m (2008), 69.57 m (2011).\n\nMarks set using dimpled rough-tailed javelins manufactured by several companies were nullified effective 20 September 1991.\n\n!Rank\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Date\n!Place\n!Ref\n!1\nalign=\"center\"96.96\nalign=left\n2 June 1991\nPunkalaidun\n\n!2\nalign=\"center\"91.36\nalign=left\n15 September 1991\nSheffield\n\n!3\nalign=\"center\"90.84\nalign=left\n8 September 1991\nGengenbach\n\n!4\nalign=\"center\"90.82\nalign=left\n26 August 1991\nTokyo\n\n!5\nalign=\"center\"90.72\nalign=left\n10 July 1991\nLausanne\n\n!Rank\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Date\n!Place\n!Ref\n1\n104.80\nalign=left\n21 July 1984\nBerlin\n\n2\n99.72\nalign=left\n15 May 1983\nWestwood\n\n3=\n96.72\nalign=left\n23 April 1980\nTata\n\n3=\n96.72\nalign=left\n9 June 1983\nBerlin\n\n5\n95.80\nalign=left\n29 August 1982\nStuttgart\n\n6\n95.10\nalign=left\n5 August 1985\nEugene\n\n7\n94.58\nalign=left\n26 July 1976\nMontreal\n\n8\n94.22\nalign=left\n3 August 1978\nOslo\n\n9\n94.20\nalign=left\n5 June 1983\nBirmingham\n\n10\n94.08\nalign=left\n5 May 1973\nLeverkusen\n\n11\n94.06\nalign=left\n26 July 1985\nEugene\n\n12\n93.90\nalign=left\n6 June 1973\nHelsinki\n\n13\n93.84\nalign=left\n27 January 1979\nAuckland\n\n14\n93.80\nalign=left\n6 July 1972\nStockholm \n\n15\n93.70\nalign=left\n17 July 1985\nKiev \n\n!Rank\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Date\n!Place\n!Ref\n1\n80.00\nalign=left\n8 September 1988\nPotsdam\n\n2\n77.44\nalign=left\n6 September 1986\nStuttgart\n\n3\n74.76\nalign=left\n13 June 1983\nTampere\n\n4\n74.20\nalign=left\n26 September 1982\nHania\n\n5\n73.58\nalign=left\n26 June 1983\nEdinburgh\n\n6\n72.70\nalign=left\n20 May 1984\nHania\n\n7\n72.16\nalign=left\n5 May 1984\nCelje\n\n8\n72.12\nalign=left\n10 July 1993\nOslo\n\n9\n71.88\nalign=left\n15 August 1981\nBirmingham\n\n10\n71.82\nalign=left\n30 August 1985\nLeverkusen\n\n11\n71.40 \nalign=left\n5 June 1994\nSevilla\n\n12\n71.00\nalign=left\n25 June 1988\nRostock\n\n13\n70.76\nalign=left\n22 June 1989\nRostock\n\n14\n70.42\nalign=left\n6 August 1990\nTianjin \n\n15\n70.20\nalign=left\n9 May 1991\nHalle \n\n!Year\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Place\n1967\n90.98\nalign=left\nOdessa\n1968\n91.98\nalign=left\nSaarijärvi\n1969\n92.70\nalign=left\nTampere\n1970\n92.64\nalign=left\nHelsinki\n1971\n90.68\nalign=left\nHelsinki\n1972\n93.80\nalign=left\nStockholm\n1973\n94.08\nalign=left\nLeverkusen\n1974\n89.58\nalign=left\nRome\n1975\n91.38\nalign=left\nBudapest\n1976\n94.58\nalign=left\nMontreal\n1977\n94.10\nalign=left\nStockholm\n1978\n94.22\nalign=left\nOslo\n1979\n93.84\nalign=left\nAuckland\n1980\n96.72\nalign=left\nTata\n1981\n92.48\nalign=left\nBerlin\n1982\n95.80\nalign=left\nStuttgart\n1983\n99.72\nalign=left\nWestwood\n1984\n104.80\nalign=left\nBerlin\n1985\n96.96\nalign=left\nCanberra\n\nA new model was introduced in 1986, and all records started fresh.\n\n!Year\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Place\n1986\n85.74\nalign=left\nComo\n1987\n87.66\nalign=left\nNitra\n1988\n86.88\nalign=left\nLeverkusen\n1989\n87.60\nalign=left\nSan José\n1990\n89.58\nalign=left\nStockholm\n1991\n90.82\nalign=left\nTokyo\n1992\n91.46\nalign=left\nAuckland\n1993\n95.66\nalign=left\nSheffield\n1994\n91.82\nalign=left\nSheffield\n1995\n92.60\nalign=left\nOslo\n1996\n98.48\nalign=left\nJena\n1997\n94.02\nalign=left\nStellenbosch\n1998\n90.88\nalign=left\nTartu\n1999\n93.09\nalign=left\nKuortane\n2000\n91.69\nalign=left\nKuortane\n2001\n92.80\nalign=left\nEdmonton\n2002\n92.61\nalign=left\nSheffield\n2003\n90.11\nalign=left\nDessau\n2004\n87.73\nalign=left\nOstrava\n2005\n91.53\nalign=left\nKuortane\n2006\n91.59\nalign=left\nOslo\n2007\n91.29\nalign=left\nIndianapolis\n2008\n90.57\nalign=left\nBeijing\n2009\n91.28\nalign=left\nZürich\n2010\n90.37\nalign=left\nFlorø\n2011\n90.61\nalign=left\nByrkjelo\n2012\n88.34\nalign=left\nLondon\n2013\n89.03\nalign=left\nBad Köstritz\n2014\n89.21\nalign=left\nShanghai\n2015\n92.72\nalign=left\nBeijing\n2016\n91.28\nalign=left\nTurku\n2017\n94.44\nalign=left\nLucerne\n2018\n92.70\nalign=left\nLeiria\n2019\n90.61\nalign=left\nKuortane\n\n!Year\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Place\n1973\n66.10\nalign=left\nEdinburgh\n1974\n67.22\nalign=left\nRome\n1975\n66.46\nalign=left\nSudbury\n1976\n69.12\nalign=left\nBerlin\n1977\n69.32\nalign=left\nFürth\n1978\n69.16\nalign=left\nPrague\n1979\n69.52\nalign=left\nDresden\n1980\n70.08\nalign=left\nPodolsk\n1981\n71.88\nalign=left\nZagreb\n1982\n74.20\nalign=left\nHania\n1983\n74.76\nalign=left\nTampere\n1984\n74.72\nalign=left\nCelje\n1985\n75.40\nalign=left\nSchwerin\n1986\n77.44\nalign=left\nStuttgart\n1987\n78.90\nalign=left\nLeipzig\n1988\n80.00\nalign=left\nPotsdam\n1989\n76.88\nalign=left\nMacerata\n1990\n73.08\nalign=left\nManaus\n1991\n71.44\nalign=left\nFana\n1992\n70.36\nalign=left\nMoscow\n1993\n72.12\nalign=left\nOslo\n1994\n71.40\nalign=left\nSeville\n1995\n71.18\nalign=left\nZürich\n1996\n69.42\nalign=left\nMonaco\n1997\n69.66\nalign=left\nHelsinki\n1998\n70.10\nalign=left\nBerlin\n\nA new model was introduced in 1999 and all records started fresh.\n\n!Year\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Place\n1999\n68.19\nalign=left\nFana\n2000\n69.48\nalign=left\nOslo\n2001\n71.54\nalign=left\nRethymno\n2002\n67.47\nalign=left\nMunich\n2003\n66.52\nalign=left\nParis\n2004\n71.53\nalign=left\nAthens\n2005\n71.70\nalign=left\nHelsinki\n2006\n66.91\nalign=left\nAthens\n2007\n70.20\nalign=left\nMunich\n2008\n72.28\nalign=left\nStuttgart\n2009\n68.92\nalign=left\nBerlin\n2010\n68.89\nalign=left\nDoha\n2011\n71.99\nalign=left\nDaegu\n2012\n69.55\nalign=left\nLondon\n2013\n70.53\nalign=left\nBerlin\n2014\n67.99\nalign=left\nBrussels\n2015\n67.69\nalign=left\nBeijing\n2016\n67.30\nalign=left\nAdler\n2017\n68.43\nalign=left\nLausanne\n2018\n68.92\nalign=left\nGold Coast\n2019\n67.98\nalign=left\nShenyang\n\nBULLET::::- List of javelin throw national champions (men)\n\nBULLET::::- List of javelin throwers\n\nBULLET::::- IAAF list of javelin-throw records in XML\nBULLET::::- (IAAF Statement) – statement of reasons to modify the javelin design\nBULLET::::- Masters World Rankings\nBULLET::::- IAAF competition rules\n"}
{"id": "16079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16079", "title": "James Madison University", "text": "James Madison University\n\nJames Madison University (also known as JMU, Madison, or James Madison) is a public research university in Harrisonburg, Virginia. Founded in 1908 as the State Normal and Industrial School for Women at Harrisonburg, the institution was renamed Madison College in 1938 in honor of President James Madison and then James Madison University in 1977. The university is situated in the Shenandoah Valley, just west of Massanutten Mountain.\n\nFounded in 1908 as a women's college, James Madison University was established by the Virginia General Assembly. It was originally called The State Normal and Industrial School for Women at Harrisonburg. In 1914, the name of the university was changed to the State Normal School for Women at Harrisonburg. At first, academic offerings included only today's equivalent of technical training or junior college courses, but authorization to award bachelor's degrees was granted in 1916. During this initial period of development, the campus plan was established and six buildings were constructed.\n\nThe university became the State Teachers College at Harrisonburg in 1924 and continued under that name until 1938, when it was named Madison College in honor of James Madison, the fourth President of the United States, whose Montpelier estate is in nearby Orange, Virginia. In 1976, the university's name was changed to James Madison University.\n\nThe first president of the university was Julian Ashby Burruss. The university opened its doors to its first student body in 1909 with an enrollment of 209 students and a faculty of 15. Its first 20 graduates received diplomas in 1911.\n\nIn 1919, Burruss resigned the presidency to become president of Virginia Polytechnic Institute. Samuel Page Duke was then chosen as the school's second president. During Duke's administration, nine major buildings were constructed. Duke served as president from 1919 to 1949.\n\nIn 1946, men were first enrolled as regular day students. G. Tyler Miller became the third president in 1949, following Duke's retirement. During Miller's administration, from 1949 to 1970, the campus was enlarged by and 19 buildings were constructed. Major curriculum changes were made and the university was authorized to grant master's degrees in 1954.\n\nIn 1966, by action of the Virginia General Assembly, the university became a coeducational institution. Ronald E. Carrier, JMU's fourth president, headed the institution from 1971 to 1998. During his administration, student enrollment and the number of faculty and staff tripled, doctoral programs were authorized, more than 20 major campus buildings were constructed and national publications recognized JMU as one of the finest institutions of its type in America. Carrier Library is named after him.\n\nDuring the first decade of the 21st century, under JMU's fifth President Linwood H. Rose, the university continued to rapidly expand, not only through new construction east of Interstate 81, but also on the west side of campus. In early 2005, JMU purchased the Rockingham Memorial Hospital campus just north of the main JMU campus for over $40 million. The hospital has since moved, and JMU now occupies the site after having made substantial renovations to it. In June 2005, the university expanded across South High Street by leasing the former Harrisonburg High School building from the City of Harrisonburg. In May 2006, the university purchased the property. The sale was approved in June 2005 for $17 million. The university named the old HHS building Memorial Hall. Recently completed projects include the Rose Library on the east side of campus, which opened on August 11, 2008. The John C. Wells Planetarium, first opened in 1974, underwent a $1.5 million renovation in 2008. It is now a state-of-the-art hybrid planetarium, the only one of its kind in the world. Its mission is science education and public outreach. It offers free shows to the public every Saturday afternoon and hosts annual summer space camps in July. The Forbes Center for the Performing Arts opened in June 2010, and serves as the home to JMU's School of Theatre and Dance. It also provides major performance venues and support spaces for the School of Music, and the administrative office for the Dean of the College of Visual and Performing Arts.\n\nThe rapid expansion of JMU's campus has at times created tension in the city-university relationship. In 2006, the local ABC affiliate reported that the university had nearly doubled in size in the last 20 years, including purchases of several local properties.\n\nThe university has also experienced tension with local residents with occasional clashes between local police and students at a popular off-campus block party. In 2000, the party with about 2,500 students grew out of hand and required a police presence at the Forest Hills townhouse complex on Village Lane. Ten years later, police equipped with riot gear used force to disperse a group of 8,000 college-aged people at the party. Several participants were airlifted to a medical center in Charlottesville to treat their injuries. The university condemned the block party attendees' behavior.\n\nJames Madison University is considered \"More Selective\" by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. It received 22,648 applications for an entering freshmen class of 4,325 for the 2012–13 academic year. The retention rate for the 2011–12 freshman class was 91.4%, and the ratio of female to male students 60/40. About 38% of students are from out of state, representing all 50 states and 89 foreign countries.\n\nJMU offers 115 degree programs on the bachelor's, master's, educational specialist, and doctoral levels. It comprises seven colleges and 78 academic programs, including the College of Arts and Letters; the College of Business; the College of Education; the College of Health and Behavioral Studies; the College of Integrated Science and Engineering; the College of Science and Mathematics; the College of Visual and Performing Arts; and The Graduate School. Total enrollment in the 2012–13 academic year was 19,927—18,392 undergraduates and 1,820 graduate students. JMU granted 4,908 degrees in 2012—4,096 undergraduate degrees, and 812 graduate degrees.\n\nOn October 2, 2009, JMU was granted a chapter by the Phi Beta Kappa academic honor society. Its chapter of Phi Kappa Phi was the first academic honor society chartered at JMU. The Honor Society of Phi Kappa Phi (or ΦΚΦ) was established in 1897 to recognize and encourage superior scholarship without restriction as to area of study and to promote the \"unity and democracy of education\".\n\nBULLET::::- College of Arts and Letters\nBULLET::::- College of Business\nBULLET::::- College of Education\nBULLET::::- College of Integrated Science and Engineering\nBULLET::::- College of Science and Mathematics\nBULLET::::- College of Health and Behavioral Studies\nBULLET::::- College of Visual and Performing Arts\nBULLET::::- The Graduate School\nBULLET::::- Honors College\nBULLET::::- Outreach and Engagement\n\nOn June 24, 2004, the Board of Visitors approved the Madison College Proposal, which created the College of Visual and Performing Arts out of the College of Arts and Letters. The College of Visual and Performing Arts includes the School of Art, Design and Art History, the School of Music, the School of Theatre and Dance, and the Madison Art Collection. About 1,200 students are enrolled in the college, and the Master of Fine Arts degree offered by the School of Art, Design and Art History is nationally ranked by \"U.S. News and World Report\".\n\nOn January 9, 2007, the Virginia higher education governing body approved the School of Engineering. The school began accepting undergraduates in fall 2008. The program focuses on sustainability with an emphasis on environmental sciences. The School of Engineering offers general engineering degrees with no specializations.\n\n\"U.S. News & World Report\" ranked JMU the No. 2 public masters-level university in the South (6th overall) for 2019. In the 2018 \"Washington Monthly\" college rankings, JMU ranked 8th among master's universities nationwide. \"Washington Monthly\" assesses the quality of schools based on social mobility (recruiting and graduating low-income students), research (producing cutting-edge scholarship and PhDs), and service (encouraging students to give something back to their country).\n\nIn 2013 \"BloombergBusiness\" ranked JMU 15th among all undergraduate business schools in the country for return on investment.In 2014 it ranked JMU's College of Business 40th among undergraduate business programs in the U.S. \"Kiplinger\" magazine's 2015 \"100 Best Values in Public Colleges\" ranked JMU 21st in value in the nation among public colleges and universities. \n\nThe campus of JMU originally consisted of two buildings, known today as Jackson and Maury Halls. Today the campus has 148 major buildings on . It has since become Virginia's second most photographed location on social media sites like Instagram and Twitter, after King Dominion. The campus is divided into five parts: Bluestone, Hillside, Lakeside, Skyline, and the Village. The Skyline area is on the east side of Interstate 81, while the Bluestone, Hillside, Lakeside, and Village areas of the campus are on the west side. The two sides are connected both by a bridge over, and a tunnel (Duke Dog Alley) under, Interstate 81. Other unique campus features include Newman Lake, a body of water in the Lake Area next to Greek Row and Sonner Hall, and the Edith J. Carrier Arboretum, a 125-acre urban botanical preserve in Harrisonburg and on campus. The arboretum combines naturalized botanical gardens (33 acres) and forest (92 acres), and is Virginia's only arboretum on a public university campus.\n\nThe original, historic \"Bluestone\" side of campus is on South Main Street (also known as U.S. Route 11, and historically as \"The Valley Pike\"). Since the late 1990s the campus has expanded both east and west of the Bluestone area. To the east, across Interstate 81, the expansion has included The College of Integrated Science and Technology (CISAT), the University Recreation Center (UREC), the Festival Conference and Student Center, the Leeolou Alumni Center, several residence halls, the Chemistry and Physics Building, and University Park, which opened in 2012 off Port Republic Road, combining recreational and varsity athletic fields. The Rose Library, completed in August 2008, serves as a repository of science and technical material.\n\nSeveral new campus construction projects were included in Governor Tim Kaine's $1.65 billion higher education bond package. Kaine's proposal designated more than $96 million for JMU projects. Among the projects included were the construction of a new biotechnology building, Centennial Hall ($44.8 million), and the renovation and expansion of Duke Hall ($43.4 million). The proposal also included $8.6 million as the final installment payment for the purchase of Rockingham Memorial Hospital. Beginning in 2002 JMU began receiving state and private funding to construct a state-of-the-art performing arts complex. The facility is opposite Wilson Hall across South Main Street, and visually completes the Main Quad. It was named the Forbes Center for the Performing Arts in honor of Bruce and Lois Forbes, who gave $5 million to the project. The wing of The Forbes Center dedicated to theater and dance is named the Dorothy Thomasson Estes Center for Theatre and Dance in honor of a $2.5 million gift by the husband of Dorothy Estes. The wing dedicated to music is named the Shirley Hanson Roberts Center for Music Performance in honor of a multi-million dollar gift from the husband of Shirley Roberts. The entire PAC was built at a total cost exceeding $92 million, and opened in June 2010 to house academic offices and performances by the Schools of Theatre, Dance and Music, and the administrative offices of the College of Visual and Performing Arts.\n\nWilson Hall is the centerpiece of the university's main quadrangle. It contains an auditorium, administrative offices, and the Community Service Learning Office. The building's cupola has been featured on the university logo, letterhead, and other university stationery and postcards. Completed in 1931, the building was named after President Woodrow Wilson, who was born in nearby Staunton, Virginia.\n\nBus service around campus and the city is provided by the Harrisonburg Department of Public Transportation.\n\nThe \"Princeton Review\" also recognized James Madison as one of 81 schools in America \"with a conscience\", and in the latest year ranked JMU second in the nation behind only the University of Virginia in the number of Peace Corps volunteers it sent from its student body among \"medium-sized\" universities. And in 2010, the food at JMU was ranked third in the United States. In 2011 the student body was ranked 20th \"happiest in the entire nation\" by \"Newsweek\" and \"The Daily Beast\". These rankings take into consideration the surrounding area's activities, academics, as well as the social scene on campus.\n\nThe school has 35 residence halls, ten of which serve as sorority houses. While most residence halls are only for housing, several halls also provide auxiliary services like computer labs and study lounges. All freshmen must live on campus, and a large portion of JMU's on-campus housing is set aside for incoming students. Consequently, most upperclassmen and graduate students live off campus. Continuing students who wish to live on campus must re-apply for housing each year. While occasional exceptions are granted, generally freshmen are not granted on-campus parking permits. Some JMU halls are set-aside as specialized living and learning residential communities. Shenandoah Hall is devoted as an Honors residential experience, Chesapeake Hall is for pre-professional health disciplines, Gifford Hall includes the Roop Learning Community for future teachers, and Wayland Hall is reserved for majors in the art disciplines.\n\nJames Madison University has over 350 clubs and organizations for students to choose from. The goal is to provide students with a unique experience that will help them to grow in community and in engagement outside of the classroom.\n\nThe JMU Student Government Association (SGA) was founded in 1915 and stood as the first organization on campus. Their goal was to become an organization whose role was to be the voice for the JMU student population and advocate on behalf of the students to the administration and the rest of the community.\n\nSGA consists of two governing bodies, the Executive Council and the Student Senate. The Executive Council consists of the Student Body President, Student Body Vice President, and SGA Treasurer, positions that are elected by the JMU Student Body each academic year. The fourth member of the Executive Council is the Speaker of the Senate who is voted on by the Student Senate. Meanwhile, the Senate consists of Academic Senators and Class Council members who form the various committees within the Senate.\n\nSGA can be attributed to many of the traditions known to JMU, such as Homecoming's Purple Out, Mr. and Ms. Madison, Ring Premiere, the Annual Tree Lighting, the Big Event, and SafeRides. They also vote on Front End Budgeted (FEB) organizational budgets each year as well as allocate contingency funds to other organizations throughout the school year. In 2015, the organization celebrated its 100th year since being founded.\n\nJames Madison University has the largest collegiate marching band in the nation, with 535 members as of Fall 2018. Nicknamed \"Virginia's Finest\", the Marching Royal Dukes have performed at venues such as the inaugurations of Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, the NFC title game between Washington and Dallas in 1983, Bands of America Grand National Championships in 1988 and 1991. The band has made four appearances in the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, first in 2001, again in 2008, 2013 and most recently in 2018. In the past decade, the band has taken trips to Europe during the school's winter break, featuring Athens, Dublin, Monaco, London, and Rome. During their most recent trip to Europe, the MRDs participated in the 2015 Italian New Year's Day Parade in the Vatican.\n\nThe University Program Board (UPB) puts on large-scale events at JMU, including concerts and themed alternative night-out events like Late Night Breakfast.\n\nThe JMU Student Ambassadors work alongside the Admissions Office to offer student-led tours for prospective students. While these positions are not paid, there is an extensive selection process to become a member.\n\n\"The Breeze\" is a student-run newspaper serving James Madison University since 1922. Since then, the newspaper has provided news and information to the university community. \"The Breeze\" publishes 7,000 copies every Thursday and maintains an online website, mobile app and a Twitter and Facebook page. \"The Breeze\" publishes local news, a culture section, sports and an opinion section during the academic year. \"The Breeze\" has been nominated and won numerous awards during its existence including a 2012 Online Pacemaker Award, 2012 VPA award for Best in Show for a Non-Daily News Presentation, and a 2012 VPA sweepstakes award. \"The Breeze\" is also known to all JMU alumni and current students for having the long-standing tradition of publishing Darts & Pats.\n\nThe James Madison Speech Team has been recognized by AFA-NIET as one of the top 20 intercollegiate speech teams in the nation. JMU Forensics is the only program in the nation directed by two recipients of AFA's most respected coaching awards: Distinguished Service and Outstanding New Coach.\n\nJMU is home to 9 different a cappella ensembles: four all-female, three all-male, and two co-educational groups. These groups are nationally recognized, with many of the groups being featured on the Best of College A Cappella (BOCA) yearly compilation albums. Several of the groups, such as Note-oriety and The Overtones, have gone \"viral\" for their music videos, \"Pretty Hurts\" and \"Say Love\", respectively. Note-oriety has also performed at the White House in Washington, D.C.\n\nThe JMU Men's and Women's Club Soccer Teams are two of the most decorated club organizations in JMU school history. The men's program has an extensive tradition of winning, most notably National Championships in 1999, 2000 & 2009. Similarly, the women have won National Championships in 2009 & 2012. Both the men's and women's teams are involved in campus philanthropy, including annual community fundraisers, as well as responsibility for the upkeep of roadways through the Adopt-a-Highway program.\n\nThe JMU Men's Ultimate team, the Flying Hellfish, was founded in 1997. The team is named after the Simpsons episode 22, season 7, \"Raging Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in 'The Curse of the Flying Hellfish'\" Since 2005, the team has hosted an annual tournament known as \"The Hellfish Bonanza,\" which attracts between 12 and 16 teams from across the east coast. Several current and former Hellfish play Ultimate professionally for Major League Ultimate's Washington DC Current and the American Ultimate Disc League's DC Breeze.\n\nLike all public universities in Virginia, James Madison is governed by a Board of Visitors appointed by the Governor of Virginia. In addition to the 15 members appointed by the governor, the speaker of the Faculty Senate and an elected student representative serve as representatives for the faculty and the student body respectively. The appointed members serve for a maximum of two consecutive four-year terms, while the student representative is limited to two one-year terms. The faculty representative serves for as long as he or she remains the speaker of the JMU Faculty Senate. Some appointed members of note include former presidential candidate Carly Fiorina and former first lady of Virginia, Susan Allen.\n\nJonathan R. Alger is the sixth and current president of the university. Before being named president, Alger served as the senior vice president and counsel at Rutgers University.\n\nBULLET::::- Julian Ashby Burruss (1908–1919)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Page Duke (1919–1949)\nBULLET::::- G. Tyler Miller (1949–1971)\nBULLET::::- Ronald E. Carrier (1971–1998)\nBULLET::::- Linwood H. Rose (1999–2012)\n\nJames Madison University's athletic teams are known as the \"Dukes.\" An English bulldog, with crown and cape, and the Duke Dog, a gray bulldog costume in a purple cape and crown, serve as the school's mascot. The \"Dukes\" nickname is in honor of Samuel Page Duke, the university's second president. The school colors are royal purple and gold. Madison competes in the NCAA's Division I in the Colonial Athletic Association and the Eastern College Athletic Conference.\n\nIn football, they are in the NCAA's Football Championship Subdivision. Over 415 varsity athletes compete in football, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's soccer, men's and women's tennis, women's swimming and diving, women's volleyball, baseball, women's lacrosse, field hockey, men's and women's golf, women's cross country and track and field, and softball. James Madison's two national championships are tied for third most national titles by a college or university in Virginia. James Madison's baseball team advanced to the College World Series in 1983, becoming the first Virginia school to do so. The JMU women's field hockey team won the university's first national title in 1994. JMU football won the NCAA Division I-AA national title in 2004, with a 13–2 record, and in 2016 with a 14-1 record going undefeated in the FCS. They are the only team in history to win the title after playing four straight road playoff games. Since 2004, the JMU football team has appeared in the playoffs in 2006, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018.\n\nJames Madison University invested heavily in new athletic facilities throughout the tenure of President Linwood Rose. JMU built a new multimillion-dollar baseball and softball field complex that opened in 2010. Additionally, after the last football game of 2009, the university began an expansion of Bridgeforth Stadium that increased seating capacity to approximately 25,000. Construction was completed in time for the 2011 football season.\n\nIn 2012, the James Madison women's basketball team won a program record 29 games, and advanced to the WNIT National Championship game, where it lost to Oklahoma State University. The Lady Dukes defeated Wake Forest, Davidson College, Virginia, South Florida and Syracuse prior to falling to Oklahoma State. In 2013, head coach Kenny Brooks led his team back to the WNIT defeating NC A&T, NC State, and Fordham before falling to Florida in the tournament's quarterfinals. In 2014, the Lady Dukes posted an overall 29–6 record that culminated with an 85–69 loss to Texas A&M University in the NCAA Championship Round of 32. This marked the ninth consecutive year that the Lady Dukes participated in postseason play and the program's ninth consecutive season with 20 victories, a school record.\n\nIn 2013, James Madison University's men's basketball team won the CAA championship title for the first time since 1994. The Dukes then won their first NCAA tournament game in 30 years, defeating Long Island University-Brooklyn. The Dukes fell to Indiana in the second round, 83-62, finishing the season with a 21–15 record.\n\nJames Madison University is home to the John C. Wells Planetarium. The planetarium first opened at JMU in 1956 under the direction of Dr. John C. Wells, head of the Physics Department. The facility was then moved to Miller Hall and renovated in 1975, later named in honor of Wells on the occasion of his retirement in 1980.\n\nThe planetarium seats 72 individuals within a 30-ft dome. It features a GOTO Chronos star projector together with Evans & Sutherland Digistar 5 digital projectors. The John C. Wells Planetarium also employs students enrolled at James Madison University to operate the system and host shows to the public.\n\nBULLET::::- Late 1940s: James Madison University, then Madison College, purchased its first planetarium to be installed in the attic of Burruss Hall\nBULLET::::- 1956: Planetarium first installed on JMU's campus by Dr. John C. Wells, who was a professor in the JMU Physics Department (1947–1988), Department Head (1956–1974), and Planetarium Curator (1979–1988). It was placed in the attic of Burruss Hall during the fall semester. The cost of the installation was $500 for the Spitz Model A star projector, and about $850 for the 20-ft fabric dome. Dr. John C. Wells built the console at the cost of approximately $100. Usage was mainly for school groups and college classes.\nBULLET::::- 1975: Moved to Miller Hall, where it is still currently located. A Goto II star projector replaced the obsolete equipment in Burruss, manufactured in Japan and installed at a cost of $47,000 by Planetariums Unlimited, a branch of Viewlex Audio-Visual, Inc. The cost of $47,000 was considerably lower than the other two bids offered by Minolta and Spitz because Viewlex was preparing to cease marketing Goto planetarium projectors in the country. Spitz is now the U.S. Goto representative. The old Spitz Model A, the dome, and console were given to the Augusta County School Division in hopes that it would be installed at the county educational center at Fishersville, VA.\nBULLET::::- 1979: Dr. John Wells retired from the Physics Department June 30, 1979, continuing to work at the Planetarium until 1980.\nBULLET::::- 1980: Planetarium is officially named after Dr. Wells\nBULLET::::- 2005: Renovations made to the Planetarium; closed to the public for the following three years (3-year Hiatus)\nBULLET::::- 2008: Renovations complete; Planetarium opened to the public, Rededicated to Dr. Wells due to his death in 2005. A Digistar 3 full-dome projector system was installed alongside GOTO, which allowed for full-dome movies in conjunction with a traditional star talk about the constellations.\nBULLET::::- Summer 2013: Evans & Sutherland Digistar 5 ultra-high definition digital projection system is added to the Planetarium.\n\nIn the early years of the Miller Hall Planetarium, not yet named after Dr. John Wells, all laboratories in the General Studies astronomy course met in the planetarium as well as other astronomy classes such as \"Controversies in Astronomy\" and \"Planetary Astronomy\". As the Planetarium grew older, it began scheduling astronomy instruction for off-campus groups. The planetarium also hosts regular public shows and special events such as Starry Nights Harrisonburg, Space Explorers Camp, and Bad Science Movie Nights as well.\n"}
{"id": "16082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16082", "title": "Jericho", "text": "Jericho\n\nJericho (; ' ; ') is a Palestinian city in the West Bank. It is located in the Jordan Valley, with the Jordan River to the east and Jerusalem to the west. It is the administrative seat of the Jericho Governorate, and is governed by the Palestinian National Authority. In 2007, it had a population of 18,346. The city was occupied by Jordan from 1949 to 1967, and has been held under Israeli occupation since 1967; administrative control was handed over to the Palestinian Authority in 1994. It is believed to be one of the oldest inhabited cities in the world and the city with the oldest known protective wall in the world. It was thought to have the oldest stone tower in the world as well, but excavations at Tell Qaramel in Syria have discovered stone towers that are even older.\n\nArchaeologists have unearthed the remains of more than 20 successive settlements in Jericho, the first of which dates back 11,000 years (9000 BCE), almost to the very beginning of the Holocene epoch of the Earth's history.\n\nCopious springs in and around the city have attracted human habitation for thousands of years. Jericho is described in the Hebrew Bible as the \"city of palm trees\".\n\nJericho's name in Hebrew, , is generally thought to derive from the Canaanite word \"reaẖ\" (\"fragrant\"), but other theories hold that it originates in the Canaanite word for \"moon\" (\"Yareaẖ\") or the name of the lunar deity Yarikh for whom the city was an early centre of worship.\n\nJericho's Arabic name, , means \"fragrant\" and also has its roots in Canaanite \"Reaẖ\".\n\nThe first excavations of the site were made by Charles Warren in 1868. Ernst Sellin and Carl Watzinger excavated Tell es-Sultan and Tulul Abu el-'Alayiq between 1907 and 1909, and in 1911, and John Garstang excavated between 1930 and 1936. Extensive investigations using more modern techniques were made by Kathleen Kenyon between 1952 and 1958. Lorenzo Nigro and Nicolò Marchetti conducted excavations in 1997–2000. Since 2009 the Italian-Palestinian archaeological project of excavation and restoration was resumed by Rome \"La Sapienza\" University and Palestinian MOTA-DACH under the direction of Lorenzo Nigro and Hamdan Taha, and Jehad Yasine since 2015. The Italian-Palestinian Expedition carried out 13 seasons in 20 years (1997–2017), with some major discoveries, like Tower A1 in the Middle Bronze Age southern Lower Town and Palace G on the eastern flanks of the Spring Hill overlooking the Spring of 'Ain es-Sultan dating from Early Bronze III.\n\nThe earliest settlement was located at the present-day Tell es-Sultan (or Sultan's Hill), a couple of kilometers from the current city. In both Arabic and Hebrew, \"tell\" means \"mound\" – consecutive layers of habitation built up a mound over time, as is common for ancient settlements in the Middle East and Anatolia. Jericho is the type site for the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) and Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) periods.\n\nEpipaleolithic construction at the site appears to predate the invention of agriculture, with the construction of Natufian culture structures beginning earlier than 9000 BCE, the beginning of the Holocene epoch in geologic history.\n\nJericho has evidence of settlement dating back to 10,000 BCE. During the Younger Dryas period of cold and drought, permanent habitation of any one location was impossible. However, the Ein es-Sultan spring at what would become Jericho was a popular camping ground for Natufian hunter-gatherer groups, who left a scattering of crescent-shaped microlith tools behind them. Around 9600 BCE, the droughts and cold of the Younger Dryas stadial had come to an end, making it possible for Natufian groups to extend the duration of their stay, eventually leading to year-round habitation and permanent settlement.\n\nThe Pre-Pottery Neolithic at Jericho is divided in Pre-Pottery Neolithic A and Pre-Pottery Neolithic B.\n\nThe first permanent settlement on the site of Jericho developed near the Ein es-Sultan spring between 9,500 and 9000 BCE. As the world warmed up, a new culture based on agriculture and sedentary dwelling emerged, which archaeologists have termed \"Pre-Pottery Neolithic A\" (abbreviated as PPNA). Its cultures lacked pottery, but featured the following:\nBULLET::::- small circular dwellings\nBULLET::::- burial of the dead under the floor of buildings\nBULLET::::- reliance on hunting of wild game\nBULLET::::- cultivation of wild or domestic cereals\nAt Jericho, circular dwellings were built of clay and straw bricks left to dry in the sun, which were plastered together with a mud mortar. Each house measured about across, and was roofed with mud-smeared brush. Hearths were located within and outside the homes.\n\nBy about 9400 BCE, the town had grown to more than 70 modest dwellings.\nThe Pre-Sultan\nis sometimes called Sultanian. The site is a settlement surrounded by a massive stone wall over high and wide at the base (see Wall of Jericho), inside of which stood a stone tower (see Tower of Jericho), over high, containing an internal staircase with 22 stone steps and placed in the centre of the west side of the tell. This tower and the even older ones excavated at Tell Qaramel in Syria are the oldest ever to be discovered. The wall may have served as a defence against flood-water, with the tower used for ceremonial purposes. The wall and tower were built during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) period around 8000 BCE. For the tower, carbon dates published in 1981 and 1983 indicate that it was built around 8300 BCE and stayed in use until c. 7800 BCE. The wall and tower would have taken a hundred men more than a hundred days to construct, thus suggesting some kind of social organization. The town contained round mud-brick houses, yet no street planning. The identity and number of the inhabitants of Jericho during the PPNA period is still under debate, with estimates going as high as 2,000–3,000, and as low as 200–300. It is known that this population had domesticated emmer wheat, barley and pulses and hunted wild animals.\n\nThe following are Pre-Pottery Neolithic B cultural features, for the period from 7220 to 5850 BCE (though carbon-14-dates are few and early):\nBULLET::::- Expanded range of domesticated plants\nBULLET::::- Possible domestication of sheep\nBULLET::::- Apparent cult involving the preservation of human skulls, with facial features reconstructed using plaster, and eyes set with shells in some cases\nAfter a few centuries, the first settlement was abandoned. After the PPNA settlement phase, there was a settlement hiatus of several centuries, then the PPNB settlement was founded on the eroded surface of the tell. This second settlement, established in 6800 BCE, perhaps represents the work of an invading people who absorbed the original inhabitants into their dominant culture. Artifacts dating from this period include ten plastered human skulls, painted so as to reconstitute the individuals' features. These represent either teraphim or the first example of portraiture in art history, and it is thought that they were kept in people's homes while the bodies were buried.\n\nThe architecture consisted of rectilinear buildings made of mudbricks on stone foundations. The mudbricks were loaf-shaped with deep thumb prints to facilitate bonding. No building has been excavated in its entirety. Normally, several rooms cluster around a central courtyard. There is one big room ( and ) with internal divisions; the rest are small, presumably used for storage. The rooms have red or pinkish terrazzo-floors made of lime. Some impressions of mats made of reeds or rushes have been preserved. The courtyards have clay floors.\n\nKathleen Kenyon interpreted one building as a shrine. It contained a niche in the wall. A chipped pillar of volcanic stone that was found nearby might have fitted into this niche.\n\nThe dead were buried under the floors or in the rubble fill of abandoned buildings. There are several collective burials. Not all the skeletons are completely articulated, which may point to a time of exposure before burial. A skull cache contained seven skulls. The jaws were removed and the faces covered with plaster; cowries were used as eyes. A total of ten skulls were found. Modelled skulls were found in Tell Ramad and Beisamoun as well.\n\nOther finds included flints, such as arrowheads (tanged or side-notched), finely denticulated sickle-blades, burins, scrapers, a few tranchet axes, obsidian, and green obsidian from an unknown source. There were also querns, hammerstones, and a few ground-stone axes made of greenstone. Other items discovered included dishes and bowls carved from soft limestone, spindle whorls made of stone and possible loom weights, spatulae and drills, stylised anthropomorphic plaster figures, almost life-size, anthropomorphic and theriomorphic clay figurines, as well as shell and malachite beads.\n\nIn the late 4th millennium BCE, Jericho was occupied during Neolithic 2 and the general character of the remains on the site link it culturally with Neolithic 2 (or PPNB) sites in the West Syrian and Middle Euphrates groups. This link is established by the presence of rectilinear mud-brick buildings and plaster floors that are characteristic of the age.\n\nA succession of settlements followed from 4500 BCE onward.\n\nIn the Early Bronze IIIA (c. 2700 – 2500/2450 BCE; Sultan IIIC1), the settlement reached its largest extent around 2600 BCE.\n\nDuring Early Bronze IIIB (c. 2500/2450–2350 BCE; Sultan IIIC2) there was a Palace G on Spring Hill and city walls.\n\nJericho was continually occupied into the Middle Bronze Age; it was destroyed in the Late Bronze Age, after which it no longer served as an urban centre. The city was surrounded by extensive defensive walls strengthened with rectangular towers, and possessed an extensive cemetery with vertical shaft-tombs and underground burial chambers; the elaborate funeral offerings in some of these may reflect the emergence of local kings.\n\nDuring the Middle Bronze Age, Jericho was a small prominent city of the Canaan region, reaching its greatest Bronze Age extent in the period from 1700 to 1550 BCE. It seems to have reflected the greater urbanization in the area at that time, and has been linked to the rise of the Maryannu, a class of chariot-using aristocrats linked to the rise of the Mitannite state to the north. Kathleen Kenyon reported \"the Middle Bronze Age is perhaps the most prosperous in the whole history of Kna'an. ... The defenses ... belong to a fairly advanced date in that period\" and there was \"a massive stone revetment ... part of a complex system\" of defenses. Bronze Age Jericho fell in the 16th century at the end of the Middle Bronze Age, the calibrated carbon remains from its City-IV destruction layer dating to 1617–1530 BCE. Notably this carbon dating 1573 BCE confirmed the accuracy of the stratigraphical dating 1550 by Kenyon.\n\nThere was evidence of a small settlement in the Late Bronze Age ( 1400s BCE) on the site, but erosion and destruction from previous excavations have erased significant parts of this layer.\n\nTell es-Sultan remained unoccupied from the end of the 15th to the 10th–9th centuries BCE, when the city was rebuilt. Of this new city not much more remains than a four-room house on the eastern slope. By the 7th century, Jericho had become an extensive town, but this settlement was destroyed in the Babylonian conquest of Judah in the late 6th century.\n\nAfter the destruction of the Judahite city by the Babylonians in the late 6th century, whatever was rebuilt in the Persian period as part of the Restoration after the Babylonian captivity, left only very few remains. The tell was abandoned as a place of settlement not long after this period. During the Persian through Hellenistic periods, there is little in terms of occupation attested throughout the region.\n\nJericho went from being an administrative centre of Yehud Medinata (\"the Province of Judah\") under Persian rule to serving as the private estate of Alexander the Great between 336 and 323 BCE after his conquest of the region. In the middle of the 2nd century BCE Jericho was under Hellenistic rule of the Seleucid Empire, when the Syrian General Bacchides built a number of forts to strengthen the defences of the area around Jericho against the revolt by the Macabees. One of these forts, built at the entrance to Wadi Qelt, was later refortified by Herod the Great, who named it \"Kypros\" after his mother.\n\nAfter the abandonment of the Tell es-Sultan location, the new Jericho of the Late Hellenistic or Hasmonean and Early Roman or Herodian periods, was established as a garden city in the vicinity of the royal estate at Tulul Abu el-'Alayiq and expanded greatly thanks to the intensive exploitation of the springs of the area. The new site consists of a group of low mounds on both banks of Wadi Qelt. The Hasmoneans were a dynasty descending from a priestly group (kohanim) from the tribe of Levi, who ruled over Judea following the success of the Maccabean Revolt until Roman influence over the region brought Herod to claim the Hasmonean throne.\n\nThe rock-cut tombs of a Herodian- and Hasmonean-era cemetery lie in the lowest part of the cliffs between Nuseib al-Aweishireh and Jabal Quruntul in Jericho and were used between 100 BCE and 68 CE.\n\nHerod had to lease back the royal estate at Jericho from Cleopatra, after Mark Antony had given it to her as a gift. After their joint suicide in 30 BCE, Octavian assumed control of the Roman Empire and granted Herod absolute rule over Jericho, as part of the new Herodian domain. Herod's rule oversaw the construction of a hippodrome-theatre (\"Tell es-Samrat\") to entertain his guests and new aqueducts to irrigate the area below the cliffs and reach his winter palaces built at the site of \"Tulul Abu el-Alaiq\" (also written \"'Alayiq\"). In 2008 the Israel Exploration Society published an illustrated volume of Herod's third Jericho palace.\n\nThe dramatic murder of Aristobulus III in a swimming pool at the winter palaces near Jericho, as described by the Roman Jewish historian Josephus, took place during a banquet organized by Herod's Hasmonean mother-in-law. After the construction of the palaces, the city had functioned not only as an agricultural center and as a crossroad, but also as a winter resort for Jerusalem's aristocracy.\n\nHerod was succeeded in Judea by his son, Herod Archelaus, who built a village in his name not far to the north, Archelaïs (modern Khirbet al-Beiyudat), to house workers for his date plantation.\n\nFirst-century Jericho is described in Strabo's \"Geography\" as follows:\n\nThe Christian Gospels state that Jesus of Nazareth passed through Jericho where he healed blind beggars (), and inspired a local chief tax-collector named Zacchaeus to repent of his dishonest practices (). The road between Jerusalem and Jericho is the setting for the Parable of the Good Samaritan.\n\nJohn Wesley, in his New Testament Notes on this section of Luke's Gospel, claimed that \"about twelve thousand priests and Levites dwelt there, who all attended the service of the temple\".\n\nSmith's \"Bible Names Dictionary\" suggests that on the arrival of Jesus and his entourage, \"Jericho was once more 'a city of palms' when our Lord visited it. Here he restored sight to the blind (Matthew 20:30; Mark 10:46; Luke 18:35). Here the descendant of Rahab did not disdain the hospitality of Zaccaeus the publican. Finally, between Jerusalem and Jericho was laid the scene of his story of the good Samaritan.\"\n\nAfter the fall of Jerusalem to Vespasian's armies in the Great Revolt of Judea in 70 CE, Jericho declined rapidly, and by 100 CE it was but a small Roman garrison town. A fort was built there in 130 and played a role in putting down the Bar Kochba revolt in 133.\n\nAccounts of Jericho by a Christian pilgrim are given in 333. Shortly thereafter the built-up area of the town was abandoned and a Byzantine Jericho, \"Ericha\", was built 1600 metres (1 mi) to the east, on which the modern town is centered. Christianity took hold in the city during the Byzantine era and the area was heavily populated. A number of monasteries and churches were built, including St George of Koziba in 340 AD and a domed church dedicated to Saint Eliseus. At least two synagogues were also built in the 6th century CE. The monasteries were abandoned after the Persian invasion of 614.\n\nThe Jericho Synagogue in the Royal Maccabean winter palace at Jericho dates from 70–50 BCE.\n\nA synagogue dating to the late 6th or early 7th century CE was discovered in Jericho in 1936, and was named Shalom Al Yisrael Synagogue, or \"peace unto Israel\", after the central Hebrew motto in its mosaic floor. It was controlled by Israel after the Six Day War, but after the handover to Palestinian Authority control per the Oslo Accords, it has been a source of conflict. On the night of 12 October 2000, the synagogue was vandalized by Palestinians who burned holy books and relics and damaged the mosaic.\n\nThe Na'aran synagogue, another Byzantine era construction, was discovered on the northern outskirts of Jericho in 1918. While less is known of it than Shalom Al Yisrael, it has a larger mosaic and is in similar condition.\n\nJericho, by then named \"Ariha\" in Arabic variation, became part of Jund Filastin (\"Military District of Palestine\"), part of the larger province of Bilad al-Sham. The Arab Muslim historian Musa b. 'Uqba (died 758) recorded that caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab exiled the Jews and Christians of Khaybar to Jericho (and Tayma).\n\nBy 659, that district had come under the control of Mu'awiya, founder of the Umayyad dynasty. That year, an earthquake destroyed Jericho. A decade later, the pilgrim Arculf visited Jericho and found it in ruins, all its \"miserable Canaanite\" inhabitants now dispersed in shanty towns around the Dead Sea shore.\n\nA palatial complex long attributed to the tenth Umayyad caliph, Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik (r. 724–743) and thus known as Hisham's Palace, is located at Khirbet al-Mafjar, about 1.5 kilometres (1 mi) north of Tell es-Sultan. This \"desert castle\" or \"qasr\" was more likely built by Caliph Walid ibn Yazid (r. 743–744), who was assassinated before he could complete the construction. The remains of two mosques, a courtyard, mosaics, and other items can still be seen \"in situ\" today. The unfinished structure was largely destroyed in an earthquake in 747.\n\nUmayyad rule ended in 750 and was followed by the Arab caliphates of the Abbasid and Fatimid dynasties. Irrigated agriculture was developed under Islamic rule, reaffirming Jericho's reputation as a fertile \"City of the Palms\". Al-Maqdisi, the Arab geographer, wrote in 985 that \"the water of Jericho is held to be the highest and best in all Islam. Bananas are plentiful, also dates and flowers of fragrant odor\". Jericho is also referred to by him as one of the principal cities of Jund Filastin.\n\nThe city flourished until 1071 with the invasion of the Seljuk Turks, followed by the upheavals of the Crusades.\n\nIn 1179, the Crusaders rebuilt the Monastery of St. George of Koziba, at its original site 10 kilometres (6 mi) from the center of town. They also built another two churches and a monastery dedicated to John the Baptist, and are credited with introducing sugarcane production to the city. The site of Tawahin es-Sukkar (lit. \"sugar mills\") holds remains of a Crusader sugar production facility. In 1187, the Crusaders were evicted by the Ayyubid forces of Saladin after their victory in the Battle of Hattin, and the town slowly went into decline.\n\nIn 1226, Arab geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi said of Jericho, \"it has many palm trees, also sugarcane in quantities, and bananas. The best of all the sugar in the \"Ghaur\" land is made here.\" In the 14th century, Abu al-Fida writes there are sulfur mines in Jericho, \"the only ones in Palestine\".\n\nJericho was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire in 1517 with all of Palestine, and in 1545 a revenue of 19,000 Akçe was recorded, destined for the new Waqf for the Haseki Sultan Imaret of Jerusalem. The villagers processed indigo as one source of revenue, using a cauldron specifically for this purpose that was loaned to them by the Ottoman authorities in Jerusalem. Later that century, the Jericho revenues no longer went to the Haseki Sultan Imaret.\n\nIn 1596 Jericho appeared in the tax registers under the name of \"Riha\", being in the \"nahiya\" of Al-Quds in the \"liwa\" of Al-Quds. It had a population of 51 household, all Muslims. They paid a fixed tax-rate of 33,3% on agricultural products, including wheat, barley, summer crops, vineyards and fruit trees, goats and beehives, water buffaloes, in addition to occasional revenues; a total of 40,000 Akçe. All of the revenue still went to a Waqf.\n\nThe French traveller Laurent d'Arvieux described the city in 1659 as \"now desolate, and consists only of about fifty poor houses, in bad condition ... The plain around is extremely fertile; the soil is middling fat; but it is watered by several rivulets, which flow into the Jordan. Notwithstanding these advantages only the gardens adjacent to the town are cultivated.\"\n\nIn the 19th century, European scholars, archaeologists and missionaries visited often. At the time it was an oasis in a poor state, similar to other regions in the plains and deserts. Edward Robinson (1838) reported 50 families, which were about 200 people, Titus Tobler (1854) reported some 30 poor huts, whose residents paid a total of 3611 Kuruş in tax. Abraham Samuel Herschberg (1858–1943) also reported after his 1899–1900 travels in the region of some 30 poor huts and 300 residents. At that time, Jericho was the residence of the region's Turkish governor. The main water sources for the village were a spring called \"Ein al-Sultan\", lit. \"Sultan's Spring\", in Arabic and \"Ein Elisha\", lit. \"Elisha Spring\", in Hebrew, and springs in Wadi Qelt.\n\nJ. S. Buckingham (1786–1855) describes in his 1822 book how the male villagers of er-Riha, although nominally sedentary, engaged in Bedouin-style raiding, or \"ghazzu\": the little land cultivation he observed was done by women and children, while men spent most of their time riding through the plains and engaging in \"robbery and plunder\", their main and most profitable activity.\n\nAn Ottoman village list from around 1870 showed that \"Riha\", Jericho, had 36 houses and a population of 105, though the population count included men, only.\n\nThe first excavation at Tell es-Sultan was carried out in 1867.\n\nThe Greek Orthodox monasteries of Monastery of St. George of Choziba and John the Baptist were refounded and completed in 1901 and 1904, respectively.\n\nDuring World War II The British built fortresses in Jericho with the help of the Jewish company Solel Boneh, and bridges were rigged with explosives in preparation for a possible invasion by German allied forces. After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War I, Jericho came under the rule of the Mandatory Palestine.\n\nAccording to the 1922 census of Palestine, Jericho had 1,029 inhabitants, consisting of 931 Muslims, 6 Jews and 92 Christians; where the Christians were 45 Orthodox, 12 Roman Catholics, 13 Greek Catholics (Melchites), 6 Syrian Catholic, 11 Armenians, 4 Copts and 1 Church of England.\n\nIn 1927, an earthquake struck and affected Jericho and other cities. Around 300 people died, but by the 1931 census the population had increased to 1,693 inhabitants, in 347 houses.\n\nIn the 1945 statistics, the Jericho's population was 3,010; 2,570 Muslims, 170 Jews, 260 Christians and 10 classified as \"other\", and it had jurisdiction over 37,481 dunams of land. Of this, 948 dunams were used for citrus and bananas, 5,873 dunams were for plantations and irrigable land, 9,141 for cereals, while a total of 38 dunams were urban, built-up areas.\n\nJericho came under Jordanian control after the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. The Jericho Conference, organized by King Abdullah and attended by over 2,000 Palestinian delegates in 1948 proclaimed \"His Majesty Abdullah as King of all Palestine\" and called for \"the unification of Palestine and Transjordan as a step toward full Arab unity\". In mid-1950, Jordan formally annexed the West Bank and Jericho residents, like other residents of West Bank localities became Jordanian citizens.\n\nIn 1961, the population of Jericho was 10,166, of whom 935 were Christian, the rest Muslim.\n\nJericho has been occupied by Israel since the Six-Day War of 1967 along with the rest of the West Bank. It was the first city handed over to Palestinian Authority control in accordance with the Oslo Accords. The limited Palestinian self-rule of Jericho was agreed on in the Gaza–Jericho Agreement of 4 May 1994. Part of the agreement was a \"Protocol on Economic Relations\", signed on 29 April 1994. The city is in an enclave of the Jordan Valley that is in Area A of the West Bank, while the surrounding area is designated as being in Area C under full Israeli military control. Four roadblocks encircle the enclave, restricting Jericho's Palestinian population's movement through the West Bank.\n\nIn response to the 2001 Second Intifada and suicide bombings, Jericho was re-occupied by Israeli troops. A deep trench was built around a large part of the city to control Palestinian traffic to and from Jericho.\n\nOn 14 March 2006, the Israel Defense Forces launched Operation Bringing Home the Goods, raiding a Jericho prison to capture the PFLP general secretary, Ahmad Sa'adat, and five other prisoners, all of whom had been charged with assassinating the Israeli tourist minister Rehavam Zeevi in 2001.\n\nAfter Hamas assaulted a neighborhood in Gaza mostly populated by the Fatah-aligned Hilles clan, in response to their attack that killed six Hamas members, the Hilles clan was relocated to Jericho on 4 August 2008.\n\nIn 2009, Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Salam Fayyad and U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs David Johnson inaugurated the Presidential Guard Training Center in Jericho, a $9.1 million training facility for Palestinian Authority security forces built with U.S. funding.\n\nThe city's current mayor is Hassan Saleh, a former lawyer.\n\nJericho is located below sea level in an oasis in Wadi Qelt in the Jordan Valley, which makes it the lowest city in the world. The nearby spring of \"Ein es-Sultan\" produces 3.8 m (1,000 gallons) of water per minute, irrigating some through multiple channels and feeding into the Jordan River, away. Annual rainfall is , mostly concentrated in the winter months and into early spring. The average temperature is in January and in July.\n\nAccording to the Köppen climate classification, Jericho has a hot desert climate (\"BWh\"). Rich alluvial soil and abundant spring water have made Jericho an attractive place for settlement.\n\nIn the first census carried out by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), in 1997, Jericho's population was 14,674. Palestinian refugees constituted a significant 43.6% of the residents or 6,393 people. The gender make-up of the city was 51% male and 49% female. Jericho has a young population, with nearly half (49.2%) of the inhabitants being under the age of 20. People between the ages of 20 and 44 made up 36.2% of the population, 10.7% between the ages of 45 and 64, and 3.6% were over the age of 64. In the 2007 census by the PCBS, Jericho had a population of 18,346.\n\nDemographics have varied widely depending on the dominant ethnic group and rule in the region over the past three thousand years. In a 1945 land and population survey by Sami Hadawi, 3,010 inhabitants is the figure given for Jericho, of which 94% (2840) were Arab and 6% (170) were Jews.\nToday, the overwhelming majority of the population is Muslim. The Christian community makes up around 1% of the population. A large community of black Palestinians is present in Jericho.\n\nIn 1994, Israel and the Palestinians signed an economic accord that enabled Palestinians in Jericho to open banks, collect taxes and engage in export and import in preparation for self-rule.\n\nIn 2010, Jericho, with its proximity to the Dead Sea, was declared the most popular destination among Palestinian tourists.\n\nIn 1998, a $150 million casino-hotel was built in Jericho with the backing of Yasser Arafat. The casino is now closed, though the hotel on the premises is open for guests.\n\nChristian tourism is one of Jericho's primary sources of income. There are several major Christian pilgrimage sites in and around Jericho.\nBULLET::::- Mount of Temptation, topped by a Greek Orthodox monastery with panoramic views of the region. A cable car runs up to the monastery.\nBULLET::::- the Spring of Elisha, as the Ein es-Sultan spring is known to Jews and Christians\nBULLET::::- the Sycamore tree of Zacchaeus (two such trees are venerated at different locations as being related to the original tree mentioned in the Gospels)\nBULLET::::- the nearby traditional site of the baptism of Jesus at Qasr el-Yahud/Al-Maghtas on the Jordan River\nBULLET::::- the Monastery of Saint Gerasimos known as Deir Hajla; in the Jordan Valley near Jericho\nBULLET::::- the Saint George Monastery in Wadi Qelt above Jericho.\n\nThe archaeological sites in and near Jericho have a high potential for attracting tourists. These are dealt with in detail in the History and archaeology paragraph:\nBULLET::::- the Stone, Bronze and Iron Age cities at Tell es-Sultan\nBULLET::::- the Hasmonean and Herodian winter palaces at Tulul Abu el-'Alayiq\nBULLET::::- the Byzantine-period synagogues at Jericho (Shalom Al Yisrael Synagogue) and Na'aran\nBULLET::::- the Umayyad palace at Khirbet al-Mafjar known as Hisham's Palace\nBULLET::::- the Crusader sugar production facility at Tawahin es-Sukkar (lit. \"sugar mills\")\nBULLET::::- Nabi Musa, the Mamluk and Ottoman shrine dedicated to Moses (\"Prophet Musa\" to the Muslims)\n\nAgriculture is another source of income, with banana groves ringing the city.\n\nThe Jericho Agro-Industrial Park is a public-private enterprise being developed in the Jericho area. Agricultural processing companies are being offered financial concessions to lease plots of land in the park in a bid to boost Jericho's economy.\n\nIn 1925, Christian friars opened a school for 100 pupils that became the Terra Santa School. The city has 22 state schools and a number of private schools.\n\nIn April 2010, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) held a groundbreaking ceremony for the renovation of the Jericho Governmental Hospital. USAID is providing $2.5 million in funding for this project.\n\nThe sports team Hilal Areeha plays association football in the West Bank First Division. They play home games in the 15,000 spectator Jericho International Stadium.\n\nJericho is twinned with:\nBULLET::::- Campinas in São Paulo, Brazil\nBULLET::::- Eger in Hungary\nBULLET::::- Alessandria in Alessandria, Piedmont, Italy\nBULLET::::- Pisa in Pisa, Tuscany, Italy\nBULLET::::- Lærdal in Norway\nBULLET::::- Iaşi in Romania\nBULLET::::- Kragujevac in Serbia\nBULLET::::- Calipatria, California in the USA\nBULLET::::- Musa Alami\n\nJericho was featured in episode 20 of the American TV show \"The Time Tunnel\", \"The Walls Of Jericho\", first aired in 1967.\n\nListed alphabetically by first word, disregarding the article.\nBULLET::::- Ancient underground quarry, Jordan Valley, some 5 km north of Jericho\nBULLET::::- al-Auja, Jericho, a Palestinian village north of Jericho\nBULLET::::- Battle of Jericho, biblical story\nBULLET::::- Cities in the Book of Joshua\nBULLET::::- Hasmonean royal winter palaces, actually Hasmonean and Herodian, at Tulul Abu al-'Alayiq south of Jericho proper\nBULLET::::- History of pottery in Palestine\nBULLET::::- Jawa, Jordan, the oldest proto-urban settlement from Jordan (late 4th millennium BC – Early Bronze Age)\nBULLET::::- Mevo'ot Yericho, Israeli settlement just north of Jericho\nBULLET::::- Wall of Jericho, the Neolithic stone wall, ca. 10,000 years old, excavated at Tell es-Sultan\nBULLET::::- Tower of Jericho, the Neolithic stone tower, c. 10,000 years old, excavated at Tell es-Sultan\n\nBULLET::::- pp. 173, 174, 181, 183, 231, 507;\nBULLET::::- (p. 46ff)\nBULLET::::- Stacey, D. 'Hedonists or pragmatic agriculturalists? Reassessing Hasmonean Jericho', \"Levant\", 38 (2006), 191–202.\n\nBULLET::::- Welcome To Jericho\nBULLET::::- Jericho City (Fact Sheet), Applied Research Institute–Jerusalem, Applied Research Institute–Jerusalem (ARIJ)\nBULLET::::- Jericho City Profile, ARIJ\nBULLET::::- Jericho aerial photo, ARIJ\nBULLET::::- Locality Development Priorities and Needs in Jericho City, ARIJ\nBULLET::::- Jericho Municipality Official Website\nBULLET::::- Survey of Western Palestine, Map 18: IAA, Wikimedia commons\nBULLET::::- Jericho Municipality Official Website Historical site\nBULLET::::- Jericho Cable Car\nBULLET::::- Resources on Biblical Archaeology\nBULLET::::- Jericho: Tel es-Sultan\nBULLET::::- The walls of Jericho fell in 1550 BCE\n"}
{"id": "16083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16083", "title": "Society of Jesus", "text": "Society of Jesus\n\nThe Society of Jesus (SJ; ) is a religious order of the Catholic Church headquartered in Rome. It was founded by Ignatius of Loyola with the approval of Pope Paul III in 1540. The members are called Jesuits (). The society is engaged in evangelization and apostolic ministry in 112 nations. Jesuits work in education, research, and cultural pursuits. Jesuits also give retreats, minister in hospitals and parishes, sponsor direct social ministries, and promote ecumenical dialogue.\n\nSaint Ignatius of Loyola, a Navarre nobleman from the Pyrenees area of northern Spain, founded the society after discerning his spiritual vocation while recovering from a wound sustained in the Battle of Pamplona. He composed the \"Spiritual Exercises\" to help others follow the teachings of Jesus Christ. In 1534, Ignatius and six other young men, including Francis Xavier and Peter Faber, gathered and professed vows of poverty, chastity, and later obedience, including a special vow of obedience to the Pope in matters of mission direction and assignment. Ignatius's plan of the order's organization was approved by Pope Paul III in 1540 by a bull containing the \"Formula of the Institute\".\n\nIgnatius was a nobleman who had a military background, and the members of the society were supposed to accept orders anywhere in the world, where they might be required to live in extreme conditions. Accordingly, the opening lines of the founding document declared that the society was founded for \"whoever desires to serve as a soldier of God to strive especially for the defence and propagation of the faith and for the progress of souls in Christian life and doctrine.\" Jesuits are thus sometimes referred to colloquially as \"God's soldiers\", \"God's marines\", or \"the Company\", which evolved from references to Ignatius' history as a soldier and the society's commitment to accepting orders anywhere and to endure any conditions. The society participated in the Counter-Reformation and, later, in the implementation of the Second Vatican Council.\n\nThe Society of Jesus is consecrated under the patronage of Madonna Della Strada, a title of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and it is led by a Superior General. The headquarters of the society, its General Curia, is in Rome. The historic curia of Ignatius is now part of the \"Collegio del Gesù\" attached to the Church of the Gesù, the Jesuit mother church.\n\nIn 2013, Jorge Mario Bergoglio became the first Jesuit to be elected Pope, taking the name Pope Francis.\n\n+Jesuits in the world — January 2013\n!Region!!Jesuits!! Percentage\nAfricastyle=\"text-align: center;\" 1,509style=\"text-align: center;\" 9%\nSouth Latin Americastyle=\"text-align: center;\" 1,221style=\"text-align: center;\" 7%\nNorth Latin Americastyle=\"text-align: center;\" 1,226style=\"text-align: center;\" 7%\nSouth Asiastyle=\"text-align: center;\" 4,016style=\"text-align: center;\" 23%\nAsia-Pacificstyle=\"text-align: center;\" 1,639style=\"text-align: center;\" 9%\nCentral and East Europestyle=\"text-align: center;\" 1,641style=\"text-align: center;\" 10%\nSouth Europestyle=\"text-align: center;\" 2,027style=\"text-align: center;\" 12%\nWest Europestyle=\"text-align: center;\" 1,541style=\"text-align: center;\" 9%\nNorth Americastyle=\"text-align: center;\" 2,467style=\"text-align: center;\" 14%\n\n, the Jesuits formed the largest single religious order of priests and brothers in the Catholic Church. The Jesuits have experienced a decline in numbers in recent decades. As of 2018 the society had 15,842 members, 11,389 priests and 4,453 Jesuits in formation, which includes brothers and scholastics. This represents a 43.4 percent decline since 1977, when the society had a total membership of 28,038, of which 20,205 were priests. This decline is most pronounced in Europe and the Americas, with relatively modest membership gains occurring in Asia and Africa. According to Patrick Reilly of the \"National Catholic Register\", there seems to be no \"Pope Francis effect\" in counteracting the fall of vocations among the Jesuits. Twenty-eight novices took first vows in the Jesuits in the United States and Haiti in 2019. In September 2019, the general superior of the Jesuits, Arturo Sosa, estimated that by 2034 the number would decrease to about 10,000 Jesuits, with a much younger average age than in 2019, and with a shift away from Europe and into Latin America, Africa, and India.\n\nThe society is divided into 83 provinces along with six independent regions and ten dependent regions. On 1 January 2007, members served in 112 nations on six continents with the largest number in India and the US. Their average age was 57.3 years: 63.4 years for priests, 29.9 years for scholastics, and 65.5 years for brothers.\n\nThe current Superior General of the Jesuits is Arturo Sosa. The society is characterized by its ministries in the fields of missionary work, human rights, social justice and, most notably, higher education. It operates colleges and universities in various countries around the world and is particularly active in the Philippines and India. In the United States the Jesuits have historical ties to 28 colleges and universities and 61 high schools. The degree to which the Jesuits are involved in the administration of each institution varies. As of September 2018, 15 of the 28 Jesuit universities in the US had non-Jesuit lay presidents. According to a 2014 article in \"The Atlantic\", \"the number of Jesuit priests who are active in everyday operations at the schools isn’t nearly as high as it once was\". Worldwide it runs 322 secondary schools and 172 colleges and universities. A typical conception of the mission of a Jesuit school will often contain such concepts as proposing Christ as the model of human life, the pursuit of excellence in teaching and learning, lifelong spiritual and intellectual growth, and training men and women for others.\n\nIgnatius laid out his original vision for the new order in the \"Formula of the Institute of the Society of Jesus\", which is \"the fundamental charter of the order, of which all subsequent official documents were elaborations and to which they had to conform.\" He ensured that his formula was contained in two papal bulls signed by Pope Paul III in 1540 and by Pope Julius III in 1550. The formula expressed the nature, spirituality, community life, and apostolate of the new religious order. Its famous opening statement echoed Ignatius' military background:\nA fresco depicting Ignatius of Loyola receiving the papal bull \"Regimini militantis Ecclesiae\" from Pope Paul III was created after 1743 by Johann Christoph Handke in the Church of Our Lady Of the Snow in Olomouc.\n\nOn 15 August 1534, Ignatius of Loyola (born Íñigo López de Loyola), a Spaniard from the Basque city of Loyola, and six others mostly of Castilian origin, all students at the University of Paris, met in Montmartre outside Paris, in a crypt beneath the church of Saint Denis, now Saint Pierre de Montmartre, to pronounce the religious vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience. Ignatius' six companions were: Francisco Xavier from Navarre (modern Spain), Alfonso Salmeron, Diego Laínez, Nicolás Bobadilla from Castile (modern Spain), Peter Faber from Savoy, and Simão Rodrigues from Portugal. The meeting has been commemorated in the Martyrium of Saint Denis, Montmartre. They called themselves the \"Compañía de Jesús\", and also \"Amigos en El Señor\" or \"Friends in the Lord\", because they felt \"they were placed together by Christ.\" The name \"company\" had echoes of the military (reflecting perhaps Ignatius' background as Captain in the Spanish army) as well as of discipleship (the \"companions\" of Jesus). The Spanish \"company\" would be translated into Latin as \"societas\" like in \"socius\", a partner or comrade. From this came \"Society of Jesus\" (SJ) by which they would be known more widely.\n\nReligious orders established in the medieval era were named after particular men: Francis of Assisi (Franciscans), Domingo de Guzmán, later canonized as St Dominic (Dominicans); and Augustine of Hippo (Augustinians). Ignatius of Loyola and his followers appropriated the name of Jesus for their new order, provoking resentment by other orders who considered it presumptuous. The resentment was recorded by Jesuit José de Acosta of a conversation with the Archbishop of Santo Domingo. In the words of one historian: \"The use of the name Jesus gave great offense. Both on the Continent and in England, it was denounced as blasphemous; petitions were sent to kings and to civil and ecclesiastical tribunals to have it changed; and even Pope Sixtus V had signed a Brief to do away with it.\" But nothing came of all the opposition; there were already congregations named after the Trinity and as \"God's daughters\".\n\nIn 1537, the seven travelled to Italy to seek papal approval for their order. Pope Paul III gave them a commendation, and permitted them to be ordained priests. These initial steps led to the official founding in 1540.\n\nThey were ordained in Venice by the bishop of Arbe (24 June). They devoted themselves to preaching and charitable work in Italy. The Italian War of 1535-1538 renewed between Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, Venice, the Pope, and the Ottoman Empire, had rendered any journey to Jerusalem impossible.\n\nAgain in 1540, they presented the project to Paul III. After months of dispute, a congregation of cardinals reported favourably upon the Constitution presented, and Paul III confirmed the order through the bull \"Regimini militantis ecclesiae\" (\"To the Government of the Church Militant\"), on 27 September 1540. This is the founding document of the Society of Jesus as an official Catholic religious order. Ignatius was chosen as the first Superior General. Paul III's bull had limited the number of its members to sixty. This limitation was removed through the bull \"Exposcit debitum\" of Julius III in 1550.\n\nIn fulfilling the mission of the \"Formula of the Institute of the Society\", the first Jesuits concentrated on a few key activities. First, they founded schools throughout Europe. Jesuit teachers were trained in both classical studies and theology, and their schools reflected this. Second, they sent out missionaries across the globe to evangelize those peoples who had not yet heard the Gospel, founding missions in widely diverse regions such as modern-day Paraguay, Japan, Ontario, and Ethiopia. One of the original seven arrived in India already in 1541. Finally, though not initially formed for the purpose, they aimed to stop Protestantism from spreading and to preserve communion with Rome and the successor of Saint Peter. The zeal of the Jesuits overcame the movement toward Protestantism in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and southern Germany.\n\nIgnatius wrote the Jesuit \"Constitutions\", adopted in 1553, which created a centralised organization and stressed acceptance of any mission to which the Pope might call them. His main principle became the unofficial Jesuit motto: \"Ad Maiorem Dei Gloriam\" (\"For the greater glory of God\"). This phrase is designed to reflect the idea that any work that is not evil can be meritorious for the spiritual life if it is performed with this intention, even things normally considered of little importance.\n\nThe Society of Jesus is classified among institutes as a mendicant order of clerks regular, that is, a body of priests organized for apostolic work, following a religious rule, and relying on alms, or donations, for support.\n\nThe term \"Jesuit\" (of 15th-century origin, meaning \"one who used too frequently or appropriated the name of Jesus\") was first applied to the society in reproach (1544–1552). The term was never used by Ignatius of Loyola, but over time, members and friends of the society adopted the name with a positive meaning.\n\nThe Jesuits were founded just before the Council of Trent (1545–1563) and ensuing Counter-Reformation that would introduce reforms within the Catholic Church, and so counter the Protestant Reformation throughout Catholic Europe.\n\nIgnatius and the early Jesuits did recognize, though, that the hierarchical church was in dire need of reform. Some of their greatest struggles were against corruption, venality, and spiritual lassitude within the Catholic Church. Ignatius insisted on a high level of academic preparation for the clergy in contrast to the relatively poor education of much of the clergy of his time. And the Jesuit vow against \"ambitioning prelacies\" can be seen as an effort to counteract another problem evidenced in the preceding century.\n\nIgnatius and the Jesuits who followed him believed that the reform of the church had to begin with the conversion of an individual's heart. One of the main tools the Jesuits have used to bring about this conversion is the Ignatian retreat, called the Spiritual Exercises. During a four-week period of silence, individuals undergo a series of directed meditations on the purpose of life and contemplations on the life of Christ. They meet regularly with a spiritual director who guides their choice of exercises and helps them to develop a more discerning love for Christ.\n\nThe retreat follows a \"Purgative-Illuminative-Unitive\" pattern in the tradition of the spirituality of John Cassian and the Desert Fathers. Ignatius' innovation was to make this style of contemplative mysticism available to all people in active life. Further, he used it as a means of rebuilding the spiritual life of the church. The Exercises became both the basis for the training of Jesuits and one of the essential ministries of the order: giving the exercises to others in what became known as \"retreats\".\n\nThe Jesuits' contributions to the late Renaissance were significant in their roles both as a missionary order and as the first religious order to operate colleges and universities as a principal and distinct ministry. By the time of Ignatius' death in 1556, the Jesuits were already operating a network of 74 colleges on three continents. A precursor to liberal education, the Jesuit plan of studies incorporated the Classical teachings of Renaissance humanism into the Scholastic structure of Catholic thought.\n\nIn addition to the teachings of faith, the Jesuit \"Ratio Studiorum\" (1599) would standardize the study of Latin, Greek, classical literature, poetry, and philosophy as well as non-European languages, sciences, and the arts. Furthermore, Jesuit schools encouraged the study of vernacular literature and rhetoric, and thereby became important centres for the training of lawyers and public officials.\n\nThe Jesuit schools played an important part in winning back to Catholicism a number of European countries which had for a time been predominantly Protestant, notably Poland and Lithuania. Today, Jesuit colleges and universities are located in over one hundred nations around the world. Under the notion that God can be encountered through created things and especially art, they encouraged the use of ceremony and decoration in Catholic ritual and devotion. Perhaps as a result of this appreciation for art, coupled with their spiritual practice of \"finding God in all things\", many early Jesuits distinguished themselves in the visual and performing arts as well as in music. The theater was a form of expression especially prominent in Jesuit schools.\n\nJesuit priests often acted as confessors to kings during the early modern period. They were an important force in the Counter-Reformation and in the Catholic missions, in part because their relatively loose structure (without the requirements of living and celebration of the Liturgy of Hours in common) allowed them to be flexible and meet diverse needs arising at the time.\n\nAfter much training and experience in theology, Jesuits went across the globe in search of converts to Christianity. Despite their dedication, they had little success in Asia except for the Philippines. For instance, early missions in Japan resulted in the government granting the Jesuits the feudal fiefdom of Nagasaki in 1580. However, Portuguese merchant and part of missionary sold the Japanese who blocked a conversion off as a slave and did a destruction act to a shrine and Buddhist temple. This was removed in 1587 due to fears over their growing influence. Jesuits did, however, have much success in Latin America. Their ascendancy in societies in the Americas accelerated during the seventeenth century, wherein Jesuits created new missions in Peru, Colombia, and Bolivia; as early as 1603, there were 345 Jesuit priests in Mexico alone.\n\nFrancis Xavier, one of the original companions of Loyola, arrived in Goa, in Portuguese India, in 1541 to consider evangelical service in the Indies. In a 1545 letter to John III of Portugal, he requested an Inquisition to be installed in Goa (see Goa Inquisition). He died in China after a decade of evangelism in Southern India. The Portuguese Jesuit, António de Andrade founded a mission in Western Tibet in 1624. Two Jesuit missionaries, Johann Grueber and Albert Dorville, reached Lhasa in Tibet in 1661. The Italian Jesuit Ippolito Desideri established a new Jesuit mission in Lhasa and Central Tibet (1716–21) and gained an exceptional mastery of Tibetan language and culture, writing a long and very detailed account of the country and its religion as well as treatises in Tibetan that attempted to refute key Buddhist ideas and establish the truth of Roman Catholic Christianity.\n\nJesuit missions in America became controversial in Europe, especially in Spain and Portugal where they were seen as interfering with the proper colonial enterprises of the royal governments. The Jesuits were often the only force standing between the Native Americans and slavery. Together throughout South America but especially in present-day Brazil and Paraguay, they formed Christian Native American city-states, called \"reductions\". These were societies set up according to an idealized theocratic model. The efforts of Jesuits like Antonio Ruiz de Montoya to protect the natives from enslavement by Spanish and Portuguese colonizers would contribute to the call for the society's suppression. Jesuit priests such as Manuel da Nóbrega and José de Anchieta founded several towns in Brazil in the 16th century, including São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, and were very influential in the pacification, religious conversion, and education of Indian nations. They also built schools, organized people into villages, and created a writing system for the local languages of Brazil. José de Anchieta and Manuel da Nóbrega were the first Jesuits that Ignacio de Loyola sent to America.\n\nJesuit scholars working in foreign missions were very important in studying their languages and strove to produce Latinized grammars and dictionaries. This included: Japanese (see \"Nippo jisho\" also known as \"Vocabvlario da Lingoa de Iapam,\" Vocabulary of the Japanese Language, a Japanese–Portuguese dictionary written 1603); Vietnamese (Portuguese missionaries created the Vietnamese alphabet, which was later formalized by Avignon missionary Alexandre de Rhodes with his 1651 trilingual dictionary); Tupi (the main language of Brazil); and the pioneering study of Sanskrit in the West by Jean François Pons in the 1740s.\n\nUnder Portuguese royal patronage, Jesuits thrived in Goa and until 1759 successfully expanded their activities to education and healthcare. In 1594 they founded the first Roman-style academic institution in the East, St. Paul Jesuit College in Macau, China. Founded by Alessandro Valignano, it had a great influence on the learning of Eastern languages (Chinese and Japanese) and culture by missionary Jesuits, becoming home to the first western sinologists such as Matteo Ricci. Jesuit efforts in Goa were interrupted by the expulsion of the Jesuits from Portuguese territories in 1759 by the powerful Marquis of Pombal, Secretary of State in Portugal.\n\nJesuit missionaries were active among indigenous peoples in New France in North America, many of them compiling dictionaries or glossaries of the First Nations and Native American languages they had learned. For instance, before his death in 1708, Jacques Gravier, vicar general of the Illinois Mission in the Mississippi River valley, compiled a Kaskaskia Illinois–French dictionary, considered the most extensive among works of the missionaries. Extensive documentation was left in the form of \"The Jesuit Relations\", published annually from 1632 until 1673.\n\nThe Jesuits first entered China through the Portuguese settlement on Macau, where they settled on Green Island and founded St. Paul's College.\n\nThe Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries introduced Western science and astronomy, then undergoing its own revolution, to China. The scientific revolution brought by the Jesuits coincided with a time when scientific innovation had declined in China:\n\nFor over a century, Jesuits like Michele Ruggieri, Matteo Ricci, Diego de Pantoja, Philippe Couplet, Michal Boym, and François Noël refined translations and disseminated Chinese knowledge, culture, history, and philosophy to Europe. Their Latin works popularized the name \"Confucius\" and had considerable influence on the Deists and other Enlightenment thinkers, some of whom were intrigued by the Jesuits' attempts to reconcile Confucian morality with Catholicism.\n\nUpon the arrival of the Franciscans and other monastic orders, Jesuit accommodation of Chinese culture and rituals led to the long-running Chinese Rites controversy. Despite the personal testimony of the Kangxi Emperor and many Jesuit converts that Chinese veneration of ancestors and Confucius was a nonreligious token of respect, 's papal decree \"Cum Deus Optimus...\" ruled that such behavior constituted impermissible forms of idolatry and superstition in 1704; his legate Tournon and the Bishop of Fujian, tasked with presenting this finding to the Kangxi Emperor, displayed such extreme ignorance that the emperor mandated the expulsion of Christian missionaries unable to abide by the terms of Ricci's Chinese catechism. Tournon's summary and automatic excommunication for any violators of Clement's decree—upheld by the 1715 bull \"Ex Illa Die...\"—led to the swift collapse of all the missions in China; the last Jesuits were finally expelled after 1721.\n\nDuring the French colonisation of New France in the 17th century, Jesuits played an active role in North America. When Samuel de Champlain established the foundations of the French colony at Québec, he was aware of native tribes who possessed their own languages, customs, and traditions. These natives that inhabited modern day Ontario, Québec, and the areas around Lake Simcoe and Georgian Bay were the Montagnais, the Algonquins, and the Huron. Champlain believed that these had souls to be saved, so in 1614 he initially obtained the Recollects, a reform branch of the Franciscans in France, to convert the native inhabitants. In 1624 the French Recollects realized the magnitude of their task and sent a delegate to France to invite the Society of Jesus to help with this mission. The invitation was accepted, and Jesuits Jean de Brébeuf, Ennemond Masse, and Charles Lalemant arrived in Quebec in 1625. Lalemant is considered to have been the first author of one of the \"Jesuit Relations of New France\", which chronicled their evangelization during the seventeenth century.\n\nThe Jesuits became involved in the Huron mission in 1626 and lived among the Huron peoples. Brébeuf learned the native language and created the first Huron language dictionary. Outside conflict forced the Jesuits to leave New France in 1629 when Quebec was captured by the Kirke brothers under the English flag. But in 1632 Quebec was returned to the French under the Treaty of Saint Germain-en-Laye and the Jesuits returned to Huron territory, modern Huronia.\n\nIn 1639, Jesuit Jerome Lalemant decided that the missionaries among the Hurons needed a local residence and established Sainte-Marie, which expanded into a living replica of European society. It became the Jesuit headquarters and an important part of Canadian history. Throughout most of the 1640s the Jesuits had great success, establishing five chapels in Huronia and baptising over one thousand Huron natives. However, as the Jesuits began to expand westward they encountered more Iroquois natives, rivals of the Hurons. The Iroquois grew jealous of the Hurons' wealth and fur trade system, began to attack Huron villages in 1648. They killed missionaries and burned villages, and the Hurons scattered. Both Jean de Brébeuf and Gabriel Lalemant were tortured and killed in the Iroquois raids; they have been canonized as martyrs in the Catholic Church. With the knowledge of the invading Iroquois, the Jesuit Paul Ragueneau burned down Sainte-Marie instead of allowing the Iroquois the satisfaction of destroying it. By late June 1649, the French and some Christian Hurons built Sainte-Marie II on Christian Island (Isle de Saint-Joseph). However, facing starvation, lack of supplies, and constant threats of Iroquois attack, the small Sainte-Marie II was abandoned in June 1650; the remaining Hurons and Jesuits departed for Quebec and Ottawa. After a series of epidemics, beginning in 1634, some Huron began to mistrust the Jesuits and accused them of being sorcerers casting spells from their books. As a result of the Iroquois raids and outbreak of disease, many missionaries, traders, and soldiers died. Today, the Huron tribe, also known as the Wyandot, have a First Nations reserve in Quebec, Canada, and three major settlements in the United States.\n\nAfter the collapse of the Huron nation, the Jesuits were to undertake the task of converting the Iroquois, something they had attempted in 1642 with little success. In 1653 the Iroquois nation had a fallout with the Dutch. They then signed a peace treaty with the French and a mission was established. The Iroquois took the treaty lightly and soon turned on the French again. In 1658, the Jesuits were having very little success and were under constant threat of being tortured or killed, but continued their effort until 1687 when they abandoned their permanent posts in the Iroquois homeland.\n\nBy 1700, Jesuits turned to maintaining Quebec, Montreal, and Ottawa without establishing new posts. During the Seven Years' War, Quebec fell to the English in 1759 and New France was under British control. The English barred the immigration of more Jesuits to New France. By 1763, there were only twenty-one Jesuits stationed in New France. By 1773 only eleven Jesuits remained. During the same year the English crown laid claim to New France and declared that the Society of Jesus in New France was dissolved.\n\nThe dissolution of the Order left in place substantial estates and investments, amounting to an income of approximately £5,000 a year, and the Council for the Affairs of the Province of Quebec, later succeeded by the Legislative Assembly of Quebec, assumed the task of allocating the funds to suitable recipients, chiefly schools.\n\nThe Jesuit mission in Quebec was re-established in 1842. There were a number of Jesuit colleges founded in the decades following; one of these colleges evolved into present-day Laval University.\n\nThe Jesuits in New Spain distinguished themselves in several ways. They had high standards for acceptance to the order and many years of training. They attracted the patronage of elite families whose sons they educated in rigorous newly founded Jesuit \"colegios\" (\"colleges\"), including Colegio de San Pedro y San Pablo, Colegio de San Ildefonso, and the Colegio de San Francisco Javier, Tepozotlan. Those same elite families hoped that a son with a vocation to the priesthood would be accepted as a Jesuit. Jesuits were also zealous in evangelization of the indigenous, particularly on the northern frontiers.\n\nTo support their colegios and members of the Society of Jesus, the Jesuits acquired landed estates that were run with the best-practices for generating income in that era. A number of these haciendas were donated by wealthy elites. The donation of a hacienda to the Jesuits was the spark igniting a conflict between seventeenth-century bishop of Puebla Don Juan de Palafox and the Jesuit colegio in that city. Since the Jesuits resisted paying the tithe on their estates, this donation effectively took revenue out of the church hierarchy's pockets by removing it from the tithe rolls.\n\nMany of Jesuit haciendas were huge, with Palafox asserting that just two colleges owned 300,000 head of sheep, whose wool was transformed locally in Puebla to cloth; six sugar plantations worth a million pesos and generating an income of 100,000 pesos. The immense Jesuit hacienda of Santa Lucía produced \"pulque\", the fermented juice of the agave cactus whose main consumers were the lower classes and Indians in Spanish cities. Although most haciendas had a free work force of permanent or seasonal labourers, the Jesuit haciendas in Mexico had a significant number of black slaves.\n\nThe Jesuits operated their properties as an integrated unit with the larger Jesuit order; thus revenues from haciendas funded their colegios. Jesuits did significantly expand missions to the indigenous in the northern frontier area and a number were martyred, but the crown supported those missions. Mendicant orders that had real estate were less economically integrated, so that some individual houses were wealthy while others struggled economically. The Franciscans, who were founded as an order embracing poverty, did not accumulate real estate, unlike the Augustinians and Dominicans in Mexico.\n\nThe Jesuits engaged in conflict with the episcopal hierarchy over the question of payment of tithes, the ten percent tax on agriculture levied on landed estates for support of the church hierarchy from bishops and cathedral chapters to parish priests. Since the Jesuits were the largest religious order holding real estate, surpassing the Dominicans and Augustinians who had accumulated significant property, this was no small matter. They argued that they were exempt, due to special pontifical privileges. In the mid-seventeenth century, bishop of Puebla, Don Juan de Palafox took on the Jesuits over this matter and was so soundly defeated that he was recalled to Spain, where he became the bishop of the minor diocese of Osma.\n\nAs elsewhere in the Spanish empire, the Jesuits were expelled from Mexico in 1767. Their haciendas were sold off and their colegios and missions in Baja California were taken over by other orders. Exiled Mexican-born Jesuit Francisco Javier Clavijero wrote an important history of Mexico while in Italy, a basis for creole patriotism. Andrés Cavo also wrote an important text on Mexican history that Carlos María de Bustamante published in the early nineteenth-century. An earlier Jesuit who wrote about the history of Mexico was Diego Luis de Motezuma (1619–99), a descendant of the Aztec monarchs of Tenochtitlan. Motezuma's \"Corona mexicana, o Historia de los nueve Motezumas\" was completed in 1696. He \"aimed to show that Mexican emperors were a legitimate dynasty in the 17th-century in the European sense.\"\n\nThe Jesuits were allowed to return to Mexico in 1840 when General Antonio López de Santa Anna was once more president of Mexico. Their re-introduction to Mexico was \"to assist in the education of the poorer classes and much of their property was restored to them.\"\n\nThe Jesuits arrived in the Viceroyalty of Peru by 1571; it was a key area of Spanish empire, with not only dense indigenous populations but also huge deposits of silver at Potosí. A major figure in the first wave of Jesuits was José de Acosta (1540–1600), whose book \"Historia natural y moral de las Indias\" (1590) introduced Europeans to Spain's American empire via fluid prose and keen observation and explanation, based on fifteen years in Peru and a bit of time in New Spain (Mexico). Viceroy of Peru Don Francisco de Toledo urged the Jesuits to evangelize the indigenous peoples of Peru, wanting to put them in charge of parishes, but Acosta adhered to the Jesuit position that they were not subject to the jurisdiction of bishops and to catechize in Indian parishes would bring them into conflict with the bishops. For that reason, the Jesuits in Peru focused on education of elite men rather than the indigenous populations.\n\nTo minister to newly arrived African slaves, Alonso de Sandoval (1576–1651) worked at the port of Cartagena de Indias. Sandoval wrote about this ministry in \"De instauranda Aethiopum salute\" (1627), describing how he and his assistant Pedro Claver, later canonized, met slave transport ships in the harbour, went below decks where 300–600 slaves were chained, and gave physical aid with water, while introducing the Africans to Christianity. In his treatise, he did not condemn slavery or the ill-treatment of slaves, but sought to instruct fellow Jesuits to this ministry and describe how he catechized the slaves.\n\nRafael Ferrer was the first Jesuit of Quito to explore and found missions in the upper Amazon regions of South America from 1602 to 1610, which belonged to the Audiencia (high court) of Quito that was a part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until it was transferred to the newly created Viceroyalty of New Granada in 1717. In 1602, Ferrer began to explore the Aguarico, Napo, and Marañon rivers (Sucumbios region, in what is today Ecuador and Peru), and between 1604 and 1605 set up missions among the Cofane natives. He was martyred by an apostate native in 1610.\n\nIn 1639, the Audiencia of Quito organized an expedition to renew its exploration of the Amazon river and the Quito Jesuit (Jesuita Quiteño) Cristóbal de Acuña was a part of this expedition. The expedition disembarked from the Napo river 16 February 1639 and arrived in what is today Pará Brazil on the banks of the Amazon river on 12 December 1639. In 1641, Acuña published in Madrid a memoir of his expedition to the Amazon river entitled \"Nuevo Descubrimiento del gran rio de las Amazonas\", which for academics became a fundamental reference on the Amazon region.\nIn 1637, the Jesuits Gaspar Cugia and Lucas de la Cueva from Quito began establishing missions in Maynas territories, on the banks of the Marañón River, around the Pongo de Manseriche region, close to the Spanish settlement of Borja. Between 1637 and 1652 there were 14 missions established along the Marañón River and its southern tributaries, the Huallaga and the Ucayali rivers. Jesuit Lucas de la Cueva and Raimundo de Santacruz opened up two new routes of communication with Quito, through the Pastaza and Napo rivers.\n\nBetween 1637 and 1715, Samuel Fritz founded 38 missions along the length of the Amazon river, between the Napo and Negro rivers, that were called the Omagua Missions. These missions were continually attacked by the Brazilian Bandeirantes beginning in the year 1705. In 1768, the only Omagua mission that was left was San Joaquin de Omaguas, since it had been moved to a new location on the Napo river away from the Bandeirantes.\n\nIn the immense territory of Maynas, the Jesuits of Quito made contact with a number of indigenous tribes which spoke 40 different languages, and founded a total of 173 Jesuit missions encompassing 150,000 inhabitants. Because of the constant epidemics (smallpox and measles) and warfare with other tribes and the Bandeirantes, the total number of Jesuit Missions were reduced to 40 by 1744. At the time when the Jesuits were expelled from Spanish America in 1767, the Jesuits of Quito registered 36 missions run by 25 Jesuits of Quito in the Audiencia of Quito – 6 in the Napo and Aguarico Missions and 19 in the Pastaza and Iquitos Missions, with the population at 20,000 inhabitants.\n\nThe first Jesuits arrived in 1588, and in 1610 Philip III proclaimed that only the \"sword of the word\" should be used to subdue Paraguayan Indians, mostly Guarani. The church granted Jesuits extensive powers to phase out the encomienda system of forced labor, angering settlers dependent on a continuing supply of Indian labor and concubines. The first Jesuit mission in the Paraguay area (which encompassed the border regions of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil) was founded in 1609. By 1732, the Jesuits had gathered into 30 missions or reductions a total of 141,382 Guarani. Due to disease, European politics, and internal discord, the population in the missions declined afterwards. At their apogee, the Jesuits dreamed of a Jesuit empire that would stretch from the Paraguay-Paraná confluence to the coast and back to the Paraná headwaters.\n\nIn the early years the new Jesuit reductions were threatened by the slave-raiding \"bandeirantes\". The bandeirantes captured Indians and sold them as slaves to planters in Brazil. Having depleted the Indian population near Sâo Paulo, they discovered the richly populated reductions. The Spanish authorities chose not to defend the settlements, and the Jesuits and their thousands of neophytes thus had little means to protect themselves. Thousands of Guarani were captured by the bandeirantes before, organized and armed by the Jesuits, a Guarani army defeated the slave raiders at the battle of Mbororé. Subsequently, the viceroy of Peru conceded the right of bearing arms to the Guarani. Thereafter, well-trained and highly motivated Indian units were able to defend themselves from slavers and other threats. The victory at Mbororé set the stage for the golden age of the Jesuits in Paraguay. Life in the reductions offered the Guaraní higher living standards, protection from settlers, and physical security. These reductions, which became quite wealthy, exported goods, and supplied Indian armies to the Spanish on many occasion.\n\nThe reductions, where the Jesuits created orchestras, musical ensembles, and actors' troupes, and in which virtually all the profits derived from Indian labor were distributed to the labourers, earned praise from some of the leaders of the French enlightenment, who were not predisposed to favour Jesuits. \"By means of religion,\" d'Alembert wrote, \"the Jesuits established a monarchical authority in Paraguay, founded solely on their powers of persuasion and on their lenient methods of government. Masters of the country, they rendered happy the people under their sway; they succeeded in subduing them without ever having recourse to force.\" And Jesuit-educated Voltaire called the Jesuit government \"a triumph of humanity.\"\n\nBecause of their success, the Paraguayan Jesuits gained many enemies, and the Reductions fell prey to changing times. During the 1720s and 1730s, Paraguayan settlers rebelled against Jesuit privileges in the Revolt of the Comuneros and against the government that protected them. Although this revolt failed, it was one of the earliest and most serious risings against Spanish authority in the New World and caused the crown to question its continued support for the Jesuits. The Jesuit-inspired War of the Seven Reductions (1750–61) increased sentiment in Madrid for suppressing this \"empire within an empire.\"\n\nThe Spanish king Charles III (1759–88) expelled the Jesuits in 1767 from Spain and its territories. Within a few decades of the expulsion, most of what the Jesuits had accomplished was lost. The missions were mismanaged and abandoned by the Guaraní. Today, these ruins of a 160-year experiment have become a tourist attraction.\n\nTomé de Sousa, first Governor General of Brazil, brought the first group of Jesuits to the colony. The Jesuits were officially supported by the King, who instructed Tomé de Sousa to give them all the support needed to Christianize the indigenous peoples.\n\nThe first Jesuits, guided by Manuel da Nóbrega, Juan de Azpilcueta Navarro, Leonardo Nunes, and later José de Anchieta, established the first Jesuit missions in Salvador and in São Paulo dos Campos de Piratininga, the settlement that gave rise to the city of São Paulo. Nóbrega and Anchieta were instrumental in the defeat of the French colonists of France Antarctique by managing to pacify the Tamoio natives, who had previously fought the Portuguese. The Jesuits took part in the foundation of the city of Rio de Janeiro in 1565.\n\nThe success of the Jesuits in converting the indigenous peoples is linked to their efforts to understand the native cultures, especially their languages. The first grammar of the Tupi language was compiled by José de Anchieta and printed in Coimbra in 1595. The Jesuits often gathered the aborigines in communities (the Jesuit Reductions) where the natives worked for the community and were evangelised.\n\nThe Jesuits had frequent disputes with other colonists who wanted to enslave the natives. The action of the Jesuits saved many natives from being enslaved by Europeans, but also disturbed their ancestral way of life and inadvertently helped spread infectious diseases against which the aborigines had no natural defenses. Slave labor and trade were essential for the economy of Brazil and other American colonies, and the Jesuits usually did not object to the enslavement of African peoples, but rather critiqued the conditions of slavery.\n\nThe Suppression of the Jesuits in Portugal, France, the Two Sicilies, Parma, and the Spanish Empire by 1767 was troubling to the society's defender, Pope Clement XIII. On 21 July 1773 Pope Clement XIV issued the papal brief \"Dominus ac Redemptor,\" decreeing: \nThe suppression was carried out in all countries except Prussia and Russia, where Catherine the Great had forbidden its promulgation. Because millions of Catholics (including many Jesuits) lived in the Polish provinces recently annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia, the society was able to maintain its existence and carry on its work all through the period of suppression. Subsequently, Pope Pius VI would grant formal permission for the continuation of the society in Russia and Poland, with Stanislaus Czerniewicz elected superior of the society in 1782. Pope Pius VII had resolved during his captivity in France to restore the Jesuits universally, and after his return to Rome he did so with little delay. On 7 August 1814, by the bull \"Sollicitudo omnium ecclesiarum\", he reversed the suppression of the society, and therewith another Polish Jesuit, Thaddeus Brzozowski, who had been elected to Superior in Russia in 1805, acquired universal jurisdiction.\n\nThe period following the Restoration of the Jesuits in 1814 was marked by tremendous growth, as evidenced by the large number of Jesuit colleges and universities established in the 19th century. In the United States, 22 of the society's 28 universities were founded or taken over by the Jesuits during this time. It has been suggested that the experience of suppression served to heighten orthodoxy among the Jesuits upon restoration. While this claim is debatable, Jesuits were generally supportive of papal authority within the church, and some members were associated with the Ultramontanist movement and the declaration of Papal Infallibility in 1870.\n\nIn Switzerland, following the defeat of the Sonderbund Catholic defense alliance, the constitution was modified and Jesuits were banished in 1848. The ban was lifted on 20 May 1973, when 54.9 per cent of voters accepted a referendum modifying the Constitution.\n\nIn the Constitution of Norway from 1814, a relic from the earlier anti-Catholic laws of Denmark-Norway, Paragraph 2 originally read: \"The Evangelical-Lutheran religion remains the public religion of the State. Those inhabitants, who confess thereto, are bound to raise their children to the same. Jesuits and monastic orders are not permitted. Jews are still prohibited from entry to the Realm.\" Jews were first allowed into the realm in 1851 after the famous Norwegian poet Henrik Wergeland had campaigned for it. Monastic orders were permitted in 1897, but the ban on Jesuits was only lifted in 1956.\n\nRepublican Spain in the 1930s passed laws banning the Jesuits on grounds that they were obedient to a power different from the state. Pope Pius XI wrote about this: \"It was an expression of a soul deeply hostile to God and the Catholic religion, to have disbanded the Religious Orders that had taken a vow of obedience to an authority different from the legitimate authority of the State. In this way it was sought to do away with the Society of Jesus – which can well glory in being one of the soundest auxiliaries of the \"Chair of Saint Peter\" – with the hope, perhaps, of then being able with less difficulty to overthrow in the near future, the Christian faith and morale in the heart of the Spanish nation, which gave to the Church of God the grand and glorious figure of Ignatius Loyola.\"\n\nThe 20th century witnessed both growth and decline. Following a trend within the Catholic priesthood at large, Jesuit numbers peaked in the 1950s and have declined steadily since. Meanwhile, the number of Jesuit institutions has grown considerably, due in large part to a post–Vatican II focus on the establishment of Jesuit secondary schools in inner-city areas and an increase in voluntary lay groups inspired in part by the \"Spiritual Exercises\". Among the notable Jesuits of the 20th century, John Courtney Murray was called one of the \"architects of the Second Vatican Council\" and drafted what eventually became the council's endorsement of religious freedom, \"Dignitatis humanae\".\n\nIn Latin America, the Jesuits had significant influence in the development of liberation theology, a movement that was controversial in the Catholic community after the negative assessment of it by Pope John Paul II in 1984.\n\nUnder Superior General Pedro Arrupe, social justice and the preferential option for the poor emerged as dominant themes of the work of the Jesuits. When Arrupe was paralyzed by a stroke in 1981, Pope John Paul II, not entirely pleased with the progressive turn of the Jesuits, took the unusual step of appointing the venerable and aged Paolo Dezza for an interim to oversee \"the authentic renewal of the Church\", instead of the progressive American priest Vincent O'Keefe whom Arrupe had preferred. In 1983 John Paul gave leave for the Jesuits to appoint a successor to Arrupe.\n\nOn 16 November 1989, six Jesuit priests (Ignacio Ellacuría, Segundo Montes, Ignacio Martín-Baró, Joaquin López y López, Juan Ramon Moreno, and Amado López), Elba Ramos their housekeeper, and Celia Marisela Ramos her daughter, were murdered by the Salvadoran military on the campus of the University of Central America in San Salvador, El Salvador, because they had been labeled as subversives by the government. The assassinations galvanized the society's peace and justice movements, including annual protests at the Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation at Fort Benning, Georgia, United States, where several of the assassins had been trained under US government sponsorship.\n\nOn 21 February 2001, the Jesuit priest Avery Dulles, an internationally known author, lecturer, and theologian, was created a cardinal of the Catholic Church by Pope John Paul II. The son of former Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, Avery Dulles was long known for his carefully reasoned argumentation and fidelity to the teaching office of the church. An author of 22 books and over 700 theological articles, Dulles died on 12 December 2008 at Fordham University, where he had taught for twenty years as the Laurence J. McGinley Professor of Religion and Society. He was, at his passing, one of ten Jesuit cardinals in the Catholic Church.\n\nIn 2002, Boston College president and Jesuit priest William P. Leahy initiated the Church in the 21st Century program as a means of moving the church \"from crisis to renewal\". The initiative has provided the society with a platform for examining issues brought about by the worldwide Catholic sex abuse cases, including the priesthood, celibacy, sexuality, women's roles, and the role of the laity.\n\nIn April 2005, Thomas J. Reese, editor of the American Jesuit weekly magazine \"America\", resigned at the request of the society. The move was widely published in the media as the result of pressure from the Vatican, following years of criticism by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith on articles touching subjects such as HIV/AIDS, religious pluralism, homosexuality, and the right of life for the unborn. Following his resignation, Reese spent a year-long sabbatical at Santa Clara University before being named a fellow at the Woodstock Theological Center in Washington, D.C., and later Senior Analyst for the \"National Catholic Reporter\". President Barack Obama appointed him to the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom in 2014 and again in 2016.\n\nOn 2 February 2006, Peter Hans Kolvenbach informed members of the Society of Jesus that, with the consent of Pope Benedict XVI, he intended to step down as Superior General in 2008, the year he would turn 80.\n\nOn 22 April 2006, Feast of Our Lady, Mother of the Society of Jesus, Pope Benedict XVI greeted thousands of Jesuits on pilgrimage to Rome, and took the opportunity to thank God \"for having granted to your Company the gift of men of extraordinary sanctity and of exceptional apostolic zeal such as St Ignatius of Loyola, St Francis Xavier, and Bl Peter Faber.\" He said \"St Ignatius of Loyola was above all a man of God, who gave the first place of his life to God, to his greater glory and his greater service. He was a man of profound prayer, which found its center and its culmination in the daily Eucharistic Celebration.\"\n\nIn May 2006, Benedict XVI also wrote a letter to Superior General Peter Hans Kolvenbach on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of Pope Pius XII's encyclical \"Haurietis aquas\", on devotion to the Sacred Heart, because the Jesuits have always been \"extremely active in the promotion of this essential devotion\". In his 3 November 2006 visit to the Pontifical Gregorian University, Benedict XVI cited the university as \"one of the greatest services that the Society of Jesus carries out for the universal Church\".\n\nThe 35th General Congregation of the Society of Jesus convened on 5 January 2008 and elected Adolfo Nicolás as the new Superior General on 19 January 2008. In a letter to the Fathers of the Congregation, Benedict XVI wrote:\nAs my Predecessors have said to you on various occasions, the Church needs you, relies on you and continues to turn to you with trust, particularly to reach those physical and spiritual places which others do not reach or have difficulty in reaching. Paul VI's words remain engraved on your hearts: \"Wherever in the Church, even in the most difficult and extreme fields, at the crossroads of ideologies, in the social trenches, there has been and there is confrontation between the burning exigencies of man and the perennial message of the Gospel, here also there have been, and there are, Jesuits\" (\"Address to the 32nd General Congregation of the Jesuits\",\" \"3 December 1974; \"ORE, \"12 December, n. 2, p. 4.)\nIn 2013, Jesuit Cardinal Jorge Bergoglio became Pope Francis. Before he became pope, he was appointed bishop when he was in \"virtual estrangement from the Jesuits\" since he was seen as \"an enemy of liberation theology\" and viewed by others as \"still far too orthodox\". He was criticised for colluding with the Argentine junta, while biographers characterised him as working to save the lives of other Jesuits. After his papal election, the Superior General of the Jesuits Adolfo Nicolás praised Pope Francis as a \"brother among brothers\".\n\nOn 2 October 2016, General Congregation 36 convened in Rome, convoked by Superior General Adolfo Nicolás, who had announced his intention to resign at age 80. On 14 October, the 36th General Congregation of the Society of Jesus elected Arturo Sosa, a Venezuelan, as its thirty-first Superior General.\n\nThe General Congregation of Jesuits who elected Arturo Sosa in 2016 asked him to bring to completion the process of discerning Jesuit priorities for the time ahead. Sosa devised a plan that enlisted all Jesuits and their lay collaborators in the process of discernment over a sixteen-month period. Then in February 2019 he presented the results of the discernment, a list of four priorities for Jesuit ministries for the next ten years.\n\nPope Francis gave his approval to these priorities, saying that they are in harmony with the Church's present priorities and with the programmatic letter of his pontificate, \"Evangelii gaudium\".\n\nThe spirituality practiced by the Jesuits, called Ignatian spirituality, ultimately based on the Catholic faith and the gospels, is drawn from the \"Constitutions\", \"The Letters\", and \"Autobiography\", and most specially from Ignatius' \"Spiritual Exercises\", whose purpose is \"to conquer oneself and to regulate one's life in such a way that no decision is made under the influence of any inordinate attachment.\" The \"Exercises\" culminate in a contemplation whereby one develops a facility to \"find God in all things.\"\n\nThe formation (training) of Jesuits seeks to prepare men spiritually, academically, and practically for the ministries they will be called to offer the church and world. Ignatius was strongly influenced by the Renaissance, and he wanted Jesuits to be able to offer whatever ministries were most needed at any given moment and, especially, to be ready to respond to missions (assignments) from the pope. Formation for priesthood normally takes between eight and fourteen years, depending on the man's background and previous education, and final vows are taken several years after that, making Jesuit formation among the longest of any of the religious orders.\n\nThe society is headed by a Superior General with the formal title \"Praepositus Generalis\", Latin for \"provost-general\", more commonly called Father General or General. He is elected by the General Congregation for life or until he resigns; he is confirmed by the Pope and has absolute authority in running the society. The current Superior General of the Jesuits is the Venezuelan Arturo Sosa who was elected on 14 October 2016.\n\nThe Father General is assisted by \"assistants\", four of whom are \"assistants for provident care\" and serve as general advisors and a sort of inner council, and several other regional assistants, each of whom heads an \"assistancy\", which is either a geographic area (for instance the North American Assistancy) or an area of ministry (for instance higher education). The assistants normally reside with Father General in Rome and along with others form an advisory council to the General. A vicar general and secretary of the society run day-to-day administration. The General is also required to have an admonitor, a confidential advisor whose task is to warn the General honestly and confidentially when he might be acting imprudently or contrary to the church's magisterium. The central staff of the General is known as the Curia.\n\nThe society is divided into geographic provinces, each of which is headed by a Provincial Superior, generally called Father Provincial, chosen by the General. He has authority over all Jesuits and ministries in his area, and is assisted by a \"socius\" who acts as a sort of secretary and chief of staff. With the approval of the General, the provincial appoints a novice master and a master of tertians to oversee formation, and rectors of local communities of Jesuits. For better cooperation and apostolic efficacy in each continent, the Jesuit provinces are grouped into six Jesuit Conferences worldwide.\n\nEach Jesuit community within a province is normally headed by a rector who is assisted by a \"minister\", from the Latin for \"servant\", a priest who helps oversee the community's day-to-day needs.\n\nThe General Congregation is a meeting of all of the assistants, provincials, and additional representatives who are elected by the professed Jesuits of each province. It meets irregularly and rarely, normally to elect a new superior general and/or to take up some major policy issues for the Order. The General meets more regularly with smaller councils composed of just the provincials.\n\nJesuits do not have an official habit. The society's \"Constitutions\" gives the following instructions: \"The clothing too should have three characteristics: first, it should be proper; second, conformed to the usage of the country of residence; and third, not contradictory to the poverty we profess.\" (Const. 577)\n\nHistorically, a \"Jesuit-style cassock\" became \"standard issue\": it was wrapped around the body and was tied with a cincture, rather than the customary buttoned front. A tuftless biretta (only diocesan clergy wore tufts) and a ferraiolo (cape) completed the look.\n\nToday, most Jesuits in the United States wear the clerical collar and black clothing of ordinary priests, although some still wear the black cassock. Jesuits in tropical countries may use a white cassock.\n\nThe \"Monita Secreta\" (Secret Instructions of the Jesuits), published in 1612 and in 1614 in Kraków, is alleged to have been written by Claudio Acquaviva, the fifth general of the society, but was probably written by former Jesuit Jerome Zahorowski. It purports to describe the methods to be adopted by Jesuits for the acquisition of greater power and influence for the society and for the Roman Catholic Church. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states the book is a forgery, fabricated to ascribe a sinister reputation to the Society of Jesus.\n\nThe Jesuits were temporarily banished from France in 1594 after a man named Jean Châtel tried to assassinate the king of France, Henri IV. Under questioning, Châtel revealed that he had been educated by the Jesuits of the Collège de Clermont. The Jesuits were accused of inspiring Châtel's attack. Two of his former teachers were exiled and a third was hanged. The Collège de Clermont was closed, and the building was confiscated. The Jesuits were banned from France, although this ban was quickly lifted.\n\nIn England, Henry Garnet, one of the leading English Jesuits, was hanged for misprision of treason because of his knowledge of the Gunpowder Plot (1605). The Plot was the attempted assassination of King James I of England and VI of Scotland, his family, and most of the Protestant aristocracy in a single attack, by exploding the Houses of Parliament. Another Jesuit, Oswald Tesimond, managed to escape arrest for his involvement in this plot.\n\nJesuits have been accused of using casuistry to obtain justifications for unjustifiable actions (cf. formulary controversy and \"Lettres Provinciales\", by Blaise Pascal). Hence, the Concise Oxford Dictionary of the English language lists \"equivocating\" as a secondary denotation of the word \"Jesuit\". Modern critics of the Society of Jesus include Avro Manhattan, Alberto Rivera, and Malachi Martin, the latter being the author of \"The Jesuits: The Society of Jesus and the Betrayal of the Roman Catholic Church\" (1987).\n\nAlthough in the first 30 years of the existence of the Society of Jesus there were many Jesuits who were \"conversos\" (Catholic-convert Jews), an anti-\"converso\" faction led to the \"Decree de genere\" (1593) which proclaimed that either Jewish or Muslim ancestry, no matter how distant, was an insurmountable impediment for admission to the Society of Jesus. This new rule was contrary to the original wishes of Ignatius who \"said that he would take it as a special grace from our Lord to come from Jewish lineage.\" The 16th-century \"Decree de genere\" was repealed in 1946.\n\nWithin the Roman Catholic Church, there has existed a sometimes tense relationship between Jesuits and the Holy See due to questioning of official church teaching and papal directives, such as those on abortion, birth control, women deacons, homosexuality, and liberation theology. At the same time, Jesuits have been appointed to prominent doctrinal and theological positions in the church; under Benedict, Archbishop Luis Ladaria Ferrer was Secretary of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.\n\nMembers of the Society of Jesus have been implicated in the Catholic Church sexual abuse cases.\n\nThe Catholic Church faced persecution in Nazi Germany. Hitler was anticlerical and had particular disdain for the Jesuits. According to John Pollard, the Jesuits' \"ethos represented the most intransigent opposition to the philosophy of Nazism\", and so the Nazis considered them as one of their most dangerous enemies. A Jesuit college in the city of Innsbruck served as a center for anti-Nazi resistance and was closed down by the Nazis in 1938. Jesuits were a target for Gestapo persecution, and many Jesuit priests were deported to concentration camps. Jesuits made up the largest contingent of clergy imprisoned in the Priest Barracks of Dachau Concentration Camp. Lapomarda lists some 30 Jesuits as having died at Dachau. Of the total of 152 Jesuits murdered by the Nazis across Europe, 43 died in the concentration camps and an additional 27 died from captivity or its results.\n\nThe Superior General of Jesuits at the outbreak of war was Wlodzimierz Ledochowski, a Pole. The Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland was particularly severe. Vincent Lapomarda wrote that Ledochowski helped \"stiffen the general attitude of the Jesuits against the Nazis\" and that he permitted Vatican Radio to carry on its campaign against the Nazis in Poland. Vatican Radio was run by the Jesuit Filippo Soccorsi and spoke out against Nazi oppression, particularly with regard to Poland and to Vichy-French anti-Semitism.\n\nSeveral Jesuits were prominent in the small German Resistance. Among the central membership of the Kreisau Circle of the Resistance were the Jesuit priests Augustin Rösch, Alfred Delp, and Lothar König. The Bavarian Jesuit Provincial, Augustin Rosch, ended the war on death row for his role in the July Plot to overthrow Hitler. Another non-military German Resistance group, dubbed the \"Frau Solf Tea Party\" by the Gestapo, included the Jesuit priest Friedrich Erxleben. The German Jesuit Robert Leiber acted as intermediary between Pius XII and the German Resistance.\n\nAmong the Jesuit victims of the Nazis, Germany's Rupert Mayer has been beatified. Mayer was a Bavarian Jesuit who clashed with the Nazis as early as 1923. Continuing his critique following Hitler's rise to power, Mayer was imprisoned in 1939 and sent to Sachsenhausen concentration camp. As his health declined, the Nazis feared the creation of a martyr and sent him to the Abbey of Ettal in 1940. There he continued to give sermons and lectures against the evils of the Nazi régime, until his death in 1945.\n\nIn his history of the heroes of the Holocaust, the Jewish historian Martin Gilbert notes that in every country under German occupation, priests played a major part in rescuing Jews, and that the Jesuits were one of the Catholic Orders that hid Jewish children in monasteries and schools to protect them from the Nazis. Fourteen Jesuit priests have been formally recognized by Yad Vashem, the Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority in Jerusalem, for risking their lives to save Jews during the Holocaust of World War II: Roger Braun (1910–1981) of France; Pierre Chaillet (1900–1972) of France; Jean-Baptist De Coster (1896–1968) of Belgium; Jean Fleury (1905–1982) of France; Emile Gessler (1891–1958) of Belgium; Jean-Baptiste Janssens (1889–1964) of Belgium; Alphonse Lambrette (1884–1970) of Belgium; Emile Planckaert (1906–2006) of France; Jacob Raile (1894–1949) of Hungary; Henri Revol (1904–1992) of France; Adam Sztark (1907–1942) of Poland; Henri Van Oostayen (1906–1945) of Belgium; Ioannes Marangas (1901–1989) of Greece; and Raffaele de Chantuz Cubbe (1904–1983) of Italy.\n\nSeveral other Jesuits are known to have rescued or given refuge to Jews during that period. A plaque commemorating the 152 Jesuit priests who gave their lives during the Holocaust was installed in April 2007 at the Jesuits' Rockhurst University in Kansas City, Missouri, United States.\n\nBetween the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries, the teaching of science in Jesuit schools, as laid down in the \"Ratio atque Institutio Studiorum Societatis Iesu\" (\"The Official Plan of studies for the Society of Jesus\") of 1599, was almost entirely based on the works of Aristotle.\n\nThe Jesuits, nevertheless, have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science. For example, the Jesuits have dedicated significant study to fields from cosmology to seismology, the latter of which has been described as \"the Jesuit science\". The Jesuits have been described as \"the single most important contributor to experimental physics in the seventeenth century.\" According to Jonathan Wright in his book \"God's Soldiers\", by the eighteenth century the Jesuits had \"contributed to the development of pendulum clocks, pantographs, barometers, reflecting telescopes and microscopes – to scientific fields as various as magnetism, optics, and electricity. They observed, in some cases before anyone else, the colored bands on Jupiter's surface, the Andromeda nebula, and Saturn's rings. They theorized about the circulation of the blood (independently of Harvey), the theoretical possibility of flight, the way the moon affected the tides, and the wave-like nature of light.\"\n\nThe Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries introduced Western science and astronomy. One modern historian writes that in late Ming courts, the Jesuits were \"regarded as impressive especially for their knowledge of astronomy, calendar-making, mathematics, hydraulics, and geography.\" The Society of Jesus introduced, according to Thomas Woods, \"a substantial body of scientific knowledge and a vast array of mental tools for understanding the physical universe, including the Euclidean geometry that made planetary motion comprehensible.\"\n\nNotable Jesuits include missionaries, educators, scientists, artists, philosophers, and Pope Francis. Among many distinguished early Jesuits was Francis Xavier, a missionary to Asia who converted more people to Catholicism than anyone before, and Robert Bellarmine, a doctor of the Church. José de Anchieta and Manuel da Nóbrega, founders of the city of São Paulo, Brazil, were Jesuit priests. Another famous Jesuit was Jean de Brébeuf, a French missionary who was martyred during the 17th century in what was once New France (now Ontario) in Canada.\n\nIn Spanish America, José de Acosta wrote a major work on early Peru and New Spain with important material on indigenous peoples. In South America, Peter Claver was notable for his mission to African slaves, building on the work of Alonso de Sandoval. Francisco Javier Clavijero was expelled from New Spain during the Suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1767 and wrote an important history of Mexico during his exile in Italy. Eusebio Kino is renowned in the southwestern United States and northern Mexico (an area then called the Pimeria Alta). He founded numerous missions and served as the peace-bringer between the tribes and the government of New Spain. Antonio Ruiz de Montoya was an important missionary in the Jesuit reductions of Paraguay.\n\nBaltasar Gracián was a 17th-century Spanish Jesuit and baroque prose writer and philosopher. He was born in Belmonte, near Calatayud (Aragon). His writings, particularly \"El Criticón\" (1651–7) and \"Oráculo Manual y Arte de Prudencia\" (\"The Art of Prudence\", 1647) were lauded by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche.\n\nIn Scotland, John Ogilvie, a Jesuit, is the nation's only post-Reformation saint.\n\nCardinal Jorge Bergoglio of Argentina was elected Pope Francis on 13 March 2013 and is the first Jesuit to be elected pope.\n\nGerard Manley Hopkins was one of the first English poets to use sprung verse. Anthony de Mello was a Jesuit priest and psychotherapist who became widely known for his books which introduced Westerners to the East Indian traditions of spirituality.\n\nGeorges Lemaître in 1927 became the first to identify that the recession of nearby galaxies could be explained by a theory of an expanding universe. He was the first to derive what is now known as Hubble's law, or the Hubble–Lemaître law. Lemaître also proposed what later became known as the Big Bang theory of the origin of the universe, initially calling it the \"hypothesis of the primeval atom\".\n\nThe Feast of All Jesuit Saints and Blesseds is celebrated on 5 November.\n\nAlthough the work of the Jesuits today embraces a wide variety of apostolates, ministries, and civil occupations, they are probably most well known for their educational work. Since the inception of the order, Jesuits have been teachers. Besides serving on the faculty of Catholic and secular schools, the Jesuits are the Catholic religious order with the second highest number of schools which they run: 168 tertiary institutions in 40 countries and 324 secondary schools in 55 countries. (The Brothers of the Christian Schools have over 560 Lasallian educational institutions.) They also run elementary schools at which they are less likely to teach. Many of the schools are named after Francis Xavier and other prominent Jesuits.\n\nJesuit educational institutions aim to promote the values of Eloquentia Perfecta. This is a Jesuit tradition that focuses on cultivating a person as a whole, as one learns to speak and write for the common good.\nJesuits have become increasingly involved in works directed primarily toward social and economic development for the poor and marginalized. Included in this would be research, training, advocacy, and action for human development, as well as direct services. Most Jesuit schools have an office that fosters social awareness and social service in the classroom and through extracurricular programs, usually detailed on their websites. The Jesuits also run over 500 notable or stand-alone social or economic development centres in 56 countries around the world.\n\nJesuits are also known for their involvement in publications. \"La Civiltà Cattolica\", a periodical produced in Rome by the Jesuits, has often been used as a semi-official platform for popes and Vatican officials to float ideas for discussion or hint at future statements or positions. In the United States, \"The Way\" is an international journal of contemporary Christian spirituality published by the British Jesuits. \"America\" magazine has long had a prominent place in Catholic intellectual circles Most Jesuit colleges and universities have their own presses which produce a variety of books, book series, textbooks, and academic publications. Ignatius Press, founded by a Jesuit, is an independent publisher of Catholic books, most of which are of the popular academic or lay-intellectual variety. Manresa is a review of Ignatian spirituality published in Madrid, Spain.\n\nIn Australia, the Jesuits produce a number of magazines, including \"Eureka Street\", \"Madonna\", \"Australian Catholics\", and \"Province Express\".\n\nIn Germany, the Jesuits publish \"Geist und Leben.\"\n\nIn Sweden the Catholic cultural magazine \"Signum\", edited by the Newman Institute, covers a broad spectrum of issues concerning faith, culture, research, and society. The printed version of \"Signum\" is published eight times per year. In addition, there is an up-to-date website (www.signum.se) containing an article archive dating from 1975 to the present.\n\nBULLET::::- The character Father Mulcahy is a Jesuit priest in the novel, film, and TV show \"M*A*S*H\" franchise.\nBULLET::::- The character Damien Karras is a Jesuit priest from the book and film \"The Exorcist\".\nBULLET::::- The Jesuits are the antagonists in the novel and TV miniseries \"Shōgun\"\nBULLET::::- The 1986 British drama film \"The Mission\" revolves around the experiences of a Jesuit missionary in 18th-century South America.\nBULLET::::- Antonio Banderas plays a Jesuit priest in the 2001 film \"The Body\".\nBULLET::::- Édgar Ramírez plays a Jesuit priest in 2014 film \"Deliver Us from Evil\".\nBULLET::::- The 2016 Martin Scorsese film \"Silence\" is based on two Jesuit priests who travel to Japan to spread Christianity.\nBULLET::::- The main protagonist in James Blish's 1958 novel \"A Case of Conscience\" is a Jesuit priest.\nBULLET::::- Aramis is made Superior General of the Jesuits in Alexandre Dumas' \"\" (1850).\nBULLET::::- Mary Doria Russell's 1996 novel \"The Sparrow\" follows a Jesuit space mission to make contact with a newfound planet; the majority of the characters are Jesuits.\nBULLET::::- Angelo Cardinal Mennoni is the head of the Society of Jesus in A. J. Quinnell's 1987 novel \"The Name of the Father\".\nBULLET::::- In James Joyce's semi-autobiographical 1916 novel \"A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man\", the novel's protagonist, Stephen Dedalus, is educated in Jesuit schools.\nBULLET::::- Jesuits appear in Umberto Eco's 2010 novel \"The Prague Cemetery\".\n\nBULLET::::- Ad maiorem Dei gloriam\nBULLET::::- Apostleship of Prayer\nBULLET::::- Bollandist\nBULLET::::- Canadian Indian residential school system\nBULLET::::- Jesuit conspiracy theories\nBULLET::::- Jesuit Ivy\nBULLET::::- Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos\nBULLET::::- Jesuits and Nazi Germany\nBULLET::::- List of Jesuit buildings\nBULLET::::- List of saints of the Society of Jesus\nBULLET::::- Misiones Province\nBULLET::::- Monumenta Historica Societatis Iesu\nBULLET::::- Pontifical university\nBULLET::::- Roman Catholicism in China\nBULLET::::- Roman Catholicism in Japan\nBULLET::::- Sexual abuse scandal in the Society of Jesus\n\nBULLET::::- Bangert, William V. \"A History of the Society of Jesus\" (2nd ed. 1958) 552 pp.\nBULLET::::- Barthel, Manfred. \"Jesuits: History & Legend of the Society of Jesus\" (1984) 347 pp. online free\nBULLET::::- Chapple, Christopher. \"Jesuit Tradition in Education & Missions: A 450-Year Perspective\" (1993), 290 pp.\nBULLET::::- Mitchell, David. \"Jesuits: A History\" (1981) 320 pp.\nBULLET::::- Molina, J. Michelle. \"To Overcome Oneself: The Jesuit Ethic and Spirit of Global Expansion, 1520–1767\" (2013) online\nBULLET::::- O'Malley, John W. \"The Jesuits: A History from Ignatius to the Present\" (2014), 138 pp\nBULLET::::- Worcester, Thomas. ed. \"The Cambridge Companion to the Jesuits\" (2008), to 1773\nBULLET::::- Wright, Jonathan. \"God's Soldiers: Adventure, Politics, Intrigue & Power: A History of the Jesuits\" (2004) 368 pp online free\n\nBULLET::::- Alden, Dauril. \"Making of an Enterprise: The Society of Jesus in Portugal, Its Empire & Beyond, 1540–1750\" (1996) 707pp\nBULLET::::- Brockey, Liam Matthew. \"Journey to the East: The Jesuit Mission to China, 1579–1724\" (2007) 496 pp.\nBULLET::::- , Special Edition Published 1997 by Loyola University Press, US -\nBULLET::::- Brodrick, James. \"Saint Francis Xavier (1506–1552)\" (1952).\nBULLET::::- Brodrick, James. \"Saint Ignatius Loyola: The Pilgrim Years 1491–1538\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- Burson, Jeffrey D. and Jonathan Wright, eds. \"The Jesuit Suppression in Global Context: Causes, Events, and Consequences\" (Cambridge UP, 2015) 297.pp\nBULLET::::- Bygott, Ursula M. L. \"With Pen & Tongue: The Jesuits in Australia, 1865–1939\" (1980) 423 pp.\nBULLET::::- Dalmases, Cándido de. \"Ignatius of Loyola, Founder of the Jesuits: His Life & Work\" (1985) 362 pp.\nBULLET::::- Caraman, Philip. \"Ignatius Loyola: A Biography of the Founder of the Jesuits\" (1990), 222 pp.\nBULLET::::- Edwards, Francis. \"Jesuits in England from 1580 to the Present Day\" (1985) 333 pp.\nBULLET::::- Edwards, Francis. \"Robert Persons: The Biography of an Elizabethan Jesuit, 1546–1610\" (1995) 411 pp.\nBULLET::::- Healy, Róisin. \"Jesuit Specter in Imperial Germany\" (2003) 263 pp.\nBULLET::::- Höpfl, Harro. \"Jesuit Political Thought: The Society of Jesus & the State, c. 1540–1640\" (2004) 406 pp.\nBULLET::::- Hsia, Ronnie Po-chia. \"Jesuit Foreign Missions. A Historiographical Essay.\" \"Journal of Jesuit Studies\"(2014) 1#1 pp: 47–65.\nBULLET::::- Kaiser, Robert Blair. \"Inside the Jesuits: How Pope Francis is Changing the Church and the World\" (Rowman & Littlefield, 2014)\nBULLET::::- Klaiber, Jeffrey. \"The Jesuits in Latin America: 1549–2000:: 450 Years of Inculturation, Defense of Human Rights, and Prophetic Witness\". St Louis, MO: Institute of Jesuit Sources 2009.\nBULLET::::- Lapomarda, Vincent A., \"The Catholic Bishops of Europe and the Nazi Persecutions of Catholics and Jews\", The Edwin Mellen Press (2012)\nBULLET::::- McCoog, Thomas M., ed. \"Mercurian Project: Forming Jesuit Culture: 1573–1580 \" (2004) 992 pp.; 30 advanced essays by scholars\nBULLET::::- Martin, A. Lynn. \"Jesuit Mind. The Mentality of an Elite in Early Modern France\" (1988) 256 pp.\nBULLET::::- O'Malley, John. \"The Society of Jesus.\" in R. Po-chia Hsia, ed., \"A Companion to the Reformation World\" (2004) pp. 223–36.\nBULLET::::- O'Malley, John W. ed. \"Saints or Devils Incarnate? Studies in Jesuit History\" (2013) 312 pp\nBULLET::::- Pomplun, Trent. \"Jesuit on the Roof of the World: Ippolito Desideri's Mission to Tibet.\" Oxford University Press (2010).\nBULLET::::- Roberts, Ian D. \"Harvest of Hope: Jesuit Collegiate Education in England, 1794–1914\" (1996) 253 pp.\nBULLET::::- Ronan, Charles E. and Bonnie B. C. Oh, eds. \"East Meets West: The Jesuits in China, 1582–1773\" (1988), 332 pp.\nBULLET::::- Ross, Andrew C. \"Vision Betrayed: The Jesuits in Japan & China, 1542–1742\" (1994) 216 pp.\nBULLET::::- Santich, Jan Joseph. \"Missio Moscovitica: The Role of the Jesuits in the Westernization of Russia, 1582–1689\" (1995) 255 pp.\nBULLET::::- Wright, Jonathan. \"From Immolation to Restoration: The Jesuits, 1773–1814.\" \"Theological Studies\" (2014) 75#4 pp. 729–745.\n\nBULLET::::- Cushner, Nicholas P. \"Soldiers of God: The Jesuits in Colonial America, 1565–1767\" (2002) 402 pp.\nBULLET::::- Garraghan, Gilbert J. \"The Jesuits Of The Middle United States\" (3 vol 1938) covers Midwest from 1800 to 1919 vol 1 online, ; vol 2; vol 3\nBULLET::::- McDonough, Peter. \"Men astutely trained : a history of the Jesuits in the American century\" (1994), covers 1900 to 1960s; online free\nBULLET::::- Schroth, Raymond A. \"The American Jesuits: A History\" (2009)\n\nBULLET::::- Desideri, Ippolito. \"Mission to Tibet: The Extraordinary Eighteenth-Century Account of Father Ippolito Desideri.\" Translated by Michael J. Sweet. Edited by Leonard Zwilling. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Donnelly, John Patrick, ed. \"Jesuit Writings of the Early Modern Period: 1540–1640\" (2006)\n\nBULLET::::- Klaus Schatz. \"Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 1: 1814–1872\" Münster: Aschendorff Verlag, 2013. XXX, 274 S. . online review\nBULLET::::- Schatz. \"Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 2: 1872–1917\"\nBULLET::::- Schatz. \"Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 3: 1917–1945\"\nBULLET::::- Schatz. \"Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 4: 1945–1983\"\nBULLET::::- Schatz. \"Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 5: Quellen, Glossar, Biogramme, Gesamtregister\"\n\nBULLET::::- Benedict XVI's Address to the Members of the Society of Jesus, 22 April 2006\nBULLET::::- Benedict XVI's Visit to the Pontifical Gregorian University, 3 November 2006\n\nBULLET::::- The Jesuit Ratio Studiorum of 1599\nBULLET::::- The Jesuit Mission Press in Japan, 1591–1610\nBULLET::::- Letter of the Jesuit Social Justice Secretariat to the leaders of the G8, July 2005\nBULLET::::- The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola\n\nBULLET::::- The Jesuits, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Nigel Aston, Simon Ditchfield & Olwen Hutton (\"In Our Time\", 18 January 2007)\nBULLET::::- Archives of Jezuïeten - Belgische (1832-1935) En Vlaamse (1935-) Provincie. 16de Eeuw-2012 in ODIS - Online Database for Intermediary Structures\n"}
{"id": "16088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16088", "title": "July 15", "text": "July 15\n\nBULLET::::- 484 BC – Dedication of the Temple of Castor and Pollux in ancient Rome\nBULLET::::- AD 70 – Titus and his armies breach the walls of Jerusalem. (17th of Tammuz in the Hebrew calendar).\nBULLET::::- 756 – An Lushan Rebellion: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang is ordered by his Imperial Guards to execute chancellor Yang Guozhong by forcing him to commit suicide or face a mutiny. General An Lushan has other members of the emperor's family killed.\nBULLET::::- 1099 – First Crusade: Christian soldiers take the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem after the final assault of a difficult siege.\nBULLET::::- 1149 – The reconstructed Church of the Holy Sepulchre is consecrated in Jerusalem.\nBULLET::::- 1207 – King John of England expels Canterbury monks for supporting Archbishop Stephen Langton.\nBULLET::::- 1240 – Swedish–Novgorodian Wars: A Novgorodian army led by Alexander Nevsky defeats the Swedes in the Battle of the Neva.\nBULLET::::- 1381 – John Ball, a leader in the Peasants' Revolt, is hanged, drawn and quartered in the presence of King Richard II of England.\nBULLET::::- 1410 – Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War: Battle of Grunwald: The allied forces of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania defeat the army of the Teutonic Order.\nBULLET::::- 1482 – Muhammad XII is crowned the twenty-second and last Nasrid king of Granada.\nBULLET::::- 1738 – Baruch Laibov and Alexander Voznitzin are burned alive in St. Petersburg, Russia. Vonitzin had converted to Judaism with Laibov's help, with the consent of Empress Anna Ivanovna.\nBULLET::::- 1741 – Aleksei Chirikov sights land in Southeast Alaska. He sends men ashore in a longboat, making them the first Europeans to visit Alaska.\nBULLET::::- 1789 – Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, is named by acclamation Colonel General of the new National Guard of Paris.\nBULLET::::- 1799 – The Rosetta Stone is found in the Egyptian village of Rosetta by French Captain Pierre-François Bouchard during Napoleon's Egyptian Campaign.\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Pike expedition: United States Army Lieutenant Zebulon Pike begins an expedition from Fort Bellefontaine near St. Louis, Missouri, to explore the west.\nBULLET::::- 1815 – Napoleonic Wars: Napoleon Bonaparte surrenders aboard .\nBULLET::::- 1823 – A fire destroys the ancient Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome, Italy.\nBULLET::::- 1834 – The Spanish Inquisition is officially disbanded after nearly 356 years.\nBULLET::::- 1838 – Ralph Waldo Emerson delivers the Divinity School Address at Harvard Divinity School, discounting Biblical miracles and declaring Jesus a great man, but not God. The Protestant community reacts with outrage.\nBULLET::::- 1862 – The CSS \"Arkansas\", the most effective ironclad on the Mississippi River, battles with Union ships commanded by Admiral David Farragut, severely damaging three ships and sustaining heavy damage herself. The encounter changed the complexion of warfare on the Mississippi and helped to reverse Rebel fortunes on the river in the summer of 1862.\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Reconstruction Era of the United States: Georgia becomes the last of the former Confederate states to be readmitted to the Union.\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Rupert's Land and the North-Western Territory are transferred to Canada from the Hudson's Bay Company, and the province of Manitoba and the Northwest Territories are established from these vast territories.\nBULLET::::- 1888 – The stratovolcano Mount Bandai erupts killing approximately 500 people, in Fukushima Prefecture, Japan.\nBULLET::::- 1910 – In his book \"Clinical Psychiatry\", Emil Kraepelin gives a name to Alzheimer's disease, naming it after his colleague Alois Alzheimer.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – In Seattle, Washington, William Boeing and George Conrad Westervelt incorporate Pacific Aero Products (later renamed Boeing).\nBULLET::::- 1918 – World War I: The Second Battle of the Marne begins near the River Marne with a German attack.\nBULLET::::- 1920 – The Polish Parliament establishes Silesian Voivodeship before the Polish-German plebiscite.\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Japanese Communist Party is established in Japan.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Massacre of July 15, 1927: Eighty-nine protesters are killed by the Austrian police in Vienna.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – State of North Borneo, today in Sabah, Malaysia, annexed by the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1954 – First flight of the Boeing 367-80, prototype for both the Boeing 707 and C-135 series.\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Eighteen Nobel laureates sign the Mainau Declaration against nuclear weapons, later co-signed by thirty-four others.\nBULLET::::- 1959 – The steel strike of 1959 begins, leading to significant importation of foreign steel for the first time in United States history.\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Vietnam War: The United States and South Vietnam begin Operation Hastings to push the North Vietnamese out of the Vietnamese Demilitarized Zone.\nBULLET::::- 1971 – The United Red Army is founded in Japan.\nBULLET::::- 1974 – In Nicosia, Cyprus, Greek junta-sponsored nationalists launch a coup d'état, deposing President Makarios and installing Nikos Sampson as Cypriot president.\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Space Race: Apollo–Soyuz Test Project features the dual launch of an Apollo spacecraft and a Soyuz spacecraft on the first joint Soviet-United States human-crewed flight. It was both the last launch of an Apollo spacecraft, and the Saturn family of rockets.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – U.S. President Jimmy Carter gives his \"malaise speech\".\nBULLET::::- 1983 – An attack at Orly Airport in Paris is launched by Armenian militant organisation ASALA, leaving eight people dead and 55 injured.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – A Belgian Air Force C-130 Hercules carrying the Royal Netherlands Army marching band crashes on landing at Eindhoven Airport.\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Sri Lankan Civil War: Sri Lankan Tamil MP S. Shanmuganathan is killed by a claymore mine.\nBULLET::::- 2002 – \"American Taliban\" John Walker Lindh pleads guilty to supplying aid to the enemy and to possession of explosives during the commission of a felony.\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Anti-Terrorism Court of Pakistan hands down the death sentence to British born Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh and life terms to three others suspected of murdering \"The Wall Street Journal\" reporter Daniel Pearl.\nBULLET::::- 2003 – AOL Time Warner disbands Netscape. The Mozilla Foundation is established on the same day.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Twitter, later one of the largest social media platforms in the world, is launched.\nBULLET::::- 2014 – A train derails on the Moscow Metro, killing at least 24 and injuring more than 160 others.\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Factions of the Turkish Armed Forces attempt a coup.\n\nBULLET::::- 980 – Ichijō, Japanese emperor (d. 1011)\nBULLET::::- 1273 – Ewostatewos, Ethiopian monk and saint (d. 1352)\nBULLET::::- 1353 – Vladimir the Bold, Russian prince (d. 1410)\nBULLET::::- 1359 – Antonio Correr, Italian cardinal (d. 1445)\nBULLET::::- 1442 – Boček IV of Poděbrady, Bohemian nobleman (d. 1496)\nBULLET::::- 1455 – Queen Yun, Korean queen (d. 1482)\nBULLET::::- 1471 – Eskender, Ethiopian emperor (d. 1494)\nBULLET::::- 1478 – Barbara Jagiellon, duchess consort of Saxony and Margravine consort of Meissen (d. 1534)\nBULLET::::- 1573 – Inigo Jones, English architect, designed the Queen's House (d. 1652)\nBULLET::::- 1600 – Jan Cossiers, Flemish painter (d. 1671)\nBULLET::::- 1606 – Rembrandt, Dutch painter and etcher (d. 1669)\nBULLET::::- 1611 – Jai Singh I, maharaja of Jaipur (d. 1667)\nBULLET::::- 1613 – Gu Yanwu, Chinese philologist and geographer (d. 1682)\nBULLET::::- 1631 – Jens Juel, Danish politician and diplomat, Governor-general of Norway (d. 1700)\nBULLET::::- 1631 – Richard Cumberland, English philosopher (d. 1718)\nBULLET::::- 1638 – Giovanni Buonaventura Viviani, Italian violinist and composer (d. 1693)\nBULLET::::- 1704 – August Gottlieb Spangenberg, German bishop and theologian (d. 1792)\nBULLET::::- 1779 – Clement Clarke Moore, American author, poet, and educator (d. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1793 – Almira Hart Lincoln Phelps, American educator, author, editor (d. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1796 – Thomas Bulfinch, American mythologist (d. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1799 – Reuben Chapman, American lawyer and politician, 13th Governor of Alabama (d. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1800 – Sidney Breese, American jurist and politician (d. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1808 – Henry Edward Manning, English cardinal (d. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1812 – James Hope-Scott, English lawyer and academic (d. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Sir John Fowler, 1st Baronet, English engineer, designed the Forth Bridge (d. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1827 – W. W. Thayer American lawyer and politician, 6th Governor of Oregon (d. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Vilfredo Pareto, Italian economist and sociologist (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Frances Xavier Cabrini, Italian-American nun and saint (d. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1852 – Josef Josephi, Polish-born singer and actor (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Emmeline Pankhurst, English political activist and suffragist (d. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Marie Tempest, English actress and singer (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1865 – Alfred Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Northcliffe, Anglo-Irish businessman and publisher, founded the \"Amalgamated Press\" (d. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1865 – Wilhelm Wirtinger, Austrian-German mathematician and theorist (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1867 – Jean-Baptiste Charcot, French physician and explorer (d. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Doppo Kunikida, Japanese journalist, author, and poet (d. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1880 – Enrique Mosca, Argentinian lawyer and politician (d. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Wharton Esherick, American sculptor (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Walter Benjamin, German philosopher and critic (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Enid Bennett, Australian-American actress (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Dick Rauch, American football player and coach (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Tadeusz Sendzimir, Polish-American engineer (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Seán Lemass, Irish soldier and politician, 4th Taoiseach of Ireland (d. 1971)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Jean Rey, Belgian lawyer and politician, 2nd President of the European Commission (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Walter D. Edmonds, American journalist and author (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – K. Kamaraj, Indian journalist and politician (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Rudolf Arnheim, German-American psychologist and author (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Dorothy Fields, American songwriter (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Anita Farra, Italian actress (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – R. S. Mugali, Indian poet and academic (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Rudolf Uhlenhaut, English-German engineer (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Jean Hamburger, French physician and surgeon (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Edward Shackleton, Baron Shackleton, English geographer and politician, Secretary of State for Air (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Cowboy Copas, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Hammond Innes, English journalist and author (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Abraham Sutzkever, Russian poet and author (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Akhtar Hameed Khan, Pakistani economist, scholar, and activist (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Howard Vernon, Swiss-French actor (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Albert Ghiorso, American chemist and academic (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Kashmir Singh Katoch, Indian army officer (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Sumner Gerard, American politician and diplomat (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Robert Conquest, English-American historian, poet, and academic (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Joan Roberts, American actress and singer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Nur Muhammad Taraki, Afghan journalist and politician (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Bertram Brockhouse, Canadian physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Brenda Milner, English-Canadian neuropsychologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Fritz Langanke, German lieutenant (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Iris Murdoch, Anglo-Irish British novelist and philosopher (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Jack Beeson, American pianist and composer (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Henri Colpi, Swiss-French director and screenwriter (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Robert Bruce Merrifield, American biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Jean Heywood, British actress\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Leon M. Lederman, American physicist and mathematician, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Jean-Pierre Richard, French writer\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Francisco de Andrade, Portuguese sailor\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Jeremiah Denton, American admiral and politician (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Marianne Bernadotte, Swedish actress and philanthropist\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Philip Carey, American actor (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Taylor Hardwick, American architect, designed Haydon Burns Library and Friendship Fountain Park (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – D. A. Pennebaker, American documentary filmmaker (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Evan Hultman, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Antony Carbone, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Pandel Savic, American football player (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Driss Chraïbi, Moroccan-French journalist and author (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Leopoldo Galtieri, Argentinian general and politician, 44th President of Argentina (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Raymond Gosling, English physicist and academic (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Sir John Graham, 4th Baronet, English diplomat\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Nan Martin, American actress (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Carmen Zapata, American actress (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Håkon Brusveen, Norwegian cross-country skier\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Carl Woese, American microbiologist and biophysicist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Viramachaneni Vimla Devi, Indian parliamentarian\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Charles Anthony, American tenor and actor (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Francis Bebey, Cameroonian-French guitarist (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Ian Stewart, Scottish race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Jacques Derrida, Algerian-French philosopher and academic (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Richard Garneau, Canadian journalist and sportscaster (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Stephen Smale, American mathematician and computer scientist\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Einosuke Akiya, Japanese Buddhist leader\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Clive Cussler, American archaeologist and author\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Joanna Merlin, American actress and casting director\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Jacques-Yvan Morin, Canadian lawyer and politician, Deputy Premier of Quebec\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Ed Litzenberger, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Guido Crepax, Italian author and illustrator (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – M. T. Vasudevan Nair, Indian author and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Harrison Birtwistle, English composer and academic\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Eva Krížiková, Czech actress\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Risto Jarva, Finnish director and producer (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Donn Clendenon, American baseball player and lawyer (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Alex Karras, American football player, wrestler, and actor (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Ken Kercheval, American actor and director (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – George Voinovich, American lawyer and politician, 65th Governor of Ohio (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Prabhash Joshi, Indian journalist (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Ernie Barnes, American football player, actor, and painter (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Carmen Callil, Australian publisher, founded Virago Press\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Barry Goldwater, Jr., American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Aníbal Cavaco Silva, Portuguese economist and politician, 19th President of the Portuguese Republic\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Denis Héroux, Canadian director and producer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Ronald Gene Simmons, American sergeant and convicted murderer (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Robert Winston, English surgeon, academic, and politician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Vivian Malone Jones, American civil rights activist (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Jocelyn Bell Burnell, Northern Irish astrophysicist, astronomer, and academic\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Millie Jackson, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Jan-Michael Vincent, American actor (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – David Arthur Granger, Guyanese politician, 9th President of Guyana\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Peter Lewis (musician), American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Jürgen Möllemann, German soldier and politician, Vice-Chancellor of Germany (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Linda Ronstadt, American singer-songwriter, producer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Hassanal Bolkiah, Sultan of Brunei\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Peter Banks, English guitarist and songwriter (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Lydia Davis, American short story writer, novelist, and essayist\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Pridiyathorn Devakula, Thai economist and politician, Thai Minister of Finance\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Roky Erickson, American singer-songwriter and musician (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Twinkle, English singer-songwriter (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Dimosthenis Kourtovik, Greek anthropologist and critic\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Artimus Pyle, American rock drummer and songwriter (Lynyrd Skynyrd)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Carl Bildt, Swedish politician and diplomat, Prime Minister of Sweden\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Trevor Horn, English singer-songwriter, keyboard player, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Richard Russo, American novelist, short story writer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Colin Barnett, Australian economist and politician, 29th Premier of Western Australia\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Arianna Huffington, Greek-American journalist and publisher (\"The Huffington Post\")\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Gregory Isaacs, Jamaican-English singer-songwriter (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Jesse Ventura, American wrestler, actor, and politician, 38th Governor of Minnesota\nBULLET::::- 1952 – David Pack, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Celia Imrie, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Terry O'Quinn, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Marky Ramone, American drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Johnny Thunders, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haitian priest and politician, 49th President of Haiti\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Sultanah Haminah, Malaysian royal consort\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Mohamad Shahrum Osman, Malaysian politician\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Alicia Bridges, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1954 – John Ferguson, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Jeff Jarvis, American journalist and blogger\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Giorgos Kaminis, American-Greek lawyer and politician, 78th Mayor of Athens\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Mario Kempes, Argentinian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Ian Curtis, English singer-songwriter and guitarist (Joy Division) (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Nicholas Harberd, British botanist, educator and academician\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Barry Melrose, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Steve Mortimer, Australian rugby league player, coach, and administrator\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Joe Satriani, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Wayne Taylor, South African race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Gary Heale, English footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Mac Thornberry, American lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Vincent Lindon, French actor, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Kim Alexis, American fashion model\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Lolita Davidovich, Canadian actress\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Jean-Christophe Grangé, French journalist and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Scott Ritter, American soldier and international weapons inspector\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Forest Whitaker, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Nikos Filippou, Greek basketball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Michelle Ford, Australian swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Brigitte Nielsen, Danish-Italian actress\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Steve Thomas, English-Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Alistair Carmichael, Scottish lawyer and politician, Secretary of State for Scotland\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Gero Miesenböck, Austrian neuroscientist and educator\nBULLET::::- 1965 – David Miliband, English politician, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Jason Bonham, English singer-songwriter and drummer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Irène Jacob, French-Swiss actress\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Adam Savage, American actor and special effects designer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Elbert West, American singer-songwriter (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Eddie Griffin, American comedian, actor, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Ain Tammus, Estonian footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Tarkan Gözübüyük, Turkish bass player and producer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Scott Foley, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Brian Austin Green, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Cherry, American wrestler and manager\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Danny Law, English cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Ben Pepper, Australian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Steve Cunningham, American boxer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Marco Di Vaio, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Diane Kruger, German actress and model\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Gabriel Iglesias, Mexican-American comedian and voice actor\nBULLET::::- 1977 – André Nel, South African cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Lana Parrilla, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1977 – John St. Clair, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Ray Toro, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Miguel Olivo, Dominican baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Laura Benanti, American actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Alexander Frei, Swiss footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Edda Garðarsdóttir, Icelandic footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Renata Kučerová, Czech tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Reggie Abercrombie, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – BxB Hulk, Japanese professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Jonathan Cheechoo, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Julia Perez, Indonesian singer and actress (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Alou Diarra, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Petros Klampanis, Greek bassist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Marius Stankevičius, Lithuanian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Alan Pérez, Spanish cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Neemia Tialata, New Zealand rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Aída Yéspica, Venezuelan model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Nelson Merlo, Brazilian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Will Rudge, English cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Heath Slater, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Angelo Siniscalchi, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Veronika Velez-Zuzulová, Slovak skier\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Sanjeev, Tamil actor\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Tomer Kapon, Israeli actor\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Tyler Kennedy, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Riki Christodoulou, English race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Steven Jahn, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Alisa Kleybanova, Russian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Anthony Randolph, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Zach Bogosian, American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Damian Lillard, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Danilo, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Derrick Favors, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Evgeny Tishchenko, Russian boxer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Tobias Harris, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Hokutōfuji Daiki, Japanese sumo wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Wayde van Niekerk, South African sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Håvard Nielsen, Norwegian footballer\nBULLET::::- 756 – Yang Guifei, consort of Xuan Zong (b. 719)\nBULLET::::- 998 – Abū al-Wafā' Būzjānī, Persian mathematician and astronomer (b. 940)\nBULLET::::- 1015 – Vladimir the Great, Grand prince of Kievan Rus' (b. c. 958)\nBULLET::::- 1274 – Bonaventure, Italian bishop and saint (b. 1221)\nBULLET::::- 1291 – Rudolf I of Germany (b. 1218)\nBULLET::::- 1299 – King Eric II of Norway (b. c. 1268)\nBULLET::::- 1381 – John Ball, English Lollard priest\nBULLET::::- 1388 – Agnes of Durazzo, titular Latin empress consort of Constantinople (d. 1313)\nBULLET::::- 1397 – Catherine of Henneberg, German ruler (b. c. 1334)\nBULLET::::- 1406 – William, Duke of Austria\nBULLET::::- 1410 – Ulrich von Jungingen, German Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights (b. 1360)\nBULLET::::- 1445 – Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scotland\nBULLET::::- 1542 – Lisa del Giocondo, subject of Leonardo da Vinci's painting \"Mona Lisa\" (b. 1479)\nBULLET::::- 1544 – René of Châlon (b. 1519)\nBULLET::::- 1571 – Shimazu Takahisa, Japanese daimyō (b. 1514)\nBULLET::::- 1609 – Annibale Carracci, Italian painter and illustrator (b. 1560)\nBULLET::::- 1614 – Pierre de Bourdeille, seigneur de Brantôme, French soldier, historian, and author (b. 1540)\nBULLET::::- 1655 – Girolamo Rainaldi, Italian architect (b. 1570)\nBULLET::::- 1685 – James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth, Dutch-English general and politician, Governor of Kingston-upon-Hull (b. 1649)\nBULLET::::- 1750 – Vasily Tatishchev, Russian ethnographer and politician (b. 1686)\nBULLET::::- 1765 – Charles-André van Loo, French painter (b. 1705)\nBULLET::::- 1767 – Michael Bruce, Scottish poet and composer (b. 1746)\nBULLET::::- 1789 – Jacques Duphly, French harpsichord player and composer (b. 1715)\nBULLET::::- 1828 – Jean-Antoine Houdon, French sculptor (b. 1741)\nBULLET::::- 1839 – Winthrop Mackworth Praed, English poet and politician (b. 1802)\nBULLET::::- 1844 – Claude Charles Fauriel, French philologist and historian (b. 1772)\nBULLET::::- 1851 – Juan Felipe Ibarra, Argentinian general and politician (b. 1787)\nBULLET::::- 1857 – Carl Czerny, Austrian pianist and composer (b. 1791)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Alexander Andreyevich Ivanov, Russian painter (b. 1806)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – General Tom Thumb, American circus performer (b. 1838)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Rosalía de Castro, Spanish author and poet (b. 1837)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Gottfried Keller, Swiss author, poet, and playwright (b. 1819)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Jean-Baptiste Salpointe, French-American archbishop (d. 1825)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Anton Chekhov, Russian playwright and short story writer (b. 1860)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Hermann Emil Fischer, German chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Hugo von Hofmannsthal, Austrian author, poet, and playwright (b. 1874)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Leopold Auer, Hungarian violinist, composer, and conductor (b. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Ladislaus Bortkiewicz, Russian-German economist and mathematician (b. 1868)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Bahíyyih Khánum, Iranian writer and leader in the Baha'i faith (b. 1846)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Cornelis Jacobus Langenhoven, South African poet and politician (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Irving Babbitt, American scholar, critic, and academic (b. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Freddie Keppard, American cornet player (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Eugen Bleuler, Swiss psychiatrist and physician (b. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Robert Wadlow, American giant, 8\"11' 271 cm (b.1918)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Wenceslao Vinzons, Filipino lawyer and politician (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Marie-Victorin Kirouac, Canadian botanist and academic (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Razor Smith, English cricketer and coach (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Walter Donaldson, American soldier and songwriter (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – John J. Pershing, American general (b. 1860)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Geevarghese Mar Ivanios, Indian archbishop, founded the Order of the Imitation of Christ (b. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – James M. Cox, American publisher and politician, 46th Governor of Ohio (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Vasily Maklakov, Russian lawyer and politician (b. 1869)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Ernest Bloch, Swiss-American composer and academic (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Vance Palmer, Australian author and critic (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Set Persson, Swedish politician (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Lawrence Tibbett, American singer and actor (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – John Edward Brownlee, Canadian lawyer and politician, 5th Premier of Alberta (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Francis Cherry, American lawyer and politician, 35th Governor of Arkansas (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Seyfi Arkan, Turkish architect (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Christine Chubbuck, American journalist (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Paul Gallico, American journalist and author (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Donald Mackay, Australian businessman and activist (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Mexican academic and politician, 29th President of Mexico, 1964-1970 (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Frédéric Dorion, Canadian lawyer, judge, and politician (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Bill Justis, American saxophonist, songwriter, and producer (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Billy Haughton, American harness racer and trainer (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Eleanor Estes, American librarian, author, and illustrator (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Laurie Cunningham, English footballer (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Zaim Topčić, Yugoslav and Bosnian writer (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Margaret Lockwood, English actress (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Omar Abu Risha, Syrian poet and diplomat, 4th Syrian Ambassador to the United States (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Bert Convy, American actor, singer, and game show host (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Hammer DeRoburt, Nauruan educator and politician, 1st President of Nauru (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Chingiz Mustafayev, Azerbaijani journalist and author (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Justinas Lagunavičius, Lithuanian basketball player (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Gianni Versace, Italian fashion designer, founded Versace (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – S. Shanmuganathan, Sri Lankan politician (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Louis Quilico, Canadian opera singer and educator (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – C. Balasingham, Sri Lankan lawyer and civil servant (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Roberto Bolaño, Chilean novelist, short-story writer, poet, and essayist (b. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Elisabeth Welch, American actress and singer (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Robert H. Brooks, American businessman, founder of Hooters and Naturally Fresh, Inc. (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Alireza Shapour Shahbazi, Iranian archaeologist and academic (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – György Kolonics, Hungarian canoe racer (b. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – James E. Akins, American politician and diplomat, United States Ambassador to Saudi Arabia (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Friedrich Wilhelm Schnitzler, German landowner and politician (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Googie Withers, British-Australian actress (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Boris Cebotari, Moldovan footballer (b. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Tsilla Chelton, Israeli-French actress (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Grant Feasel, American football player (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – David Fraser, English general (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Celeste Holm, American actress and singer (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Yoichi Takabayashi, Japanese director and screenwriter (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Ninos Aho, Syrian-American poet and activist (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Henry Braden, American lawyer and politician (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Tom Greenwell, American lawyer and judge (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Earl Gros, American football player (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Noël Lee, Chinese-American pianist and composer (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Meskerem Legesse, Ethiopian runner (b. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – John T. Riedl, American computer scientist and academic (b. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Óscar Acosta, Honduran author, poet, and diplomat (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – James MacGregor Burns, American historian, political scientist, and author (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Saúl Lara, Spanish footballer (b. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Edward Perl, American neuroscientist and academic (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Robert A. Roe, American soldier and politician (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Masahiko Aoki, Japanese-American economist and academic (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Wan Li, Chinese politician, 4th Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Aubrey Morris, British actor (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Dave Somerville, Canadian singer (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Martin Landau, American film and television actor (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- Bon Festival (Kantō region, Japan)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Abhai (Syriac Orthodox Church)\nBULLET::::- Anne-Marie Javouhey\nBULLET::::- Bernhard II, Margrave of Baden-Baden\nBULLET::::- Bonaventure\nBULLET::::- Dispersion of the Apostles (No longer officially celebrated by the Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- Donald of Ogilvy\nBULLET::::- Edith of Polesworth\nBULLET::::- Edith of Wilton\nBULLET::::- Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor\nBULLET::::- Plechelm\nBULLET::::- Quriaqos and Julietta\nBULLET::::- Swithun\nBULLET::::- Vladimir the Great (Eastern Orthodox; Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- July 15 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Birthday of Don Luis Muñoz Rivera can fall, while July 21 is the latest; celebrated on the third Monday of July. (Puerto Rico)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Galla Bayramy can fall, while July 21 is the latest; celebrated on the third Sunday of July. (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Marine Day can fall, while July 21 is the latest; celebrated on the third Monday of July. (Japan)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which President's Day (Botswana) can fall, while July 21 is the latest; celebrated on the third Monday of July.\nBULLET::::- Elderly Men Day (Kiribati)\nBULLET::::- Festival of Santa Rosalia (Palermo, Sicily)\nBULLET::::- Sultan's Birthday (Brunei Darussalam)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "16089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16089", "title": "July 17", "text": "July 17\n\nBULLET::::- 180 – Twelve inhabitants of Scillium (near Kasserine, modern-day Tunisia) in North Africa are executed for being Christians. This is the earliest record of Christianity in that part of the world.\nBULLET::::- 1048 – Damasus II is elected pope.\nBULLET::::- 1203 – The Fourth Crusade captures Constantinople by assault. The Byzantine emperor Alexios III Angelos flees from his capital into exile.\nBULLET::::- 1402 – Zhu Di, better known by his era name as the Yongle Emperor, assumes the throne over the Ming dynasty of China.\nBULLET::::- 1429 – Hundred Years' War: Charles VII of France is crowned the King of France in the Reims Cathedral after a successful campaign by Joan of Arc.\nBULLET::::- 1453 – Battle of Castillon: The last battle of Hundred Years' War, the French under Jean Bureau defeat the English under the Earl of Shrewsbury, who is killed in the battle in Gascony.\nBULLET::::- 1717 – King George I of Great Britain sails down the River Thames with a barge of 50 musicians, where George Frideric Handel's \"Water Music\" is premiered.\nBULLET::::- 1762 – Catherine II becomes tsar of Russia upon the murder of Peter III of Russia.\nBULLET::::- 1771 – Bloody Falls massacre: Chipewyan chief Matonabbee, traveling as the guide to Samuel Hearne on his Arctic overland journey, massacres a group of unsuspecting Inuit.\nBULLET::::- 1791 – Members of the French National Guard under the command of General Lafayette open fire on a crowd of radical Jacobins at the Champ de Mars, Paris, during the French Revolution, killing scores of people.\nBULLET::::- 1794 – The 16 Carmelite Martyrs of Compiègne are executed ten days prior to the end of the French Revolution's Reign of Terror.\nBULLET::::- 1867 – Harvard School of Dental Medicine is established in Boston, Massachusetts. It is the first dental school in the U.S. that is affiliated with a university.\nBULLET::::- 1821: The Kingdom of Spain cedes the territory of Florida to the United States.\nBULLET::::- 1899 – NEC Corporation is organized as the first Japanese joint venture with foreign capital.\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Willis Carrier creates the first air conditioner in Buffalo, New York.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – King George V issues a Proclamation stating that the male line descendants of the British Royal Family will bear the surname Windsor.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and his immediate family and retainers are executed by Bolshevik Chekists at the Ipatiev House in Yekaterinburg, Russia.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The , the ship that rescued the 705 survivors from the , is sunk off Ireland by the German ; five lives are lost.\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Altona Bloody Sunday: A riot between the Nazi Party paramilitary forces, the SS and SA, and the German Communist Party ensues.\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Spanish Civil War: An Armed Forces rebellion against the recently elected leftist Popular Front government of Spain starts the civil war.\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Douglas Corrigan takes off from Brooklyn to fly the \"wrong way\" to Ireland and becomes known as \"Wrong Way\" Corrigan.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Port Chicago disaster: Near the San Francisco Bay, two ships laden with ammunition for the war explode in Port Chicago, California, killing 320.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – World War II: At Sainte-Foy-de-Montgommery. in Normandy Field Marshal Erwin Rommel was strafed by allied aircraft while returning to his headquarters.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – World War II: The main three leaders of the Allied nations, Winston Churchill, Harry S. Truman and Joseph Stalin, meet in the German city of Potsdam to decide the future of a defeated Germany.\nBULLET::::- 1953 – The largest number of United States midshipman casualties in a single event results from an aircraft crash in Florida, killing 44.\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Disneyland is dedicated and opened by Walt Disney in Anaheim, California.\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Nuclear weapons testing: The \"Small Boy\" test shot Little Feller I becomes the last atmospheric test detonation at the Nevada National Security Site.\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Abdul Rahman Arif is overthrown and the Ba'ath Party is installed as the governing power in Iraq with Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr as the new Iraqi President.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – King Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanistan, while having surgery in Italy, is deposed by his cousin Mohammed Daoud Khan.\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Apollo–Soyuz Test Project: An American Apollo and a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft dock with each other in orbit marking the first such link-up between spacecraft from the two nations.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – East Timor is annexed, and becomes the 27th province of Indonesia.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – The opening of the Summer Olympics in Montreal is marred by 25 African teams boycotting the games because of New Zealand's participation. Contrary to rulings by other international sports organizations, the IOC had declined to exclude New Zealand because of their participation in South African sporting events during apartheid.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Nicaraguan dictator General Anastasio Somoza Debayle resigns and flees to Miami, Florida, United States.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – A structural failure leads to the collapse of a walkway at the Hyatt Regency in Kansas City, Missouri, killing 114 people and injuring more than 200.\nBULLET::::- 1984 – The national drinking age in the United States was changed from 18 to 21.\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Founding of the EUREKA Network by former head of states François Mitterrand (France) and Helmut Kohl (Germany).\nBULLET::::- 1989 – First flight of the B-2 Spirit Stealth Bomber.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Holy See–Poland relations are restored.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – TWA Flight 800: Off the coast of Long Island, New York, a Paris-bound TWA Boeing 747 explodes, killing all 230 on board.\nBULLET::::- 1998 – The 7.0 Papua New Guinea earthquake triggers a tsunami that destroys ten villages in Papua New Guinea, killing up to 2,700 people, and leaving several thousand injured.\nBULLET::::- 1998 – A diplomatic conference adopts the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, establishing a permanent international court to prosecute individuals for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and the crime of aggression.\nBULLET::::- 2000 – During approach to Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Airport, Alliance Air Flight 7412 suddenly crashes into a residential neighborhood in Patna, killing 60 people.\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Concorde is brought back into service nearly a year after the July 2000 crash.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – The 7.7 Pangandaran tsunami earthquake severely affects the Indonesian island of Java, killing 668 people, and leaving more than 9,000 injured.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – TAM Airlines Flight 3054, an Airbus A320, crashes into a warehouse after landing too fast and missing the end of the São Paulo–Congonhas Airport runway, killing 199 people.\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, a Boeing 777, crashes near the border of Ukraine and Russia after being shot down. All 298 people on board are killed.\nBULLET::::- 2014 – A French regional train on the Pau-Bayonne line crashes into a high-speed train near the town of Denguin, resulting in at least 25 injuries.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – At least 120 people are killed and 130 injured by a suicide bombing in Diyala Governorate, Iraq.\nBULLET::::- 2018 – 12 new moons are discovered orbiting Jupiter\nBULLET::::- 1476 – Adrian Fortescue, English Roman Catholic martyr (d. 1539)\nBULLET::::- 1487 – Ismail I of Iran (d. 1524)\nBULLET::::- 1499 – Maria Salviati, Italian noblewoman (d. 1543)\nBULLET::::- 1531 – Antoine de Créqui Canaples, Roman Catholic cardinal (d. 1574)\nBULLET::::- 1674 – Isaac Watts, English hymnwriter and theologian (d. 1748)\nBULLET::::- 1695 – Christian Karl Reinhard of Leiningen-Dachsburg-Falkenburg-Heidesheim (d. 1766)\nBULLET::::- 1698 – Pierre Louis Maupertuis, French mathematician and philosopher (d. 1759)\nBULLET::::- 1708 – Frederick Christian, Margrave of Brandenburg-Bayreuth (d. 1769)\nBULLET::::- 1714 – Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten, German philosopher and academic (d. 1762)\nBULLET::::- 1744 – Elbridge Gerry, American merchant and politician, 5th Vice President of the United States (d. 1814)\nBULLET::::- 1763 – John Jacob Astor, German-American businessman and philanthropist (d. 1848)\nBULLET::::- 1774 – John Wilbur, American minister and theologian (d. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1797 – Paul Delaroche, French painter and academic (d. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1823 – Leander Clark, American businessman, judge, and politician (d. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1831 – Xianfeng Emperor of China (d. 1861)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – Joseph-Alfred Mousseau, Canadian lawyer, judge, and politician, 7th Secretary of State for Canada (d. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1839 – Ephraim Shay, American engineer, invented the Shay locomotive (d. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1853 – Alexius Meinong, Ukrainian-Austrian philosopher and academic (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1868 – Henri Nathansen, Danish director and playwright (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Charles Davidson Dunbar, Scottish soldier and bagpipe player (d. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Lyonel Feininger, German-American painter and illustrator (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Jack Laviolette, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – James Somerville, English admiral and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Somerset (d. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Shmuel Yosef Agnon, Ukrainian-Israeli novelist, short story writer and poet, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Erle Stanley Gardner, American lawyer and author (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Georges Lemaître, Belgian priest, astronomer, and cosmologist (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Rupert Atkinson, English RAF officer (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Berenice Abbott, American photographer (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Osmond Borradaile, Canadian soldier and cinematographer (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – James Cagney, American actor and dancer (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Marcel Dalio, French actor (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Luigi Chinetti, Italian-American race car driver (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Bruno Jasieński, Polish poet and author (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Patrick Smith, Irish farmer and politician, Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Christina Stead, Australian author and academic (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – William Gargan, American actor (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – James Coyne, Canadian lawyer and banker, 2nd Governor of the Bank of Canada (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Frank Olson, American chemist and microbiologist (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Lionel Ferbos, American trumpet player (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Heinz Lehmann, German-Canadian psychiatrist and academic (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Erwin Bauer, German race car driver (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Art Linkletter, Canadian-American radio and television host (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Bertrand Goldberg, American architect, designed the Marina City Building (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Eleanor Steber, American soprano and educator (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Bijon Bhattacharya, Indian actor, singer, and screenwriter (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Arthur Rothstein, American photographer and educator (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Lou Boudreau, American baseball player and manager (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Phyllis Diller, American actress, comedian, and voice artist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Kenan Evren, Turkish general and politician, 7th President of Turkey (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Christiane Rochefort, French author (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Carlos Manuel Arana Osorio, Guatemalan soldier and politician, President of Guatemala (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Red Sovine, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Gordon Gould, American physicist and academic, invented the laser (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Juan Antonio Samaranch, Spanish businessman, 7th President of the International Olympic Committee (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – George Barnes, American guitarist, producer, and songwriter (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Louis Lachenal, French mountaineer (d. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Mary Osborne, American guitarist (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Toni Stone, American baseball player (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – František Zvarík, Slovak actor (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Jeanne Block, American psychologist (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – John Cooper, English car designer, co-founded the Cooper Car Company (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Garde Gardom, Canadian lawyer and politician, 26th Lieutenant Governor of British Columbia (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Jimmy Scott, American singer and actor (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Mohammad Hasan Sharq, Afghan politician\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Édouard Carpentier, French-Canadian wrestler (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Willis Carto, American activist and theorist (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Vince Guaraldi, American singer-songwriter and pianist (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Sergei K. Godunov, Russian mathematician and academic\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Quino, Spanish-Argentinian cartoonist\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Niccolò Castiglioni, Italian composer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Johnny Kerr, American basketball player and coach (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Wojciech Kilar, Polish pianist and composer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Karla Kuskin, American author and illustrator (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Hal Riney, American businessman, founded Publicis & Hal Riney (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Keiko Awaji, Japanese actress (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici, Maltese politician, 9th Prime Minister of Malta\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Tony Pithey, Zimbabwean-South African cricketer (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Lucio Tan, Chinese-Filipino billionaire businessman and educator\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Diahann Carroll, American actress and singer (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Peter Schickele, American composer and educator\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Donald Sutherland, Canadian actor and producer\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Hermann Huppen, Belgian author and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Andrée Champagne, Canadian actress and politician\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Spencer Davis, Welsh singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Ali Khamenei, Iranian cleric and politician, 2nd Supreme Leader of Iran\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Tim Brooke-Taylor, English actor and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Daryle Lamonica, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Bob Taylor, English cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Achim Warmbold, German race car driver and manager\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Don Kessinger, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Gale Garnett, New Zealand–born Canadian singer\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Connie Hawkins, American basketball player (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Zoot Money, English singer-songwriter and keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1943 – LaVyrle Spencer, American author and educator\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Mark Burgess, New Zealand cricketer and footballer\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Catherine Schell, Hungarian-English actress\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Carlos Alberto Torres, Brazilian footballer and manager (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Alexander, Crown Prince of Yugoslavia\nBULLET::::- 1945 – John Patten, Baron Patten, English politician, Secretary of State for Education\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Chris Crutcher, American novelist and short story writer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Ted Sampley, American POW/MIA activist (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Joyce Anelay, Baroness Anelay of St John's, English educator and politician\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Robert Begerau, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Wolfgang Flür, German musician (Kraftwerk)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Mick Tucker, English rock drummer (Sweet) (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Ron Asheton, American guitarist and songwriter (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Luc Bondy, Swiss director and producer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Geezer Butler, English bass player and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Charley Steiner, American journalist and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Phoebe Snow, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Tengku Sulaiman Shah, Malaysian corporate figure\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Lucie Arnaz, American actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Mark Bowden, American journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Andrew Robathan, English soldier and politician, Minister of State for the Armed Forces\nBULLET::::- 1952 – David Hasselhoff, American actor, singer, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Nicolette Larson, American singer-songwriter (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Thé Lau, Dutch singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Robert R. McCammon, American author\nBULLET::::- 1954 – António Costa, Prime Minister of Portugal\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Angela Merkel, German chemist and politician, 8th Chancellor of Germany\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Edward Natapei, Vanuatuan politician, 6th Prime Minister of Vanuatu (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – J. Michael Straczynski, American author, screenwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Sylvie Léonard, Canadian actress and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Paul Stamets, American mycologist and author\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Julie Bishop, Australian lawyer and politician, 38th Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Bryan Trottier, Canadian-American ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Bruce Crump, American drummer and songwriter (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Wendy Freedman, Canadian-American cosmologist and astronomer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Wong Kar-wai, Chinese director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Suzanne Moore, English journalist\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Susan Silver, American music manager\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Thérèse Rein, Australian businesswoman, founded Ingeus\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Pola Uddin, Baroness Uddin, Bangladeshi-English politician\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Kim Barnett, English cricketer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Mark Burnett, English-American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Nancy Giles, American journalist and actress\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Robin Shou, Hong Kong martial artist and actor\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Dawn Upshaw, American soprano\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Jan Wouters, Dutch footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1961 – António Costa, Portuguese politician, 119th Prime Minister of Portugal\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Jeremy Hardy, English comedian and actor\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Regina Belle, American singer-songwriter, producer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Letsie III of Lesotho\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Matti Nykänen, Finnish ski jumper and singer (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Craig Morgan, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Alex Winter, English-American actor, film director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Lou Barlow, American guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Sten Tolgfors, Swedish lawyer and politician, 30th Swedish Minister of Defence\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Scott Johnson, American cartoonist\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Jaan Kirsipuu, Estonian cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Calbert Cheaney, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Cory Doctorow, Canadian author and activist\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Nico Mattan, Belgian cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Elizabeth Cook, American singer and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Donny Marshall, American basketball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Jason Rullo, American drummer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Jaap Stam, Dutch footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Eric Williams, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Eric Moulds, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Claudio López, Argentine footballer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Andre Adams, New Zealand cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Elena Anaya, Spanish actress\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Darude, Finnish DJ and producer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Harlette, Australian-English fashion designer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Loretta Harrop, Australian triathlete\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Luke Bryan, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Gino D'Acampo, Italian chef and author\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Dagmara Domińczyk, Polish-American actress\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Marcos Senna, Brazilian-Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Anders Svensson, Swedish footballer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Andrew Downton, Australian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Leif Hoste, Belgian cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Marc Savard, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Ricardo Arona, Brazilian mixed martial artist\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Panda Bear, American musician and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Jason Jennings, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Mike Vogel, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Javier Camuñas, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Ryan Miller, American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Hely Ollarves, Venezuelan runner\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Omari Banks, Anguillan cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Natasha Hamilton, English singer-songwriter, dancer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Ryan Guettler, Australian motocross racer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Adam Lind, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Loui Eriksson, Swedish ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Tom Fletcher, English singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Neil McGregor, Scottish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – DeAngelo Smith, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Lacey Von Erich, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Darius Boyd, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Jan Charouz, Czech race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Jeremih, American singer, songwriter, and record producer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Benjamin Mendy, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Kali Uchis, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 521 – Magnus Felix Ennodius, Gallo-Roman bishop\nBULLET::::- 855 – Leo IV, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 790)\nBULLET::::- 924 – Edward the Elder, English king (b. 877)\nBULLET::::- 952 – Wu Hanyue, Chinese noblewoman (b. 913)\nBULLET::::- 961 – Du, empress dowager of the Song Dynasty\nBULLET::::- 1070 – Baldwin VI, count of Flanders (b. 1030)\nBULLET::::- 1085 – Robert Guiscard, Norman adventurer\nBULLET::::- 1119 – Baldwin VII, count of Flanders (b. 1093)\nBULLET::::- 1210 – Sverker II, king of Sweden (b. 1210)\nBULLET::::- 1304 – Edmund Mortimer, 2nd Baron Mortimer (b. 1251)\nBULLET::::- 1399 – Jadwiga, queen of Poland (b. 1374)\nBULLET::::- 1453 – Dmitry Shemyaka, Grand Prince of Moscow\nBULLET::::- 1453 – John Talbot, 1st Earl of Shrewsbury, English commander and politician (b. 1387)\nBULLET::::- 1531 – Hosokawa Takakuni, Japanese commander (b. 1484)\nBULLET::::- 1571 – Georg Fabricius, German poet and historian (b. 1516)\nBULLET::::- 1588 – Mimar Sinan, Ottoman architect and engineer, designed the Sokollu Mehmet Pasha Mosque and Süleymaniye Mosque (b. 1489)\nBULLET::::- 1603 – Mózes Székely, Hungarian noble (b. 1553)\nBULLET::::- 1645 – Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset, English-Scottish politician, Lord Chamberlain of the United Kingdom (b. 1587)\nBULLET::::- 1704 – Pierre-Charles Le Sueur, French fur trader and explorer (b. 1657)\nBULLET::::- 1709 – Robert Bolling, English planter and merchant (b. 1646)\nBULLET::::- 1762 – Peter III of Russia (b. 1728)\nBULLET::::- 1790 – Adam Smith, Scottish economist and philosopher (b. 1723)\nBULLET::::- 1791 – Martin Dobrizhoffer, Austrian missionary and author (b. 1717)\nBULLET::::- 1793 – Charlotte Corday, French murderer (b. 1768)\nBULLET::::- 1794 – John Roebuck, English chemist and businessman (b. 1718)\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey, English politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1764)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Carl Tausig, Polish virtuoso pianist, arranger and composer (b. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Aleardo Aleardi, Italian poet and politician (b. 1812)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Maurycy Gottlieb, Ukrainian-Polish painter (b. 1856)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Jim Bridger, American scout and explorer (b. 1804)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Tự Đức, Vietnamese emperor (b. 1829)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Jean-Charles Chapais, Canadian farmer and politician, 1st Canadian Minister of Agriculture (b. 1811)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Dorothea Dix, American nurse and activist (b. 1802)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Frederick A. Johnson, American banker and politician (b. 1833)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Leconte de Lisle, French poet and translator (b. 1818)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Josef Hyrtl, Austrian anatomist and biologist (b. 1810)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Thomas McIlwraith, Scottish-Australian politician, 8th Premier of Queensland (b. 1835)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Hector Malot, French author and critic (b. 1830)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Henri Poincaré, French mathematician, physicist, and engineer (b. 1854)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Victims of the Shooting of the Romanov family\nBULLET::::- Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- Grand Duchess Tatiana Nikolaevna of Russia (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- Alexandra Fyodorovna of Russia (b. 1872)\nBULLET::::- Aleksei Nikolaevich, Tsarevich of Russia (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- Nikolai II of Russia (b. 1868)\nBULLET::::- Anna Demidova (b. 1878)\nBULLET::::- Ivan Kharitonov (b. 1872)\nBULLET::::- Alexei Trupp (b. 1858)\nBULLET::::- Yevgeny Botkin (b. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Lovis Corinth, German painter (b. 1858)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Giovanni Giolitti, Italian politician, 13th Prime Minister of Italy (b. 1842)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Álvaro Obregón, Mexican general and politician, 39th President of Mexico (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Rasmus Rasmussen, Norwegian actor, singer, and director (b. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – George William Russell, Irish poet and painter (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – William James Sidis, American mathematician and anthropologist (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Ernst Busch, German field marshal (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1946 - Florence Fuller, South African-born Australian artist (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Draža Mihailović, Serbian general (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Evangeline Booth, English 4th General of The Salvation Army (b. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Antonie Nedošinská, Czech actress (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Billie Holiday, American singer (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Eugene Meyer, American businessman and publisher (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Maud Menten, Canadian physician and biochemist (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Ty Cobb, American baseball player and manager (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Emin Halid Onat, Turkish architect and academic (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – John Coltrane, American saxophonist and composer (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Dizzy Dean, American baseball player and sportscaster (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Konstantine Gamsakhurdia, Georgian author (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Don \"Red\" Barry, American actor and screenwriter (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Boris Delaunay, Russian mathematician and academic (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Bruiser Brody, American football player and wrestler (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Itubwa Amram, Nauruan pastor and politician (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – John Patrick Spiegel, American psychiatrist and academic (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Jean Borotra, French tennis player (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Juan Manuel Fangio, Argentinian race car driver (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Victims of TWA Flight 800\nBULLET::::- Michel Breistroff, French ice hockey player (b. 1971)\nBULLET::::- Marcel Dadi, Tunisian-French guitarist (b. 1951)\nBULLET::::- David Hogan, American composer (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- Jed Johnson, American interior designer and director (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Chas Chandler, American bass player and producer (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Lillian Hoban, American author and illustrator (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Katharine Graham, American publisher (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Joseph Luns, Dutch politician and Dutch Minister of Foreign Affairs (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – David Kelly, Welsh weapons inspector (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Rosalyn Tureck, American pianist and harpsichord player (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Walter Zapp, Latvian-Swiss inventor, invented the Minox (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Geraldine Fitzgerald, Irish-American actress (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Edward Heath, English colonel and politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Joe Vialls, Australian journalist and theorist (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Sam Myers, American singer-songwriter (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Mickey Spillane, American crime novelist (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Grant Forsberg, American actor and businessman (b. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Júlio Redecker, Brazilian politician (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Paulo Rogério Amoretty Souza, Brazilian lawyer and businessman (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Walter Cronkite, American journalist and actor (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Leszek Kołakowski, Polish historian and philosopher (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Larry Keith, American actor (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – David Ngoombujarra, Australian actor (b. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Richard Evatt, English boxer (b. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Forrest S. McCartney, American general (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – İlhan Mimaroğlu, Turkish-American composer and producer (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – William Raspberry, American journalist and academic (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Marsha Singh, Indian-English politician (b. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Henri Alleg, English-French journalist and author (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Peter Appleyard, English-Canadian vibraphone player and composer (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Vincenzo Cerami, Italian screenwriter and producer (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Don Flye, American tennis player (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Ian Gourlay, English general (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – David White, Scottish footballer and manager (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 victims:\nBULLET::::- Liam Davison, Australian author and critic (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- Shuba Jay, Malaysian actress (b. 1976)\nBULLET::::- Joep Lange, Dutch physician and academic (b. 1954)\nBULLET::::- Willem Witteveen, Dutch scholar and politician (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Henry Hartsfield, American colonel, pilot, and astronaut (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Otto Piene, German sculptor and academic (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Elaine Stritch, American actress and singer (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Bill Arnsparger, American football player and coach (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Jules Bianchi, French race car driver (b. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Owen Chadwick, English rugby player, historian, and academic (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Van Miller, American sportscaster (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – John Taylor, English pianist and educator (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Alexius of Rome (Western Church)\nBULLET::::- Andrew Zorard\nBULLET::::- Cynehelm\nBULLET::::- Cynllo\nBULLET::::- Inácio de Azevedo\nBULLET::::- Jadwiga of Poland\nBULLET::::- Magnus Felix Ennodius\nBULLET::::- Marcellina\nBULLET::::- Martyrs of Compiègne\nBULLET::::- Blessed Pavel Peter Gojdič (Greek Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- Pope Leo IV\nBULLET::::- Romanov sainthood (Russian Orthodox Church)\nBULLET::::- Speratus and companions\nBULLET::::- William White (Episcopal Church))\nBULLET::::- July 17 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (South Korea)\nBULLET::::- Gion Matsuri (Yasaka Shrine, Kyoto)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Slovakia)\nBULLET::::- International Firgun Day (international)\nBULLET::::- King's Birthday (Lesotho)\nBULLET::::- U Tirot Sing Day (Meghalaya, India)\nBULLET::::- World Day for International Justice (International)\nBULLET::::- World Emoji Day (International)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "16090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16090", "title": "July 18", "text": "July 18\n\nBULLET::::- 477 BC – Battle of the Cremera as part of the Roman–Etruscan Wars. Veii ambushes and defeats the Roman army.\nBULLET::::- 387 BC – Roman-Gaulish Wars: Battle of the Allia: A Roman army is defeated by raiding Gauls, leading to the subsequent sacking of Rome.\nBULLET::::- 362 – Roman–Persian Wars: Emperor Julian arrives at Antioch with a Roman expeditionary force (60,000 men) and stays there for nine months to launch a campaign against the Persian Empire.\nBULLET::::- 452 – Sack of Aquileia: After an earlier defeat on the Catalaunian Plains, Attila lays siege to the metropolis of Aquileia and eventually destroys it.\nBULLET::::- 645 – Chinese forces under general Li Shiji besiege the strategic fortress city of Anshi (Liaoning) during the Goguryeo–Tang War.\nBULLET::::- 1195 – Battle of Alarcos: Almohad forces defeat the Castilian army of Alfonso VIII and force its retreat to Toledo.\nBULLET::::- 1290 – King Edward I of England issues the Edict of Expulsion, banishing all Jews (numbering about 16,000) from England; this was Tisha B'Av on the Hebrew calendar, a day that commemorates many Jewish calamities.\nBULLET::::- 1334 – The bishop of Florence blesses the first foundation stone for the new \"campanile\" (bell tower) of the Florence Cathedral, designed by the artist Giotto di Bondone.\nBULLET::::- 1389 – France and England agree to the Truce of Leulinghem, inaugurating a 13-year peace, the longest period of sustained peace during the Hundred Years' War.\nBULLET::::- 1391 – Tokhtamysh–Timur war: Battle of the Kondurcha River: Timur defeats Tokhtamysh of the Golden Horde in present-day southeast Russia.\nBULLET::::- 1507 – In Brussels, Prince Charles I, is crowned Duke of Burgundy and Count of Flanders, a year after inheriting the title.\nBULLET::::- 1555 – The College of Arms is reincorporated by Royal charter signed by Queen Mary I of England and King Philip II of Spain.\nBULLET::::- 1806 – A gunpowder magazine explosion in Birgu, Malta, kills around 200 people.\nBULLET::::- 1812 – The Treaties of Orebro end both the Anglo-Russian and Anglo-Swedish Wars.\nBULLET::::- 1841 – Coronation of Emperor Pedro II of Brazil.\nBULLET::::- 1857 – Louis Faidherbe, French governor of Senegal, arrives to relieve French forces at Kayes, effectively ending El Hajj Umar Tall's war against the French.\nBULLET::::- 1862 – First ascent of Dent Blanche, one of the highest summits in the Alps.\nBULLET::::- 1863 – American Civil War: Second Battle of Fort Wagner: One of the first formal African American military units, the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, supported by several white regiments, attempts an unsuccessful assault on Confederate-held Battery Wagner.\nBULLET::::- 1870 – The First Vatican Council decrees the dogma of papal infallibility.\nBULLET::::- 1872 – The Ballot Act 1872 in the United Kingdom introduced the requirement that parliamentary and local government elections be held by secret ballot.\nBULLET::::- 1914 – The U.S. Congress forms the Aviation Section, U.S. Signal Corps, giving official status to aircraft within the U.S. Army for the first time.\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Adolf Hitler publishes \"Mein Kampf\".\nBULLET::::- 1936 – On the Spanish mainland, a faction of the army supported by fascists, rises up against the Second Spanish Republic in a coup d'etat starting the 3-year-long Civil War, resulting in the longest dictatorship in modern European history.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: During the Beisfjord massacre in Norway, 15 Norwegian paramilitary guards help members of the SS to kill 288 political prisoners from Yugoslavia.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – The Germans test fly the Messerschmitt Me 262 using its jet engines for the first time.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – World War II: Hideki Tōjō resigns as Prime Minister of Japan because of numerous setbacks in the war effort.\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Human spaceflight: Gemini 10 is launched from Cape Kennedy on a 70-hour mission that includes docking with an orbiting Agena target vehicle.\nBULLET::::- 1966 – A racially charged incident in a bar sparks the six-day Hough riots in Cleveland, Ohio; 1,700 Ohio National Guard troops intervene to restore order.\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Intel is founded in Mountain View, California.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Nadia Comăneci becomes the first person in Olympic Games history to score a perfect 10 in gymnastics at the 1976 Summer Olympics.\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Two hundred sixty-eight Guatemalan \"campesinos\" (\"peasants\" or \"country people\") are slain in the Plan de Sánchez massacre.\nBULLET::::- 1984 – McDonald's massacre in San Ysidro, California: In a fast-food restaurant, James Oliver Huberty opens fire, killing 21 people and injuring 19 others before being shot dead by police.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – A picture of Les Horribles Cernettes was taken, which became the first ever photo posted to the World Wide Web.\nBULLET::::- 1994 – The bombing of the Asociación Mutual Israelita Argentina (Argentine Jewish Community Center) in Buenos Aires kills 85 people (mostly Jewish) and injures 300.\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Rwandan genocide: The Rwandan Patriotic Front takes control of Gisenyi and north western Rwanda, forcing the interim government into Zaire and ending the genocide.\nBULLET::::- 1995 – On the Caribbean island of Montserrat, the Soufrière Hills volcano erupts. Over the course of several years, it devastates the island, destroying the capital, forcing most of the population to flee.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Storms provoke severe flooding on the Saguenay River, beginning one of Quebec's costliest natural disasters ever.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Battle of Mullaitivu: The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam capture the Sri Lanka Army's base, killing over 1200 soldiers.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – At least seven people are killed and 32 others are injured after a bomb explodes on an Israeli tour bus at Burgas Airport, Bulgaria.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – The Government of Detroit, with up to $20 billion in debt, files for the largest municipal bankruptcy in U.S. history.\nBULLET::::- 2019 – A man sets fire to an anime studio in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan, killing at 35 people and injuring dozens of others.\n\nBULLET::::- 1013 – Hermann of Reichenau, German music theorist (d. 1054)\nBULLET::::- 1439 – John V, duke of Saxe-Lauenburg (d. 1507)\nBULLET::::- 1501 – Isabella of Austria, queen of Denmark (d. 1526)\nBULLET::::- 1504 – Heinrich Bullinger, Swiss pastor and reformer (d. 1575)\nBULLET::::- 1534 – Zacharius Ursinus, German theologian (d. 1583)\nBULLET::::- 1552 – Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor (d. 1612)\nBULLET::::- 1634 – Johannes Camphuys, Dutch politician, Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies (d. 1695)\nBULLET::::- 1659 – Hyacinthe Rigaud, French painter (d. 1743)\nBULLET::::- 1670 – Giovanni Bononcini, Italian cellist and composer (d. 1747)\nBULLET::::- 1702 – Maria Clementina Sobieska, Polish noble (d. 1735)\nBULLET::::- 1718 – Saverio Bettinelli, Italian poet, playwright, and critic (d. 1808)\nBULLET::::- 1720 – Gilbert White, English ornithologist and ecologist (d. 1793)\nBULLET::::- 1724 – Maria Antonia of Bavaria, Electress of Saxony (d. 1780)\nBULLET::::- 1750 – Frederick Adolf, duke of Östergötland (d. 1803)\nBULLET::::- 1796 – Immanuel Hermann Fichte, German philosopher and academic (d. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1811 – William Makepeace Thackeray, English author and poet (d. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1818 – Louis Gerhard De Geer, Swedish lawyer and politician, 1st Prime Minister of Sweden (d. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1821 – Pauline Viardot, French soprano and composer (d. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – Vasil Levski, Bulgarian priest and activist (d. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Virgil Earp, American marshal (d. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Tristan Corbière, French poet (d. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1848 – W. G. Grace, English cricketer and physician (d. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1853 – Hendrik Lorentz, Dutch physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Kadambini Ganguly, Indian physician, one of the first Indian women to obtain a degree (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Philip Snowden, 1st Viscount Snowden, English politician, Chancellor of the Exchequer (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1867 – Margaret Brown, American philanthropist and activist (d. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Giacomo Balla, Italian painter (d.1958)\nBULLET::::- 1871 – Sada Yacco, Japanese actress and dancer (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Larry McLean, Canadian-American baseball player (d. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Alberto di Jorio, Italian cardinal (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Simon Bolivar Buckner Jr., American general (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Vidkun Quisling, Norwegian military officer and politician, Minister President of Norway (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Kōichi Kido, Japanese politician, 13th Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal of Japan (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Frank Forde, Australian educator and politician, 15th Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Arthur Friedenreich, Brazilian footballer (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – David Ogilvy, 12th Earl of Airlie, Scottish peer, soldier and courtier (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Olga Spessivtseva, Russian-American ballerina (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Machine Gun Kelly, American gangster (d. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Ernest Eldridge, English race car driver and engineer (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – John Stuart, Scottish-English actor (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Ernst Scheller, German soldier and politician, 8th Mayor of Marburg (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Nathalie Sarraute, French lawyer and author (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Jessamyn West, American author (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Chill Wills, American actor (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Robert Elton Brooker, American business executive (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – S. I. Hayakawa, Canadian-American academic and politician (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Clifford Odets, American director, playwright, and screenwriter (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Peace Pilgrim, American mystic and activist (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Lupe Vélez, Mexican-American actress and dancer (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Beatrice Aitchison, American mathematician, statistician, and transportation economist (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Bishnu Dey, Indian poet, critic, and academic (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Andrei Gromyko, Belarusian-Russian economist and politician, Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Mohammed Daoud Khan, Afghan commander and politician, 1st President of Afghanistan (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Harriet Nelson, American singer and actress (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Diptendu Pramanick, Indian businessman (d. 1989)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Mamadou Dia, Senegalese politician; 1st Prime Minister of Senegal (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Hume Cronyn, Canadian-American actor, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Red Skelton, American actor and comedian (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Gino Bartali, Italian cyclist (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Oscar Heisserer, French footballer (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Carequinha, Brazilian clown and actor (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Roxana Cannon Arsht, American judge (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Louis Le Bailly, British Royal Navy officer (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Charles Kittel, American physicist (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Henri Salvador, French singer and guitarist (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Paul Streeten, Austrian-born British economics professor (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Nelson Mandela, South African lawyer and politician, 1st President of South Africa, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Lilia Dale, Italian actress\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Eric Brandon, English race car driver and businessman (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Peter Austin, English brewer, founded Ringwood Brewery (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Aaron T. Beck, American psychiatrist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1921 – John Glenn, American colonel, astronaut, and politician (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Richard Leacock, English-French director and producer (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Heinz Bennent, German actor (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Thomas Kuhn, American physicist, historian, and philosopher (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Jerome H. Lemelson, American engineer and businessman (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Michael Medwin, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Inge Sørensen, Danish swimmer (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Tullio Altamura, Italian actor\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Shirley Strickland, Australian runner and hurdler (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Friedrich Zimmermann, German lawyer and politician, German Federal Minister of the Interior (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Raymond Jones, Australian Modernist architect\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Windy McCall, American baseball relief pitcher (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Margaret Laurence, Canadian author and academic (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Nita Bieber, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Bernard Pons, French politician and medical doctor\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Maunu Kurkvaara, Finnish film director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Mehdi Hassan, Pakistani \"ghazal\" singer and playback singer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Kurt Masur, German conductor and educator (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Antonio García-Trevijano, Spanish republican, political activist, and author (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Keith MacDonald, Canadian politician\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Anthony Mirra, American gangster, member of the Bonanno Crime Family (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Andrea Gallo, Italian priest and author (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Baddiewinkle, American internet personality\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Dick Button, American figure skater and actor\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Screamin' Jay Hawkins, American R&B singer-songwriter, musician, and actor (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Robert Ellis Miller, American director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Jean Yanne, French actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Yevgeny Yevtushenko, Russian poet and playwright (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Edward Bond, English director, playwright, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Darlene Conley, American actress (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Tenley Albright, American figure skater and physician\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Jayendra Saraswathi, Indian guru, 69th Shankaracharya\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Roald Hoffmann, Polish chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Hunter S. Thompson, American journalist and author (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – John Connelly, English footballer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Ian Stewart, Scottish keyboard player and manager (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Paul Verhoeven, Dutch director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Brian Auger, English rock and jazz keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Dion DiMucci, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Jerry Moore, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1940 – James Brolin, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Joe Torre, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Frank Farian, German songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Lonnie Mack, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Martha Reeves, American singer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Giacinto Facchetti, Italian footballer (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Adolf Ogi, Swiss politician, 84th President of the Swiss Confederation\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Joseph J. Ellis, American historian and author\nBULLET::::- 1944 – David Hemery, English hurdler and author\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Pat Doherty, Irish Republican politician\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Kalpana Mohan, Indian actress\nBULLET::::- 1946 – John Naughton, Scottish-Irish journalist, author, and academic\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Steve Forbes, American publisher and politician\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Carlos Colón Sr., Puerto Rican-American wrestler and promoter\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Jeanne Córdova, American journalist and activist (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Graham Spanier, 16th President of Pennsylvania State University\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Hartmut Michel, German biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Dennis Lillee, Australian cricketer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Richard Branson, English businessman, founded Virgin Group\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Jack Dongarra, American computer scientist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Kostas Eleftherakis, Greek footballer\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Glenn Hughes, American disco singer (Village People) and actor (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Jack Layton, Canadian political scientist, academic, and politician (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Mark Udall, American educator and politician\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Elio Di Rupo, Belgian chemist, academic, and politician, 68th Prime Minister of Belgium\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Margo Martindale, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Ricky Skaggs, American singer-songwriter, mandolin player, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Bernd Fasching, Austrian painter and sculptor\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Nick Faldo, English golfer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Keith Levene, English guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Simon Heffer, English journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Elizabeth McGovern, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Alan Pardew, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Pasi Rautiainen, Finnish footballer, coach, and manager\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Shaun Micallef, Australian comedian, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Marc Girardelli, Austrian-Luxembourgian skier\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Martín Torrijos, Panamanian economist and politician, 35th President of Panama\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Wendy Williams, American talk show host\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Vesselina Kasarova, Bulgarian soprano\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Dan O'Brien, American decathlete and coach\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Vin Diesel, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Grant Bowler, New Zealand-Australian actor\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Scott Gourley, Australian rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Elizabeth Gilbert, American author\nBULLET::::- 1969 – The Great Sasuke, Japanese wrestler and politician\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Penny Hardaway, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Sukhwinder Singh, Indian singer-songwriter and actor\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Alan Morrison, British poet\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Torii Hunter, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Daron Malakian, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – M.I.A., English rapper and producer5\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Elsa Pataky, Spanish actress\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Go Soo-hee, South Korean actress\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Alexander Morozevich, Russian chess player and author\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Adabel Guerrero, Argentinian actress, singer, and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Shane Horgan, Irish rugby player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Crystal Mangum, American murderer responsible for making false rape allegations in the Duke lacrosse case\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Joo Sang-wook, South Korean actor\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Ben Sheets, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Mélissa Theuriau, French journalist\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Deion Branch, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Joey Mercury, American wrestler and producer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Kristen Bell, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Dennis Seidenberg, German ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Ryan Cabrera, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Priyanka Chopra, Indian actress, singer, and film producer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Carlo Costly, Honduran footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Carlos Diogo, Uruguayan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Aaron Gillespie, American singer-songwriter and drummer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Mikk Pahapill, Estonian decathlete\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Jan Schlaudraff, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Chace Crawford, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Panagiotis Lagos, Greek footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – James Norton, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Natalia Mikhailova, Russian ice dancer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Tontowi Ahmad, Indonesian badminton player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Änis Ben-Hatira, German-Tunisian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – César Villaluz, Mexican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Jamie Benn, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Sebastian Mielitz, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Yohan Mollo, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Nabil Fekir, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Lee Tae-min, South Korean singer and actor\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Michael Lichaa, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Nilo Soares, East Timorese footballer\n\nBULLET::::- 707 – Emperor Monmu of Japan (b. 683)\nBULLET::::- 715 – Muhammad bin Qasim, Umayyad general (b. 695)\nBULLET::::- 912 – Zhu Wen, Chinese emperor (b. 852)\nBULLET::::- 924 – Abu'l-Hasan Ali ibn al-Furat, Abbasid vizier (b. 855)\nBULLET::::- 928 – Stephen II, patriarch of Constantinople\nBULLET::::- 984 – Dietrich I, bishop of Metz\nBULLET::::- 1100 – Godfrey of Bouillon, Frankish knight (b. 1016)\nBULLET::::- 1185 – Stefan, first Archbishop of Uppsala (b. before 1143)\nBULLET::::- 1194 – Guy of Lusignan, king consort of Jerusalem (b. c. 1150)\nBULLET::::- 1232 – John de Braose, Marcher Lord of Bramber and Gower\nBULLET::::- 1270 – Boniface of Savoy, Archbishop of Canterbury\nBULLET::::- 1300 – Gerard Segarelli, Italian religious leader, founded the Apostolic Brethren (b. 1240)\nBULLET::::- 1450 – Francis I, Duke of Brittany (b. 1414)\nBULLET::::- 1488 – Alvise Cadamosto, Italian explorer (b. 1432)\nBULLET::::- 1566 – Bartolomé de las Casas, Spanish bishop and historian (b. 1484)\nBULLET::::- 1591 – Jacobus Gallus, Slovenian composer (b. 1550)\nBULLET::::- 1608 – Joachim Frederick, Elector of Brandenburg (b. 1546)\nBULLET::::- 1610 – Caravaggio, Italian painter (b. 1571)\nBULLET::::- 1639 – Bernard of Saxe-Weimar, German general (b. 1604)\nBULLET::::- 1650 – Robert Levinz, English Royalist, hanged in London by Parliamentary forces as a spy (b. 1615)\nBULLET::::- 1695 – Johannes Camphuys, Dutch politician, Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies (b. 1634)\nBULLET::::- 1698 – Johann Heinrich Heidegger, Swiss theologian and author (b. 1633)\nBULLET::::- 1721 – Jean-Antoine Watteau, French painter (b. 1684)\nBULLET::::- 1730 – François de Neufville, duc de Villeroy, French general (b. 1644)\nBULLET::::- 1756 – Pieter Langendijk, Dutch poet and playwright (b. 1683)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – John Paul Jones, Scottish-American admiral and diplomat (b. 1747)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Jane Austen, English novelist (b. 1775)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – Vincenzo Borg, Maltese merchant and rebel leader (b. 1777)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Robert Gould Shaw, American colonel (b. 1837)\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Benito Juárez, Mexican lawyer and politician, 26th President of Mexico (b. 1806)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Ferdinand von Hochstetter, Austrian geologist and academic (b. 1829)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Dorothea Dix, American social reformer and activist (b. 1802)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Lydia Becker, English journalist, author, and activist, co-founded the \"Women's Suffrage Journal\" (b. 1827)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Thomas Cook, English travel agent, founded the Thomas Cook Group (b. 1808)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Horatio Alger, American novelist and journalist (b. 1832)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Benjamin C. Truman, American journalist and author (b. 1835)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Louis-Nazaire Bégin, Canadian cardinal (b. 1840)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Jean Jules Jusserand, French author and diplomat, French Ambassador to the United States (b. 1855)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Julian Bell, English poet and academic (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Marie of Romania (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Thomas Sturge Moore, English author, poet, and playwright (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Evald Tipner, Estonian footballer and ice hockey player (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Herman Gummerus, Finnish historian, academic, and politician (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Vítězslav Novák, Czech composer and educator (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Francisco Javier Arana, Guatemalan Army colonel and briefly Guatemalan head of state (b.1905)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Carl Clinton Van Doren, American critic and biographer (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Paul Saintenoy, Belgian architect and historian (b. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Machine Gun Kelly, American gangster (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Bobby Fuller, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Corneille Heymans, Belgian physiologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Mary Jo Kopechne, American educator and secretary (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Jack Hawkins, English actor (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Vaughn Bodē, American illustrator (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Sonja Branting-Westerståhl, Swedish lawyer (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Roman Jakobson, Russian–American linguist and theorist (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Lally Bowers, English actress (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Grigori Kromanov, Estonian director and screenwriter (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Gilberto Freyre, Brazilian sociologist, anthropologist, historian, writer, painter, journalist and congressman (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Nico, German singer-songwriter, keyboard player, and actress (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Joly Braga Santos, Portuguese composer and conductor (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Donnie Moore, American baseball player (b. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Rebecca Schaeffer, American model and actress (b.1967)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Karl Menninger, American psychiatrist and author (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Yun Posun, South Korean politician, 2nd President of South Korea (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Mimi Fariña, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Metin Toker, Turkish journalist and author (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – André Castelot, Belgian-French historian and author (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Émile Peynaud, French wine maker (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Amy Gillett, Australian cyclist and rower (b. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – William Westmoreland, American general (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Jerry Hadley, American tenor (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Kenji Miyamoto, Japanese politician (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Henry Allingham, English soldier (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Jill Balcon, English actress (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Yosef Shalom Eliashiv, Lithuanian-Israeli rabbi and author (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Jean François-Poncet, French politician and diplomat, French Minister of Foreign Affairs (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Dawoud Rajiha, Syrian general and politician, Syrian Minister of Defense (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Assef Shawkat, Syrian general and politician (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Hasan Turkmani, Syrian general and politician, Syrian Minister of Defense (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Rajesh Khanna, Indian actor (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Vaali, Indian poet, songwriter, and actor (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Olivier Ameisen, French-American cardiologist and academic (b. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Andreas Biermann, German footballer (b. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – João Ubaldo Ribeiro, Brazilian journalist, author, and academic (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Dietmar Schönherr, Austrian-Spanish actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Alex Rocco, American actor (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Jonathan Gold, American food critic (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Adrian Cronauer, American Radio personality (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Arnulf of Metz\nBULLET::::- Bartolomé de las Casas (Episcopal Church (USA))\nBULLET::::- Bruno of Segni\nBULLET::::- Camillus de Lellis (optional memorial, United States only)\nBULLET::::- Eadburh (or Edburga) of Bicester\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Ferard (Church of England)\nBULLET::::- Frederick of Utrecht\nBULLET::::- Goneri of Brittany\nBULLET::::- Gundenis\nBULLET::::- Marina of Aguas Santas\nBULLET::::- Maternus of Milan\nBULLET::::- Minnborinus of Cologne\nBULLET::::- Pambo\nBULLET::::- Philastrius (or Filaster)\nBULLET::::- Symphorosa\nBULLET::::- Teneu (or Theneva)\nBULLET::::- Theodosia of Constantinople\nBULLET::::- July 18 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Uruguay)\nBULLET::::- Nelson Mandela International Day\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- On This Day in Canada\n"}
{"id": "16091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16091", "title": "July 19", "text": "July 19\n\nBULLET::::- AD 64 – The Great Fire of Rome causes widespread devastation and rages on for six days, destroying half of the city.\nBULLET::::- 484 – Leontius, Roman usurper, is crowned Eastern emperor at Tarsus (modern Turkey). He is recognized in Antioch and makes it his capital.\nBULLET::::- 711 – Umayyad conquest of Hispania: Battle of Guadalete: Umayyad forces under Tariq ibn Ziyad defeat the Visigoths led by King Roderic.\nBULLET::::- 939 – Battle of Simancas: King Ramiro II of León defeats the Moorish army under Caliph Abd-al-Rahman III near the city of Simancas.\nBULLET::::- 998 – Arab–Byzantine wars: Battle of Apamea: Fatimids defeat a Byzantine army near Apamea.\nBULLET::::- 1333 – Wars of Scottish Independence: Battle of Halidon Hill: The English win a decisive victory over the Scots.\nBULLET::::- 1544 – Italian War of 1542–46: The first Siege of Boulogne begins.\nBULLET::::- 1545 – The Tudor warship \"Mary Rose\" sinks off Portsmouth; in 1982 the wreck is salvaged in one of the most complex and expensive projects in the history of maritime archaeology.\nBULLET::::- 1553 – Lady Jane Grey is replaced by Mary I of England as Queen of England after only nine days on the throne.\nBULLET::::- 1588 – Anglo-Spanish War: Battle of Gravelines: The Spanish Armada is sighted in the English Channel.\nBULLET::::- 1701 – Representatives of the Iroquois Confederacy sign the Nanfan Treaty, ceding a large territory north of the Ohio River to England.\nBULLET::::- 1702 – Great Northern War: A numerically superior Polish-Saxon army of Augustus II the Strong, operating from an advantageous defensive position, is defeated by a Swedish army half its size under the command of King Charles XII in the Battle of Klissow.\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Unsuccessful in his attempt to conquer the Kingdom of Hawaii for the Russian-American Company, Georg Anton Schäffer is forced to admit defeat and leave Kauai.\nBULLET::::- 1821 – Coronation of George IV of the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1832 – The British Medical Association is founded as the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association by Sir Charles Hastings at a meeting in the Board Room of the Worcester Infirmary.\nBULLET::::- 1843 – Brunel's steamship the is launched, becoming the first ocean-going craft with an iron hull and screw propeller, becoming the largest vessel afloat in the world.\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Great New York City Fire of 1845: The last great fire to affect Manhattan began early in the morning and was subdued that afternoon. The fire killed four firefighters, 26 civilians, and destroyed 345 buildings.\nBULLET::::- 1848 – Women's rights: A two-day Women's Rights Convention opens in Seneca Falls, New York.\nBULLET::::- 1863 – American Civil War: Morgan's Raid: At Buffington Island in Ohio, Confederate General John Hunt Morgan's raid into the north is mostly thwarted when a large group of his men are captured while trying to escape across the Ohio River.\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Taiping Rebellion: Third Battle of Nanking: The Qing dynasty finally defeats the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Franco-Prussian War: France declares war on Prussia.\nBULLET::::- 1900 – The first line of the Paris Métro opens for operation.\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Maurice Garin wins the first Tour de France.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – World War I: Battle of Fromelles: British and Australian troops attack German trenches as part of the Battle of the Somme.\nBULLET::::- 1940 – World War II: Battle of Cape Spada: The Royal Navy and the Regia Marina clash; the Italian light cruiser \"Bartolomeo Colleoni\" sinks, with 121 casualties.\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Field Marshal Ceremony: First occasion in World War II, that Hitler appointed field marshals due to military achievements.\nBULLET::::- 1940 – World War II: Army order 112 forms the Intelligence Corps of the British Army.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: The Second Happy Time of Hitler's submarines comes to an end, as the increasingly effective American convoy system compels them to return to the central Atlantic.\nBULLET::::- 1943 – World War II: Rome is heavily bombed by more than 500 Allied aircraft, inflicting thousands of casualties.\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Prime Minister of the shadow Burmese government, Bogyoke Aung San and eight others are assassinated.\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Korean politician Lyuh Woon-hyung is assassinated.\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Opening of the Summer Olympics in Helsinki, Finland.\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Tunisia imposes a blockade on the French naval base at Bizerte; the French would capture the entire town four days later.\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Joe Walker flies a North American X-15 to a record altitude of 106,010 meters (347,800 feet) on X-15 Flight 90. Exceeding an altitude of 100 km, this flight qualifies as a human spaceflight under international convention.\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Vietnam War: At a rally in Saigon, South Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyễn Khánh calls for expanding the war into North Vietnam.\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Chappaquiddick incident: U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy crashes his car into a tidal pond at Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts, killing his passenger Mary Jo Kopechne.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Dhofar Rebellion: British SAS units help the Omani government against Popular Front for the Liberation of Oman rebels in the Battle of Mirbat.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Sagarmatha National Park in Nepal is created.\nBULLET::::- 1977 – The world's first Global Positioning System (GPS) signal was transmitted from Navigation Technology Satellite 2 (NTS-2) and received at Rockwell Collins in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, at 12:41 a.m. Eastern time (ET).\nBULLET::::- 1979 – The Sandinista rebels overthrow the government of the Somoza family in Nicaragua.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – The oil tanker \"SS Atlantic Empress\" collides with another oil tanker, causing the largest ever ship-borne oil spill.\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Opening of the Summer Olympics in Moscow.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – In a private meeting with U.S. President Ronald Reagan, French President François Mitterrand reveals the existence of the \"Farewell Dossier\", a collection of documents showing the Soviet Union had been stealing American technological research and development.\nBULLET::::- 1982 – In one of the first militant attacks by Hezbollah, David S. Dodge, president of the American University of Beirut, is kidnapped.\nBULLET::::- 1983 – The first three-dimensional reconstruction of a human head in a CT is published.\nBULLET::::- 1985 – The Val di Stava dam collapses killing 268 people in Val di Stava, Italy.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – United Airlines Flight 232 crashes in Sioux City, Iowa killing 111.\nBULLET::::- 1992 – A car bomb kills Judge Paolo Borsellino and five members of his escort.\nBULLET::::- 1997 – The Troubles: The Provisional Irish Republican Army resumes a ceasefire to end their 25-year paramilitary campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland.\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Gunmen in Egypt's western desert province of New Valley Governorate attack a military checkpoint, killing at least 21 soldiers. Egypt reportedly declares a state of emergency on its border with Sudan.\n\nBULLET::::- 810 – Muhammad al-Bukhari, Persian scholar (d. 870)\nBULLET::::- 1223 – Baibars, sultan of Egypt (d. 1277)\nBULLET::::- 1420 – William VIII, Marquess of Montferrat (d. 1483)\nBULLET::::- 1569 – Conrad Vorstius, Dutch theologian (d. 1622)\nBULLET::::- 1670 – Richard Leveridge, English singer-songwriter (d. 1758)\nBULLET::::- 1688 – Giuseppe Castiglione, Italian missionary and painter (d. 1766)\nBULLET::::- 1744 – Heinrich Christian Boie, German author and poet (d. 1806)\nBULLET::::- 1759 – Marianna Auenbrugger, Austrian pianist and composer (d. 1782)\nBULLET::::- 1759 – Seraphim of Sarov, Russian monk and saint (d. 1833)\nBULLET::::- 1771 – Thomas Talbot, Irish-Canadian colonel and politician (d. 1853)\nBULLET::::- 1794 – José Justo Corro, Mexican politician and president, (1836-1837) (d. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1789 – John Martin, English painter, engraver, and illustrator (d. 1854)\nBULLET::::- 1800 – Juan José Flores, Venezuelan general and politician, 1st President of Ecuador (d. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1814 – Samuel Colt, American businessman, founded the Colt's Manufacturing Company (d. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1819 – Gottfried Keller, Swiss author, poet, and playwright (d. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1822 – Princess Augusta of Cambridge (d. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1827 – Mangal Pandey, Indian soldier (d. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1834 – Edgar Degas, French painter, sculptor, and illustrator (d. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1835 – Justo Rufino Barrios, Guatemalan president (d. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1842 – Frederic T. Greenhalge, English-American lawyer and politician, 38th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1846 – Edward Charles Pickering, American astronomer and physicist (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Ferdinand Brunetière, French scholar and critic (d. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1865 – Georges Friedel, French mineralogist and crystallographer (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1865 – Charles Horace Mayo, American surgeon, founded the Mayo Clinic (d. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1860 – Lizzie Borden, American woman, tried and acquitted for the murders of her parents in 1892 (d. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1868 – Florence Foster Jenkins, American soprano and educator (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Xenophon Stratigos, Greek general and politician, Greek Minister of Transport (d. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – Alice Dunbar Nelson, African-American poet and activist (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Joseph Fielding Smith, American religious leader, 10th President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Arthur Fielder, English cricketer (d. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Friedrich Dessauer, German physicist and philosopher (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Max Fleischer, Austrian-American animator and producer (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Michael Fekete, Hungarian-Israeli mathematician and academic (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Enno Lolling, German physician (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – George II of Greece (d. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Dick Irvin, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Vladimir Mayakovsky, Russian actor, playwright, and poet (d. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Aleksandr Khinchin, Russian mathematician and academic (d. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Khawaja Nazimuddin, Bangladeshi-Pakistani politician, 2nd Prime Minister of Pakistan (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Percy Spencer, American physicist and inventor of the microwave oven (d. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Xu Beihong, Chinese painter and academic (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Reginald Baker, English film producer (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – A. J. Cronin, Scottish physician and novelist (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Bob Meusel, American baseball player and sailor (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Herbert Marcuse, German-American sociologist and philosopher (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Balai Chand Mukhopadhyay, Indian physician, author, poet, and playwright (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Samudrala Raghavacharya, Indian singer, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith, American lawyer and farmer (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Isabel Jewell, American actress (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Daniel Fry, American contactee (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Balamani Amma, Indian poet and author (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Peter Leo Gerety, American prelate (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Marius Russo, American baseball player (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Åke Hellman, Finnish painter (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Phil Cavarretta, American baseball player and manager (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – William Scranton, American captain and politician, 13th United States Ambassador to the United Nations (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Patricia Medina, English-American actress (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Miltos Sachtouris, Greek poet and author (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Ron Searle, English-Canadian soldier, publisher, and politician, 4th Mayor of Mississauga (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Robert Mann, American violinist, composer, and conductor (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Richard Oriani, Salvadoran-American metallurgist and engineer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Harold Camping, American evangelist, author, radio host (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – André Moynet, French soldier, race car driver, and politician (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Elizabeth Spencer, American novelist, short story writer, and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Rosalyn Sussman Yalow, American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – George McGovern, American lieutenant, historian, and politician (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Rachel Robinson, American professor, registered nurse, and the widow of baseball player Jackie Robinson\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Theo Barker, English historian (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Joseph Hansen, American author and poet (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – William A. Rusher, American lawyer and journalist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Lon Simmons, American baseball player and sportscaster (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Stanley K. Hathaway, American soldier, lawyer, and politician, 40th United States Secretary of the Interior (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Pat Hingle, American actor and producer (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Arthur Rankin Jr., American director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Sue Thompson, American singer\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Helen Gallagher, American actress, singer, and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Samuel John Hazo, American author\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Choi Yun-chil, South Korean long-distance runner and a two-time national champion in the marathon.\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Gaston Glock, Austrian engineer and businessman, co-founded Glock Ges.m.b.H.\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Orville Turnquest, Bahamian politician\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Buster Benton, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Jan Lindblad, Swedish biologist and photographer (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Francisco de Sá Carneiro, Portuguese lawyer and politician, 111th Prime Minister of Portugal (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Nick Koback, American baseball player and golfer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – David Colquhoun, English pharmacologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1937 – George Hamilton IV, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Richard Jordan, American actor (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Jayant Narlikar, Indian astrophysicist and astronomer\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Tom Raworth, English poet and academic\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Vikki Carr, American singer and actress\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Neelie Kroes, Dutch politician and diplomat, European Commissioner for Digital Economy and Society\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Han Sai Por, Singaporean sculptor and academic\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Tim McIntire, American actor and singer (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Andres Vooremaa, Estonian chess player\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Paule Baillargeon, Canadian actress, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Alan Gorrie, Scottish singer-songwriter and musician (Average White Band)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Ilie Năstase, Romanian tennis player and politician\nBULLET::::- 1947 – André Forcier, Canadian director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Hans-Jürgen Kreische, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Bernie Leadon, American guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Brian May, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, producer, and astrophysicist\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Keith Godchaux, American keyboard player and songwriter (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Kgalema Motlanthe, South African politician, 3rd President of South Africa\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Per-Kristian Foss, Norwegian politician, Norwegian Minister of Finance\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Freddy Moore, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Adrian Noble, English director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Abel Ferrara, American director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Allen Collins, American guitarist and songwriter (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Jayne Anne Phillips American novelist and short story writer\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Mark O'Donnell, American playwright (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Steve O'Donnell, American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Srđa Trifković, Serbian-American journalist and historian\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Roger Binny, Indian cricketer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Dalton McGuinty, Canadian lawyer and politician, 24th Premier of Ontario\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Mark Crispin, American computer scientist, designed the IMAP (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Brad Drewett, Australian tennis player and sportscaster (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Robert Gibson, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1958 – David Robertson, American conductor\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Juan J. Campanella, Argentinian director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Atom Egoyan, Egyptian-Canadian director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Kevin Haskins, English drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Harsha Bhogle, Indian journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Maria Filatova, Russian gymnast\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Lisa Lampanelli, American comedian, actress, and author\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Benoît Mariage, Belgian director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Hideo Nakata, Japanese director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Campbell Scott, American actor, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Anthony Edwards, American actor and director\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Thomas Gabriel Fischer, Swiss musician\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Garth Nix, Australian author\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Masahiko Kondō, Japanese singer-songwriter and race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Evelyn Glennie, Scottish musician\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Claus-Dieter Wollitz, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Yael Abecassis, Israeli model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Jean-François Mercier, Canadian comedian, screenwriter, and television host\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Robb Flynn, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Pavel Kuka, Czech footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Jim Norton, American comedian, actor, and author\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Matthew Libatique, American cinematographer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Bill Chen, American poker player and software designer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Nicola Sturgeon, Scottish lawyer and politician, First Minister of Scotland\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Rene Busch, Estonian tennis player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Vitali Klitschko, Ukrainian boxer and politician, Mayor of Kiev\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Michael Modest, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Catriona Rowntree, Australian television host\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Lesroy Weekes, Montserratian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Ebbe Sand, Danish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Martin Powell, English keyboard player and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Scott Walker, Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Rey Bucanero, Mexican wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Francisco Copado, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Josée Piché, Canadian ice dancer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Vince Spadea, American tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Preston Wilson, American baseball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Luca Castellazzi, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Benedict Cumberbatch, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Gonzalo de los Santos, Uruguayan footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Jean-Sébastien Aubin, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Tony Mamaluke, American wrestler and manager\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Ed Smith, English cricketer and journalist\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Rick Ankiel, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Josué Anunciado de Oliveira, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Dilhara Fernando, Sri Lankan cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Luke Young, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Xavier Malisse, Belgian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Giorgio Mondini, Italian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Nenê, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – David Bernard, Jamaican cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Mark Gasnier, Australian rugby player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Jimmy Gobble, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Grégory Vignal, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Christopher Bear, American drummer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Phil Coke, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Jared Padalecki, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Jess Vanstrattan, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Helen Skelton, English television host and actress\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Fedor Tyutin, Russian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Andrea Libman, Canadian voice actress\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Adam Morrison, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Ryan O'Byrne, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Lewis Price, Welsh footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – LaMarcus Aldridge, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Zhou Haibin, Chinese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Marina Kuzina, Russian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Hadi Norouzi, Iranian footballer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Leandro Greco, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Jon Jones, American mixed martial artist\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Marc Murphy, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Shane Dawson, American comedian and actor\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Kevin Großkreutz, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Jakub Kovář, Czech ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Sam McKendry, Australian-New Zealand rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Eray İşcan, Turkish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Jake Nicholson, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Christian Welch, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Ronaldo Vieira, Bissau-Guinean footballer\nBULLET::::- 514 – Symmachus, pope of the Catholic Church\nBULLET::::- 806 – Li Shigu, Chinese general (b. 778)\nBULLET::::- 973 – Kyunyeo, Korean monk and poet (b. 917)\nBULLET::::- 998 – Damian Dalassenos, Byzantine general (b. 940)\nBULLET::::- 1030 – Adalberon, French bishop\nBULLET::::- 1234 – Floris IV, Dutch nobleman (b. 1210)\nBULLET::::- 1249 – Jacopo Tiepolo, doge of Venice\nBULLET::::- 1333 – John Campbell, Scottish nobleman\nBULLET::::- 1333 – Alexander Bruce, Scottish nobleman\nBULLET::::- 1333 – Sir Archibald Douglas, Scottish nobleman\nBULLET::::- 1333 – Maol Choluim II, Scottish nobleman\nBULLET::::- 1333 – Kenneth de Moravia, 4th Earl of Sutherland\nBULLET::::- 1374 – Petrarch, Italian poet and scholar (b. 1304)\nBULLET::::- 1415 – Philippa of Lancaster, Portuguese queen (b. 1360)\nBULLET::::- 1543 – Mary Boleyn, English daughter of Elizabeth Boleyn, Countess of Wiltshire (b. 1499)\nBULLET::::- 1631 – Cesare Cremonini, Italian philosopher and academic (b. 1550)\nBULLET::::- 1742 – William Somervile, English poet and author (b. 1675)\nBULLET::::- 1810 – Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Prussian queen (b. 1776)\nBULLET::::- 1814 – Matthew Flinders, English navigator and cartographer (b. 1774)\nBULLET::::- 1824 – Agustín de Iturbide, Mexican general and emperor (b. 1783)\nBULLET::::- 1838 – Pierre Louis Dulong, French physicist and chemist (b. 1785)\nBULLET::::- 1850 – Margaret Fuller, American journalist and critic (b. 1810)\nBULLET::::- 1855 – Konstantin Batyushkov, Russian poet and translator (b. 1787)\nBULLET::::- 1857 – Stefano Franscini, Swiss statistician and politician (b. 1796)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Yegor Ivanovich Zolotarev, Russian mathematician and academic (b. 1847)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Abraham H. Cannon, American publisher and religious leader (b. 1859)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Clímaco Calderón, Colombian lawyer and politician, 15th President of Colombia (b. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – John Indermaur, British lawyer (b. 1851)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Robert Stout, Scottish-New Zealand politician, 13th Prime Minister of New Zealand (b. 1844)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Kaarle Krohn, Finnish historian and academic (b. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Rose Hartwick Thorpe, American poet and author (b. 1850)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Yekaterina Budanova, Russian captain and pilot (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – U Razak, Burmese educator and politician (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Aung San, Burmese general and politician (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Lyuh Woon-hyung, South Korean politician (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1963 – William Andrew, English priest (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Syngman Rhee, South Korean journalist and politician, 1st President of South Korea (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Odell Shepard, American poet and politician, 66th Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Stratis Myrivilis, Greek soldier and author (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Ernő Schwarz, Hungarian-American soccer player and coach (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Lefty Frizzell, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Karl Ristikivi, Estonian geographer, author, and poet (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Margaret Craven, American journalist and author (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Nihat Erim, Turkish jurist and politician, 13th Prime Minister of Turkey (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Hans Morgenthau, German-American political scientist, philosopher, and academic (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Roger Doucet, Canadian tenor (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Hugh Everett III, American physicist and mathematician (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Faina Ranevskaya, Russian actress (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Aziz Sami, Iraqi writer and translator (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Janusz Zajdel, Polish author (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Kazimierz Sabbat, Polish businessman and politician, President of the Republic of Poland (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Eddie Quillan, American actor (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Paolo Borsellino, Italian lawyer and judge (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Victor Barbeau, Canadian author and academic (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Elmer Valo, Polish-American baseball player, coach, and manager (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Dave Carter, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Alan Lomax, American historian, scholar, and activist (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Bill Bright, American evangelist and author, founded the Campus Crusade for Christ (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Pierre Graber, Swiss politician, President of the Swiss National Council (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Sylvia Daoust, Canadian sculptor (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – J. Gordon Edwards, American entomologist, mountaineer, and DDT advocate (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Francis A. Marzen, American priest and journalist (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Zenkō Suzuki, Japanese politician, 70th Prime Minister of Japan (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Edward Bunker, American author and screenwriter (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Jack Warden, American actor (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – A. K. Faezul Huq, Bangladeshi journalist, lawyer, and politician (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Roberto Fontanarrosa, Argentinian cartoonist (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Dercy Gonçalves, Brazilian comedian and actress (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Frank McCourt, American author and educator (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Henry Surtees, English race car driver (b. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Cécile Aubry, French actress, author, television screenwriter and director (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Jon Cleary, Australian author and playwright (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Humayun Ahmed, Bangladeshi director and playwright (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Tom Davis, American comedian, actor, and screenwriter (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Mohammad Hassan Ganji, Iranian meteorologist and academic (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Omar Suleiman, Egyptian general and politician, 16th Vice President of Egypt (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Sylvia Woods, American businesswoman, co-founded Sylvia's Restaurant of Harlem (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Valiulla Yakupov, Islamic cleric (b. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Mikhail Gorsheniov, Russian singer-songwriter (b. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Geeto Mongol, Canadian-American wrestler and trainer (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Mel Smith, English actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Bert Trautmann, German footballer and manager (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Phil Woosnam, Welsh-American soccer player and manager (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Peter Ziegler, Swiss geologist and academic (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Leyla Erbil, Turkish author (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Rubem Alves, Brazilian theologian (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – David Easton, Canadian-American political scientist and academic (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Paul M. Fleiss, American pediatrician and author (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – James Garner, American actor (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Jerzy Jurka, Polish biologist (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Ray King, English footballer and manager (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Ingemar Odlander, Swedish journalist (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Harry Pougher, English cricketer (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Leen Vleggeert, Dutch politician (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – John Winkin, American baseball player, coach, and journalist (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Van Alexander, American composer and conductor (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Galina Prozumenshchikova, Ukrainian-Russian swimmer and journalist (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Carmino Ravosa, American singer-songwriter, pianist, and producer (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Gennadiy Seleznyov, Russian journalist and politician, 2nd Speaker of the Duma (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Garry Marshall, American actor, director, and producer (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Jon Schnepp, American producer, director, voice actor, editor, writer, cartoonist, animator, and cinematographer (b. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Rutger Hauer, Dutch actor, director, and producer (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Arsenius (Catholic Church)\nBULLET::::- Bernold, Bishop of Utrecht\nBULLET::::- Justa and Rufina\nBULLET::::- Kirdjun (or Abakerazum)\nBULLET::::- Macrina the Younger, Sister of St. Basil the Great\nBULLET::::- Symmachus\nBULLET::::- July 19 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Martyrs' Day (Myanmar)\nBULLET::::- Sandinista Day or Liberation Day (Nicaragua)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "16092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16092", "title": "Jan Karon", "text": "Jan Karon\n\nJan Karon is an American novelist who writes for both adults and young readers. She is the author of the \"New York Times\"-bestselling Mitford novels, featuring Father Timothy Kavanagh, an Episcopal priest, and the fictional village of Mitford. Her most recent Mitford novel, \"To Be Where You Are\", was released in September 2017. She has been designated a lay Canon for the Arts in the Episcopal Diocese of Quincy (Illinois) by Keith Ackerman, Episcopal Bishop of Quincy, and in 2015, she was awarded the Library of Virginia's Literary Lifetime Achievement Award. Her original papers-to date are archived in the Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library at the University of Virginia.\n\nKaron was born on March 14, 1937 in the Blue Ridge foothills town of Lenoir, North Carolina as Janice Meredith Wilson. She was named Janice Meredith Wilson, after the novel \"Janice Meredith\". Before Karon was 4, her parents split up and left her with her maternal grandparents on a farm a few miles from Lenoir. Her mother Wanda, who was 15 at Karon's birth, went to Charlotte. Her father, Robert Wilson, joined the Royal Canadian Air Force.\n\nAt age 12, Karon moved to Charlotte to rejoin her mother, who had married Toby Setzer and had two more children. Karon dropped out of school in ninth grade, at 14, and married Robert Freeland in South Carolina, where girls her age could do so legally. Freeland, who was five years older, worked at a Charlotte tire store, while Karon worked in a clothing store. At age 15, she gave birth to her only child, Candace Freeland.\n\nKaron and Freeland's marriage was troubled from the beginning, and tragedy rocked it further. While Freeland was sitting in a car with one of his brothers and one or more friends, a gun was handed through the window and went off. The bullet punctured one of Robert Freeland's lungs and chipped his spine, nearly killing him and leaving him paralyzed. Karon was distraught, the marriage suffered, and she filed for divorce.\n\nKaron, age 18, was on her own with Candace. She took a receptionist job at Walter J. Klein Co., a Charlotte advertising agency. Bored with answering the phone, she submitted writing examples. Klein soon had her writing advertising copy. In her early 20s, Karon married Bill Orth, a Duke Power chemist. Orth was active with Karon in theater and the Unitarian Church. By the late 1960s, Karon and Orth were divorced, and she had married a third time, to Arthur Karon, a clothing salesman. Arthur moved his wife and her daughter to Berkeley, California, where they lived for three years.\n\nIn California, Karon practiced Judaism, but she did not convert from Christianity. Karon wanted to be a novelist, and tried all through the 1960s. When Karon's third marriage ended she returned to Charlotte and again worked in advertising. By 1985, Karon had moved to Raleigh and the McKinney & Silver advertising agency, where she had worked in the late 1970s. Karon and Michael Winslow, a Mckinney designer, collaborated on a tourism campaign, interviewing artisans, musicians and others for print ads aimed at showing that North Carolina had other attractions besides theme parks and big hotels. One ad featured mountain musicians under the headline, \"The Best Place to Hear Old English Music Is 3,000 Miles West of London.\" The campaign, which ran in \"National Geographic\" and other magazines, won the 1987 Kelly Award, the print advertising equivalent of the Academy Award. Karon and Winslow split a $100,000 prize.\n\nIn 1988, Karon quit her job, traded her Mercedes for a used Toyota and moved to Blowing Rock. In Blowing Rock, Karon began writing Father Tim stories for the \"Blowing Rocket\" newspaper. An agent circulated Karon's fiction to publishers, but got only rejections. In 1994, Karon herself placed her work with a small religious publisher, which brought out a volume titled \"At Home in Mitford\". Karon kept writing, and employed her marketing skills to promote her book, writing press releases and cold-calling bookstores. But the publisher offered limited distribution and little marketing muscle of its own. Two more Mitford novels appeared. Sales remained modest. Then Karon's friend Mary Richardson, mother of Carolina Panthers' owner Jerry Richardson, showed \"At Home in Mitford\" to Nancy Olson, owner of Quail Ridge Books & Music in Raleigh. Olson felt there was a large audience looking for clean, well-written fiction. She sent Karon's book to a New York agent friend, who got it to Carolyn Carlson, an editor at Viking Penguin and daughter of a Lutheran minister. Carlson faced opposition at Viking Penguin, a mainstream publisher unused to Christian fiction. But in 1996 the New York firm brought out Karon's first three titles as paperbacks. The publisher also put Karon on a cross-country promotional tour. Meanwhile, independent bookstore workers began reading and championing her novels. By the late 1990s, Karon's books were \"New York Times\" bestsellers.\n\nIn 2000, Karon left Blowing Rock and moved to Albemarle County, Virginia, where she restored a historic 1816 home and 100 acre farm, Esmont Farm, built by Dr. Charles Cocke (who served in both houses of the Virginia General Assembly before the American Civil War). Enniscorthy had been listed on the Virginia Landmarks Register and the National Register of Historic Places, but had been delisted in 1997 based upon the removal of outlying structures by a prior owner.\n\nBULLET::::- \"At Home in Mitford\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"A Light in the Window\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"These High, Green Hills\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Out to Canaan\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"A New Song\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"A Common Life: the Wedding Story\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"In This Mountain\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Shepherds Abiding\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Light from Heaven\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"Home to Holly Springs\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"In the Company of Others\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Somewhere Safe with Somebody Good\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- \"Come Rain or Come Shine (2015)\"\nBULLET::::- \"To Be Where You Are (2017)\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Patches of Godlight: Father Tim's Favorite Quotes\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"The Mitford Snowmen\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Esther's Gift: A Mitford Christmas Story\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Jan Karon's Mitford Cookbook and Kitchen Reader\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"A Continual Feast: Words of Comfort and Celebration, collected by Father Tim\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"The Mitford Bedside Companion\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Bathed in Prayer: Father Tim's Prayers, Sermons, and Reflections from the Mitford Series\" (2018)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Miss Fannie's Hat\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Jeremy: The Tale of an Honest Bunny\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"Jan Karon Presents: Violet Comes to Stay\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Jan Karon Presents:\" \"Violet Goes to the Country\" (2007)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Trellis and the Seed: A Book of Encouragement for All Ages\" (2003)\n\nCurrent biography at Penguin\n\nBULLET::::- Official site for the Mitford series author\nBULLET::::- December 6, 2005 lecture given by Karon at the National Cathedral, entitled \"Wrestling with and Writing from the Heart\"\n"}
{"id": "16094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16094", "title": "Joseph Haydn", "text": "Joseph Haydn\n\nFranz Joseph Haydn (; ; 31 March 173231 May 1809) was an Austrian composer of the Classical period. He was instrumental in the development of chamber music such as the piano trio. His contributions to musical form have earned him the epithets \"Father of the Symphony\" and \"Father of the String Quartet\".\n\nHaydn spent much of his career as a court musician for the wealthy Esterházy family at their remote estate. Until the later part of his life, this isolated him from other composers and trends in music so that he was, as he put it, \"forced to become original\". Yet his music circulated widely, and for much of his career he was the most celebrated composer in Europe.\n\nHe was a friend and mentor of Mozart, a tutor of Beethoven, and the older brother of composer Michael Haydn.\n\nJoseph Haydn was born in Rohrau, Austria, a village that at that time stood on the border with Hungary. His father was Mathias Haydn, a wheelwright who also served as \"Marktrichter\", an office akin to village mayor. Haydn's mother Maria, Koller, had previously worked as a cook in the palace of Count Harrach, the presiding aristocrat of Rohrau. Neither parent could read music; however, Mathias was an enthusiastic folk musician, who during the journeyman period of his career had taught himself to play the harp. According to Haydn's later reminiscences, his childhood family was extremely musical, and frequently sang together and with their neighbours.\n\nHaydn's parents had noticed that their son was musically gifted and knew that in Rohrau he would have no chance to obtain serious musical training. It was for this reason that, around the time Haydn turned six, they accepted a proposal from their relative Johann Matthias Frankh, the schoolmaster and choirmaster in Hainburg, that Haydn be apprenticed to Frankh in his home to train as a musician. Haydn therefore went off with Frankh to Hainburg and he never again lived with his parents.\n\nLife in the Frankh household was not easy for Haydn, who later remembered being frequently hungry and humiliated by the filthy state of his clothing. He began his musical training there, and could soon play both harpsichord and violin. The people of Hainburg heard him sing treble parts in the church choir.\n\nThere is reason to think that Haydn's singing impressed those who heard him, because in 1739 he was brought to the attention of Georg von Reutter, the director of music in St. Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna, who happened to be visiting Hainburg and was looking for new choirboys. Haydn passed his audition with Reutter, and after several months of further training moved to Vienna (1740), where he worked for the next nine years as a chorister.\n\nHaydn lived in the Kapellhaus next to the cathedral, along with Reutter, Reutter's family, and the other four choirboys, which after 1745 included his younger brother Michael. The choirboys were instructed in Latin and other school subjects as well as voice, violin, and keyboard. Reutter was of little help to Haydn in the areas of music theory and composition, giving him only two lessons in his entire time as chorister. However, since St. Stephen's was one of the leading musical centres in Europe, Haydn learned a great deal simply by serving as a professional musician there.\n\nLike Frankh before him, Reutter did not always bother to make sure Haydn was properly fed. As he later told his biographer Albert Christoph Dies, Haydn was motivated to sing well, in hopes of gaining more invitations to perform before aristocratic audiences—where the singers were usually served refreshments.\n\nBy 1749, Haydn had matured physically to the point that he was no longer able to sing high choral parts. Empress Maria Theresa herself complained to Reutter about his singing, calling it \"crowing\". One day, Haydn carried out a prank, snipping off the pigtail of a fellow chorister. This was enough for Reutter: Haydn was first caned, then summarily dismissed and sent into the streets. He had the good fortune to be taken in by a friend, Johann Michael Spangler, who shared his family's crowded garret room with Haydn for a few months. Haydn immediately began his pursuit of a career as a freelance musician.\nHaydn struggled at first, working at many different jobs: as a music teacher, as a street serenader, and eventually, in 1752, as valet–accompanist for the Italian composer Nicola Porpora, from whom he later said he learned \"the true fundamentals of composition\". He was also briefly in Count Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz's employ, playing the organ in the Bohemian Chancellery chapel at the Judenplatz.\n\nWhile a chorister, Haydn had not received any systematic training in music theory and composition. As a remedy, he worked his way through the counterpoint exercises in the text \"Gradus ad Parnassum\" by Johann Joseph Fux and carefully studied the work of Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, whom he later acknowledged as an important influence. As his skills increased, Haydn began to acquire a public reputation, first as the composer of an opera, \"Der krumme Teufel\", \"The Limping Devil\", written for the comic actor Johann Joseph Felix Kurz, whose stage name was \"Bernardon\". The work was premiered successfully in 1753, but was soon closed down by the censors due to \"offensive remarks\". Haydn also noticed, apparently without annoyance, that works he had simply given away were being published and sold in local music shops. Between 1754 and 1756 Haydn also worked freelance for the court in Vienna. He was among several musicians who were paid for services as supplementary musicians at balls given for the imperial children during carnival season, and as supplementary singers in the imperial chapel (the \"Hofkapelle\") in Lent and Holy Week.\n\nWith the increase in his reputation, Haydn eventually obtained aristocratic patronage, crucial for the career of a composer in his day. Countess Thun, having seen one of Haydn's compositions, summoned him and engaged him as her singing and keyboard teacher. In 1756, Baron Carl Josef Fürnberg employed Haydn at his country estate, Weinzierl, where the composer wrote his first string quartets. Fürnberg later recommended Haydn to Count Morzin, who, in 1757, became his first full-time employer.\n\nHaydn's job title under Count Morzin was \"Kapellmeister\", that is, music director. He led the count's small orchestra in Unterlukawitz and wrote his first symphonies for this ensemble. In 1760, with the security of a Kapellmeister position, Haydn married. His wife was the former Maria Anna Theresia Keller (1730–1800), the sister of Therese (b. 1733), with whom Haydn had previously been in love. Haydn and his wife had a completely unhappy marriage, from which time permitted no escape. They produced no children, and both took lovers.\n\nCount Morzin soon suffered financial reverses that forced him to dismiss his musical establishment, but Haydn was quickly offered a similar job (1761) by Prince Paul Anton, head of the immensely wealthy Esterházy family. Haydn's job title was only Vice-Kapellmeister, but he was immediately placed in charge of most of the Esterházy musical establishment, with the old Kapellmeister Gregor Werner retaining authority only for church music. When Werner died in 1766, Haydn was elevated to full Kapellmeister.\n\nAs a \"house officer\" in the Esterházy establishment, Haydn wore livery and followed the family as they moved among their various palaces, most importantly the family's ancestral seat Schloss Esterházy in Kismarton \"(today Eisenstadt, Austria)\" and later on Esterháza, a grand new palace built in rural Hungary in the 1760s. Haydn had a huge range of responsibilities, including composition, running the orchestra, playing chamber music for and with his patrons, and eventually the mounting of operatic productions. Despite this backbreaking workload, the job was in artistic terms a superb opportunity for Haydn. The Esterházy princes (Paul Anton, then from 1762–1790 Nikolaus I) were musical connoisseurs who appreciated his work and gave him daily access to his own small orchestra. During the nearly thirty years that Haydn worked at the Esterházy court, he produced a flood of compositions, and his musical style continued to develop.\nMuch of Haydn's activity at the time followed the musical taste of his patron Prince Nikolaus. In about 1765, the prince obtained and began to learn to play the baryton, an uncommon musical instrument similar to the bass viol, but with a set of plucked sympathetic strings. Haydn was commanded to provide music for the prince to play, and over the next ten years produced about 200 works for this instrument in various ensembles, the most notable of which are the 126 baryton trios. Around 1775, the prince abandoned the baryton and took up a new hobby: opera productions, previously a sporadic event for special occasions, became the focus of musical life at court, and the opera theater the prince had built at Esterháza came to host a major season, with multiple productions each year. Haydn served as company director, recruiting and training the singers and preparing and leading the performances. He wrote several of the operas performed and wrote substitution arias to insert into the operas of other composers.\n\n1779 was a watershed year for Haydn, as his contract was renegotiated: whereas previously all his compositions were the property of the Esterházy family, he now was permitted to write for others and sell his work to publishers. Haydn soon shifted his emphasis in composition to reflect this (fewer operas, and more quartets and symphonies) and he negotiated with multiple publishers, both Austrian and foreign. His new employment contract \"acted as a catalyst in the next stage in Haydn's career, the achievement of international popularity. By 1790 Haydn was in the paradoxical position ... of being Europe's leading composer, but someone who spent his time as a duty-bound Kapellmeister in a remote palace in the Hungarian countryside.\" The new publication campaign resulted in the composition of a great number of new string quartets (the six-quartet sets of Op. 33, 50, 54/55, and 64). Haydn also composed in response to commissions from abroad: the Paris symphonies (1785–1786) and the original orchestral version of \"The Seven Last Words of Christ\" (1786), a commission from Cádiz, Spain.\nThe remoteness of Esterháza, which was farther from Vienna than Kismarton, led Haydn gradually to feel more isolated and lonely. He longed to visit Vienna because of his friendships there. Of these, a particularly important one was with Maria Anna von Genzinger (1754–1793), the wife of Prince Nikolaus's personal physician in Vienna, who began a close, platonic relationship with the composer in 1789. Haydn wrote to Mrs. Genzinger often, expressing his loneliness at Esterháza and his happiness for the few occasions on which he was able to visit her in Vienna. Later on, Haydn wrote to her frequently from London. Her premature death in 1793 was a blow to Haydn, and his F minor variations for piano, Hob. XVII:6, may have been written in response to her death.\n\nAnother friend in Vienna was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, whom Haydn had met sometime around 1784. According to later testimony by Michael Kelly and others, the two composers occasionally played in string quartets together. Haydn was hugely impressed with Mozart's work and praised it unstintingly to others. Mozart evidently returned the esteem, as seen in his dedication of a set of six quartets, now called the \"Haydn\" quartets, to his friend. In 1785 Haydn was admitted to the same Masonic lodge as Mozart, the \"\" in Vienna.\n\nIn 1790, Prince Nikolaus died and was succeeded as prince by his son Anton. Following a trend of the time, Anton sought to economize by dismissing most of the court musicians. Haydn retained a nominal appointment with Anton, at a reduced salary of 400 florins, as well as a 1000-florin pension from Nikolaus. Since Anton had little need of Haydn's services, he was willing to let him travel, and the composer accepted a lucrative offer from Johann Peter Salomon, a German violinist and impresario, to visit England and conduct new symphonies with a large orchestra.\n\nThe choice was a sensible one because Haydn was already a very popular composer there. Since the death of Johann Christian Bach in 1782, Haydn's music had dominated the concert scene in London; \"hardly a concert did not feature a work by him\". Haydn's work was widely distributed by publishers in London, including Forster (who had their own contract with Haydn) and Longman & Broderip (who served as agent in England for Haydn's Vienna publisher Artaria). Efforts to bring Haydn to London had been undertaken since 1782, though Haydn's loyalty to Prince Nikolaus had prevented him from accepting.\n\nAfter fond farewells from Mozart and other friends, Haydn departed Vienna with Salomon on 15 December 1790, arriving in Calais in time to cross the English Channel on New Year's Day of 1791. It was the first time that the 58-year-old composer had seen the ocean. Arriving in London, Haydn stayed with Salomon in Great Pulteney Street (London, near Piccadilly Circus) working in a borrowed studio at the Broadwood piano firm nearby.\n\nIt was the start of a very auspicious period for Haydn; both the 1791–1792 journey, along with a repeat visit in 1794–1795, were greatly successful. Audiences flocked to Haydn's concerts; he augmented his fame and made large profits, thus becoming financially secure. Charles Burney reviewed the first concert thus: \"Haydn himself presided at the piano-forte; and the sight of that renowned composer so electrified the audience, as to excite an attention and a pleasure superior to any that had ever been caused by instrumental music in England.\" Haydn made many new friends and, for a time, was involved in a romantic relationship with Rebecca Schroeter.\nMusically, Haydn's visits to England generated some of his best-known work, including the \"Surprise\", \"Military\", \"Drumroll\" and \"London\" symphonies; the \"Rider\" quartet; and the \"Gypsy Rondo\" piano trio. The great success of the overall enterprise does not mean that the journeys were free of trouble. Notably, his very first project, the commissioned opera \"L'anima del filosofo\" was duly written during the early stages of the trip, but the opera's impresario John Gallini was unable to obtain a license to permit opera performances in the theater he directed, the King's Theatre. Haydn was well paid for the opera (£300) but much time was wasted. Thus only two new symphonies, no. 95 and no. 96 \"Miracle\", could be premiered in the 12 concerts of Salomon's spring concert series. Another problem arose from the jealously competitive efforts of a senior, rival orchestra, the Professional Concerts, who recruited Haydn's old pupil Ignaz Pleyel as a rival visiting composer; the two composers, refusing to play along with the concocted rivalry, dined together and put each other's symphonies on their concert programs.\n\nThe end of Salomon's series in June gave Haydn a rare period of relative leisure. He spent some of the time in the country (Hertingfordbury), but also had time to travel, notably to Oxford, where he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University. The symphony performed for the occasion, no. 92 has since come to be known as the \"Oxford Symphony\", although it had been written in 1789.\nWhile traveling to London in 1790, Haydn had met the young Ludwig van Beethoven in his native city of Bonn. On Haydn's return, Beethoven came to Vienna and was Haydn's pupil up until the second London journey. Haydn took Beethoven with him to Eisenstadt for the summer, where Haydn had little to do, and taught Beethoven some counterpoint. While in Vienna, Haydn purchased a house for himself and his wife in the suburbs and started remodeling it. He also arranged for the performance of some of his London symphonies in local concerts.\n\nBy the time he arrived on his second journey to England, (1794–1795), Haydn had become a familiar figure on the London concert scene. The 1794 season was dominated by Salomon's ensemble, as the Professional Concerts had abandoned their efforts. The concerts included the premieres of the 99th, 100th, and 101st symphonies. For 1795, Salomon had abandoned his own series, citing difficulty in obtaining \"vocal performers of the first rank from abroad\", and Haydn joined forces with the Opera Concerts, headed by the violinist Giovanni Battista Viotti. These were the venue of the last three symphonies, 102, 103, and 104. The final benefit concert for Haydn (\"Dr. Haydn's night\") at the end of the 1795 season was a great success and was perhaps the peak of his English career. Haydn's biographer Griesinger wrote that Haydn \"considered the days spent in England the happiest of his life. He was everywhere appreciated there; it opened a new world to him\".\n\nHaydn returned to Vienna in 1795. Prince Anton had died, and his successor Nikolaus II proposed that the Esterházy musical establishment be revived with Haydn serving again as Kapellmeister. Haydn took up the position on a part-time basis. He spent his summers with the Esterházys in Eisenstadt, and over the course of several years wrote six masses for them.\nBy this time Haydn had become a public figure in Vienna. He spent most of his time in his home, a large house in the suburb of Windmühle, and wrote works for public performance. In collaboration with his librettist and mentor Gottfried van Swieten, and with funding from van Swieten's Gesellschaft der Associierten, he composed his two great oratorios, \"The Creation\" (1798) and \"The Seasons\" (1801). Both were enthusiastically received. Haydn frequently appeared before the public, often leading performances of \"The Creation\" and \"The Seasons\" for charity benefits, including Tonkünstler-Societät programs with massed musical forces. He also composed instrumental music: the popular \"Trumpet Concerto\", and the last nine in his long series of string quartets, including the \"Fifths\", \"Emperor\", and \"Sunrise\". Directly inspired by hearing audiences sing God Save the King in London, in 1797 Haydn wrote a patriotic \"Emperor's Hymn\" Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser, (\"God Save Emperor Francis\"). This achieved great success and became \"the enduring emblem of Austrian identity right up to the First World War\" (Jones). The melody was used for von Fallersleben's \"Deutschlandlied\" (1841), which was written as part of the German unification movement and whose third stanza is today the national anthem of the Federal Republic of Germany. (Modern Austria uses an anthem with music by Mozart.)\n\nDuring the later years of this successful period, Haydn faced incipient old age and fluctuating health, and he had to struggle to complete his final works. His last major work, from 1802, was the sixth mass for the Esterházys, the \"Harmoniemesse\".\n\nBy the end of 1803, Haydn's condition had declined to the point that he became physically unable to compose. He suffered from weakness, dizziness, inability to concentrate and painfully swollen legs. Since diagnosis was uncertain in Haydn's time, it is unlikely that the precise illness can ever be identified, though Jones suggests arteriosclerosis. The illness was especially hard for Haydn because the flow of fresh musical ideas continued unabated, although he could no longer work them out as compositions. His biographer Dies reported Haydn saying in 1806:\n\n\"I must have something to do—usually musical ideas are pursuing me, to the point of torture, I cannot escape them, they stand like walls before me. If it's an allegro that pursues me, my pulse keeps beating faster, I can get no sleep. If it's an adagio, then I notice my pulse beating slowly. My imagination plays on me as if I were a clavier.\" Haydn smiled, the blood rushed to his face, and he said \"I am really just a living clavier.\"\nThe winding down of Haydn's career was gradual. The Esterházy family kept him on as Kapellmeister to the very end (much as they had with his predecessor Werner long before), but they appointed new staff to lead their musical establishment: Johann Michael Fuchs in 1802 as Vice-Kapellmeister and Johann Nepomuk Hummel as Konzertmeister in 1804. Haydn's last summer in Eisenstadt was in 1803, and his last appearance before the public as a conductor was a charity performance of \"The Seven Last Words\" on 26 December 1803. As debility set in, he made largely futile efforts at composition, attempting to revise a rediscovered \"Missa brevis\" from his teenage years and complete his final string quartet. The latter project was abandoned for good in 1805, and the quartet was published with just two movements.\n\nHaydn was well cared for by his servants, and he received many visitors and public honors during his last years, but they could not have been very happy years for him. During his illness, Haydn often found solace by sitting at the piano and playing his \"Emperor's Hymn\". A final triumph occurred on 27 March 1808 when a performance of \"The Creation\" was organized in his honour. The very frail composer was brought into the hall on an armchair to the sound of trumpets and drums and was greeted by Beethoven, Salieri (who led the performance) and by other musicians and members of the aristocracy. Haydn was both moved and exhausted by the experience and had to depart at intermission.\nHaydn lived on for 14 more months. His final days were hardly serene, as in May 1809 the French army under Napoleon launched an attack on Vienna and on 10 May bombarded his neighborhood. According to Griesinger, \"Four case shots fell, rattling the windows and doors of his house. He called out in a loud voice to his alarmed and frightened people, 'Don't be afraid, children, where Haydn is, no harm can reach you!'. But the spirit was stronger than the flesh, for he had hardly uttered the brave words when his whole body began to tremble.\" More bombardments followed until the city fell to the French on 13 May. Haydn, was, however, deeply moved and appreciative when on 17 May a French cavalry officer named Sulémy came to pay his respects and sang, skillfully, an aria from \"The Creation\".\n\nOn 26 May Haydn played his \"Emperor's Hymn\" with unusual gusto three times; the same evening he collapsed and was taken to what proved to be to his deathbed. He died peacefully at 12:40 a.m. on 31 May 1809, aged 77. On 15 June, a memorial service was held in the Schottenkirche at which Mozart's Requiem was performed. Haydn's remains were interred in the local Hundsturm cemetery until 1820, when they were moved to Eisenstadt by Prince Nikolaus. His head took a different journey; it was stolen by phrenologists shortly after burial, and the skull was reunited with the other remains only in 1954.\n\nJames Webster writes of Haydn's public character thus: \"Haydn's public life exemplified the Enlightenment ideal of the \"honnête homme\" (\"honest man\"): the man whose good character and worldly success enable and justify each other. His modesty and probity were everywhere acknowledged. These traits were not only prerequisites to his success as Kapellmeister, entrepreneur and public figure, but also aided the favorable reception of his music.\" Haydn was especially respected by the Esterházy court musicians whom he supervised, as he maintained a cordial working atmosphere and effectively represented the musicians' interests with their employer; see Papa Haydn and the tale of the \"Farewell\" Symphony. Haydn had a robust sense of humor, evident in his love of practical jokes and often apparent in his music, and he had many friends. For much of his life he benefited from a \"happy and naturally cheerful temperament\", but in his later life, there is evidence for periods of depression, notably in the correspondence with Mrs. Genzinger and in Dies's biography, based on visits made in Haydn's old age.\n\nHaydn was a devout Catholic who often turned to his rosary when he had trouble composing, a practice that he usually found to be effective. He normally began the manuscript of each composition with \"in nomine Domini\" (\"in the name of the Lord\") and ended with \"Laus Deo\" (\"praise be to God\").\n\nHaydn's early years of poverty and awareness of the financial precariousness of musical life made him astute and even sharp in his business dealings. Some contemporaries (usually, it has to be said, wealthy ones) were surprised and even shocked at this. Webster writes: \"As regards money, Haydn…always attempted to maximize his income, whether by negotiating the right to sell his music outside the Esterházy court, driving hard bargains with publishers or selling his works three and four times over [to publishers in different countries]; he regularly engaged in 'sharp practice'” which nowadays might be regarded as plain fraud. But those were days when copyright was in its infancy, and the pirating of musical works was common. Publishers had few qualms about attaching Haydn's name to popular works by lesser composers, an arrangement that effectively robbed the lesser musician of livelihood. Webster notes that Haydn's ruthlessness in business might be viewed more sympathetically in light of his struggles with poverty during his years as a freelancer—and that outside of the world of business, in his dealings, for example, with relatives, musicians and servants, and in volunteering his services for charitable concerts, Haydn was a generous man – offering to teach the two infant sons of Mozart for free after their father's death. When Haydn died his was certainly comfortably off, but by middle class rather than aristocratic standards.\n\nHaydn was short in stature, perhaps as a result of having been underfed throughout most of his youth. He was not handsome, and like many in his day he was a survivor of smallpox; his face was pitted with the scars of this disease. His biographer Dies wrote: \"he couldn't understand how it happened that in his life he had been loved by many a pretty woman. 'They couldn't have been led to it by my beauty.\n\nHis nose, large and aquiline, was disfigured by the polyps he suffered during much of his adult life, an agonizing and debilitating disease that at times prevented him from writing music.\n\nJames Webster summarizes Haydn's role in the history of classical music as follows: \"He excelled in every musical genre. ... He is familiarly known as the 'father of the symphony' and could with greater justice be thus regarded for the string quartet; no other composer approaches his combination of productivity, quality and historical importance in these genres.\"\n\nA central characteristic of Haydn's music is the development of larger structures out of very short, simple musical motifs, often derived from standard accompanying figures. The music is often quite formally concentrated, and the important musical events of a movement can unfold rather quickly.\nHaydn's work was central to the development of what came to be called sonata form. His practice, however, differed in some ways from that of Mozart and Beethoven, his younger contemporaries who likewise excelled in this form of composition. Haydn was particularly fond of the so-called monothematic exposition, in which the music that establishes the dominant key is similar or identical to the opening theme. Haydn also differs from Mozart and Beethoven in his recapitulation sections, where he often rearranges the order of themes compared to the exposition and uses extensive thematic development.\n\nHaydn's formal inventiveness also led him to integrate the fugue into the classical style and to enrich the rondo form with more cohesive tonal logic (see sonata rondo form). Haydn was also the principal exponent of the double variation form—variations on two alternating themes, which are often major- and minor-mode versions of each other.\n\nPerhaps more than any other composer's, Haydn's music is known for its humor. The most famous example is the sudden loud chord in the slow movement of his \"Surprise\" symphony; Haydn's many other musical jokes include numerous false endings (e.g., in the quartets Op. 33 No. 2 and Op. 50 No. 3), and the remarkable rhythmic illusion placed in the trio section of the third movement of Op. 50 No. 1.\n\nMuch of the music was written to please and delight a prince, and its emotional tone is correspondingly upbeat. This tone also reflects, perhaps, Haydn's fundamentally healthy and well-balanced personality. Occasional minor-key works, often deadly serious in character, form striking exceptions to the general rule. Haydn's fast movements tend to be rhythmically propulsive and often impart a great sense of energy, especially in the finales. Some characteristic examples of Haydn's \"rollicking\" finale type are found in the \"London\" Symphony No. 104, the String Quartet Op. 50 No. 1, and the Piano Trio Hob XV: 27. Haydn's early slow movements are usually not too slow in tempo, relaxed, and reflective. Later on, the emotional range of the slow movements increases, notably in the deeply felt slow movements of the quartets Op. 76 Nos. 3 and 5, the Symphonies No. 98 and 102, and the Piano Trio Hob XV: 23. The minuets tend to have a strong downbeat and a clearly popular character. Over time, Haydn turned some of his minuets into \"scherzi\" which are much faster, at one beat to the bar.\n\nHaydn's early work dates from a period in which the compositional style of the High Baroque (seen in J.S. Bach and Handel) had gone out of fashion. This was a period of exploration and uncertainty, and Haydn, born 18 years before the death of Bach, was himself one of the musical explorers of this time. An older contemporary whose work Haydn acknowledged as an important influence was Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach.\n\nTracing Haydn's work over the six decades in which it was produced (roughly from 1749 to 1802), one finds a gradual but steady increase in complexity and musical sophistication, which developed as Haydn learned from his own experience and that of his colleagues. Several important landmarks have been observed in the evolution of Haydn's musical style.\n\nIn the late 1760s and early 1770s, Haydn entered a stylistic period known as \"Sturm und Drang\" (\"storm and stress\"). This term is taken from a literary movement of about the same time, though it appears that the musical development actually preceded the literary one by a few years. The musical language of this period is similar to what went before, but it is deployed in work that is more intensely expressive, especially in the works in minor keys. James Webster describes the works of this period as \"longer, more passionate, and more daring\". Some of the most famous compositions of this time are the \"Trauer\" (Mourning) Symphony No. 44, \"Farewell\" Symphony No. 45, the Piano Sonata in C minor (Hob. XVI/20, L. 33), and the six \"Sun\" Quartets Op. 20, all from c. 1771–72. It was also around this time that Haydn became interested in writing fugues in the Baroque style, and three of the Op. 20 quartets end with a fugue.\n\nFollowing the climax of the \"Sturm und Drang\", Haydn returned to a lighter, more overtly entertaining style. There are no quartets from this period, and the symphonies take on new features: the scoring often includes trumpets and timpani. These changes are often related to a major shift in Haydn's professional duties, which moved him away from \"pure\" music and toward the production of comic operas. Several of the operas were Haydn's own work (see List of operas by Joseph Haydn); these are seldom performed today. Haydn sometimes recycled his opera music in symphonic works, which helped him continue his career as a symphonist during this hectic decade.\n\nIn 1779, an important change in Haydn's contract permitted him to publish his compositions without prior authorization from his employer. This may have encouraged Haydn to rekindle his career as a composer of \"pure\" music. The change made itself felt most dramatically in 1781, when Haydn published the six Op. 33 String Quartets, announcing (in a letter to potential purchasers) that they were written in \"a new and completely special way\". Charles Rosen has argued that this assertion on Haydn's part was not just sales talk but meant quite seriously, and he points out a number of important advances in Haydn's compositional technique that appear in these quartets, advances that mark the advent of the Classical style in full flower. These include a fluid form of phrasing, in which each motif emerges from the previous one without interruption, the practice of letting accompanying material evolve into melodic material, and a kind of \"Classical counterpoint\" in which each instrumental part maintains its own integrity. These traits continue in the many quartets that Haydn wrote after Op. 33.\n\nIn the 1790s, stimulated by his England journeys, Haydn developed what Rosen calls his \"popular style\", a method of composition that, with unprecedented success, created music having great popular appeal but retaining a learned and rigorous musical structure. An important element of the popular style was the frequent use of folk or folk-like material (see Haydn and folk music). Haydn took care to deploy this material in appropriate locations, such as the endings of sonata expositions or the opening themes of finales. In such locations, the folk material serves as an element of stability, helping to anchor the larger structure. Haydn's popular style can be heard in virtually all of his later work, including the twelve \"London\" symphonies, the late quartets and piano trios, and the two late oratorios.\n\nThe return to Vienna in 1795 marked the last turning point in Haydn's career. Although his musical style evolved little, his intentions as a composer changed. While he had been a servant, and later a busy entrepreneur, Haydn wrote his works quickly and in profusion, with frequent deadlines. As a rich man, Haydn now felt that he had the privilege of taking his time and writing for posterity. This is reflected in the subject matter of \"The Creation\" (1798) and \"The Seasons\" (1801), which address such weighty topics as the meaning of life and the purpose of humankind and represent an attempt to render the sublime in music. Haydn's new intentions also meant that he was willing to spend much time on a single work: both oratorios took him over a year to complete. Haydn once remarked that he had worked on \"The Creation\" so long because he wanted it to last.\n\nThe change in Haydn's approach was important in the history of classical music, as other composers were soon following his lead. Notably, Beethoven adopted the practice of taking his time and aiming high.\n\nHaydn's works are listed in a comprehensive catalogue prepared by Anthony van Hoboken. This Hoboken catalogue provides each work with an identifying number, called its Hoboken number (abbreviation: H. or Hob.). The string quartets also have Hoboken numbers, but are usually identified instead by their opus numbers, which have the advantage of indicating the groups of six quartets that Haydn published together; thus for example the string quartet Opus 76, No. 3 is the third of the six quartets published in 1799 as Opus 76.\n\nBULLET::::- List of compositions by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of concertos by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of masses by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of operas by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of piano trios by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of solo piano compositions by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of string quartets by Joseph Haydn\nBULLET::::- List of symphonies by Joseph Haydn\n\nBULLET::::- Marianne von Martinesas a child, one of Haydn's first students; as an adult, a friend and eminent musician.\nBULLET::::- List of Austrians in music\n\nBULLET::::- Joseph Haydn's ethnicitywas Haydn Croatian?\nBULLET::::- Haydn's birthplace\nBULLET::::- List of Haydn's residences\nBULLET::::- Mannersdorf am Leithagebirge, visited by Haydn during the summer of 1753.\nBULLET::::- Haydn's writing for timpani\n\nBULLET::::- English translation in: One of the first biographies of Haydn, written on the basis of 30 interviews carried out during the composer's old age.\nBULLET::::- Highly detailed discussion of life and work; in German.\nBULLET::::- The first edition was published in 1946 with Karl Geiringer as the sole author.\nBULLET::::- A translation from the original German: \"Biographische Notizen über Joseph Haydn\" (1810). Leipzig. Like Dies's, a biography produced from interviews with the elderly Haydn.\nBULLET::::- Reissued 2010 by Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Originally published in 1950. Gives a sympathetic and witty account of Haydn's life, along with a survey of the music.\nBULLET::::- Focuses on biography rather than musical works; an up-to-date study benefiting from recent scholarly research on Haydn's life and times.\nBULLET::::- A comprehensive one-volume collection of detailed contributions by Haydn scholars.\nBULLET::::- An extensive compilation of original sources in five volumes.\nBULLET::::- Biography chapters by Robbins Landon, excerpted from Robbins Landon (1976–1980) and rich in original source documents. Analysis and appreciation of the works by Jones.\nBULLET::::- Published separately as\nBULLET::::- , in German\nBULLET::::- Published separately as a book: Careful scholarship with little subjective interpretation; covers both life and music, and includes a very detailed list of works.\n\nBULLET::::- On jokes in Haydn and Beethoven.\nBULLET::::- On the sublime in Haydn's later works; in German.\nBULLET::::- Covers each of the genres Haydn composed in as well as stylistic and interpretive contexts and performance and reception.\nBULLET::::- A brief (55 page) introduction to Haydn's string quartets.\nBULLET::::- Surveys the decline in Haydn's reputation in the nineteenth century before examining the factors that led to a resurgence in the twentieth.\nBULLET::::- First edition published in 1971. Covers much of Haydn's output and seeks to explicate Haydn's central role in the creation of the classical style. The work has been influential, provoking both positive citation and work (e.g., Webster 1991) written in reaction.\nBULLET::::- . Further discussion of Haydn's style and technique as it relates to sonata form.\nBULLET::::- Sisman, Elaine (1993) \"Haydn and the classical variation\". Cambridge: Harvard University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Covers not just Op. 50 but also its relevance to Haydn's other output as well as his earlier quartets.\nBULLET::::- This book focuses on a single work, but contains many observations and opinions about Haydn in general.\n\nBULLET::::- Haydn Festival Eisenstadt\nBULLET::::- Albert Christoph Dies: (German) \"Biographische Nachrichten von Joseph Haydn. Wien: Camesinaische Buchhandlung\", 1810.\nBULLET::::- Haydn's Late Oratorios: The Creation and The Seasons by Brian Robins\nBULLET::::- Full text of the biography \"Haydn\" by J. Cuthbert Hadden, 1902, from Project Gutenberg. The end of book contains documentary material including a number of Haydn's letters. Alternatively scanned copy \"Haydn\" at archive.org.\nBULLET::::- No Royal Directive: Joseph Haydn and the String Quartet by Ron Drummond\nBULLET::::- \"musicologie.org\", with biography\nBULLET::::- \"Haydn – Quartet in F minor, Op. 20 No. 5\", lecture by Professor Roger Parker, with the Badke Quartet, Gresham College, 8 April 2008 (available for video, audio and text download)\nBULLET::::- Haydn anniversary page on Bachtrack, includes lists of live performances\n\nBULLET::::- www.kreusch-sheet-music.net – Free scores by Haydn\nBULLET::::- Free scores at the Mutopia Project\nBULLET::::- Kunst der Fuge: Franz Joseph Haydn, MIDI files\nBULLET::::- Haydn's page at Classical Archives\nBULLET::::- Haydn Symphonies from the British Library Sound Archive\n"}
{"id": "16095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16095", "title": "Jimi Hendrix", "text": "Jimi Hendrix\n\nJames Marshall \"Jimi\" Hendrix (born Johnny Allen Hendrix; November 27, 1942 – September 18, 1970) was an American rock guitarist, singer, and songwriter. His mainstream career lasted only four years, but he is widely regarded as one of the most influential guitarists in history and one of the most celebrated musicians of the 20th century. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame describes him as \"the greatest instrumentalist in the history of rock music\".\n\nBorn in Seattle, Washington, Hendrix began playing guitar at age 15. In 1961, he enlisted in the US Army and trained as a paratrooper in the 101st Airborne Division, but he was discharged the following year. He moved to Clarksville, Tennessee soon after and began playing gigs on the Chitlin' Circuit, earning a place in the Isley Brothers' backing band and later with Little Richard, with whom he continued to work through mid-1965. He played with Curtis Knight and the Squires before moving to England in late 1966 after being discovered by Linda Keith, who interested bassist Chas Chandler of the Animals in becoming his first manager. Within months, Hendrix earned three UK top ten hits with the Jimi Hendrix Experience: \"Hey Joe\", \"Purple Haze\", and \"The Wind Cries Mary\". He achieved fame in the US after his performance at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967, and his third and final studio album \"Electric Ladyland\" reached number one in the US in 1968; it was Hendrix's most commercially successful release and his only number-one album. He was the world's highest-paid performer, and he headlined the Woodstock festival in 1969 and the Isle of Wight Festival in 1970. He died from barbiturate-related asphyxia on September 18, 1970, at age 27.\n\nHendrix was inspired by American rock and roll and electric blues. He favored overdriven amplifiers with high volume and gain, and he was instrumental in popularizing the previously undesirable sounds caused by guitar amplifier feedback. He was also one of the first guitarists to make extensive use of tone-altering effects units in mainstream rock, such as fuzz tone, Octavia, wah-wah, and Uni-Vibe. He was the first musician to use stereophonic phasing effects in recordings. Holly George-Warren of \"Rolling Stone\" writes: \"Hendrix pioneered the use of the instrument as an electronic sound source. Players before him had experimented with feedback and distortion, but Hendrix turned those effects and others into a controlled, fluid vocabulary every bit as personal as the blues with which he began.\"\n\nIn 1967, readers of \"Melody Maker\" voted Hendrix the Pop Musician of the Year, and \"Rolling Stone\" declared him the Performer of the Year in 1968. \"Disc and Music Echo\" magazine honored him with the World Top Musician of 1969, and \"Guitar Player\" named him the Rock Guitarist of the Year in 1970. The Jimi Hendrix Experience was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1992 and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the band's three studio albums among the 100 greatest albums of all time, and ranked Hendrix the greatest guitarist and the sixth greatest artist of all time.\n\nJimi Hendrix had a diverse heritage. His paternal grandmother, Zenora \"Nora\" Rose Moore, was African American and one-quarter Cherokee. Hendrix's paternal grandfather, Bertran Philander Ross Hendrix (born 1866), was born out of an extramarital affair between a woman named Fanny, and a grain merchant from Urbana, Ohio, or Illinois, one of the wealthiest men in the area at that time. After Hendrix and Moore relocated to Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, they had a son they named James Allen Hendrix on June 10, 1919; the family called him \"Al\".\n\nIn 1941, after moving to Seattle, Al met Lucille Jeter (1925–1958) at a dance; they married on March 31, 1942. Lucille's father (Jimi's maternal grandfather) was Preston Jeter (born 1875), whose mother was born in similar circumstances as Bertran Philander Ross Hendrix. Lucille's mother, née Clarice Lawson, had African American and Cherokee ancestors. Al, who had been drafted by the US Army to serve in World War II, left to begin his basic training three days after the wedding. Johnny Allen Hendrix was born on November 27, 1942, in Seattle; he was the first of Lucille's five children. In 1946, Johnny's parents changed his name to James Marshall Hendrix, in honor of Al and his late brother Leon Marshall.\n\nStationed in Alabama at the time of Hendrix's birth, Al was denied the standard military furlough afforded servicemen for childbirth; his commanding officer placed him in the stockade to prevent him from going AWOL to see his infant son in Seattle. He spent two months locked up without trial, and while in the stockade received a telegram announcing his son's birth. During Al's three-year absence, Lucille struggled to raise their son. When Al was away, Hendrix was mostly cared for by family members and friends, especially Lucille's sister Delores Hall and her friend Dorothy Harding. Al received an honorable discharge from the US Army on September 1, 1945. Two months later, unable to find Lucille, Al went to the Berkeley, California, home of a family friend named Mrs. Champ, who had taken care of and had attempted to adopt Hendrix; this is where Al saw his son for the first time.\n\nAfter returning from service, Al reunited with Lucille, but his inability to find steady work left the family impoverished. They both struggled with alcohol, and often fought when intoxicated. The violence sometimes drove Hendrix to withdraw and hide in a closet in their home. His relationship with his brother Leon (born 1948) was close but precarious; with Leon in and out of foster care, they lived with an almost constant threat of fraternal separation. In addition to Leon, Hendrix had three younger siblings: Joseph, born in 1949, Kathy in 1950, and Pamela, 1951, all of whom Al and Lucille gave up to foster care and adoption. The family frequently moved, staying in cheap hotels and apartments around Seattle. On occasion, family members would take Hendrix to Vancouver to stay at his grandmother's. A shy and sensitive boy, he was deeply affected by his life experiences. In later years, he confided to a girlfriend that he had been the victim of sexual abuse by a man in uniform. On December 17, 1951, when Hendrix was nine years old, his parents divorced; the court granted Al custody of him and Leon.\n\nAt Horace Mann Elementary School in Seattle during the mid-1950s, Hendrix's habit of carrying a broom with him to emulate a guitar gained the attention of the school's social worker. After more than a year of his clinging to a broom like a security blanket, she wrote a letter requesting school funding intended for underprivileged children, insisting that leaving him without a guitar might result in psychological damage. Her efforts failed, and Al refused to buy him a guitar.\n\nIn 1957, while helping his father with a side-job, Hendrix found a ukulele amongst the garbage they were removing from an older woman's home. She told him that he could keep the instrument, which had only one string. Learning by ear, he played single notes, following along to Elvis Presley songs, particularly \"Hound Dog\". By the age of 33, Hendrix's mother Lucille had developed cirrhosis of the liver, and on February 2, 1958, she died when her spleen ruptured. Al refused to take James and Leon to attend their mother's funeral; he instead gave them shots of whiskey and instructed them that was how men should deal with loss. In 1958, Hendrix completed his studies at Washington Junior High School and began attending, but did not graduate from, Garfield High School.\n\nIn mid-1958, at age 15, Hendrix acquired his first acoustic guitar, for $5 (equivalent to $43.40 in 2018). He played for hours daily, watching others and learning from more experienced guitarists, and listening to blues artists such as Muddy Waters, B.B. King, Howlin' Wolf, and Robert Johnson. The first tune Hendrix learned to play was the television theme \"Peter Gunn\". Around that time, Hendrix jammed with boyhood friend Sammy Drain and his keyboard-playing brother. In 1959, attending a concert by Hank Ballard & the Midnighters in Seattle, Hendrix met the group's guitarist Billy Davis. Davis showed him some guitar licks and got him a short gig with the Midnighters. The two remained friends until Hendrix's death in 1970.\n\nSoon after he acquired the acoustic guitar, Hendrix formed his first band, the Velvetones. Without an electric guitar, he could barely be heard over the sound of the group. After about three months, he realized that he needed an electric guitar. In mid-1959, his father relented and bought him a white Supro Ozark. Hendrix's first gig was with an unnamed band in the Jaffe Room of Seattle's Temple De Hirsch Sinai, but they fired him between sets for showing off. He joined the Rocking Kings, which played professionally at venues such as the Birdland club. When his guitar was stolen after he left it backstage overnight, Al bought him a red Silvertone Danelectro.\n\nBefore Hendrix was 19 years old, law authorities had twice caught him riding in stolen cars. Given a choice between prison or joining the Army, he chose the latter and enlisted on May 31, 1961. After completing eight weeks of basic training at Fort Ord, California, he was assigned to the 101st Airborne Division and stationed at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. He arrived on November 8, and soon afterward he wrote to his father: \"There's nothing but physical training and harassment here for two weeks, then when you go to jump school ... you get hell. They work you to death, fussing and fighting.\" In his next letter home, Hendrix, who had left his guitar at his girlfriend Betty Jean Morgan's house in Seattle, asked his father to send it to him as soon as possible, stating: \"I really need it now.\" His father obliged and sent the red Silvertone Danelectro on which Hendrix had hand-painted the words \"Betty Jean\" to Fort Campbell. His apparent obsession with the instrument contributed to his neglect of his duties, which led to taunting and physical abuse from his peers, who at least once hid the guitar from him until he had begged for its return. In November 1961, fellow serviceman Billy Cox walked past an army club and heard Hendrix playing. Impressed by Hendrix's technique, which Cox described as a combination of \"John Lee Hooker and Beethoven\", Cox borrowed a bass guitar and the two jammed. Within weeks, they began performing at base clubs on the weekends with other musicians in a loosely organized band, the Casuals.\n\nHendrix completed his paratrooper training in just over eight months, and Major General C. W. G. Rich awarded him the prestigious Screaming Eagles patch on January 11, 1962. By February, his personal conduct had begun to draw criticism from his superiors. They labeled him an unqualified marksman and often caught him napping while on duty and failing to report for bed checks. On May 24, Hendrix's platoon sergeant, James C. Spears, filed a report in which he stated: \"He has no interest whatsoever in the Army ... It is my opinion that Private Hendrix will never come up to the standards required of a soldier. I feel that the military service will benefit if he is discharged as soon as possible.\" On June 29, 1962, Hendrix was granted a discharge under honorable conditions. Hendrix later spoke of his dislike of the army and lied that he had received a medical discharge after breaking his ankle during his 26th parachute jump.\n\nIn September 1963, after Cox was discharged from the Army, he and Hendrix moved about twenty miles across the state line from Fort Campbell to Clarksville, Tennessee, and formed a band, the King Kasuals. In Seattle, Hendrix saw Butch Snipes play with his teeth and now the Kasual's second guitarist, Alphonso \"Baby Boo\" Young, was performing this guitar gimmick. Not to be upstaged, Hendrix also learned to play with way. He later explained: \"The idea of doing that came to me... in Tennessee. Down there you have to play with your teeth or else you get shot. There's a trail of broken teeth all over the stage.\"\n\nAlthough they began playing low-paying gigs at obscure venues, the band eventually moved to Nashville's Jefferson Street, which was the traditional heart of the city's black community and home to a thriving rhythm and blues music scene. They earned a brief residency playing at a popular venue in town, the Club del Morocco, and for the next two years Hendrix made a living performing at a circuit of venues throughout the South that were affiliated with the Theater Owners' Booking Association (TOBA), widely known as the Chitlin' Circuit. In addition to playing in his own band, Hendrix performed as a backing musician for various soul, R&B, and blues musicians, including Wilson Pickett, Slim Harpo, Sam Cooke, Ike & Tina Turner and Jackie Wilson.\n\nIn January 1964, feeling he had outgrown the circuit artistically, and frustrated by having to follow the rules of bandleaders, Hendrix decided to venture out on his own. He moved into the Hotel Theresa in Harlem, where he befriended Lithofayne Pridgon, known as \"Faye\", who became his girlfriend. A Harlem native with connections throughout the area's music scene, Pridgon provided him with shelter, support, and encouragement. Hendrix also met the Allen twins, Arthur and Albert. In February 1964, Hendrix won first prize in the Apollo Theater amateur contest. Hoping to secure a career opportunity, he played the Harlem club circuit and sat in with various bands. At the recommendation of a former associate of Joe Tex, Ronnie Isley granted Hendrix an audition that led to an offer to become the guitarist with the Isley Brothers' back-up band, the I.B. Specials, which he readily accepted.\n\nIn March 1964, Hendrix recorded the two-part single \"Testify\" with the Isley Brothers. Released in June, it failed to chart. In May, he provided guitar instrumentation for the Don Covay song, \"Mercy Mercy\". Issued in August by Rosemart Records and distributed by Atlantic, the track reached number 35 on the \"Billboard\" chart.\n\nHendrix toured with the Isleys during much of 1964, but near the end of October, after growing tired of playing the same set every night, he left the band. Soon afterward, Hendrix joined Little Richard's touring band, the Upsetters. During a stop in Los Angeles in February 1965, he recorded his first and only single with Richard, \"I Don't Know What You Got (But It's Got Me)\", written by Don Covay and released by Vee-Jay Records. Richard's popularity was waning at the time, and the single peaked at number 92, where it remained for one week before dropping off the chart. Hendrix met singer Rosa Lee Brooks while staying at the Wilcox Hotel in Hollywood, and she invited him to participate in a recording session for her single, which included the Arthur Lee penned \"My Diary\" as the A-side, and \"Utee\" as the B-side. Hendrix played guitar on both tracks, which also included background vocals by Lee. The single failed to chart, but Hendrix and Lee began a friendship that lasted several years; Hendrix later became an ardent supporter of Lee's band, Love.\n\nIn July 1965, on Nashville's Channel 5 \"Night Train\", Hendrix made his first television appearance. Performing in Little Richard's ensemble band, he backed up vocalists Buddy and Stacy on \"Shotgun\". The video recording of the show marks the earliest known footage of Hendrix performing. Richard and Hendrix often clashed over tardiness, wardrobe, and Hendrix's stage antics, and in late July, Richard's brother Robert fired him. He then briefly rejoined the Isley Brothers, and recorded a second single with them, \"Move Over and Let Me Dance\" backed with \"Have You Ever Been Disappointed\". Later that year, he joined a New York-based R&B band, Curtis Knight and the Squires, after meeting Knight in the lobby of a hotel where both men were staying. Hendrix performed with them for eight months. In October 1965, he and Knight recorded the single, \"How Would You Feel\" backed with \"Welcome Home\" and on October 15, Hendrix signed a three-year recording contract with entrepreneur Ed Chalpin. While the relationship with Chalpin was short-lived, his contract remained in force, which later caused legal and career problems for Hendrix. During his time with Knight, Hendrix briefly toured with Joey Dee and the Starliters, and worked with King Curtis on several recordings including Ray Sharpe's two-part single, \"Help Me\". Hendrix earned his first composer credits for two instrumentals, \"Hornets Nest\" and \"Knock Yourself Out\", released as a Curtis Knight and the Squires single in 1966.\n\nFeeling restricted by his experiences as an R&B sideman, Hendrix moved in 1966 to New York City's Greenwich Village, which had a vibrant and diverse music scene. There, he was offered a residency at the Cafe Wha? on MacDougal Street and formed his own band that June, Jimmy James and the Blue Flames, which included future Spirit guitarist Randy California. The Blue Flames played at several clubs in New York and Hendrix began developing his guitar style and material that he would soon use with the Experience. In September, they gave some of their last concerts at the Cafe au Go Go, as John Hammond Jr.'s backing group.\n\nBy May 1966, Hendrix was struggling to earn a living wage playing the R&B circuit, so he briefly rejoined Curtis Knight and the Squires for an engagement at one of New York City's most popular nightspots, the Cheetah Club. During a performance, Linda Keith, the girlfriend of Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards, noticed Hendrix and was \"mesmerised\" by his playing. She invited him to join her for a drink, and the two became friends.\n\nWhile Hendrix was playing with Jimmy James and the Blue Flames, Keith recommended him to Stones manager Andrew Loog Oldham and producer Seymour Stein. They failed to see Hendrix's musical potential, and rejected him. Keith referred him to Chas Chandler, who was leaving the Animals and was interested in managing and producing artists. Chandler saw Hendrix play in Cafe Wha?, a Greenwich Village, New York City nightclub. Chandler liked the Billy Roberts song \"Hey Joe\", and was convinced he could create a hit single with the right artist. Impressed with Hendrix's version of the song, he brought him to London on September 24, 1966, and signed him to a management and production contract with himself and ex-Animals manager Michael Jeffery. On September 24, Hendrix gave an impromptu solo performance at The Scotch of St James, and later that night began a relationship with Kathy Etchingham that lasted for two and a half years.\nFollowing Hendrix's arrival in London, Chandler began recruiting members for a band designed to highlight his talents, the Jimi Hendrix Experience. Hendrix met guitarist Noel Redding at an audition for the New Animals, where Redding's knowledge of blues progressions impressed Hendrix, who stated that he also liked Redding's hairstyle. Chandler asked Redding if he wanted to play bass guitar in Hendrix's band; Redding agreed. Chandler began looking for a drummer and soon after contacted Mitch Mitchell through a mutual friend. Mitchell, who had recently been fired from Georgie Fame and the Blue Flames, participated in a rehearsal with Redding and Hendrix where they found common ground in their shared interest in rhythm and blues. When Chandler phoned Mitchell later that day to offer him the position, he readily accepted. Chandler also convinced Hendrix to change the spelling of his first name from \"Jimmy\" to the more exotic \"Jimi\".\n\nOn October 1, 1966, Chandler brought Hendrix to the London Polytechnic at Regent Street, where Cream was scheduled to perform, and where Hendrix and guitarist Eric Clapton met. Clapton later said: \"He asked if he could play a couple of numbers. I said, 'Of course', but I had a funny feeling about him.\" Halfway through Cream's set, Hendrix took the stage and performed a frantic version of the Howlin' Wolf song \"Killing Floor\". In 1989, Clapton described the performance: \"He played just about every style you could think of, and not in a flashy way. I mean he did a few of his tricks, like playing with his teeth and behind his back, but it wasn't in an upstaging sense at all, and that was it ... He walked off, and my life was never the same again\".\n\nIn mid-October 1966, Chandler arranged an engagement for the Experience as Johnny Hallyday's supporting act during a brief tour of France. Thus, the Jimi Hendrix Experience performed their very first show on October 13, 1966, at the Novelty in Evreux. Their enthusiastically received 15-minute performance at the Olympia theatre in Paris on October 18 marks the earliest known recording of the band. In late October, Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp, managers of the Who, signed the Experience to their newly formed label, Track Records, and the group recorded their first song, \"Hey Joe\", on October 23. \"Stone Free\", which was Hendrix's first songwriting effort after arriving in England, was recorded on November 2.\n\nIn mid-November, they performed at the Bag O'Nails nightclub in London, with Clapton, John Lennon, Paul McCartney, Jeff Beck, Pete Townshend, Brian Jones, Mick Jagger, and Kevin Ayers in attendance. Ayers described the crowd's reaction as stunned disbelief: \"All the stars were there, and I heard serious comments, you know 'shit', 'Jesus', 'damn' and other words worse than that.\" The performance earned Hendrix his first interview, published in \"Record Mirror\" with the headline: \"Mr. Phenomenon\". \"Now hear this ... we predict that [Hendrix] is going to whirl around the business like a tornado\", wrote Bill Harry, who asked the rhetorical question: \"Is that full, big, swinging sound really being created by only three people?\" Hendrix said: \"We don't want to be classed in any category ... If it must have a tag, I'd like it to be called, 'Free Feeling'. It's a mixture of rock, freak-out, rave and blues\". Through a distribution deal with Polydor Records, the Experience's first single, \"Hey Joe\", backed with \"Stone Free\", was released on December 16, 1966. After appearances on the UK television shows \"Ready Steady Go!\" and the \"Top of the Pops\", \"Hey Joe\" entered the UK charts on December 29 and peaked at number six. Further success came in March 1967 with the UK number three hit \"Purple Haze\", and in May with \"The Wind Cries Mary\", which remained on the UK charts for eleven weeks, peaking at number six. On March 12, 1967, he performed at the Troutbeck Hotel, Ilkley, West Yorkshire, where, after about 900 people turned up (the hotel was licensed for 250) the local police stopped the gig due to safety concerns.\n\nOn March 31, 1967, while the Experience waited to perform at the London Astoria, Hendrix and Chandler discussed ways in which they could increase the band's media exposure. When Chandler asked journalist Keith Altham for advice, Altham suggested that they needed to do something more dramatic than the stage show of the Who, which involved the smashing of instruments. Hendrix joked: \"Maybe I can smash up an elephant\", to which Altham replied: \"Well, it's a pity you can't set fire to your guitar\". Chandler then asked road manager Gerry Stickells to procure some lighter fluid. During the show, Hendrix gave an especially dynamic performance before setting his guitar on fire at the end of a 45-minute set. In the wake of the stunt, members of London's press labeled Hendrix the \"Black Elvis\" and the \"Wild Man of Borneo\".\n\nAfter the UK chart success of their first two singles, \"Hey Joe\" and \"Purple Haze\", the Experience began assembling material for a full-length LP. Recording began at De Lane Lea Studios and later moved to the prestigious Olympic Studios. The album, \"Are You Experienced\", features a diversity of musical styles, including blues tracks such as \"Red House\" and \"Highway Chile\", and the R&B song \"Remember\". It also included the experimental science fiction piece, \"Third Stone from the Sun\" and the post-modern soundscapes of the title track, with prominent backwards guitar and drums. \"I Don't Live Today\" served as a medium for Hendrix's guitar feedback improvisation and \"Fire\" was driven by Mitchell's drumming.\n\nReleased in the UK on May 12, 1967, \"Are You Experienced\" spent 33 weeks on the charts, peaking at number two. It was prevented from reaching the top spot by the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\". On June 4, 1967, Hendrix opened a show at the Saville Theatre in London with his rendition of \"Sgt. Pepper\" title track, which was released just three days previous. Beatles manager Brian Epstein owned the Saville at the time, and both George Harrison and Paul McCartney attended the performance. McCartney described the moment: \"The curtains flew back and he came walking forward playing 'Sgt. Pepper'. It's a pretty major compliment in anyone's book. I put that down as one of the great honors of my career.\" Released in the US on August 23 by Reprise Records, \"Are You Experienced\" reached number five on the \"Billboard\" 200.\n\nIn 1989, Noe Goldwasser, the founding editor of \"Guitar World\" magazine, described \"Are You Experienced\" as \"the album that shook the world ... leaving it forever changed\". In 2005, \"Rolling Stone\" called the double-platinum LP Hendrix's \"epochal debut\", and they ranked it the 15th greatest album of all time, noting his \"exploitation of amp howl\", and characterizing his guitar playing as \"incendiary ... historic in itself\".\n\nAlthough popular in Europe at the time, the Experience's first US single, \"Hey Joe\", failed to reach the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart upon its release on May 1, 1967. The group's fortunes improved when McCartney recommended them to the organizers of the Monterey Pop Festival. He insisted that the event would be incomplete without Hendrix, whom he called \"an absolute ace on the guitar\", and he agreed to join the board of organizers on the condition that the Experience perform at the festival in mid-June.\n\nOn June 18, 1967, introduced by Brian Jones as \"the most exciting performer [he had] ever heard\", Hendrix opened with a fast arrangement of Howlin' Wolf's song \"Killing Floor\", wearing what author Keith Shadwick described as \"clothes as exotic as any on display elsewhere.\" Shadwick wrote: \"[Hendrix] was not only something utterly new musically, but an entirely original vision of what a black American entertainer should and could look like.\" The Experience went on to perform renditions of \"Hey Joe\", B.B. King's \"Rock Me Baby\", Chip Taylor's \"Wild Thing\", and Bob Dylan's \"Like a Rolling Stone\", as well as four original compositions: \"Foxy Lady\", \"Can You See Me\", \"The Wind Cries Mary\", and \"Purple Haze\". The set ended with Hendrix destroying his guitar and tossing pieces of it out to the audience. \"Rolling Stone\" Alex Vadukul wrote:\n\nCaraeff stood on a chair next to the edge of the stage while taking a series of four monochrome pictures of Hendrix burning his guitar. Caraeff was close enough to the fire that he had to use his camera as a shield to protect his face from the heat. \"Rolling Stone\" later colorized the image, matching it with other pictures taken at the festival before using the shot for a 1987 magazine cover. According to author Gail Buckland, the fourth and final frame of \"Hendrix kneeling in front of his burning guitar, hands raised, is one of the most famous images in rock.\" Author and historian Matthew C. Whitaker wrote: \"Hendrix's burning of his guitar became an iconic image in rock history and brought him national attention.\" The \"Los Angeles Times\" asserted that, upon leaving the stage, Hendrix \"graduated from rumor to legend\". Author John McDermott wrote that \"Hendrix left the Monterey audience stunned and in disbelief at what they'd just heard and seen\". According to Hendrix: \"I decided to destroy my guitar at the end of a song as a sacrifice. You sacrifice things you love. I love my guitar.\" The performance was filmed by D. A. Pennebaker, and later included in the concert documentary \"Monterey Pop\", which helped Hendrix gain popularity with the US public.\n\nImmediately after the festival, the Experience was booked for a series of five concerts at Bill Graham's Fillmore, with Big Brother and the Holding Company and Jefferson Airplane. The Experience outperformed Jefferson Airplane during the first two nights, and replaced them at the top of the bill on the fifth. Following their successful West Coast introduction, which included a free open-air concert at Golden Gate Park and a concert at the Whisky a Go Go, the Experience was booked as the opening act for the first American tour of the Monkees. They requested Hendrix as a supporting act because they were fans, but their young audience disliked the Experience, who left the tour after six shows. Chandler later admitted that he engineered the tour in an effort to gain publicity for Hendrix.\n\nThe second Experience album, \"\", opens with the track \"EXP\", which utilized microphonic and harmonic feedback in a new, creative fashion. It also showcased an experimental stereo panning effect in which sounds emanating from Hendrix's guitar move through the stereo image, revolving around the listener. The piece reflected his growing interest in science fiction and outer space. He composed the album's title track and finale around two verses and two choruses, during which he pairs emotions with personas, comparing them to colors. The song's coda features the first recording of stereo phasing. Shadwick described the composition as \"possibly the most ambitious piece on \"Axis\", the extravagant metaphors of the lyrics suggesting a growing confidence\" in Hendrix's songwriting. His guitar playing throughout the song is marked by chordal arpeggios and contrapuntal motion, with tremolo-picked partial chords providing the musical foundation for the chorus, which culminates in what musicologist Andy Aledort described as \"simply one of the greatest electric guitar solos ever played\". The track fades out on tremolo-picked 32nd note double stops.\n\nThe scheduled release date for \"Axis\" was almost delayed when Hendrix lost the master tape of side one of the LP, leaving it in the back seat of a London taxi. With the deadline looming, Hendrix, Chandler, and engineer Eddie Kramer remixed most of side one in a single overnight session, but they could not match the quality of the lost mix of \"If 6 Was 9\". Bassist Noel Redding had a tape recording of this mix, which had to be smoothed out with an iron as it had gotten wrinkled. During the verses, Hendrix doubled his singing with a guitar line which he played one octave lower than his vocals. Hendrix voiced his disappointment about having re-mixed the album so quickly, and he felt that it could have been better had they been given more time.\n\n\"Axis\" featured psychedelic cover art that depicts Hendrix and the Experience as various avatars of Vishnu, incorporating a painting of them by Roger Law, from a photo-portrait by Karl Ferris. The painting was then superimposed on a copy of a mass-produced religious poster. Hendrix stated that the cover, which Track spent $5,000 producing, would have been more appropriate had it highlighted his American Indian heritage. He said: \"You got it wrong ... I'm not that kind of Indian.\" Track released the album in the UK on December 1, 1967, where it peaked at number five, spending 16 weeks on the charts. In February 1968, \"Axis: Bold as Love\" reached number three in the US.\n\nWhile author and journalist Richie Unterberger described \"Axis\" as the least impressive Experience album, according to author Peter Doggett, the release \"heralded a new subtlety in Hendrix's work\". Mitchell said: \"\"Axis\" was the first time that it became apparent that Jimi was pretty good working behind the mixing board, as well as playing, and had some positive ideas of how he wanted things recorded. It could have been the start of any potential conflict between him and Chas in the studio.\"\n\nRecording for the Experience's third and final studio album, \"Electric Ladyland\", began as early as December 20, 1967, at Olympic Studios. Several songs were attempted; however, in April 1968, the Experience, with Chandler as producer and engineers Eddie Kramer and Gary Kellgren, moved the sessions to the newly opened Record Plant Studios in New York. As the sessions progressed, Chandler became increasingly frustrated with Hendrix's perfectionism and his demands for repeated takes. Hendrix also allowed numerous friends and guests to join them in the studio, which contributed to a chaotic and crowded environment in the control room and led Chandler to sever his professional relationship with Hendrix. Redding later recalled: \"There were tons of people in the studio; you couldn't move. It was a party, not a session.\" Redding, who had formed his own band in mid-1968, Fat Mattress, found it increasingly difficult to fulfill his commitments with the Experience, so Hendrix played many of the bass parts on \"Electric Ladyland\". The album's cover stated that it was \"produced and directed by Jimi Hendrix\".\n\nDuring the \"Electric Ladyland\" recording sessions, Hendrix began experimenting with other combinations of musicians, including Jefferson Airplane's Jack Casady and Traffic's Steve Winwood, who played bass and organ, respectively, on the 15-minute slow-blues jam, \"Voodoo Chile\". During the album's production, Hendrix appeared at an impromptu jam with B.B. King, Al Kooper, and Elvin Bishop. \"Electric Ladyland\" was released on October 25, and by mid-November it had reached number one in the US, spending two weeks at the top spot. The double LP was Hendrix's most commercially successful release and his only number one album. It peaked at number six in the UK, spending 12 weeks on the chart. \"Electric Ladyland\" included Hendrix's cover of Bob Dylan's song, \"All Along the Watchtower\", which became Hendrix's highest-selling single and his only US top 40 hit, peaking at number 20; the single reached number five in the UK. \"Burning of the Midnight Lamp\", his first recorded song to feature a wah-wah pedal, was added to the album. It was originally released as his fourth single in the UK in August 1967 and reached number 18 on the charts.\n\nIn 1989, Noe Goldwasser, the founding editor of \"Guitar World\" magazine, described \"Electric Ladyland\" as \"Hendrix's masterpiece\". According to author Michael Heatley, \"most critics agree\" that the album is \"the fullest realization of Jimi's far-reaching ambitions.\" In 2004, author Peter Doggett wrote: \"For pure experimental genius, melodic flair, conceptual vision and instrumental brilliance, \"Electric Ladyland\" remains a prime contender for the status of rock's greatest album.\" Doggett described the LP as \"a display of musical virtuosity never surpassed by any rock musician.\"\n\nIn January 1969, after an absence of more than six months, Hendrix briefly moved back into his girlfriend Kathy Etchingham's Brook Street apartment, which was next door to the Handel House Museum in the West End of London. After a performance of \"Voodoo Child\", on BBC's \"Happening for Lulu\" show in January 1969, the band stopped midway through an attempt at their first hit \"Hey Joe\" and then launched into an instrumental version of \"Sunshine of Your Love\", as a tribute to the recently disbanded band Cream, until producers brought the song to a premature end. Because the unplanned performance precluded Lulu's usual closing number, Hendrix was told he would never work at the BBC again. During this time, the Experience toured Scandinavia, Germany, and gave their final two performances in France. On February 18 and 24, they played sold-out concerts at London's Royal Albert Hall, which were the last European appearances of this lineup.\n\nBy February 1969, Redding had grown weary of Hendrix's unpredictable work ethic and his creative control over the Experience's music. During the previous month's European tour, interpersonal relations within the group had deteriorated, particularly between Hendrix and Redding. In his diary, Redding documented the building frustration during early 1969 recording sessions: \"On the first day, as I nearly expected, there was nothing doing ... On the second it was no show at all. I went to the pub for three hours, came back, and it was still ages before Jimi ambled in. Then we argued ... On the last day, I just watched it happen for a while, and then went back to my flat.\" The last Experience sessions that included Redding—a re-recording of \"Stone Free\" for use as a possible single release—took place on April 14 at Olmstead and the Record Plant in New York. Hendrix then flew bassist Billy Cox to New York; they started recording and rehearsing together on April 21.\n\nThe last performance of the original Experience lineup took place on June 29, 1969, at Barry Fey's Denver Pop Festival, a three-day event held at Denver's Mile High Stadium that was marked by police using tear gas to control the audience. The band narrowly escaped from the venue in the back of a rental truck, which was partly crushed by fans who had climbed on top of the vehicle. Before the show, a journalist angered Redding by asking why he was there; the reporter then informed him that two weeks earlier Hendrix announced that he had been replaced with Billy Cox. The next day, Redding quit the Experience and returned to London. He announced that he had left the band and intended to pursue a solo career, blaming Hendrix's plans to expand the group without allowing for his input as a primary reason for leaving. Redding later said: \"Mitch and I hung out a lot together, but we're English. If we'd go out, Jimi would stay in his room. But any bad feelings came from us being three guys who were traveling too hard, getting too tired, and taking too many drugs ... I liked Hendrix. I don't like Mitchell.\"\n\nSoon after Redding's departure, Hendrix began lodging at the eight-bedroom Ashokan House, in the hamlet of Boiceville near Woodstock in upstate New York, where he had spent some time vacationing in mid-1969. Manager Michael Jeffery arranged the accommodations in the hope that the respite might encourage Hendrix to write material for a new album. During this time, Mitchell was unavailable for commitments made by Jeffery, which included Hendrix's first appearance on US TV—on \"The Dick Cavett Show\"—where he was backed by the studio orchestra, and an appearance on \"The Tonight Show\" where he appeared with Cox and session drummer Ed Shaughnessy.\n\nBy 1969, Hendrix was the world's highest-paid rock musician. In August, he headlined the Woodstock Music and Art Fair that included many of the most popular bands of the time. For the concert, he added rhythm guitarist Larry Lee and conga players Juma Sultan and Jerry Velez. The band rehearsed for less than two weeks before the performance, and according to Mitchell, they never connected musically. Before arriving at the engagement, Hendrix heard reports that the size of the audience had grown enormously, which concerned him as he did not enjoy performing for large crowds. He was an important draw for the event, and although he accepted substantially less money for the appearance than his usual fee, he was the festival's highest-paid performer.\n\nHendrix decided to move his midnight Sunday slot to Monday morning, closing the show. The band took the stage around 8:00 a.m, by which time Hendrix had been awake for more than three days. The audience, which peaked at an estimated 400,000 people, was reduced to 30,000–40,000, many of whom had waited to catch a glimpse of Hendrix before leaving during his performance. The festival MC, Chip Monck, introduced the group as \"the Jimi Hendrix Experience\", but Hendrix clarified: \"We decided to change the whole thing around and call it 'Gypsy Sun and Rainbows'. For short, it's nothin' but a 'Band of Gypsys'.\"\n\nHendrix's performance included a rendition of the US national anthem, \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", with copious feedback, distortion, and sustain to imitate the sounds made by rockets and bombs. Contemporary political pundits described his interpretation as a statement against the Vietnam War. Three weeks later Hendrix said: \"We're all Americans ... it was like 'Go America!'... We play it the way the air is in America today. The air is slightly static, see.\" Immortalized in the 1970 documentary film, \"Woodstock\", his guitar-driven version would become part of the sixties Zeitgeist. Pop critic Al Aronowitz of the \"New York Post\" wrote: \"It was the most electrifying moment of Woodstock, and it was probably the single greatest moment of the sixties.\" Images of the performance showing Hendrix wearing a blue-beaded white leather jacket with fringe, a red head-scarf, and blue jeans are regarded as iconic pictures that capture a defining moment of the era. He played \"Hey Joe\" during the encore, concluding the 3-day festival. Upon leaving the stage, he collapsed from exhaustion. In 2011, the editors of \"Guitar World\" named his performance of \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" the greatest performance of all time.\n\nA legal dispute arose in 1966 regarding a record contract that Hendrix had entered into the previous year with producer Ed Chalpin. After two years of litigation, the parties agreed to a resolution that granted Chalpin the distribution rights to an album of original Hendrix material. Hendrix decided that they would record the LP, \"Band of Gypsys\", during two live appearances. In preparation for the shows he formed an all-black power-trio with Cox and drummer Buddy Miles, formerly with Wilson Pickett, the Electric Flag, and the Buddy Miles Express. Critic John Rockwell described Hendrix and Miles as jazz-rock fusionists, and their collaboration as pioneering. Others identified a funk and soul influence in their music. Concert promoter Bill Graham called the shows \"the most brilliant, emotional display of virtuoso electric guitar\" that he had ever heard. Biographers have speculated that Hendrix formed the band in an effort to appease members of the Black Power movement and others in the black communities who called for him to use his fame to speak-up for civil rights.\n\nHendrix had been recording with Cox since April and jamming with Miles since September, and the trio wrote and rehearsed material which they performed at a series of four shows over two nights on December 31 and January 1, at the Fillmore East. They used recordings of these concerts to assemble the LP, which was produced by Hendrix. The album includes the track \"Machine Gun\", which musicologist Andy Aledort described as the pinnacle of Hendrix's career, and \"the premiere example of [his] unparalleled genius as a rock guitarist ... In this performance, Jimi transcended the medium of rock music, and set an entirely new standard for the potential of electric guitar.\" During the song's extended instrumental breaks, Hendrix created sounds with his guitar that sonically represented warfare, including rockets, bombs, and diving planes.\n\nThe \"Band of Gypsys\" album was the only official live Hendrix LP made commercially available during his lifetime; several tracks from the Woodstock and Monterey shows were released later that year. The album was released in April 1970 by Capitol Records; it reached the top ten in both the US and the UK. That same month a single was issued with \"Stepping Stone\" as the A-side and \"Izabella\" as the B-side, but Hendrix was dissatisfied with the quality of the mastering and he demanded that it be withdrawn and re-mixed, preventing the songs from charting and resulting in Hendrix's least successful single; it was also his last.\n\nOn January 28, 1970, a third and final Band of Gypsys appearance took place; they performed during a music festival at Madison Square Garden benefiting the anti-Vietnam War Moratorium Committee titled the \"Winter Festival for Peace\". American blues guitarist Johnny Winter was backstage before the concert; he recalled: \"[Hendrix] came in with his head down, sat on the couch alone, and put his head in his hands ... He didn't move until it was time for the show.\" Minutes after taking the stage he snapped a vulgar response at a woman who had shouted a request for \"Foxy Lady\". He then began playing \"Earth Blues\" before telling the audience: \"That's what happens when earth fucks with space\". Moments later, he briefly sat down on the drum riser before leaving the stage. Both Miles and Redding later stated that Jeffery had given Hendrix LSD before the performance. Miles believed that Jeffery gave Hendrix the drugs in an effort to sabotage the current band and bring about the return of the original Experience lineup. Jeffery fired Miles after the show and Cox quit, ending the Band of Gypsys.\n\nSoon after the abruptly ended Band of Gypsys performance and their subsequent dissolution, Jeffery made arrangements to reunite the original Experience lineup. Although Hendrix, Mitchell, and Redding were interviewed by \"Rolling Stone\" in February 1970 as a united group, Hendrix never intended to work with Redding. When Redding returned to New York in anticipation of rehearsals with a re-formed Experience, he was told that he had been replaced with Cox. During an interview with \"Rolling Stone\" Keith Altham, Hendrix defended the decision: \"It's nothing personal against Noel, but we finished what we were doing with the Experience and Billy's style of playing suits the new group better.\" Although an official name was never adopted for the lineup of Hendrix, Mitchell, and Cox, promoters often billed them as the Jimi Hendrix Experience or just Jimi Hendrix.\n\nDuring the first half of 1970, Hendrix sporadically worked on material for what would have been his next LP. Many of the tracks were posthumously released in 1971 as \"The Cry of Love\". He had started writing songs for the album in 1968, but in April 1970 he told Keith Altham that the project had been abandoned. Soon afterward, he and his band took a break from recording and began the Cry of Love tour at the L.A. Forum, performing for 20,000 people. Set-lists during the tour included numerous Experience tracks as well as a selection of newer material. Several shows were recorded, and they produced some of Hendrix's most memorable live performances. At one of them, the second Atlanta International Pop Festival, on July 4, he played to the largest American audience of his career. According to authors Scott Schinder and Andy Schwartz, as many as 500,000 people attended the concert. On July 17, they appeared at the New York Pop Festival; Hendrix had again consumed too many drugs before the show, and the set was considered a disaster. The American leg of the tour, which included 32 performances, ended in Honolulu, Hawaii, on August 1, 1970. This would be Hendrix's final concert appearance in the US.\n\nIn 1968, Hendrix and Jeffery jointly invested in the purchase of the Generation Club in Greenwich Village. They had initially planned to reopen the establishment, but when an audit of Hendrix's expenses revealed that he had incurred exorbitant fees by block-booking recording studios for lengthy sessions at peak rates they decided to convert the building into a studio of his own. Hendrix could then work as much as he wanted while also reducing his recording expenditures, which had reached a reported $300,000 annually. Architect and acoustician John Storyk designed Electric Lady Studios for Hendrix, who requested that they avoid right angles where possible. With round windows, an ambient lighting machine, and a psychedelic mural, Storyk wanted the studio to have a relaxing environment that would encourage Hendrix's creativity. The project took twice as long as planned and cost twice as much as Hendrix and Jeffery had budgeted, with their total investment estimated at $1 million.\n\nHendrix first used Electric Lady on June 15, 1970, when he jammed with Steve Winwood and Chris Wood of Traffic; the next day, he recorded his first track there, \"Night Bird Flying\". The studio officially opened for business on August 25, and a grand opening party was held the following day. Immediately afterwards, Hendrix left for England; he never returned to the States. He boarded an Air India flight for London with Cox, joining Mitchell for a performance as the headlining act of the Isle of Wight Festival.\n\nWhen the European leg of the Cry of Love tour began, Hendrix was longing for his new studio and creative outlet, and was not eager to fulfill the commitment. On September 2, 1970, he abandoned a performance in Aarhus after three songs, stating: \"I've been dead a long time\". Four days later, he gave his final concert appearance, at the Isle of Fehmarn Festival in Germany. He was met with booing and jeering from fans in response to his cancellation of a show slated for the end of the previous night's bill due to torrential rain and risk of electrocution. Immediately following the festival, Hendrix, Mitchell, and Cox traveled to London.\n\nThree days after the performance, Cox, who was suffering from severe paranoia after either taking LSD or being given it unknowingly, quit the tour and went to stay with his parents in Pennsylvania. Within days of Hendrix's arrival in England, he had spoken with Chas Chandler, Alan Douglas, and others about leaving his manager, Michael Jeffery. On September 16, Hendrix performed in public for the last time during an informal jam at Ronnie Scott's Jazz Club in Soho with Eric Burdon and his latest band, War. They began by playing a few of their recent hits, and after a brief intermission Hendrix joined them during \"Mother Earth\" and \"Tobacco Road\". His performance was uncharacteristically subdued; he quietly played backing guitar, and refrained from the histrionics that people had come to expect from him. He died less than 48 hours later.\n\nHendrix entered a small club in Clarksville, Tennessee, in July 1962, drawn in by live music. He stopped for a drink and ended up spending most of the $400 that he had saved during his time in the Army. \"I went in this jazz joint and had a drink,\" he explained. \"I liked it and I stayed. People tell me I get foolish, good-natured sometimes. Anyway, I guess I felt real benevolent that day. I must have been handing out bills to anyone that asked me. I came out of that place with sixteen dollars left.\" Alcohol eventually became \"the scourge of his existence, driving him to fits of pique, even rare bursts of atypical, physical violence\".\n\nRoby and Schreiber assert that Hendrix first used LSD when he met Linda Keith in late 1966. Shapiro and Glebbeek, however, assert that Hendrix used it in June 1967 at the earliest while attending the Monterey Pop Festival. According to Hendrix biographer Charles Cross, the subject of drugs came up one evening in 1966 at Keith's New York apartment. One of Keith's friends offered Hendrix \"acid\", a street name for LSD, but Hendrix asked for LSD instead, showing what Cross describes as \"his naivete and his complete inexperience with psychedelics\". Before that, Hendrix had only sporadically used drugs, experimenting with cannabis, hashish, amphetamines, and occasionally cocaine. After 1967, he regularly used cannabis, hashish, LSD, and amphetamines, particularly while touring. According to Cross, \"few stars were as closely associated with the drug culture as Jimi\".\n\nHendrix would often become angry and violent when he drank too much alcohol or when he mixed alcohol with drugs. His friend Herbie Worthington said that Hendrix \"simply turned into a bastard\" when he drank. According to friend Sharon Lawrence, liquor \"set off a bottled-up anger, a destructive fury he almost never displayed otherwise\".\n\nIn January 1968, the Experience travelled to Sweden for a one-week tour of Europe. During the early morning hours of the first day, Hendrix became engaged in a drunken brawl in the Hotel Opalen in Gothenburg, smashing a plate-glass window and injuring his right hand, for which he received medical treatment. The incident culminated in his arrest and release, pending a court appearance that resulted in a large fine.\n\nHendrix was renting a house in Benedict Canyon, California, in 1969 that was burglarized. He was later under the influence of drugs and alcohol, and he punched his friend Paul Caruso and accused him of the theft. He then chased Caruso away from the residence while throwing stones at him. A few days later, Hendrix's girlfriend Carmen Borrero required stitches after he hit her above her eye with a vodka bottle during a drunken, jealous rage.\n\nHendrix was passing through customs at Toronto International Airport on May 3, 1969 when authorities found a small amount of heroin and hashish in his luggage. Four hours later, he was formally charged with drug possession and released on $10,000 bail. He was required to return on May 5 for an arraignment hearing. The incident proved stressful for Hendrix, and it weighed heavily on his mind during the seven months that he awaited trial, which took place in December 1969. For the Crown to prove possession, they had to show that Hendrix knew that the drugs were there. During the jury trial, he testified that a fan had given him a vial of what he thought was legal medication which he put in his bag. He was acquitted of the charges. Mitchell and Redding later revealed that everyone had been warned about a planned drug bust the day before flying to Toronto; both men also stated that they believed that the drugs had been planted in Hendrix's bag without his knowledge.\n\nDetails are disputed concerning Hendrix's last day and death. He spent much of September 17, 1970, with Monika Dannemann in London, the only witness to his final hours. Dannemann said that she prepared a meal for them at her apartment in the Samarkand Hotel around 11 p.m., when they shared a bottle of wine. She drove him to the residence of an acquaintance at approximately 1:45 a.m., where he remained for about an hour before she picked him up and drove them back to her flat at 3 a.m. She said that they talked until around 7 a.m., when they went to sleep. She awoke around 11 a.m. and found Hendrix breathing but unconscious and unresponsive. She called for an ambulance at 11:18 which arrived at 11:27. Paramedics then transported Hendrix to St Mary Abbot's Hospital where Dr. John Bannister pronounced him dead at 12:45 on September 18.\n\nCoroner Gavin Thurston ordered a post-mortem examination which was performed on September 21 by Professor Robert Donald Teare, a forensic pathologist. Thurston completed the inquest on September 28 and concluded that Hendrix aspirated his own vomit and died of asphyxia while intoxicated with barbiturates. Citing \"insufficient evidence of the circumstances\", he declared an open verdict. Dannemann later revealed that Hendrix had taken nine of her prescribed Vesparax sleeping tablets, 18 times the recommended dosage.\n\nDesmond Henley embalmed Hendrix's body which was flown to Seattle on September 29, 1970. Hendrix's family and friends held a service at Dunlap Baptist Church in Seattle's Rainier Valley on October 1; his body was interred at Greenwood Cemetery in Renton, Washington, the location of his mother's grave. Family and friends traveled in 24 limousines, and more than 200 people attended the funeral, including Mitch Mitchell, Noel Redding, Miles Davis, John Hammond, and Johnny Winter.\n\nBy 1967, as Hendrix was gaining in popularity, many of his pre-Experience recordings were marketed to an unsuspecting public as Jimi Hendrix albums, sometimes with misleading later images of Hendrix. The recordings, which came under the control of producer Ed Chalpin of PPX, with whom Hendrix had signed a recording contract in 1965, were often re-mixed between their repeated reissues, and licensed to record companies such as Decca and Capitol. Hendrix publicly denounced the releases, describing them as \"malicious\" and \"greatly inferior\", stating: \"At PPX, we spent on average about one hour recording a song. Today I spend at least twelve hours on each song.\" These unauthorized releases have long constituted a substantial part of his recording catalogue, amounting to hundreds of albums.\n\nSome of Hendrix's unfinished material was released as the 1971 title \"The Cry of Love\". Although the album reached number three in the US and number two in the UK, producers Mitchell and Kramer later complained that they were unable to make use of all the available songs because some tracks were used for 1971's \"Rainbow Bridge\"; still others were issued on 1972's \"War Heroes\". Material from \"The Cry of Love\" was re-released in 1997 as \"First Rays of the New Rising Sun\", along with the other tracks that Mitchell and Kramer had wanted to include.\n\nIn 1993, MCA Records delayed a multimillion-dollar sale of Hendrix's publishing copyrights because Al Hendrix was unhappy about the arrangement. He acknowledged that he had sold distribution rights to a foreign corporation in 1974, but stated that it did not include copyrights and argued that he had retained veto power of the sale of the catalogue. Under a settlement reached in July 1995, Al Hendrix prevailed in his legal battle and regained control of his son's song and image rights. He subsequently licensed the recordings to MCA through the family-run company Experience Hendrix LLC, formed in 1995. In August 2009, Experience Hendrix announced that it had entered a new licensing agreement with Sony Music Entertainment's Legacy Recordings division which would take effect in 2010. Legacy and Experience Hendrix launched the 2010, Jimi Hendrix Catalog Project, starting with the release of \"Valleys of Neptune\" in March of that year. In the months before his death, Hendrix recorded demos for a concept album tentatively titled \"Black Gold\", which are now in the possession of Experience Hendrix LLC; , no official release date has been announced.\n\nHendrix played a variety of guitars throughout his career, but the instrument that became most associated with him was the Fender Stratocaster. He acquired his first Stratocaster in 1966, when a girlfriend loaned him enough money to purchase a used one that had been built around 1964. He thereafter used the model prevalently during performances and recordings. In 1967, he described the instrument as \"the best all-around guitar for the stuff we're doing\"; he praised its \"bright treble and deep bass sounds\".\n\nWith few exceptions, Hendrix played right-handed guitars that were turned upside down and restrung for left-hand playing. This had an important effect on the sound of his guitar; because of the slant of the bridge pickup, his lowest string had a brighter sound while his highest string had a darker sound, which was the opposite of the Stratocaster's intended design. In addition to Stratocasters, Hendrix also used Fender Jazzmasters, Duosonics, two different Gibson Flying Vs, a Gibson Les Paul, three Gibson SGs, a Gretsch Corvette, and a Fender Jaguar. He used a white Gibson SG Custom for his performances on \"The Dick Cavett Show\" in September 1969, and a black Gibson Flying V during the Isle of Wight festival in 1970.\n\nDuring 1965, and 1966, while Hendrix was playing back-up for soul and R&B acts in the US, he used an 85-watt Fender Twin Reverb amplifier. When Chandler brought Hendrix to England in October 1966, he supplied him with 30-watt Burns amps, which Hendrix thought were too small for his needs. After an early London gig when he was unable to use his preferred Fender Twin, he asked about the Marshall amps that he had noticed other groups using. Years earlier, Mitch Mitchell had taken drum lessons from the amp builder, Jim Marshall, and he introduced Hendrix to Marshall. At their initial meeting, Hendrix bought four speaker cabinets and three 100-watt Super Lead amplifiers; he would grow accustomed to using all three in unison. The equipment arrived on October 11, 1966, and the Experience used the new gear during their first tour. Marshall amps were well-suited for Hendrix's needs, and they were paramount in the evolution of his heavily overdriven sound, enabling him to master the use of feedback as a musical effect, creating what author Paul Trynka described as a \"definitive vocabulary for rock guitar\". Hendrix usually turned all of the amplifier's control knobs to the maximum level, which became known as the Hendrix setting. During the four years prior to his death, he purchased between 50 and 100 Marshall amplifiers. Jim Marshall said that he was \"the greatest ambassador\" his company ever had.\n\nOne of Hendrix's signature effects was the wah-wah pedal, which he first heard used with an electric guitar in Cream's \"Tales of Brave Ulysses\", released in May 1967. That July, while performing at the Scene club in New York City, Hendrix met Frank Zappa, whose band the Mothers of Invention were performing at the adjacent Garrick Theater. Hendrix was fascinated by Zappa's application of the pedal, and he experimented with one later that evening. He used a wah pedal during the opening to \"Voodoo Child (Slight Return)\", creating one of the best-known wah-wah riffs of the classic rock era. He also uses the effect on \"Up from the Skies\", \"Little Miss Lover\", and \"Still Raining, Still Dreaming\".\n\nHendrix used a Dallas Arbiter Fuzz Face and a Vox wah pedal during recording sessions and performances, but also experimented with other guitar effects. He enjoyed a fruitful long-term collaboration with electronics enthusiast Roger Mayer, whom he once called \"the secret\" of his sound. Mayer introduced him to the Octavia, an octave-doubling effect pedal, in December 1966, and he first recorded with it during the guitar solo to \"Purple Haze\".\n\nHendrix also used the Uni-Vibe, designed to simulate the modulation effects of a rotating Leslie speaker. He uses the effect during his performance at Woodstock and on the Band of Gypsys track \"Machine Gun\", which prominently features the Uni-vibe along with an Octavia and a Fuzz Face. For performances, he plugged his guitar into the wah-wah, which was connected to the Fuzz Face, then the Uni-Vibe, and finally a Marshall amplifier.\n\nAs an adolescent during the 1950s, Hendrix became interested in rock and roll artists such as Elvis Presley, Little Richard, and Chuck Berry. In 1968, he told \"Guitar Player\" magazine that electric blues artists Muddy Waters, Elmore James, and B.B. King inspired him during the beginning of his career; he also cited Eddie Cochran as an early influence. Of Muddy Waters, the first electric guitarist of which Hendrix became aware, he said: \"I heard one of his records when I was a little boy and \"it scared me to death\" because I heard all of these \"sounds\".\" In 1970, he told \"Rolling Stone\" that he was a fan of western swing artist Bob Wills and while he lived in Nashville, the television show the Grand Ole Opry.\n\nCox stated that during their time serving in the US military, he and Hendrix primarily listened to southern blues artists such as Jimmy Reed and Albert King. According to Cox, \"King was a very, very powerful influence\". Howlin' Wolf also inspired Hendrix, who performed Wolf's \"Killing Floor\" as the opening song of his US debut at the Monterey Pop Festival. The influence of soul artist Curtis Mayfield can be heard in Hendrix's guitar playing, and the influence of Bob Dylan can be heard in Hendrix's songwriting; he was known to play Dylan's records repeatedly, particularly \"Highway 61 Revisited\" and \"Blonde on Blonde\".\n\nThe Experience's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame biography states: \"Jimi Hendrix was arguably the greatest instrumentalist in the history of rock music. Hendrix expanded the range and vocabulary of the electric guitar into areas no musician had ever ventured before. His boundless drive, technical ability and creative application of such effects as wah-wah and distortion forever transformed the sound of rock and roll.\" Musicologist Andy Aledort described Hendrix as \"one of the most creative\" and \"influential musicians that has ever lived\". Music journalist Chuck Philips wrote: \"In a field almost exclusively populated by white musicians, Hendrix has served as a role model for a cadre of young black rockers. His achievement was to reclaim title to a musical form pioneered by black innovators like Little Richard and Chuck Berry in the 1950s.\"\n\nHendrix favored overdriven amplifiers with high volume and gain. He was instrumental in developing the previously undesirable technique of guitar amplifier feedback, and helped to popularize use of the wah-wah pedal in mainstream rock. He rejected the standard barre chord fretting technique used by most guitarists in favor of fretting the low 6th string root notes with his thumb. He applied this technique during the beginning bars of \"Little Wing\", which allowed him to sustain the root note of chords while also playing melody. This method has been described as piano style, with the thumb playing what a pianist's left hand would play and the other fingers playing melody as a right hand. Having spent several years fronting a trio, he developed an ability to play rhythm chords and lead lines together, giving the audio impression that more than one guitarist was performing. He was the first artist to incorporate stereophonic phasing effects in rock music recordings. Holly George-Warren of \"Rolling Stone\" wrote: \"Hendrix pioneered the use of the instrument as an electronic sound source. Players before him had experimented with feedback and distortion, but Hendrix turned those effects and others into a controlled, fluid vocabulary every bit as personal as the blues with which he began.\" Aledort wrote: \"In rock guitar, there are but two eras—before Hendrix and after Hendrix.\"\n\nWhile creating his unique musical voice and guitar style, Hendrix synthesized diverse genres, including blues, R&B, soul, British rock, American folk music, 1950s rock and roll, and jazz. Musicologist David Moskowitz emphasized the importance of blues music in Hendrix's playing style, and according to authors Steven Roby and Brad Schreiber, \"[He] explored the outer reaches of psychedelic rock\". His influence is evident in a variety of popular music formats, and he has contributed significantly to the development of hard rock, heavy metal, funk, post-punk, grunge, and hip hop music. His lasting influence on modern guitar players is difficult to overstate; his techniques and delivery have been abundantly imitated by others. Despite his hectic touring schedule and notorious perfectionism, he was a prolific recording artist who left behind numerous unreleased recordings. More than 40 years after his death, Hendrix remains as popular as ever, with annual album sales exceeding that of any year during his lifetime.\n\nHendrix has influenced numerous funk and funk rock artists, including Prince, George Clinton, John Frusciante, formerly of the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Eddie Hazel of Funkadelic, and Ernie Isley of the Isley Brothers. Grunge guitarists such as Jerry Cantrell of Alice in Chains, and Mike McCready and Stone Gossard of Pearl Jam have cited Hendrix as an influence. Hendrix's influence also extends to many hip hop artists, including De La Soul, A Tribe Called Quest, Digital Underground, Beastie Boys, and Run–D.M.C. Miles Davis was deeply impressed by Hendrix, and he compared Hendrix's improvisational abilities with those of saxophonist John Coltrane. Guitar virtuoso Greg Koch has stated that Jimi Hendrix was his biggest influence. Hendrix also influenced industrial artist Marilyn Manson, blues legend Stevie Ray Vaughan, Metallica Kirk Hammett, Aerosmith's Brad Whitford, Judas Priest's Richie Faulkner, instrumental rock guitarist Joe Satriani, Frank Zappa/David Bowie/Talking Heads/King Crimson/Nine Inch Nails hired gun Adrian Belew, and heavy metal virtuoso Yngwie Malmsteen, who said: \"[Hendrix] created modern electric playing, without question ... He was the first. He started it all. The rest is history.\"\n\nHendrix received several prestigious rock music awards during his lifetime and posthumously. In 1967, readers of \"Melody Maker\" voted him the Pop Musician of the Year. In 1968, \"Rolling Stone\" declared him the Performer of the Year. Also in 1968, the City of Seattle gave him the Keys to the City. \"Disc & Music Echo\" newspaper honored him with the World Top Musician of 1969 and in 1970 \"Guitar Player\" magazine named him the Rock Guitarist of the Year.\n\n\"Rolling Stone\" ranked his three non-posthumous studio albums, \"Are You Experienced\" (1967), \"Axis: Bold as Love\" (1967), and \"Electric Ladyland\" (1968) among the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\". They ranked Hendrix number one on their list of the 100 greatest guitarists of all time, and number six on their list of the 100 greatest artists of all time. \"Guitar World\"'s readers voted six of Hendrix's solos among the top 100 Greatest Guitar Solos of All Time: \"Purple Haze\" (70), \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" (52; from \"Live at Woodstock\"), \"Machine Gun\" (32; from \"Band of Gypsys\"), \"Little Wing\" (18), \"Voodoo Child (Slight Return)\" (11), and \"All Along the Watchtower\" (5). \"Rolling Stone\" placed seven of his recordings in their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time: \"Purple Haze\" (17), \"All Along the Watchtower\" (47) \"Voodoo Child (Slight Return)\" (102), \"Foxy Lady\" (153), \"Hey Joe\" (201), \"Little Wing\" (366), and \"The Wind Cries Mary\" (379). They also included three of Hendrix's songs in their list of the \"100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time\": \"Purple Haze\" (2), \"Voodoo Child\" (12), and \"Machine Gun\" (49).\n\nA star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame was dedicated to Hendrix on November 14, 1991, at 6627 Hollywood Boulevard. The Jimi Hendrix Experience was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1992, and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005. In 1999, readers of \"Rolling Stone\" and \"Guitar World\" ranked Hendrix among the most important musicians of the 20th century. In 2005, his debut album, \"Are You Experienced\", was one of 50 recordings added that year to the United States National Recording Registry in the Library of Congress, \"[to] be preserved for all time ... [as] part of the nation's audio legacy\". In Seattle, November 27, 1992, which would have been Hendrix's 50th birthday, was made Jimi Hendrix Day, largely due to the efforts of his boyhood friend, guitarist Sammy Drain.\n\nThe blue plaque identifying Hendrix's former residence at 23 Brook Street, London, (next door to the former residence of George Frideric Handel) was the first issued by English Heritage to commemorate a pop star. A memorial statue of Hendrix playing a Stratocaster stands near the corner of Broadway and Pine Streets in Seattle. In May 2006, the city renamed a park near its Central District Jimi Hendrix Park, in his honor. In 2012, an official historic marker was erected on the site of the July 1970 Second Atlanta International Pop Festival near Byron, Georgia. The marker text reads, in part: \"Over thirty musical acts performed, including rock icon Jimi Hendrix playing to the largest American audience of his career.\"\n\nHendrix's music has received a number of Hall of Fame Grammy awards, starting with a Lifetime Achievement Award in 1992, followed by two Grammys in 1999 for his albums \"Are You Experienced\" and \"Electric Ladyland\"; \"Axis: Bold as Love\" received a Grammy in 2006. In 2000, he received a Hall of Fame Grammy award for his original composition, \"Purple Haze\", and in 2001, for his recording of Dylan's \"All Along the Watchtower\". Hendrix's rendition of \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" was honored with a Grammy in 2009.\n\nThe United States Postal Service issued a commemorative postage stamp honoring Hendrix in 2014. On August 21, 2016, Jimi Hendrix was inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame in Dearborn, Michigan. The James Marshall \"Jimi\" Hendrix United States Post Office in Renton Highlands near Seattle, about a mile from Hendrix's grave and memorial, was renamed for Hendrix in 2019.\n\nOn June 23, 2019, the Band of Gypsys were inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame, at the Charles H. Wright Museum of African-American History in Detroit, Michigan. Billy Cox, the last surviving member of the group was on hand to accept, along with representatives of the Buddy Miles and Hendrix estates.\n\nThe Jimi Hendrix Experience\nBULLET::::- \"Are You Experienced\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"Electric Ladyland\" (1968)\n\nJimi Hendrix/Band of Gypsys\nBULLET::::- \"Band of Gypsys\" (1970)\n\nBULLET::::- The Electric Lady Studio Guitar\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- Articles concerning disputes about rights to the Hendrix musical publishing estate. \"Los Angeles Times\"\nBULLET::::- FBI Records: The Vault – James Marshall \"Jimi\" Hendrix at vault.fbi.gov\n"}
{"id": "16097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16097", "title": "Johann Elert Bode", "text": "Johann Elert Bode\n\nJohann Elert Bode (; 19 January 1747 – 23 November 1826) was a German astronomer known for his reformulation and popularisation of the Titius–Bode law. Bode determined the orbit of Uranus and suggested the planet's name.\n\nBode was born in Hamburg. As a youth, he suffered from a serious eye disease which particularly damaged his right eye; he continued to have trouble with his eyes throughout his life.\n\nHis early promise in mathematics brought him to the attention of Johann Georg Büsch, who allowed Bode to use his own library for study.\nHe began his career with the publication of a short work on the solar eclipse of 5 August 1766. This was followed by an elementary treatise on astronomy entitled \"Anleitung zur Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels\" (1768, 10th ed. 1844), the success of which led to his being invited to Berlin by Johann Heinrich Lambert in 1772 for the purpose of computing ephemerides on an improved plan. There he founded, in 1774, the well-known \"Astronomisches Jahrbuch\", 51 yearly volumes of which he compiled and issued.\n\nHe became director of the Berlin Observatory in 1786, from which he retired in 1825.\nThere he published the \"Uranographia\" in 1801, a celestial atlas that aimed both at scientific accuracy in showing the positions of stars and other astronomical objects, as well as the artistic interpretation of the stellar constellation figures. The \"Uranographia\" marks the climax of an epoch of artistic representation of the constellations. Later atlases showed fewer and fewer elaborate figures until they were no longer printed on such tables.\n\nBode also published another small star atlas, intended for astronomical amateurs (\"Vorstellung der Gestirne\"). He is credited with the discovery of Bode's Galaxy (M81). Comet Bode (C/1779 A1) is named after him; its orbit was calculated by Erik Prosperin. Asteroid 998 Bodea, discovered on 6 August 1923 by Karl Reinmuth at Heidelberg, was also christened in his honour, the letter 'a' added to its name to fulfil the convention that asteroids were given feminine names.\n\nHis name became attached to the 'law' discovered by Johann Daniel Titius in 1766. Bode first makes mention of it in the \"Anleitung zur Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels\" in a footnote, and although it is often officially called the Titius–Bode law, it is also commonly just called Bode's law. This law attempts to explain the distances of the planets from the Sun in a formula although ironically it breaks down for the planet Neptune which was later discovered in Berlin. It was the discovery of Uranus at a position predicted by the law which aroused great interest in it. There was actually a gap (with no planet) between Mars and Jupiter, and Bode urged a search for a planet in this region which culminated in a group formed for this purpose, the so-called \"Celestial Police\". However before the group initiated a search, they were trumped by the discovery of the asteroid Ceres by Giuseppe Piazzi from Palermo in 1801, at Bode's predicted position.\n\nLatterly, the law fell out of favour when it was realised that Ceres was only one of a small number of asteroids and when Neptune was found not to be in a position required by the law. The discovery of planets around other stars has brought the law back into discussion.\n\nBode himself was directly involved in research leading from the discovery of a planet – that of Uranus in 1781. Although Uranus was the first planet to be discovered by telescope, it is just about visible with the naked eye. Bode consulted older star charts and found numerous examples of the planet's position being given while being mistaken for a star, for example John Flamsteed, Astronomer Royal in Britain, had listed it in his catalogue of 1690 as a star with the name \"34 Tauri\". These earlier sightings allowed an exact calculation of the orbit of the new planet.\n\nBode was also responsible for giving the new planet its name. The discoverer William Herschel proposed to name it after George III which was not accepted so readily in other countries. Bode opted for Uranus, with the apparent logic that just as Saturn was the father of Jupiter, the new planet should be named after the father of Saturn.\nIn 1789, Bode's Royal Academy colleague Martin Klaproth was inspired by Bode's name for the planet to name his newly discovered element \"uranium\".[37]\n\nFrom 1787 to 1825 Bode was director of the Astronomisches Rechen-Institut. In 1794, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. In April 1789 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society.\n\nBode died in Berlin on 23 November 1826, aged 79.\n\nBULLET::::- 1768 (10th ed. 1844) \"Anleitung zur Kentniss des Gestirnten Himmels\" (The most famous of Bode's writings. In this work, he first announced Bode's law.)\nBULLET::::- 1774-1957 \"Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch für 1776–1959\" (The astronomical yearbook published by Berlin Observatory.)\nBULLET::::- 1776 \"Sammlung astronomischer Tafeln\" (3 vols.)\nBULLET::::- 1776 (3rd ed. 1808) \"Erläuterung der Sternkunde\", an introductory book on the constellations and their tales, which was reprinted more than ten times\nBULLET::::- 1782 \"Vorstellung der Gestirne ... des Flamsteadschen Himmelsatlas\" (Bode's revised and enlarged edition of Fortin's small star atlas of Flamsteed.)\nBULLET::::- 1801 \"Uranographia sive Astrorum Descriptio\" (A large star atlas illustrated with twenty copper plates.)\n\nHis works were highly effective in diffusing throughout Germany a taste for astronomy.\n\nBULLET::::- - \"Acta Historica Astronomiae\", Vol. 30 – A new, comprehensive biography and the source for some of the material on this page.\n\nBULLET::::- AtlasCoelestis.com: \"Vorstellung der Gestirne\" by J.E. Bode, 1782 – last. Retrieved 7 September 2007,\nBULLET::::- AtlasCoelestis.com: \"Uranographia\", Berlino 1801 – last. Retrieved 7 September 2007,\nBULLET::::- Brief Biography of Bode\nBULLET::::- Bode's 'Complete Catalog of hitherto observed Nebulous Stars and Star Clusters,' 1779, with links to his deep sky observations and discoveries.\nBULLET::::- \"Vorstellung der Gestirne\", Berlin und Stralsand : Bey Gottlieb August Lange. 1782. – Full digital facsimile, Linda Hall Library.\nBULLET::::- \"Vorstellung der Gestirne\", Berlin und Stralfund ; bey Gottlieb August Lange. 1805. – Full digital facsimile, Linda Hall Library.\nBULLET::::- Vorstellung der gestirne da www.atlascoelestis.com\nBULLET::::- Uranographia, Berlino 1801, colorato a mano da www.atlascoelestis.com\nBULLET::::- Anleitung zur Kenntniss des Gestirnten Himmels, Berlin 1788 da www.atlascoelestis.com\nBULLET::::- Von dem neuen zwischen Mars und Jupiter entdeckten achten Hauptplaneten des Sonnensystems, Berlin, Himburg, 1802 da www.atlascoelestis.com\n"}
{"id": "16099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16099", "title": "Janet Reno", "text": "Janet Reno\n\nJanet Wood Reno (July 21, 1938 – November 7, 2016) was an American lawyer who served as the Attorney General of the United States from 1993 until 2001. President Bill Clinton nominated Reno on February 11, 1993, and the Senate confirmed her the following month. She was the first woman to serve as Attorney General and the second-longest serving Attorney General in U.S. history, after William Wirt.\n\nReno was born and raised in Miami, Florida. After leaving to attend Cornell University and Harvard Law School, she returned to Miami where she started her career at private law firms. Her first foray into government was as a staff member for the Judiciary Committee of the Florida House of Representatives. She then worked for the Dade County State Attorney's Office before returning to private practice. She was elected to the Office of State Attorney five times.\n\nReno was born in Miami, Florida. Reno's mother, Jane Wallace (née Wood), wrote a weekly home improvement column for \"The Miami News\" under a male pseudonym and later became an investigative reporter for the paper. Her father, Henry Olaf Reno (né Rasmussen), was an emigrant from Denmark and a reporter for the \"Miami Herald\" for 43 years. Janet Reno had three younger siblings: Mark; writer Robert Reno; and Maggy Hurchalla. The family moved to a property near the Everglades when Reno was 8 years old, living in a house Reno's mother built. The house originally sat on 21 acres of property, some of which the family later sold to pay for the children's education.\n\nReno attended public school in Miami-Dade County, Florida, where she was a debating champion, and was salutatorian at Coral Gables Senior High School. In 1956 she enrolled at Cornell University, where she majored in chemistry, became president of the Women's Self-Government Association, and earned her room and board. After graduating from Cornell, Reno enrolled at Harvard Law School, one of only 16 women in a class of 500 students. She graduated from Harvard in 1963.\n\nFrom 1963 to 1971 Reno worked as an attorney for two Miami law firms. In 1971, she joined the staff of the Judiciary Committee of the Florida House of Representatives. The following year, Reno ran for a seat in Florida's state house. She did not win. In 1973, she worked on a project to revise the state's system of rules and regulations for criminal procedures. Later in the same year, she accepted a position with the Dade County State Attorney's Office led by Richard Gerstein. Shortly after joining the office, Gerstein made Reno his chief assistant. Reno did not try any cases during her time working for Gerstein. She worked for the Judiciary Circuit, and left the state attorney's office in 1976 to become a partner in a private law firm, Steel, Hector & Davis. Gerstein decided to retire in 1977, creating a vacancy with Florida governor Reubin Askew to appoint a successor. Reno was one of two candidates Gerstein recommended to replace him.\n\nIn January 1978, Governor Askew appointed Reno the State Attorney for Dade County (now called Miami-Dade County). She was the first woman to serve as a state attorney in Florida. She was elected to the Office of State Attorney in November 1978 and was returned to office by the voters four more times. Reno ran as a liberal, pro-choice Democrat even though Miami-Dade was a conservative county. Reno did not always face serious challengers, although in 1984 Cuban-American lawyer Jose Garcia-Pedrosa ran against Reno, and picked up the endorsement of the Miami Herald editorial board. In spite of his support among Miami's Hispanic voters, Reno won the election decisively.\n\nThe office she led included 95 attorneys and an annual caseload that included 15,000 felonies and 40,000 misdemeanors. As state attorney, she developed a reputation for ethical behavior, going so far as to purchase a car at sticker price to avoid the appearance of impropriety.\n\nShe established a drug court which was later replicated in other parts of the country. She worked actively in various civic organizations, including the Miami Coalition for a Safe and Drug Free Community and the Beacon Council, which was formed to address Miami-Dade's economic development.\n\nIn May 1980, Reno prosecuted five white policemen who were accused of beating a black insurance salesman, named Arthur McDuffie, to death. The policemen were all acquitted. During the resulting 1980 Miami riots, eighteen people were killed, with looters in Liberty City angrily chanting \"Reno! Reno! Reno!\" Reno met with nearly all of her critics, and a few months later, she won reelection in a landslide.\n\nDuring Reno's tenure as state attorney, she began what the PBS series \"Frontline\" described as a \"crusade\" against accused child abusers. Reno \"pioneered a controversial technique for eliciting intimate details from young children and inspired passage of a law allowing them to testify by closed-circuit television, out of the possibly intimidating presence of their suspected molesters.\" Several of those prosecuted by Reno were either acquitted or later released by appellate judges. One defendant, \"a 14-year-old boy, was acquitted after his attorneys discredited the children's persistent interrogations by a psychologist who called herself the 'yucky secrets doctor'. Another was freed by a federal appeals court after 12 years in prison.\"\n\nIn 1984, Frank Fuster, the owner of the Country Walk Babysitting Service, in a suburb of Miami, Florida, was found guilty of 14 counts of abuse and sentenced to prison with a minimum of 165 years. Fuster was convicted based in large part on the testimony of his 18-year-old wife, Ileana Flores, who pleaded guilty and testified against him. According to a 2002 episode of \"Frontline\", Flores maintained that he was innocent.\n\nIn 1989, as Florida state attorney, Reno pressed adult charges against 13-year-old Bobby Fijnje, who was accused of sexually molesting 21 children in his care during church services. The charges were driven by the testimony of children interviewed by mental-health professionals using techniques later discredited as a contemporary version of witch hunts. During the trial, the prosecution was unable to present any witnesses to the alleged abuse. After two years of investigation and trial, Fijnje was acquitted of all charges.\n\nSome raised questions about her handling of these cases when Reno was nominated for U.S. Attorney General, but she was not directly questioned about them.\n\nAlthough Reno personally opposed the death penalty, her office secured 80 capital punishment convictions during her tenure. None of these were executed during her tenure, but three were later executed.\n\nIn 1993, President Bill Clinton nominated Reno to serve as the United States Attorney General. Both of his previous choices, Zoë Baird and Kimba Wood, faced problems because both had employed undocumented immigrants as nannies. Upon Clinton's announcement on February 11, 1993 that he had selected Reno for Attorney General, he said he wanted to hire a woman for the job but had also considered multiple male candidates. Clinton said he had discounted Reno early in his search because she did not have experience in the Justice Department or federal law, but ultimately he came to understand that she had experience with a variety of criminal law issues from her role as State Attorney. On March 11, 1993, Senate confirmed Reno by a vote of 98 to 0. She was sworn in the next day, becoming the first woman to serve as U.S. Attorney General. As Attorney General, Reno oversaw the Justice Department and its 95,000 employees. Reno remained Attorney General for the rest of Clinton's presidency, making her the longest-serving Attorney General since William Wirt in 1829.\n\nIn 1994, Reno tasked the Justice Department with compiling a report on DNA exoneration. The science was still new at that point in time. Reno commissioned the report after reading about the exoneration of a death row inmate. She wanted to know how many cases existed like the one she read about and what the Department of Justice could learn from it. The resulting report concluded there was a strong possibility that many more wrongful convictions which could be cleared with DNA evidence existed. Reno changed policies on how to interview eyewitnesses and laboratory protocols in response.\n\nThe following Department of Justice actions occurred during Reno's tenure:\nBULLET::::- The 51-day Waco siege standoff and resulting 76 deaths—the Branch Davidians—in Waco, Texas. (The standoff began on February 28, 1993, twelve days before Reno was installed as Attorney-General.) Reno in congressional testimony stated that she authorized the FBI assault on the Branch Davidians because of reports that militia groups were en route to Waco during the standoff \"either to help [Branch Davidian leader David] Koresh or to attack him.\" The FBI had also, erroneously reported to Reno that children were being abused at the compound. Reno publicly expressed her regret of the decision to storm the compound, and accepted full responsibility for the loss of life.\nBULLET::::- The antitrust division brought suit against the software company Microsoft for violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. The Justice Department alleged Microsoft was bundling its browser with its operating system to decrease competition for other browser makers. Microsoft executive Steve Ballmer responded to the suit saying \"To Heck with Janet Reno,\" a comment for which he later expressed regret. The case was ultimately settled in 2001, after Reno's departure.\nBULLET::::- Prosecution resulting in the conviction of 21 of the Montana Freemen, a group that did not believe there should be government above the county level, after an 81-day armed standoff which ended without loss of life. In March 1996, Montana Freemen began a 61-day standoff with the FBI after the FBI arrested three members of the group for refusing to leave property from which they had been evicted. Following the tragedy at Waco, the FBI was determined to avoid violence, and Reno assured the public the FBI was looking for a peaceful solution to the standoff.\nBULLET::::- Capture and conviction of Ted Kaczynski, the Unabomber.\nBULLET::::- Capture and conviction of Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols for the Oklahoma City bombing.\nBULLET::::- Capture and conviction of those who conducted the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, resulting in life-sentences of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and four conspirators.\nBULLET::::- Leak to the news media regarding Richard Jewell that led to the widespread and incorrect presumption of his guilt in the Centennial Olympic Park bombing. She later apologized, saying \"I'm very sorry it happened. I think we owe him an apology. I regret the leak.\"\nBULLET::::- The government's unsuccessful defense of the Communications Decency Act, which culminated in the Supreme Court decision \"Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union\".\n\nBULLET::::- Identification of the correct suspect (Eric Rudolph) in the Centennial Olympic Park bombing and other bombings, who remained a fugitive throughout her tenure. Rudolph was apprehended in 2003 and pleaded guilty to the attacks.\nBULLET::::- Capture and conviction of Mir Qazi for the 1993 shootings at CIA Headquarters.\nBULLET::::- The armed seizure of six-year-old Elián González and his return to his father, who eventually took him home to Cuba; Elián's mother and stepfather had died in a dangerous trip by sea, and though his U.S. relatives had lost custody to his father in court, local officials did not enforce the ruling. Reno made the decision to remove Elián González from the house of a relative.\n\nIn 1994, Reno appointed Robert Fiske special counsel to investigate Bill Clinton 's involvement in Whitewater, a controversy stemming from Clinton's business dealings during his time as Governor of Arkansas. Fiske wrapped up his criminal investigation within six months, and found no link between Whitewater and the suicide of former Deputy White House Counsel Vince Foster. Congress reauthorized the investigation and in August, 1994, a panel of judges from the U.S. Court of Appeals overseeing the special counsel refused to reappoint Fiske. The panel considered it a conflict of interest for Fiske to investigate Clinton because Reno, a member of the Clinton Administration, appointed Fiske. Instead, the panel appointed former member of the Reagan and Bush Administrations Ken Starr to continue the Whitewater investigation. Starr concluded the Whitewater investigation in December 1997 due to insufficient evidence. The following month, Starr received permission from Reno to expand his probe turned his probe into conduct related to the Paula Jones and Monica Lewinsky affairs. Starr's Report, issued in September 1998, listed eleven grounds for impeachment against Clinton.\n\nIn 1998, the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, in a party line vote, voted to recommend the House cite Reno for contempt of Congress for not turning over two internal justice department memos related to a campaign finance controversy during the impeachment of President Bill Clinton. Reno contended she refused to turn over the documents sought because the documents would reveal prosecutor strategy in an ongoing investigation. Reno argued her actions were in defense of the principle that prosecutors should be free of political influence. The full House of Representatives never voted on the resolution and the documents were turned over to the House.\n\nReno ran for Governor of Florida in 2002, but lost in the Democratic primary to Bill McBride 44% to 44.4%. Voting problems arose in the election, and she did not concede defeat until a week later.\n\nAfter her tenure as United States Attorney General and her unsuccessful gubernatorial bid, Reno toured the country giving speeches on topics relating to the criminal justice system. On March 31, 2006, she spoke at a criminology conference at the University of Pennsylvania. She stated that she believed the education system in the United States needs to be improved, as there is a link between the quality of education and the crime rate. She also believed that too much money has been diverted away from the juvenile court system and that the government should find some way to make the juvenile courts work effectively, so as to prevent problems in troubled children and adolescents before these problems are exacerbated by the time they reach adulthood.\n\nReno was a founding member board of directors for the Innocence Project, a nonprofit organization which assists prisoners who may be exonerated through DNA testing, in 2004. By 2013 she was Director Emeritus of the Board of Directors.\n\n\"Glamour\" magazine named Reno one of its \"Women of the Year\" for 1993. In 2000, Reno was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame. In March 2008, Reno received the Council on Litigation Management's Professionalism Award, which recognizes and commemorates an individual who has demonstrated the unique ability to lead others by example in the highest standard of their profession.\n\nOn April 17, 2009, Reno was awarded the Justice Award by the American Judicature Society. Eric Holder, Attorney General under the Obama Administration, presented Reno the award. Seth Andersen, Executive Vice President of AJS said the award recognizes \"her commitment to improving our systems of justice and educating Americans about our great common enterprise – to ensure equality under the law.\" The award is the highest given by the AJS, and recognizes significant contributions toward improvements in the administration of justice within the United States.\n\nReno had a higher profile than many of her immediate predecessors. She appeared on the cover of \"Time\" and was the subject of a \"Vanity Fair\" profile. Late night hosts frequently joked about her height and perceived lack of traditional femininity, and Will Ferrell repeatedly portrayed Reno on \"Saturday Night Live\". In 2001, Reno appeared alongside Ferrell on \"Saturday Night Live\" in the final installment of the recurring sketch \"Janet Reno's Dance Party\". On a 2007 Super Bowl XLI TV commercial, Reno was among the guests at Chad Ochocinco's Super Bowl party. Reno curated a compilation of old-time American songs performed by contemporary artists called the \"Song of America\". Reno worked with her niece's husband on the project, music producer Ed Pettersen. Reno said her goal with the project was to share music with her great-nieces and great-nephews. In 2013, Reno voiced herself for the \"Dark Knight Court\" episode of \"The Simpsons\". She was depicted by Jane Lynch in \"\", a fictionalized account of the true story of the FBI's hunt for the Unabomber.\n\nReno never married and did not have children. Reno took Spanish lessons during her time as state attorney. She remained active after her diagnosis with Parkinson's disease in 1995, including learning to in-line skate the following year. Following her mother's death in 1992, Reno inherited her childhood home. In response to a 1998 \"Saturday Night Live\" sketch which portrayed her as lonely, former Justice Department public affairs director Carl Stern said, \"Both in Florida and in Washington she has a great many friends whose homes she visits, and she goes to plays, her dance card is full.\"\n\nReno died from Parkinson's disease on November 7, 2016. She was surrounded by friends and family at the end of her life, including her sister Maggy and her goddaughter. Upon her death, President Barack Obama praised Reno for her \"intellect, integrity, and fierce commitment to justice\" and President Clinton released a statement thanking Reno \"for her service, counsel, and friendship.\"\n\nBULLET::::- List of female United States Cabinet Secretaries\n\nBULLET::::- \"This article incorporates text from the Department of Justice Web site, which is in the public domain.\"\n"}
{"id": "16103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16103", "title": "John Wayne", "text": "John Wayne\n\nMarion Mitchell Morrison (born Marion Robert Morrison; May 26, 1907 – June 11, 1979), known professionally as John Wayne and nicknamed Duke, was an American actor, filmmaker, and Presidential Medal of Freedom recipient. He was among the top box office draws for three decades.\n\nWayne was born in Winterset, Iowa but grew up in Southern California. He lost a football scholarship to the University of Southern California as a result of a bodysurfing accident, and began working for the Fox Film Corporation. He appeared mostly in small parts, but his first leading role came in Raoul Walsh's Western \"The Big Trail\" (1930), an early widescreen film epic which was a box-office failure. Leading roles followed in numerous during the 1930s, most of them also Westerns, without becoming a major name. It was John Ford's \"Stagecoach\" (1939) that made him a mainstream star, and he starred in 142 motion pictures altogether. According to one biographer, \"John Wayne personified for millions the nation's frontier heritage.\"\n\nWayne's other roles in Westerns include a cattleman driving his herd on the Chisholm Trail in \"Red River\" (1948), a Civil War veteran whose niece is abducted by a tribe of Comanches in \"The Searchers\" (1956), a troubled rancher competing with a lawyer (James Stewart) for a woman's hand in \"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\" (1962), and a cantankerous one-eyed marshal in \"True Grit\" (1969), for which he received the Academy Award for Best Actor. He is also remembered for his roles in \"The Quiet Man\" (1952), \"Rio Bravo\" (1959) with Dean Martin, and \"The Longest Day\" (1962). In his final screen performance, he starred as an aging gunfighter battling cancer in \"The Shootist\" (1976). He appeared with many important Hollywood stars of his era, and made his last public appearance at the Academy Awards ceremony on April 9, 1979.\n\nWayne was born Marion Robert Morrison on May 26, 1907, at 224 South Second Street in Winterset, Iowa. The local paper, \"Winterset Madisonian\", reported on page 4 of the edition of May 30, 1907, that Wayne weighed 13 lbs. (around 6 kg.) at birth. His middle name was soon changed from Robert to Mitchell when his parents decided to name their next son Robert. Wayne's father, Clyde Leonard Morrison (1884–1937), was the son of American Civil War veteran Marion Mitchell Morrison (1845–1915). Wayne's mother, the former Mary \"Molly\" Alberta Brown (1885–1970), was from Lancaster County, Nebraska. Wayne had Scottish and Irish ancestry. He was raised Presbyterian.\n\nWayne's family moved to Palmdale, California, and then in 1916 to Glendale at 404 Isabel Street, where his father worked as a pharmacist. He attended Glendale Union High School where he performed well in both sport and academics. Wayne was part of his high school's football team and its debating team. He was also the president of the Latin Society and contributed to the school's newspaper sports column.\n\nA local fireman at the station on his route to school in Glendale started calling him \"Little Duke\" because he never went anywhere without his huge Airedale Terrier, Duke. He preferred \"Duke\" to \"Marion\", and the nickname stuck. Wayne attended Wilson Middle School in Glendale. As a teen, he worked in an ice cream shop for a man who shod horses for Hollywood studios. He was also active as a member of the Order of DeMolay. He played football for the 1924 league champion Glendale High School team.\n\nWayne applied to the U.S. Naval Academy, but was not accepted. Instead, he attended the University of Southern California (USC), majoring in pre-law. He was a member of the Trojan Knights and Sigma Chi fraternities. Wayne also played on the USC football team under coach Howard Jones. A broken collarbone injury curtailed his athletic career; Wayne later noted that he was too terrified of Jones' reaction to reveal the actual cause of his injury, a bodysurfing accident. He lost his athletic scholarship, and without funds, had to leave the university.\n\nAs a favor to coach Jones, who had given silent western film star Tom Mix tickets to USC games, director John Ford and Mix hired Wayne as a prop boy and extra. Wayne later credited his walk, talk, and persona to his acquaintance with Wyatt Earp, who was good friends with Tom Mix. Wayne soon moved to bit parts, establishing a longtime friendship with the director who provided most of those roles, John Ford. Early in this period he had a minor, uncredited role as a guard in the 1926 film \"Bardelys the Magnificent\". Wayne also appeared with his USC teammates playing football in \"Brown of Harvard\" (1926), \"The Dropkick\" (1927), and \"Salute\" (1929) and Columbia's \"Maker of Men\" (filmed in 1930, released in 1931).\n\nWhile working for Fox Film Corporation in bit roles, Wayne was given on-screen credit as \"Duke Morrison\" only once, in \"Words and Music\" (1929). Director Raoul Walsh saw him moving studio furniture while working as a prop boy and cast him in his first starring role in \"The Big Trail\" (1930). For his screen name, Walsh suggested \"Anthony Wayne\", after Revolutionary War general \"Mad\" Anthony Wayne. Fox Studios chief Winfield Sheehan rejected it as sounding \"too Italian\". Walsh then suggested \"John Wayne\". Sheehan agreed, and the name was set. Wayne was not even present for the discussion. His pay was raised to $105 a week.\n\n\"The Big Trail\" was to be the first big-budget outdoor spectacle of the sound era, made at a then-staggering cost of over $2 million, using hundreds of extras and wide vistas of the American southwest, still largely unpopulated at the time. To take advantage of the breathtaking scenery, it was filmed in two versions, a standard 35 mm version and another in the new 70 mm Grandeur film process, using an innovative camera and lenses. Many in the audience who saw it in Grandeur stood and cheered. However, only a handful of theaters were equipped to show the film in its widescreen process, and the effort was largely wasted. Despite being highly regarded by modern critics, the film was considered a huge box office flop at the time.\nAfter the commercial failure of \"The Big Trail\", Wayne was relegated to small roles in A-pictures, including Columbia's \"The Deceiver\" (1931), in which he played a corpse. He appeared in the serial \"The Three Musketeers\" (1933), an updated version of the Alexandre Dumas novel in which the protagonists were soldiers in the French Foreign Legion in then-contemporary North Africa. He played the lead, with his name over the title, in many low-budget Poverty Row Westerns, mostly at Monogram Pictures and serials for Mascot Pictures Corporation. By Wayne's own estimation, he appeared in about 80 of these horse operas from 1930 to 1939. In \"Riders of Destiny\" (1933), he became one of the first singing cowboys of film, albeit via dubbing. Wayne also appeared in some of the \"Three Mesquiteers\" Westerns, whose title was a play on the Dumas classic. He was mentored by stuntmen in riding and other Western skills. Stuntman Yakima Canutt and Wayne developed and perfected stunts and onscreen fisticuffs techniques which are still in use.\nWayne's breakthrough role came with John Ford's \"Stagecoach\" (1939). Because of Wayne's B-movie status and track record in low-budget Westerns throughout the 1930s, Ford had difficulty getting financing for what was to be an A-budget film. After rejection by all the major studios, Ford struck a deal with independent producer Walter Wanger in which Claire Trevor—a much bigger star at the time—received top billing. \"Stagecoach\" was a huge critical and financial success, and Wayne became a mainstream star. Cast member Louise Platt credited Ford as saying at the time that Wayne would become the biggest star ever because of his appeal as the archetypal \"everyman\".\nAmerica's entry into World War II resulted in a deluge of support for the war effort from all sectors of society, and Hollywood was no exception. Wayne was exempted from service due to his age (34 at the time of Pearl Harbor) and family status (classified as 3-A – family deferment). Wayne repeatedly wrote to John Ford saying he wanted to enlist, on one occasion inquiring whether he could get into Ford's military unit, but consistently kept postponing it until after \"he finished just one or two pictures\". Wayne did not attempt to prevent his reclassification as 1-A (draft eligible), but Republic Studios was emphatically resistant to losing him since he was their only A-list actor under contract. Herbert J. Yates, President of Republic, threatened Wayne with a lawsuit if he walked away from his contract, and Republic Pictures intervened in the Selective Service process, requesting Wayne's further deferment.\nU.S. National Archives records indicate that Wayne, in fact, did make an application to serve in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), precursor to the modern CIA, and had been accepted within the U.S. Army's allotted billet to the OSS. William J. Donovan, OSS Commander, wrote Wayne a letter informing him of his acceptance into the Field Photographic Unit, but the letter went to his estranged wife Josephine's home. She never told him about it. Donovan also issued an OSS Certificate of Service to Wayne.\nWayne's first color film was \"Shepherd of the Hills\" (1941), in which he co-starred with his longtime friend Harry Carey. The following year, he appeared in his only film directed by Cecil B. DeMille, the Technicolor epic \"Reap the Wild Wind\" (1942), in which he co-starred with Ray Milland and Paulette Goddard; it was one of the rare times he played a character with questionable values. Wayne toured U.S. bases and hospitals in the South Pacific for three months in 1943 and 1944. with the USO.\n\nBy many accounts, his failure to serve in the military later became the most painful part of his life. His widow later suggested that his patriotism in later decades sprang from guilt, writing: \"He would become a 'superpatriot' for the rest of his life trying to atone for staying home.\"\n\nLike most Hollywood stars of his era, Wayne appeared as a guest on radio programs, such as: \"The Hedda Hopper Show\" and \"The Louella Parsons Show\". He made a number of appearances in dramatic roles, mainly recreations for radio of his own film roles, on programs like \"Screen Directors Playhouse\" and \"Lux Radio Theatre\". For six months in 1942, Wayne starred in his own radio adventure series, \"Three Sheets to the Wind\", produced by film director Tay Garnett. In the series, an international spy/detective show, Wayne played Dan O'Brien, a detective who used alcoholism as a mask for his investigatory endeavors. The show was intended by Garnett to be a pilot of sorts for a film version, though the motion picture never came to fruition. No episodes of the series featuring Wayne seem to have survived, though a demonstration episode with Brian Donlevy in the leading role does exist. Wayne, not Donlevy, played the role throughout the series run on NBC.\n\nDirector Robert Rossen offered the starring role in \"All the King's Men\" (1949) to Wayne. Wayne refused, believing the script to be un-American in many ways. Broderick Crawford, who was eventually cast in the role, won the 1949 Oscar for best male actor, ironically beating out Wayne, who had been nominated for \"Sands of Iwo Jima.\"\n\nHe lost the leading role of Jimmy Ringo in \"The Gunfighter\" (1950) to Gregory Peck due to his refusal to work for Columbia Pictures because its chief, Harry Cohn, had mistreated him years before when he was a young contract player. Cohn had bought the project for Wayne, but Wayne's grudge was too deep, and Cohn sold the script to Twentieth Century Fox, which cast Peck in the role Wayne badly wanted but for which he refused to bend.\n\nOne of Wayne's most popular roles was in \"The High and the Mighty\" (1954), directed by William Wellman, and based on a novel by Ernest K. Gann. His portrayal of a heroic copilot won widespread acclaim. Wayne also portrayed aviators in \"Flying Tigers\" (1942), \"Flying Leathernecks\" (1951), \"Island in the Sky\" (1953), \"The Wings of Eagles\" (1957), and \"Jet Pilot\" (1957).\n\nHe appeared in nearly two dozen of John Ford's films over twenty years, including \"She Wore a Yellow Ribbon\" (1949), \"The Quiet Man\" (1952), \"The Wings of Eagles\" (1957), and \"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\" (1962) with James Stewart. The first movie in which he called someone \"Pilgrim\", Ford's \"The Searchers\" (1956), is often considered to contain Wayne's finest and most complex performance.\n\nWayne was nominated as the producer of Best Picture for \"The Alamo\" (1960), one of two films he directed. The other was \"The Green Berets\" (1968), the only major film made during the Vietnam War in support of the war. During the filming of \"The Green Berets\", the Degar or Montagnard people of Vietnam's Central Highlands, fierce fighters against communism, bestowed on Wayne a brass bracelet that he wore in the film and all subsequent films. Wayne finally won a Best Actor Oscar for \"True Grit\" (1969), two decades after his only other nomination.\n\nOn April 26, 1970 CBS released the television special \"Raquel!\" directed by David Winters, in which he was a guest. It starred Raquel Welch, and other guests included Tom Jones, and Bob Hope. On the day of the premiere, the show received a 51% share on the National ARB Ratings and an impressive Overnight New York Nielsen Rating of 58% share.\n\nWayne took on the role of the eponymous detective in the crime drama \"McQ\" (1974). His last film was \"The Shootist\" (1976), whose main character, J. B. Books, was dying of cancer—which Wayne himself succumbed to three years later. \"The Shootist\" (1976) contains numerous plot similarities to \"The Gunfighter\" of nearly thirty years before, a role which Wayne had wanted but turned down.\n\nBatjac, the production company cofounded by Wayne, was named after the fictional shipping company Batjak in \"Wake of the Red Witch\" (1948), a film based on the novel by Garland Roark. (A spelling error by Wayne's secretary was allowed to stand, accounting for the variation.) Batjac (and its predecessor, Wayne-Fellows Productions) was the arm through which Wayne produced many films for himself and other stars. Its best-known non-Wayne productions were \"Seven Men From Now\" (1956), which started the classic collaboration between director Budd Boetticher and star Randolph Scott, and \"Gun the Man Down\" (1956) with contract player James Arness as an outlaw.\n\nIn the \"Motion Picture Herald\" Top Ten Money-Making Western Stars poll, Wayne was listed in 1936 and 1939. He appeared in the similar \"Box Office\" poll in 1939 and 1940. While these two polls are really an indication only of the popularity of series stars, Wayne also appeared in the Top Ten Money Makers Poll of all films from 1949 to 1957 and 1958 to 1974, taking first place in 1950, 1951, 1954, and 1971. With a total of 25 years on the list, Wayne has more appearances than any other star, surpassing Clint Eastwood (21) who is in second place.\n\nIn later years, Wayne was recognized as a sort of American natural resource, and his various critics, of his performances and his politics, viewed him with more respect. Abbie Hoffman, the radical of the 1960s, paid tribute to Wayne's singularity, saying, \"I like Wayne's wholeness, his style. As for his politics, well—I suppose even cavemen felt a little admiration for the dinosaurs that were trying to gobble them up.\" Reviewing \"The Cowboys\" (1972), Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\", who did not particularly care for the film, wrote: \"Wayne is, of course, marvelously indestructible, and he has become an almost perfect father figure\".\n\nThroughout most of his life, Wayne was a vocally prominent conservative Republican in Hollywood, supporting anti-communist positions. However, he did vote for Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1936 presidential election and expressed admiration for Roosevelt's successor, fellow Democratic President Harry S. Truman. He took part in creating the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals in February 1944, and was elected president of that organization in 1949. An ardent anti-communist and vocal supporter of the House Un-American Activities Committee, he made \"Big Jim McLain\" (1952) with himself as a HUAC investigator to demonstrate his support for the cause of anti-communism. His personal views found expression as a proactive inside enforcer of the \"Black List\" denying employment and undermining careers of many actors and writers who expressed their personal political beliefs earlier in life. Declassified Soviet documents reveal that, despite being a fan of Wayne's movies, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin according to some sources contemplated assassination of Wayne for his frequently espoused anti-communist politics.\n\nWayne supported Vice President Richard Nixon in the presidential election of 1960, but expressed his vision of patriotism when John F. Kennedy won the election: \"I didn't vote for him but he's my president, and I hope he does a good job.\" He used his star power to support conservative causes, including rallying support for the Vietnam War by producing, codirecting, and starring in the financially successful \"The Green Berets\" (1968).\n\nDue to his status as the highest profile Republican star in Hollywood, wealthy Texas Republican Party backers asked Wayne to run for national office in 1968, as had his friend and fellow actor Senator George Murphy. He declined, joking that he did not believe the public would seriously consider an actor in the White House. Instead, he supported his friend Ronald Reagan's runs for Governor of California in 1966 and 1970. He was asked to be the running mate for Democratic Alabama Governor George Wallace in 1968, but he rejected the offer and actively campaigned for Richard Nixon; Wayne addressed the 1968 Republican National Convention on its opening day. For a while, he was also a member of the anti-communist John Birch Society.\n\nWayne openly differed with the Republican Party over the issue of the Panama Canal, as he supported the Panama Canal Treaty in the mid-1970s; conservatives had wanted the U.S. to retain full control of the canal, but Wayne believed that the Panamanians had the right to the canal and sided with President Jimmy Carter and the Democrats. Wayne was a close friend of the late Panamanian leader Omar Torrijos Herrera, and Wayne's first wife, Josephine, was a native of Panama. His support of the treaty brought him hate mail for the first time in his life.\n\nIn May 1971, \"Playboy\" magazine published an interview with Wayne, in which he expressed his support for the Vietnam War, and made headlines for his opinions about social issues and race relations in the United States:\n\nIn the same \"Playboy\" interview, Wayne calls the two lead characters in \"Midnight Cowboy\" \"fags\" for the alleged \"love of those two men\". He also responded to questions about whether social programs were good for the country:\nIn March 2019, the \"Playboy\" interview resurfaced, which resulted in calls for John Wayne Airport to be renamed. John Wayne's son Ethan defended him, stating, \"It would be an injustice to judge someone based on an interview that's being used out of context.\" In October 2019, USC student activists called for the removal of an exhibit dedicated to the actor, citing the interview.\n\nWayne was married three times and divorced twice. His three wives, one of Spanish American descent and two of Hispanic descent, were Josephine Alicia Saenz, Esperanza Baur, and Pilar Pallete. He had four children with Josephine: Michael Wayne (November 23, 1934 – April 2, 2003), Mary Antonia \"Toni\" Wayne LaCava (February 25, 1936 – December 6, 2000), Patrick Wayne (born July 15, 1939), and Melinda Wayne Munoz (born December 3, 1940). He had three more children with Pilar: Aissa Wayne (born March 31, 1956), John Ethan Wayne (born February 22, 1962), and Marisa Wayne (born February 22, 1966). \n\nPilar was an avid tennis player. In 1973, she encouraged him to build the John Wayne Tennis Club in Newport Beach, CA. In 1995, the Club was sold to Ken Stuart, former General Manager, and became the Palisades Tennis Club. \n\nSeveral of Wayne's children entered the film and television industry; Wayne's son Ethan was billed as John Ethan Wayne in a few films, and played one of the leads in the 1990s update of the \"Adam-12\" television series. His granddaughter Jennifer Wayne is a member of the country music group Runaway June.\n\nHis stormiest divorce was from Esperanza Baur, a former Mexican actress. She believed that Wayne and co-star Gail Russell were having an affair, a claim which both Wayne and Russell denied. The night the film \"Angel and the Badman\" (1947) wrapped, there was the usual party for cast and crew, and Wayne came home very late. Esperanza was in a drunken rage by the time he arrived, and she attempted to shoot him as he walked through the front door.\n\nWayne had several high-profile affairs, including one with Marlene Dietrich that lasted for three years and one with Merle Oberon that lasted from 1938 to 1947. After his separation from his wife, Pilar, in 1973, Wayne became romantically involved and lived with his former secretary Pat Stacy (1941–1995) until his death in 1979. She published a biography of her life with him in 1983, titled \"Duke: A Love Story\".\n\nWayne's hair began to thin in the 1940s, and he had begun to wear a hairpiece by the end of the decade. He was occasionally seen in public without the hairpiece (such as, according to \"Life\" magazine, at Gary Cooper's funeral). During an appearance at Harvard University, Wayne was asked by a student \"Is it true that your toupée is real mohair?\" He responded: \"Well sir, that's real hair. Not mine, but real hair.\"\n\nA close friend of Wayne's, California Congressman Alphonzo E. Bell Jr., wrote of him: \"Duke's personality and sense of humor were very close to what the general public saw on the big screen. It is perhaps best shown in these words he had engraved on a plaque: 'Each of us is a mixture of some good and some not so good qualities. In considering one's fellow man it's important to remember the good things ... We should refrain from making judgments just because a fella happens to be a dirty, rotten SOB.'\"\n\nWayne biographer Michael Munn chronicled Wayne's drinking habits. According to Sam O'Steen's memoir, \"Cut to the Chase\", studio directors knew to shoot Wayne's scenes before noon, because by afternoon he \"was a mean drunk\". He had been a chain smoker of cigarettes since young adulthood and was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1964. He underwent successful surgery to remove his entire left lung and four ribs. Despite efforts by his business associates to prevent him from going public with his illness for fear that it would cost him work, Wayne announced he had cancer and called on the public to get preventive examinations. Five years later, Wayne was declared cancer-free. Wayne has been credited with coining the term \"The Big C\" as a euphemism for cancer.\n\nHe was a Freemason, a Master Mason in Marion McDaniel Lodge No. 56 F&AM, in Tucson, Arizona. He became a 32nd Degree Scottish Rite Mason and later joined the Al Malaikah Shrine Temple in Los Angeles. He became a member of the York Rite. During the early 1960s, Wayne traveled extensively to Panama, during which he purchased the island of Taborcillo off the main coast. It was sold by his estate at his death.\n\nWayne's yacht, the \"Wild Goose\", was one of his favorite possessions. He kept it docked in Newport Beach Harbor, and it was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 2011.\n\nWayne was fond of literature, his favorite authors being Charles Dickens, Arthur Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie. His favorite books were \"David Copperfield\", and Conan Doyle's historical novels \"The White Company\" and \"Sir Nigel\".\n\nWayne's height has been reported as at least .\n\nWayne always wore the same revolver in all the westerns that he appeared in.\n\nAlthough he enrolled in a cancer vaccine study in an attempt to ward off the disease, Wayne died of stomach cancer on June 11, 1979, at the UCLA Medical Center. His body was buried in the Pacific View Memorial Park Cemetery in Corona del Mar, Newport Beach. According to his son Patrick and his grandson Matthew Muñoz, who was a priest in the California Diocese of Orange, Wayne converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before his death. He requested that his tombstone read \"Feo, Fuerte y Formal\", a Spanish epitaph Wayne described as meaning \"ugly, strong, and dignified\". His grave, which was unmarked for 20 years, has been marked since 1999 with a quotation from his controversial 1971 \"Playboy\" interview:\n\nAmong the cast and crew who filmed \"The Conqueror\" (1956) on location near St. George, Utah, 91 cast/crew members developed some form of cancer at various times, including stars Wayne, Susan Hayward, Agnes Moorehead, Pedro Armendáriz, and director Dick Powell. The film was shot in southwestern Utah, east of and generally downwind from the site of recent U.S. government nuclear weapons tests in southeastern Nevada. Many contend that radioactive fallout from these tests contaminated the film location and poisoned the film crew working there. Despite the suggestion that Wayne's 1964 lung cancer and his 1979 stomach cancer resulted from nuclear contamination, he believed his lung cancer to have been a result of his six-pack-a-day cigarette habit.\n\nWayne's enduring status as an iconic American was formally recognized by the U.S. government in the form of the two highest civilian decorations. On May 26, 1979, he was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal. Hollywood figures and American leaders from across the political spectrum, including Maureen O'Hara, Elizabeth Taylor, Frank Sinatra, Mike Frankovich, Katharine Hepburn, General and Mrs. Omar Bradley, Gregory Peck, Robert Stack, James Arness, and Kirk Douglas, testified to Congress in support of the award. Robert Aldrich, president of the Directors Guild of America, made a particularly notable statement:\n\nWayne was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom on June 9, 1980, by President Jimmy Carter. He had attended Carter's inaugural ball in 1977 \"as a member of the loyal opposition\", as he described it. In 1998, he was awarded the Naval Heritage Award by the US Navy Memorial Foundation for his support of the Navy and military during his film career. In 1999, the American Film Institute (AFI) named Wayne 13th among the Greatest Male Screen Legends of Classic Hollywood cinema.\n\nVarious public locations are named in honor of Wayne, including the John Wayne Airport in Orange County, California, where a nine-foot bronze statue of him stands at the entrance; the John Wayne Marina for which Wayne bequeathed the land, near Sequim, Washington; John Wayne Elementary School (P.S. 380) in Brooklyn, New York, which boasts a 38-foot mosaic mural commission by New York artist Knox Martin entitled \"John Wayne and the American Frontier\"; and a 100-plus-mile trail named the \"John Wayne Pioneer Trail\" in Washington's Iron Horse State Park. A larger than life-size bronze statue of Wayne atop a horse was erected at the corner of La Cienega Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills, California, at the former offices of the Great Western Savings and Loan Corporation, for which Wayne had made a number of commercials. In the city of Maricopa, Arizona, part of Arizona State Route 347 is named John Wayne Parkway, which runs through the center of town.\n\nIn 2006, friends of Wayne and his former Arizona business partner, Louis Johnson, inaugurated the \"Louie and the Duke Classics\" events benefiting the John Wayne Cancer Foundation and the American Cancer Society. The weekend-long event each fall in Casa Grande, Arizona, includes a golf tournament, an auction of John Wayne memorabilia, and a team roping competition.\n\nSeveral celebrations took place on May 26, 2007, the centennial of Wayne's birth. A celebration at the John Wayne birthplace in Winterset, Iowa, included chuck-wagon suppers, concerts by Michael Martin Murphey and Riders in the Sky, a Wild West Revue in the style of Buffalo Bill's Wild West show, and a Cowboy Symposium with Wayne's costars, producers, and costumers. Wayne's films ran repetitively at the local theater. Ground was broken for the New John Wayne Birthplace Museum and Learning Center at a ceremony consisting of over 30 of Wayne's family members, including Melinda Wayne Muñoz, Aissa, Ethan, and Marisa Wayne. Later that year, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Wayne into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.\n\nIn 2016 Republican assemblyman Matthew Harper proposed marking May 26 as \"John Wayne Day\" in California. This resolution was struck down by a vote of 35 to 20, due to Wayne's views on race and his support of controversial organizations such as the John Birch Society and the House Un-American Activities Committee.\n\nWayne rose beyond the typical recognition for a famous actor to that of an enduring icon who symbolized and communicated American values and ideals. By the middle of his career, Wayne had developed a larger-than-life image, and as his career progressed, he selected roles that would not compromise his off-screen image. At a party in 1957, Wayne confronted actor Kirk Douglas about the latter's decision to play the role of Vincent van Gogh in the film \"Lust for Life\", saying: \"Christ, Kirk, how can you play a part like that? There's so goddamn few of us left. We got to play strong, tough characters. Not these weak queers.\"\n\nWayne's rise to being the quintessential movie war hero began to take shape four years after World War II, when \"Sands of Iwo Jima\" (1949) was released. His footprints at Grauman's Chinese theater in Hollywood were laid in concrete that contained sand from Iwo Jima. His status grew so large and legendary that when Japanese Emperor Hirohito visited the United States in 1975, he asked to meet John Wayne, the symbolic representation of his country's former enemy. Likewise when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visited the United States in 1959, he made two requests: to visit Disneyland and meet Wayne.\n\nWayne is the only actor to appear in every edition of the annual Harris Poll of Most Popular Film Actors, and the only actor to appear on the list after his death. Wayne has been in the top ten in this poll for 19 consecutive years, starting in 1994, 15 years after his death.\n\nThe John Wayne Cancer Foundation was founded in 1985 in honor of John Wayne, after his family granted the use of his name (and limited funding) for the continued fight against cancer. The foundation's mission is to \"bring courage, strength, and grit to the fight against cancer\". The foundation provides funds for innovative programs that improve cancer patient care, including research, education, awareness, and support.\n\nNewport Beach, California-based John Wayne Enterprises, a business operated by Wayne's heirs, sells products, including Kentucky straight bourbon, bearing the \"Duke\" brand and using Wayne's picture. When the company tried to trademark the image appearing on one of the bottles, Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, filed a notice of opposition. According to court documents, Duke has tried three times since 2005 to stop the company from trademarking the name. The company sought a declaration permitting registration of their trademark. The company's complaint filed in federal court said the university did \"not own the word 'Duke' in all contexts for all purposes.\" The university's official position was not to object provided Wayne's image appeared with the name. On September 30, 2014, the Orange County, California, federal judge David Carter dismissed the company's suit deciding the plaintiffs had chosen the wrong jurisdiction.\n\nBetween 1926 and 1977, Wayne appeared in over one hundred and seventy films, and became one of America's biggest box office stars. Only Clark Gable sold more tickets than Wayne, although the ticket prices were not commensurate since, although both actors started their careers at the same time, Gable's career height preceded Wayne's by approximately fifteen years.\n\nBULLET::::- Wayne rebuffed the lead role in the 1952 film \"High Noon\" because he felt the film's story was an allegory against blacklisting, which he actively supported. In a 1971 interview, Wayne said he considered \"High Noon\" \"the most un-American thing I've ever seen in my whole life\", and that he would \"never regret having helped run screenwriter Carl Foreman, [who was later blacklisted] out of the country\".\nBULLET::::- An urban legend has it that in 1955, Wayne turned down the role of Matt Dillon in the long-running television series \"Gunsmoke\" and recommended James Arness instead. While he did suggest Arness for the part, and introduced him in a prologue to the first episode, no film star of Wayne's stature would have considered a television role at the time.\nBULLET::::- Terry Southern's biographer Lee Hill wrote that the role of Major T. J. \"King\" Kong in \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964) was originally written with Wayne in mind, and that Stanley Kubrick offered him the part after Peter Sellers injured his ankle during filming; he immediately turned it down.\nBULLET::::- In 1966, Wayne accepted the role of Major Reisman in \"The Dirty Dozen\" (1967), and asked Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for some script changes, but eventually withdrew from the project to make \"The Green Berets\". He was replaced by Lee Marvin.\nBULLET::::- Though Wayne actively campaigned for the title role in \"Dirty Harry\" (1971), Warner Bros. decided that at 63 he was too old, and cast the 41-year-old Clint Eastwood.\nBULLET::::- Director Peter Bogdanovich and screenwriter Larry McMurtry pitched a film in 1971 called \"Streets of Laredo\" that would co-star Wayne along with James Stewart and Henry Fonda. They conceived it as a Western that would bring the final curtain down on Hollywood Westerns. Stewart and Fonda both agreed to appear in it, but after long consideration, Wayne turned it down, citing his feeling that his character was more underdeveloped and uninteresting than those of his co-stars, which was largely based on John Ford's recommendation after perusing the script. The project was shelved for some twenty years, until McMurtry rewrote and expanded the original screenplay co-written with Bogdanovich to make the novel and subsequent TV miniseries \"Lonesome Dove\", with Tommy Lee Jones in Wayne's role and Robert Duvall playing the part originally written for Stewart in the extremely popular miniseries.\nBULLET::::- Mel Brooks offered Wayne the role of the Waco Kid (eventually played by Gene Wilder) in \"Blazing Saddles\" (1974). After reading the script Wayne declined, fearing the dialogue was \"too dirty\" for his family image, but told Brooks that he would be \"first in line\" to see the movie.\nBULLET::::- Steven Spielberg offered both Wayne and Charlton Heston the role of Major General Joseph Stilwell in \"1941\" (1979) with Wayne still considered for a cameo in the film. After reading the script, Wayne decided not to participate due to ill health, but also urged Spielberg not to pursue the project. Both Wayne and Heston felt the film was unpatriotic. Spielberg recalled, \"[Wayne] was really curious and so I sent him the script. He called me the next day and said he felt it was a very un-American movie, and I shouldn't waste my time making it. He said, 'You know, that was an important war, and you're making fun of a war that cost thousands of lives at Pearl Harbor. Don't joke about World War II'.\"\n\nAs shown below, Wayne was nominated for three Academy Awards, winning once for Best Actor in a Leading Role in 1969.\n\nThe category's nominees for each year in which Wayne was nominated are shown, with that year's winner highlighted in yellow.\n\n! background:lightsteelblue;\" colspan=\"2\" - 1949 -\n! background:lightsteelblue;\" colspan=\"2\" - 1969 -\n! Actor\n! Film\n! Actor\n! Film\n\n! background:lightsteelblue;\" colspan=\"2\" 1961 -\n! Producer\n! Film\nBilly Wilder\n\"The Apartment\"\n\nThe Golden Globe Awards are presented annually by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) to recognize outstanding achievements in the entertainment industry, both domestic and foreign, and to focus wide public attention upon the best in motion pictures and television. In 1953, Wayne was awarded the Henrietta Award (a now retired award) for being World Film Favorite: Male.\n\nThe Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement in motion pictures is an annual award given by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association at the Golden Globe Award ceremonies in Hollywood. It was named in honor of Cecil B. DeMille (1881–1959), one of the industry's most successful filmmakers; John Wayne won the award in 1966.\n\nIn 1970, Wayne won a Golden Globe Award for his performance in \"True Grit\".\n\nIn 1973, \"The Harvard Lampoon\", a satirical paper run by Harvard University students, invited Wayne to receive The Brass Balls Award, created in his \"honor\", after calling him \"the biggest fraud in history\". Harvard Square had become known for leftist intellectualism and protest throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Wayne accepted the invitation as a chance to promote the recently released film \"McQ\", and a Fort Devens Army convoy offered to drive him into the square on an armored personnel carrier. The ceremony was held on January 15, 1974, at the Harvard Square Theater and the award was officially presented in honor of Wayne's \"outstanding machismo and penchant for punching people\". Although the convoy was met with protests by members of the American Indian Movement and others, some of whom threw snowballs, Wayne received a standing ovation from the audience when he walked onto the stage. An internal investigation was launched into the Army's involvement in the day.\n\nBULLET::::- Hall of Great Western Performers\nBULLET::::- List of film director and actor collaborations\nBULLET::::- List of famous amateur chess players\nBULLET::::- List of Notable Freemasons\nBULLET::::- National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum\nBULLET::::- Red Scare\nFootnotes\nCitations\nBULLET::::- Jensen, Richard (2012). \"When the Legend Became Fact – The True Life of John Wayne\". Nashville: Raymond Street Publishers, 2012.\n\nBULLET::::- John Wayne Cancer Foundation\nBULLET::::- John Wayne Cancer Institute\nBULLET::::- FBI file on John Wayne\nBULLET::::- Birthplace of John Wayne official website\nBULLET::::- \"On the Set of The Alamo\": Behind-the-scenes footage from the production of the film, from the Texas Archive of the Moving Image\n"}
{"id": "16110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16110", "title": "Johnny Haynes", "text": "Johnny Haynes\n\nJohn Norman Haynes (17 October 1934 – 18 October 2005) was an English internationalist association football inside forward. He made 56 appearances for his country including 22 as captain. He was selected for 3 World Cup finals squads playing in the latter two of those. Nicknamed \"the Maestro\", his attacking play was noted for two footed passing ability, vision and deftness of touch. Haynes is widely regarded as Fulham's greatest ever player remaining loyal there for 20 years despite coming no nearer to a major trophy win than two FA Cup semi-final appearances. Immediately following the abolition of the £20 maximum wage in 1961 he became the first player to be paid £100 a week. He also had a spell on loan with Toronto City in 1961 and ended his playing days at Durban City winning there the only trophy he won in his football career.\n\nThe son of post office engineer, he was born in Kentish Town supporting Arsenal as a boy. He signed for Fulham as a 15 year old amateur in 1950 when Fulham were in a 3-season spell in the Football League top tier. He was loaned to then non-league Wimbledon. He made his senior debut aged 18 in the 1952 home Boxing Day visit of Southampton when Fulham were in their 1st season back in the Football League 2nd tier.\n\nHaynes made his debut for the England football team in October 1954, scoring a goal in a 2-0 victory over Northern Ireland in Belfast. He first captained England in 1960 and played for them at two World Cups.\n\nHaynes played in his 1st of 2 FA Cup semi-finals in 1958. They were eliminated in a replay by the remnants of Manchester United's Busby Babes team that had been decimated in the Munich air disaster the month before. United were the first top division team Fulham played in that cup run. Fulham were promoted to the top division when finishing second to Sheffield Wednesday in 1959. In the 1959–60 season, Fulham finished tenth in the top division, which until finishing ninth in the 2003–04 season was their highest-ever league position. Following the abolition of the £20 maximum wage in 1961 he became Britain's first footballer to earn £100 per week. He played in a 2nd FA Cup semi-final in 1962 losing a replay this time to Burnley.\n\nIn August 1962 on Blackpool promenade the sports car in which he was returning late to his hotel was blown by a gust of wind into the path of another vehicle. Haynes broke bones in both feet and badly injured a knee. He recounts that the police officer who attended the incident reassured him by saying \"Don't worry son, you've only broken your legs\". He missed almost a season and, when he returned to the Fulham side, was not quite the same player. Prior to the accident he had captained England 22 times, and, being only 27, was expected to lead them in the 1966 World Cup; but he was never again selected for the national team.\n\nFulham were relegated in 1968. Haynes then had a single spell in football management, taking charge of the Cottagers for 18 days in November that year after the dismissal of Bobby Robson as player-manager, but Haynes never had any ambition to go into coaching. That season Fulham endured a 2nd successive relegation. His last appearance for Fulham's 1st team was on 17 January 1970 in a 3rd tier home match against Stockport County. In total he made 657 appearances for Fulham, and scored 157 goals.\n\nIn 1970, he retired professionally aged 35, and joined Durban City playing one season and winning South Africa's 1970/71 National Football League (South Africa). This was his only winner's medal in club football.\n\nOn retiring from playing in 1970 he was already an active bookmaker. He sold his chain of bookmakers to The Tote in 1976. In 1985 he moved to Edinburgh, the city of his partner Avril. Haynes first met Avril in the 1960s when she travelled down to London to buy stock for boutiques she ran in Edinburgh. On moving to Edinburgh he ran a laundry business with Avril, played golf and watched local club, Heart of Midlothian. In 2004 he and Avril married in a secret ceremony at Dalkeith registry office.\n\nOn 17 October 2005 Haynes was driving his car on Edinburgh's Dalry Road when he suffered a brain haemorrhage, instantaneously effectively rendering him brain dead. The vehicle veered across the road crashing into a van. Although kept on a ventilator for some 30 hours, the ventilator was turned off on the evening of 18 October 2005. He had just turned 71 years old the day before. The funeral at Mortonhall Crematorium was attended by ex-players Bobby Charlton, George Cohen, Sven-Göran Eriksson, Dave Mackay, Alan Mullery, Jimmy Murray and Bobby Robson and also George Foulkes. Avril was unable to attend due to injuries from the car accident. He is survived by Avril and his step-children Mark and Sara.\n\nIn 2002 Haynes became an Inaugural Inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in recognition of his football talents and impact on the English game.\n\nOn the day of Haynes' death, Alan Mullery, another ex Fulham and England player, made the following tribute:\n\"\"He was the only reason I went to Fulham as a young boy of 15 leaving school. He was my hero, the captain of England and Fulham. The word great rolls off the tongue quite easily these days but he really was. He was the best passer of a ball I have ever seen - I don't know anyone who could pass a ball as accurately. Anyone who saw him will know what a great player he was.\"\"\n\nShortly after his death Fulham renamed The Stevenage Road Stand as The Johnny Haynes Stand.\n\nGeorge Cohen, a World Cup winner for England in 1966 and a Fulham teammate of Johnny Haynes, stated:\n\"\"I have a hundred individual memories of the beauty of John's play. One stands out for the sheer perfection of his skill. It was a charity match which, but for that one second, has faded completely from my memory. The ball came to him at speed on a wet, slippery surface but with the slightest of adjustments, one that was almost imperceptible, he played it inside a full-back and into the path of an on-running winger. I looked at our coach Dave Sexton on the bench and he caught my glance and shook his head as if to say 'fantastic'. Haynes could give you goose bumps on a wet night in a match that didn't matter.\"\"\n\nBobby Moore, Haynes' successor as England captain, said of him: \"Once you get used to watching that perfection you realised the rest of the secret. John was always available, always hungry for the ball, always wanting to play. I loved watching the player. Later I learnt to love the man.\" Pelé said he had never seen a better passer of the ball than Haynes.\n\nThe Fulham Supporters Trust stated: \"\"His dedication, skill, professionalism, grace and charm - both in his playing days and in retirement - serve as a poignant reminder to many of today's footballers about what true greatness really means.\" \" On 28 July 2008, Fulham announced that fundraising had commenced, with the co-operation of a fan's group, to produce a lasting tribute to Haynes. The Johnny Haynes Statue was unveiled outside the stadium before the 0-0 draw v Sunderland on Saturday 18 October 2008.\n\n! colspan=3  Club performance\n! colspan=2  League\n! colspan=2  Cup\n! colspan=2  League Cup\n! colspan=2  Continental\n! colspan=2  Total\n! Season !! Club !! League\n! Apps !! Goals\n! Apps !! Goals\n! Apps !! Goals\n! Apps !! Goals\n! Apps !! Goals\n\n! colspan=3  England\n! colspan=2  League\n! colspan=2  FA Cup\n! colspan=2  League Cup\n! colspan=2  Europe\n! colspan=2  Total\n1952–53rowspan=\"18\"Fulhamrowspan=\"7\"Second Division181\n1953–544116\n1954–55378\n1955–564018\n1956–57335\n1957–583815\n1958–593426\n1959–60rowspan=\"9\"First Division3110\n1960–61399\n1961–62385\n1962–6380\n1963–64408\n1964–65395\n1965–66336\n1966–67366\n1967–68345\n1968–69Second Division281\n1969–70Third Division273\n! rowspan=1  Total\n! colspan=2  England\n!594147\n! colspan=3  Career total\n!594147\n\n! colspan=3  England national team\n!Year!!Apps!!Goals\n\n195411\n195520\n195674\n195763\n1958104\n195971\n196073\n196182\n196280\n!Total5618\n\nBULLET::::- Fulham: Division 2 promotion 1958/59\nBULLET::::- Durban City: National Football League winners 1970/71\n\nBULLET::::- Haynes' Post War English & Scottish Football League A - Z Player's Transfer Database profile's statistics site\nBULLET::::- Pathe newsreel footage of Johnny Haynes hattrick for England against Russia\nBULLET::::- Brian Glanville: Silent fans pay tribute to their midfield maestro (subscription required)\nBULLET::::- Memories of Craven Cottage\n"}
{"id": "16111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16111", "title": "John Sayles", "text": "John Sayles\n\nJohn Thomas Sayles (born September 28, 1950) is an American independent film director, screenwriter, editor, actor and novelist. He has twice been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay, for \"Passion Fish\" (1992) and \"Lone Star\" (1996). His film \"Men with Guns\" (1997) was nominated for the Golden Globe for Best Foreign Language Film. His directorial debut, \"Return of the Secaucus 7\" (1980), has been added to the National Film Registry.\n\nSayles was born in Schenectady, New York, the son of Mary (\"née\" Rausch), a teacher, and Donald John Sayles, a school administrator. Both of Sayles's parents were of half-Irish descent and Catholic. He attended Williams College with frequent collaborators Gordon Clapp and David Strathairn.\n\nLike Martin Scorsese and James Cameron, Sayles began his career working with Roger Corman. In 1979, Sayles used $30,000 he earned writing scripts for Corman to fund his first film, \"Return of the Secaucus 7\". To make the film on a limited budget, he set the film in a large house so that he did not have to travel to or get permits for different locations, set the story over a three-day weekend to limit costume changes, and wrote about people his age so he could cast his friends in it. The film received near-unanimous critical acclaim at the time and has held its reputation. In November 1997, the National Film Preservation Board announced that \"Return of the Secaucus 7\" would be one of the 25 films selected that year for preservation in the National Film Registry at the Library of Congress.\n\nIn 1983, after the films \"Baby It's You\" (starring Rosanna Arquette) and \"Lianna\" (a story in which a married woman becomes discontented with her marriage and falls in love with another woman), Sayles received a MacArthur Fellowship. He put the money into the fantasy \"The Brother from Another Planet\", a film about a black, three-toed slave who escapes from another planet and after crash-landing on Earth, finds himself at home among the people of Harlem, being pursued by white male agents from his home planet dressed as men in black.\n\nIn 1989, Sayles created and wrote the pilot episode for the short-lived television show \"Shannon's Deal\" about a down-and-out Philadelphia lawyer played by Jamey Sheridan. Sayles received a 1990 Edgar Award for his teleplay for the pilot. The show ran for 16 episodes before being cancelled in 1991.\n\nSayles has funded most of his films by writing genre scripts, such as \"Piranha\", \"Alligator\", \"The Howling\" and \"The Challenge\" Having collaborated with Joe Dante on \"Piranha\" and \"The Howling\", Sayles acted in Dante's movie, \"Matinee\". Sayles gets the rest of his funding by working as a script doctor; he did rewrites for \"Apollo 13\" and \"Mimic\".\n\nA genre script, called \"Night Skies\", inspired what would eventually become the film \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\". That film's director, Steven Spielberg, later commissioned Sayles to write a script (unused) for the fourth \"Jurassic Park\" film.\n\nHe has written and directed his own films, including \"Lone Star\", \"Passion Fish\", \"Eight Men Out\", \"The Secret of Roan Inish,\" and \"Matewan\". He serves on the advisory board for the Austin Film Society.\nMaggie Renzi has been John Sayles' long-time companion (and collaborator), but they have not married. Renzi has produced most of his films since \"Lianna\". They met as students at Williams College.\n\nSayles works with a regular repertory of actors, most notably Chris Cooper, David Strathairn, and Gordon Clapp, each of whom has appeared in at least four of his films.\n\nIn early 2003, Sayles signed the Not In Our Name \"Statement of Conscience\" (along with Noam Chomsky, Steve Earle, Brian Eno, Jesse Jackson, Viggo Mortensen, Bonnie Raitt, Oliver Stone, Marisa Tomei, Susan Sarandon and others) which opposed the invasion of Iraq\n\nIn February 2009, Sayles was reported to be writing an HBO series based on the early life of Anthony Kiedis of the Red Hot Chili Peppers. The drama, tentatively titled \"Scar Tissue\", centers on Kiedis's early years living in West Hollywood with his father. At that time, Kiedis's father, known as Spider, sold drugs (according to legend, his clients included The Who and Led Zeppelin) and mingled with rock stars on the Sunset Strip, all while aspiring to get into show business.\n\nIn February 2010, Sayles began shooting his 17th feature film, the historical war drama \"Amigo\", in the Philippines. The film is a fictional account of events during the Philippine–American War, with a cast that includes Joel Torre, Chris Cooper, and Garret Dillahunt.\n\nHis novel \"A Moment in the Sun\", set during the same period as \"Amigo\", in the Philippines, Cuba, and the US, was released in 2011 by McSweeney's. It includes an account of the Wilmington Insurrection of 1898 in North Carolina, the only coup d'état in United States history in which a duly elected government was overthrown.\n\nBULLET::::- 1983 MacArthur Fellowship\nBULLET::::- 1990 Edgar Award, for teleplay for pilot of \"Shannon's Deal\"\nBULLET::::- In June 2014 Sayles donated his non-film archive to the University of Michigan. It will be accessible at the Harlan Hatcher Graduate Library. Sayles' film archive is held by the UCLA Film and Television Archive.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Return of the Secaucus 7\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Lianna\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Baby It's You\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"The Brother from Another Planet\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Matewan\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Eight Men Out\" (1988) (Also actor portraying Ring Lardner)\nBULLET::::- \"City of Hope\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Passion Fish\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"The Secret of Roan Inish\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Lone Star\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Men with Guns\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Limbo\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Sunshine State\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Casa de los Babys\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Silver City\" (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Honeydripper\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Amigo\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Go for Sisters\" (2013)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Piranha\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lady in Red\" (1979)\nBULLET::::- \"Alligator\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Battle Beyond the Stars\" (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"The Howling\" (1981)\nBULLET::::- \"The Challenge\" (with Richard Maxwell) (1982)\nBULLET::::- \"E.T. the Extra Terrestrial\" (early draft, then titled \"Night Skies\")\nBULLET::::- \"Enormous Changes at the Last Minute\" (with Susan Rice) (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"The Clan of the Cave Bear\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Wild Thing\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Breaking In\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Men of War\" (as \"A Safe Place\", later repolished by Ethan Reiff and Cyrus Voris) (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Apollo 13\" (1995) (uncredited)\nBULLET::::- \"The Spiderwick Chronicles\" (Co-writer with David Berenbaum and Karey Kirkpatrick) (2008)\nBULLET::::- \"The Devil's Highway\" (2018)\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Perfect Match\" (with Mel Damski) (1980)\nBULLET::::- \"Unnatural Causes\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Shannon's Deal\" (1989) (Creator)\nBULLET::::- \"The Alienist\" (2018)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Lianna\" (as Jerry) (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"The Brother from Another Planet\" (as Man in Black #2)(1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Matewan\" (as Hardshell Preacher) (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Eight Men Out\" (as Ring Lardner) (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Matinee\" (as Bob) (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Gridlock'd (1996)\"\nBULLET::::- \"In the Electric Mist\" (as Michael Goldman) (2009)\nBULLET::::- \"The Normals\" (as Dr. Marx) (2012)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Pride of the Bimbos\" (1975) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"Union Dues\" (1977) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"Los Gusanos\" (1991) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"A Moment in the Sun\" (2011) (novel)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Anarchists' Convention\" (1979) (short story collection)\nBULLET::::- \"Thinking in Pictures: The Making of the Movie \"Matewan\"\" (1987) (non-fiction)\nBULLET::::- \"Dillinger in Hollywood\" (2004) (short story collection)\n\nBULLET::::- Bruce Springsteen – \"Born in the U.S.A.\"\nBULLET::::- Bruce Springsteen – \"I'm on Fire\"\nBULLET::::- Bruce Springsteen – \"Glory Days\"\n\nAwards for \"Honeydripper\":\nBULLET::::- Outstanding Independent or Foreign Film (Win) – 2008 NAACP Image Award\nBULLET::::- Outstanding Writing in a Motion Picture (Theatrical or Television) (Nominated) – John Sayles – 2008 NAACP Image Awards\nBULLET::::- Top 10 Independent Films of 2007 – National Board of Review of Motion Pictures\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Win) – John Sayles – 2007 San Sebastián International Film Festival (Tied with Gracia Querejeta and David Planell for Siete mesas de billar francés (2007))\n\nAward for \"Silver City\":\nBULLET::::- Golden Seashell Award for Best Film (Nominated) – John Sayles – 2004 San Sebastián International Film Festival\n\nAwards for \"Sunshine State\":\nBULLET::::- Golden Orange Award (Win) – John Sayles – 2002 Florida Film Critics Circle Awards\nBULLET::::- Special Mention For Excellence In Filmmaking (Win) – 2002 National Board of Review\n\nAwards for \"Limbo\":\nBULLET::::- Best Director Golden Space Needle Award (Win) – John Sayles −1999 Seattle International Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Outstanding Indies (Win) – 1999 National Board of Review\n\nAwards for \"Men with Guns/Hombres armados\":\nBULLET::::- Best Foreign Independent Film (Nominated) – 1998 British Independent Film Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Foreign Film (Nominated) – 1999 Golden Globes\nBULLET::::- Peace Award (Nominated) – 1998 Political Film Society\nBULLET::::- FIPRESCI Prize (Win) – John Sayles – 1997 San Sebastián International Film Festival\nBULLET::::- OCIC Award (Win) – John Sayles – 1997 San Sebastián International Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Solidarity Award (Win) – John Sayles – 1997 San Sebastián International Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Golden Seashell Award for Best Film (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1997 San Sebastián International Film Festival\n\nAwards for \"Lone Star\":\nBULLET::::- Best Original Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1997 Academy Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Original Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1997 BAFTA Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay, Motion Picture (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1997 Golden Globes\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1997 Writers Guild of America Award\nBULLET::::- Best Picture (Nominated) – 1997 Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Motion Picture Original Screenplay (Win) – John Sayles – 1997 Golden Satellite Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Motion Picture – Drama (Nominated) – Maggie Renzi & R. Paul Miller – 1997 Golden Satellite Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1997 Independent Spirit Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Film (Win) – Lone Star – 1996 Lone Star Film & Television Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Director (Win) – John Sayles – 1996 Lone Star Film & Television Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Win) – John Sayles – 1996 Lone Star Film & Television Awards\nBULLET::::- Special Achievement Award for Outstanding Feature Film (Win) – 1996 NCLR Bravo Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Director (Win) – John Sayles – 1997 Southeastern Film Critics Association Awards\n\nAwards for \"The Secret of Roan Inish\":\nBULLET::::- Best Genre Video Release (Nominated) – 1996 Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films\nBULLET::::- International Critics Award (Win) – John Sayles – 1996 Gérardmer Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Best Director (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1996 Independent Spirit Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1996 Independent Spirit Awards\n\nAwards for \"Passion Fish\":\nBULLET::::- Best Original Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1993 Academy Awards\nBULLET::::- Golden Spur Award (Win) – John Sayles – 1993 Flanders International Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1993 Writers Guild of America\n\nAwards for \"City of Hope\":\nBULLET::::- Critics Award (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1991 Deauville American Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Special Award, Democracy Award (Win) – 1992 Political Film Society\nBULLET::::- Tokyo Grand Prix Award (Win) – John Sayles – 1991 Tokyo International Film Festival\n\nAwards for \"Matewan\":\nBULLET::::- Critics Award (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1987 Deauville American Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Best Director (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1988 Independent Spirit Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1988 Independent Spirit Award\nBULLET::::- Human Rights Award (Win) – 1988 Political Film Society\n\nAwards for \"The Brother from Another Planet\":\n\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay Caixa de Catalunya Award (Win) – John Sayles – 1984 Catalan International Film Festival, Sitges, Spain\nBULLET::::- Grand Jury Prize – Dramatic (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1985 USA Film Festival (later became the Sundance Film Festival)\n\nAwards for \"Return of the Secaucus 7\":\nBULLET::::- Best Independent Film (Win) – 1981 Boston Society of Film Critics Awards\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Win) – John Sayles – 1980 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards\nBULLET::::- National Film Registry – 1997 Library of Congress, National Film Preservation Board\nBULLET::::- Best Comedy Written Directly for the Screen (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1981 Writers Guild of America\nBULLET::::- Best Screenplay (Nominated) – John Sayles – 1980 New York Film Critics Circle\nBULLET::::- Second Place – 1981 US Film Festival (later became the Sundance Film Festival)\n\nSayles' first published story, \"I-80 Nebraska\", won an O. Henry Award; his novel, \"Union Dues\", was nominated for a National Book Award as well as the National Book Critics Circle Award.\n\nIn 1983, Sayles received the John D. MacArthur Award, given to 20 Americans in diverse fields each year for their innovative work. He has also been the recipient of the Eugene V. Debs Award, the John Steinbeck Award and the John Cassavetes Award. He was honored with the Ian McLellan Hunter Award for Lifetime Achievement by the Writers Guild of America (1999).\n\nActors who have regularly worked with Sayles include Maggie Renzi, David Strathairn, Joe Morton, Chris Cooper, Mary McDonnell, Vincent Spano, Kevin Tighe, Josh Mostel, Tom Wright, Gordon Clapp and Angela Bassett.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Night Skies\" – for a more complete history of how the proposed \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" sequel became the \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" story\n\nBULLET::::- Diane Carson and Heidi Kenaga, eds., \"Sayles Talk: New Perspectives on Independent Filmmaker John Sayles\", Wayne State University Press, 2006\nBULLET::::- John Sayles, \"Thinking in Pictures: The Making of the Movie Matewan\", Da Capo Press, 2003\n\nBULLET::::- Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database\nBULLET::::- Interview April 2007 by Cathy Pryor in the London Independent\nBULLET::::- \"The Rumpus\" interview\nBULLET::::- \"Return of the Independent: Sayles on Sayles\" (5-part interview) from siffblog.com\n"}
{"id": "16112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16112", "title": "January 12", "text": "January 12\n\nBULLET::::- 1528 – Gustav I of Sweden is crowned King of Sweden, having already reigned since his election in June 1523.\nBULLET::::- 1554 – Bayinnaung, who would go on to assemble the largest empire in the history of Southeast Asia, is crowned King of Burma.\nBULLET::::- 1616 – The city of Belém, Brazil is founded on the Amazon River delta, by Portuguese captain Francisco Caldeira Castelo Branco.\nBULLET::::- 1808 – John Rennie's scheme to defend St Mary's Church, Reculver, founded in 669, from coastal erosion is abandoned in favour of demolition, despite the church being an exemplar of Anglo-Saxon architecture and sculpture.\nBULLET::::- 1808 – The organizational meeting leading to the creation of the Wernerian Natural History Society, a former Scottish learned society, is held in Edinburgh.\nBULLET::::- 1848 – The Palermo rising takes place in Sicily against the Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.\nBULLET::::- 1866 – The Royal Aeronautical Society is formed in London.\nBULLET::::- 1872 – Yohannes IV is crowned Emperor of Ethiopia in Axum, the first imperial coronation in that city in over 200 years.\nBULLET::::- 1895 – The National Trust is founded in the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1908 – A long-distance radio message is sent from the Eiffel Tower for the first time.\nBULLET::::- 1911 – The University of the Philippines College of Law is formally established; three future Philippine presidents are among the first enrollees.\nBULLET::::- 1915 – The United States House of Representatives rejects a proposal to require states to give women the right to vote.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Both Oswald Boelcke and Max Immelmann, for achieving eight aerial victories each over Allied aircraft, receive the German Empire's highest military award, the Pour le Mérite as the first German aviators to earn it.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The Minnie Pit Disaster coal mining accident occurs in Halmer End, Staffordshire, in which 155 men and boys die.\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Acting to restore confidence in baseball after the Black Sox Scandal, Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis is elected as Major League Baseball's first commissioner.\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Hattie Caraway becomes the first woman elected to the United States Senate.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt creates the National War Labor Board.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – World War II: The Red Army begins the Vistula–Oder Offensive.\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Vietnam War: Operation Chopper, the first American combat mission in the war, takes place.\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Rebels in Zanzibar begin a revolt known as the Zanzibar Revolution and proclaim a republic.\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Lyndon B. Johnson states that the United States should stay in South Vietnam until Communist aggression there is ended.\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Dr. James Bedford becomes the first person to be cryonically preserved with intent of future resuscitation.\nBULLET::::- 1969 – The New York Jets of the American Football League defeat the Baltimore Colts of the National Football League to win Super Bowl III in what is considered to be one of the greatest upsets in sports history.\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Biafra capitulates, ending the Nigerian Civil War.\nBULLET::::- 1971 – The Harrisburg Seven: Rev. Philip Berrigan and five other activists are indicted on charges of conspiring to kidnap Henry Kissinger and of plotting to blow up the heating tunnels of federal buildings in Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- 1976 – The United Nations Security Council votes 11–1 to allow the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in a Security Council debate (without voting rights).\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Space Shuttle program: Congressman Bill Nelson lifts off from Kennedy Space Center aboard \"Columbia\" on mission STS-61-C as a payload specialist.\nBULLET::::- 1990 – A seven-day pogrom breaks out against the Armenian civilian population of Baku, Azerbaijan, during which Armenians were beaten, tortured, murdered, and expelled from the city.\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Persian Gulf War: An act of the U.S. Congress authorizes the use of American military force to drive Iraq out of Kuwait.\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Nineteen European nations agree to forbid human cloning.\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Downtown Disney opens to the public as part of the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, California.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – The world's largest ocean liner, , makes its maiden voyage.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Deep Impact launches from Cape Canaveral on a Delta II rocket.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – A stampede during the Stoning of the Devil ritual on the last day at the Hajj in Mina, Saudi Arabia, kills at least 362 Muslim pilgrims.\nBULLET::::- 2010 – An earthquake in Haiti occurs, killing over 100,000 people and destroying much of the capital Port-au-Prince.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Violent protests occur in Bucharest, Romania, as two-day-old demonstrations continue against President Traian Băsescu's economic austerity measures. Clashes are reported in numerous Romanian cities between protesters and law enforcement officers.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Government raids kill 143 Boko Haram fighters in Kolofata, Cameroon.\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Ten people are killed and 15 wounded in a bombing near the Blue Mosque in Istanbul.\n\nBULLET::::- 1483 – Henry III of Nassau-Breda (d. 1538)\nBULLET::::- 1562 – Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy (d. 1630)\nBULLET::::- 1576 – Petrus Scriverius, Dutch historian and scholar (d. 1660)\nBULLET::::- 1577 – Jan Baptist van Helmont, Flemish chemist and physician (d. 1644)\nBULLET::::- 1588 – John Winthrop, English lawyer and politician, 2nd Governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony (d. 1649)\nBULLET::::- 1591 – Jusepe de Ribera, Spanish painter (d. 1652)\nBULLET::::- 1597 – François Duquesnoy, Flemish sculptor and educator (d. 1643)\nBULLET::::- 1598 – Jijabai Shahaji Bhosale, venerated mother of Indian king Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (d. 1674)\nBULLET::::- 1628 – Charles Perrault, French author and academic (d. 1703)\nBULLET::::- 1673 – Rosalba Carriera, Italian painter (d. 1757)\nBULLET::::- 1711 – Gaetano Latilla, Italian composer (d. 1788)\nBULLET::::- 1715 – Jacques Duphly, French organist and composer (d. 1789)\nBULLET::::- 1716 – Antonio de Ulloa, Spanish general and politician, 1st Spanish Governor of Louisiana (d. 1795)\nBULLET::::- 1721 – Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, Prussian field marshal (d. 1792)\nBULLET::::- 1723 – Samuel Langdon, American minister, theologian, and academic (d. 1797)\nBULLET::::- 1724 – Frances Brooke, English author and playwright (d. 1789)\nBULLET::::- 1729 – Edmund Burke, Irish philosopher, academic, and politician (d. 1797)\nBULLET::::- 1746 – Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi, Swiss philosopher and educator (d. 1827)\nBULLET::::- 1751 – Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies (d. 1825)\nBULLET::::- 1772 – Mikhail Speransky, Russian academic and politician (d. 1839)\nBULLET::::- 1786 – Sir Robert Inglis, 2nd Baronet, English politician (d. 1855)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Johan August Arfwedson, Swedish chemist and academic (d. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1797 – Gideon Brecher, Austrian physician and author (d. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1799 – Priscilla Susan Bury, British botanist (d. 1872)\nBULLET::::- 1822 – Étienne Lenoir, Belgian engineer, designed the internal combustion engine (d. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – Adolf Jensen, German pianist and composer (d. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – Jean Béraud, Russian-French painter and academic (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1853 – Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro, Italian mathematician (d. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – John Singer Sargent, American painter and academic (d. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Swami Vivekananda, Indian monk and philosopher (d. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Bhagwan Das, Indian philosopher, academic, and politician (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Spyridon Louis, Greek runner (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Laura Adams Armer, American author and photographer (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Fevzi Çakmak, Turkish field marshal and politician, Prime Minister of the Turkish Provisional Government (d. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Jack London, American novelist and journalist (d. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari, Italian composer and educator (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1877 – Frank J. Corr, American lawyer and politician, 45th Mayor of Chicago (d. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Ferenc Molnár, Hungarian-American author and playwright (d. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Ray Harroun, American race car driver and engineer (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Anton Uesson, Estonian engineer and politician, 17th Mayor of Tallinn (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Milton Sills, American actor and screenwriter (d. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Texas Guinan, Canadian-American entertainer and bootlegger (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad, Indian-Pakistani spiritual leader (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Johannes Vares, Estonian poet, physician, and politician (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Mikhail Gurevich, Russian engineer and businessman, co-founded the Russian Aircraft Corporation (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Hermann Göring, German commander, pilot, and politician, Minister President of Prussia (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Alfred Rosenberg, Estonian-German architect and politician, Reich Minister for the Occupied Eastern Territories (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Georges Carpentier, French boxer and actor (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1895 – Leo Aryeh Mayer, Polish-Israeli scholar and academic (d. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – David Wechsler, Romanian-American psychologist and author (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Pierre Bernac, French opera singer and educator (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Paul Hermann Müller, Swiss chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Karl Künstler, German SS officer (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Igor Kurchatov, Russian physicist and academic (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Andrew J. Transue, American politician and attorney (\"Morissette v. United States\") (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Mississippi Fred McDowell, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Nihal Atsız, Turkish author, poet, and philosopher (d. 1975)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – James Bennett Griffin, American archaeologist and academic (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Tex Ritter, American actor and singer (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Emmanuel Levinas, Lithuanian-French historian, philosopher, and academic (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Sergei Korolev, Russian colonel and engineer (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Jean Delannoy, French actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Clement Hurd, American illustrator (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Patsy Kelly, American actress and comedian (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Luise Rainer, German-English actress (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Richard Kuremaa, Estonian footballer (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Mieko Kamiya, Japanese psychiatrist and psychologist (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Paul Jarrico, American screenwriter and producer (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Joseph-Aurèle Plourde, Canadian archbishop and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Ruth R. Benerito, American chemist and inventor (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Mary Wilson, Baroness Wilson of Rievaulx, British poet and Spouse of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – P. W. Botha, South African politician, 8th Prime Minister of South Africa (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Walter Hendl, American pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Jimmy Skinner, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – James Farmer, American activist and politician, co-founded Congress of Racial Equality (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Jerzy Zubrzycki, Polish-Australian sociologist and academic (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Tadeusz Żychiewicz, Polish journalist and historian (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Vic Allen, English sociologist, economist, and historian (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Ira Hayes, American marine who raised the U.S. flag on Iwo Jima (d. 1955)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Olivier Gendebien, Belgian race car driver and businessman (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Chris Chase, American model, actress, and journalist (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Bill Burrud, American television host, producer, and actor (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Morton Feldman, American composer and academic (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Ray Price, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Ruth Brown, American R&B singer-songwriter and actress (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Lloyd Ruby, American race car driver (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Alasdair MacIntyre, Scottish-American philosopher and academic\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Jaakko Hintikka, Finnish philosopher and logician (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Tim Horton, Canadian ice hockey player and businessman, founded Tim Hortons (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Jennifer Johnston, Irish author and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Glenn Yarbrough, American singer and actor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Des O'Connor, English comedian, singer, and television host\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Michael Aspel, English television host\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Pavlos Matesis, Greek author and playwright (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Alan Sharp, Scottish-American author and screenwriter (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Mick Sullivan, English rugby player and coach (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Teresa del Conde, Mexican historian and critic (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Kreskin, American mentalist\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Jennifer Hilton, Baroness Hilton of Eggardon, English police officer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Raimonds Pauls, Latvian pianist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Brajanath Ratha, Indian poet and activist (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, Indian lawyer and politician, Indian Minister of Home Affairs (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Shirley Eaton, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Qazi Hussain Ahmad, Pakistani scholar and politician (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – William Lee Golden, American singer-songwriter and painter\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Jacques Hamelink, Dutch poet, novelist and literary critic\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Jim Palosaari, American evangelist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Bob Hewitt, Australian-South African tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Ronald Shannon Jackson, American drummer and composer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Dick Motz, New Zealand cricketer (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Long John Baldry, English-Canadian singer-songwriter and voice actor (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Fiona Caldicott, English psychiatrist and psychotherapist\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Chet Jastremski, American swimmer and physician (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Bernardine Dohrn, American domestic terrorist, political activist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Hans Henning Atrott, German author and theorist\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Joe Frazier, American boxer (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Cynthia Robinson, American R&B trumpet player and singer (d 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Maggie Bell, Scottish singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Hazel Cosgrove, Lady Cosgrove, Scottish lawyer and judge\nBULLET::::- 1946 – George Duke, American keyboard player, composer, and educator (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Richard Carwardine, English historian and academic\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Tom Dempsey, American football player and educator\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Sally Hamwee, Baroness Hamwee, English politician\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Kenny Allen, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Anthony Andrews, English actor and producer\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Gordon Campbell, Canadian educator and politician, 34th Premier of British Columbia\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Brendan Foster, English runner and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1948 – William Nicholson, English author and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Kentarō Haneda, Japanese pianist and composer (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Ottmar Hitzfeld, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Hamadi Jebali, Tunisian engineer, journalist, and politician, 19th Prime Minister of Tunisia\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Haruki Murakami, Japanese novelist, short-story writer, and essayist\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Sheila Jackson Lee, American lawyer, judge, and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Göran Lindblad, Swedish dentist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Bob McEwen, American businessman and politician\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Dorrit Moussaieff, Israeli-Icelandic jewelry designer and businesswoman, 5th First Lady of Iceland\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Kirstie Alley, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Chris Bell, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Rush Limbaugh, American talk show host and author\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Drew Pearson, American football player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Phil Perry, American singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Ricky Van Shelton, American country singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1952 – John Walker, New Zealand runner and politician\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Walter Mosley, American novelist\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Mary Harron, Canadian director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Howard Stern, American radio host, actor, and author\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Martin Kylhammar, Swedish professor of culture and society\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Tom Ardolino, American rock drummer (NRBQ) (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Nikolai Noskov, Russian rock singer and singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1957 – John Lasseter, American animator, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Jeremy Sams, English director, playwright, and composer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Christiane Amanpour, English-born Iranian-American journalist\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Curt Fraser, American-Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1959 – B. Brian Blair, American wrestler and politician\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Per Gessle, Swedish singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Oliver Platt, Canadian-American actor\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Dominique Wilkins, French-American basketball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Simon Russell Beale, Malaysia-born English actor and historian\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Joe Quesada, American author and illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Richie Richardson, Antiguan cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Luna Vachon, American-Canadian wrestler and manager (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1963 – François Girard, Canadian director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Nando Reis, Brazilian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Jeff Bezos, American computer scientist and businessman, founded Amazon.com\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Raekwon, American rapper\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Rob Zombie, American singer-songwriter, producer, actor, and director\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Olivier Martinez, French actor\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Craig Parry, Australian golfer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Vendela Kirsebom, Norwegian-Swedish model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Junichi Masuda, Japanese director, producer, and composer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Heather Mills, English businesswoman, activist and model\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Mauro Silva, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – David Mitchell, English novelist\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Margaret Nagle, American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Zack de la Rocha, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Scott Burrell, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Priyanka Gandhi, Indian politician\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Espen Knutsen, Norwegian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Paul Wilson, Australian cricketer and umpire\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Brian Culbertson, American pianist and producer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Hande Yener, Turkish singer-songwriter, producer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Melanie C, English singer-songwriter and actress\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Tor Arne Hetland, Norwegian skier\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Jason Freese, American saxophonist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Jocelyn Thibault, Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Yoandy Garlobo, Cuban baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Luis Ayala, Mexican baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Maurizio Zaffiri, Italian rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Marián Hossa, Slovak ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Lee Bo-young, South Korean actress and model\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Grzegorz Rasiak, Polish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – David Zabriskie, American cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Bobby Crosby, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Amerie, American singer-songwriter, producer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – João Paulo Daniel, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Dan Klecko, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Angus Macdonald, New Zealand rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Luis Ernesto Pérez, Mexican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Paul-Henri Mathieu, French tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Hans Van Alphen, Belgian decathlete\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Dean Whitehead, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Dontrelle Willis, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Daniel Sepulveda, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Jonathan Zydko, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Artem Milevskiy, Ukrainian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Issa Rae, American actress, writer, director, producer and web series creator\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Borja Valero, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Kehoma Brenner, German rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Miguel Ángel Nieto, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Naya Rivera, American actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Salvatore Sirigu, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Claude Giroux, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Thiemo-Jérôme Kialka, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Axel Witsel, Belgian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Pixie Lott, English singer-songwriter, dancer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Matt Srama, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Ishak Belfodil, Algerian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Samuele Longo, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Zayn Malik, English singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Simone Pecorini, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Do Kyungsoo, South Korean singer and member of boy band EXO\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Alessio Romagnoli, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 690 – Benedict Biscop, English scholar and saint, founded the Monkwearmouth–Jarrow Abbey (b. 628)\nBULLET::::- 914 – Ahmad Samani, Samanid emir\nBULLET::::- 947 – Sang Weihan, Chinese chief of staff (b. 898)\nBULLET::::- 1140 – Louis I, Landgrave of Thuringia\nBULLET::::- 1167 – Aelred of Rievaulx, English monk and saint (b. 1110)\nBULLET::::- 1320 – John Dalderby, bishop of Lincoln\nBULLET::::- 1321 – Marie of Brabant, Queen of France (b. 1256)\nBULLET::::- 1405 – Eleanor Maltravers, English noblewoman (b. 1345)\nBULLET::::- 1519 – Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor (b. 1459)\nBULLET::::- 1665 – Pierre de Fermat, French mathematician and lawyer (b. 1601)\nBULLET::::- 1674 – Giacomo Carissimi, Italian priest and composer (b. 1605)\nBULLET::::- 1700 – Marguerite Bourgeoys, French-Canadian nun and saint, founded the Congregation of Notre Dame of Montreal (b. 1620)\nBULLET::::- 1720 – William Ashhurst, English banker and politician, Lord Mayor of London (b. 1647)\nBULLET::::- 1732 – John Horsley, English-Scottish historian and author (b. 1685)\nBULLET::::- 1735 – John Eccles, English composer (b. 1668)\nBULLET::::- 1759 – Anne, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange (b. 1709)\nBULLET::::- 1765 – Johann Melchior Molter, German violinist and composer (b. 1696)\nBULLET::::- 1777 – Hugh Mercer, Scottish-American general and physician (b. 1726)\nBULLET::::- 1778 – François Bigot, French politician (b. 1703)\nBULLET::::- 1781 – Richard Challoner, English bishop (b. 1691)\nBULLET::::- 1829 – Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Schlegel, German philosopher, poet, and critic (b. 1772)\nBULLET::::- 1833 – Marie-Antoine Carême, French chef (b. 1784)\nBULLET::::- 1834 – William Grenville, 1st Baron Grenville, English academic and politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1759)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – Ľudovít Štúr, Slovak philologist and politician (b. 1815)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Václav Hanka, Czech philologist and author (b. 1791)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – James Caulfeild, 3rd Earl of Charlemont, Irish politician, Lord Lieutenant of Tyrone (b. 1820)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – William Reeves, Irish bishop and historian (b. 1815)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Hiram Walker, American businessman, founded Canadian Club (b. 1816)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Hermann Minkowski, Lithuanian-German mathematician and academic (b. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Andreas Papagiannakopoulos, Greek journalist, judge, and politician (b. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Georgios Theotokis, Greek lawyer and politician, 80th Prime Minister of Greece (b. 1844)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Gervase Elwes, English tenor and actor (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Austin Chapman, Australian businessman and politician, 4th Australian Minister for Defence (b. 1864)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Paul Kochanski, Polish violinist and composer (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Oscar Florianus Bluemner, German-American painter and illustrator (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Ralph Hitz, Austrian-American hotelier (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Edward Smith, English lieutenant, Victoria Cross recipient (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Jan Campert, Dutch journalist and critic (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Lance C. Wade, American commander and pilot (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Charles Hatfield, American meteorologist (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Nevil Shute, English engineer and author (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Ariadna Tyrkova-Williams, Russian journalist and activist (b. 1869)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Lorraine Hansberry, American author, playwright, and director (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Burhan Asaf Belge, Turkish diplomat (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – John Tovey, 1st Baron Tovey, English admiral (b. 1885)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Roy Franklin Nichols, American historian and academic (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Princess Patricia of Connaught (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Agatha Christie, English crime novelist, short story writer, and playwright (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Henri-Georges Clouzot, French director and screenwriter (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Nikolai Podgorny, Ukrainian engineer and politician (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Connie Mulder, South African politician (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Piero Taruffi, Italian race car driver and motorcycle racer (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Laurence J. Peter, Canadian-American author and educator (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Robert Jackson, Australian public servant and diplomat (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Kumar Gandharva, a Hindustani classical singer (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Gustav Naan, Estonian physicist and philosopher (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Joachim Nitsche, German mathematician and academic (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Jean-Edern Hallier, French author (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Charles Brenton Huggins, Canadian-American physician and physiologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Roger Clark, English race car driver (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Doug Wickenheiser, Canadian-American ice hockey player (b. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Marc Davis, American animator and screenwriter (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Bobby Phills, American basketball player (b. 1969)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Luiz Bonfá, Brazilian guitarist and composer (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – William Redington Hewlett, American engineer and businessman, co-founded Hewlett-Packard (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Cyrus Vance, American lawyer and politician, 57th U.S. Secretary of State (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Dean Amadon, American ornithologist and author (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Kinji Fukasaku, Japanese actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Leopoldo Galtieri, Argentine general and politician, 44th President of Argentina (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Maurice Gibb, Manx-Australian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Alan Nunn May, English physicist and spy (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Olga Ladyzhenskaya, Russian mathematician and academic (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Amrish Puri, Indian actor (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Pablita Velarde, Santa Clara Pueblo (Native American) painter (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Alice Coltrane, American pianist and composer (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – James Killen, Australian soldier, lawyer, and politician, 38th Australian Minister for Defence (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Max Beck, American intersex advocate (b. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Claude Berri, French actor, director, and screenwriter (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Russ Conway, Canadian-American actor (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Daniel Bensaïd, French philosopher and author (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Hasib Sabbagh, Palestinian businessman and philanthropist, co-founded Consolidated Contractors Company (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Bjørn G. Andersen, Norwegian geologist and academic (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Glenda Dickerson, American director, choreographer, and educator (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Bill Janklow, American lawyer and politician, 27th Governor of South Dakota (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Charles H. Price II, American businessman and diplomat, United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Jim Stanley, American football player and coach (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Precious Bryant, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Eugene Patterson, American journalist and activist (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Alexandra Bastedo, English actress (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Connie Binsfeld, American educator and politician, 58th Lieutenant Governor of Michigan (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – George Dement, American soldier, businessman, and politician (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Trevor Colbourn, American historian and academic (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Robert Gover, American journalist and author (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Carl Long, American baseball player (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Elena Obraztsova, Russian soprano and actress (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Inge Vermeulen, Brazilian-Dutch field hockey player (b. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – William Peter Blatty, American writer and filmmaker (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Graham Taylor, former Grimsby Town player and former manager of the England football team. (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Keith Jackson, American sports commentator and journalist (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Aelred of Rievaulx\nBULLET::::- Benedict Biscop\nBULLET::::- Bernard of Corleone\nBULLET::::- Marguerite Bourgeoys\nBULLET::::- Tatiana\nBULLET::::- January 12 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Earliest day on which Lee–Jackson Day can fall while January 18 is the latest, celebrated on the Friday before Martin Luther King Day. (Commonwealth of Virginia)\nBULLET::::- Memorial Day (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- National Youth Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Prosecutor General's Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Zanzibar Revolution Day (Tanzania)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "16113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16113", "title": "John Digweed", "text": "John Digweed\n\nThomas John Digweed (born 1 January 1967) is a British DJ, record producer and actor. \"DJ Magazine\" voted him World No 1 DJ in 2001. As well as achieving success as a solo act, he has collaborated with Sasha as Sasha & John Digweed, and with Nick Muir as Bedrock.\n\nDigweed began DJing at the age of 15, and made a name for himself in his home town of Hastings, where he put on successful club nights, the most famous of which were his successful raves on Hastings Pier, where the likes of Carl Cox and The Prodigy performed. His breakthrough came in 1993, when he sent a mixtape demo to Geoff Oakes, founder of the Renaissance nightclub in Mansfield, who played it to fellow DJ Alexander Coe (aka Sasha). The two DJs struck up a long-term friendship and working relationship, despite Sasha twice failing to turn up for gigs that Digweed had booked him for in Hastings.\n\nIn partnership with Sasha, Digweed is known for promoting progressive house and notable for producing the first commercial compilation for a nightclub, when they released their 1994 compilation of mixes from Renaissance entitled \"\". Until then, mixtapes from clubs had only been circulated by DJs on an amateur basis. The Renaissance CD was the first time that a compilation CD had been planned strategically for marketing, from artwork to promotion. The two DJs famously followed this up with their \"Northern Exposure\" compilations and those on \"Global Underground\".\n\nDigweed then started the record label Bedrock Records to further promote the music that he was playing at the time. He and his friend Nick Muir went on to produce under the Bedrock alias, getting their big break when their first track \"For What You Dream Of\" was used in the film Trainspotting. The Bedrock duo also produced the soundtrack for the MTV adult cartoon superhero drama series, \"\" in 2003. In his sets, Digweed is noted for adopting tracks with new and different styles.\n\nBetween 2000 and 2005, Digweed promoted his \"Bedrock\" sound with monthly club nights for club members and newcomers to the electronic music scene. He played on Thursday nights at Heaven in London, and on Friday nights in a smaller club night at The Beach in Brighton. These nights featured numerous guest DJs, including Danny Howells, Phil Thompson, Hernan Cattaneo and Chris Fortier. As Digweed's international schedule increased, these events drew to a close, although occasional reunions have been held at Heaven since. He celebrated ten years of his Bedrock club night on 10 October 2008 at Matter in London, with a near on ten-hour set.\n\nDigweed has enjoyed popularity throughout North America as well as Europe. He and Sasha established a monthly residency at the now defunct New York club Twilo, which proved a key location for the American electronic music scene. The residency began in 1997 with a lukewarm reception, but grew into one of the most popular club nights in New York City by the end of its run in 2001. Sasha and Digweed played at Twilo on the last Friday of every month, playing sets that lasted between eight and twelve hours. In early 2001, Sasha suffered an ear injury and was unable to play for their last four dates before Twilo was closed by the New York City authorities. Digweed continued to play the time-slot by himself until 6 May 2001, when Twilo was raided by the NYPD and subsequently forced to close down.\n\nDigweed has a cameo of himself playing music in Greg Harrison's 2000 movie \"Groove\", which tells the story of an all-night rave in San Francisco.\n\nIn early 2002, Digweed along with Sasha and Jimmy Van M undertook a six-week countrywide tour of the United States called Delta Heavy. The tour was promoted by Clear Channel and attendance reached 85,000. It took place in a variety of venues but was completely self-reliant from a technical point of view; sound, lights, and visual setups were brought along to every gig of the tour. Also in 2002, Digweed curated and compiled the soundtrack to the film \"Stark Raving Mad\".\n\nFrom September 2000 to January 2011, Digweed hosted a weekly two-hour radio show on Kiss 100 in the UK, in which he played the first hour of music and a guest DJ played the second hour. Beginning in September 2006, his show was available on all three Kiss radio stations. By that time, the show's name had become Transitions, which was also the name of a four-volume series of mix albums by Digweed that was released every six months during 2006–2008. In January 2011, Transitions aired for the last time on Kiss 100, but the show continues to be broadcast online.\n\n2008 saw Digweed and Sasha reuniting for a Spring Club Tour that once again featured performances all over North America. In 2011, Digweed's music was featured in the film movie adaptation of Irvine Welsh's best-selling novel\n\"Irvine Welsh's Ecstasy\".\n\nHe featured among the top ten artists from 1998–2008 and was voted DJ Mag's number 1 DJ in 2001. In 2010, he was voted number 29 in DJ Mag's annual Top 100 DJs vote. In 2013, Digweed was ranked the number 17 best DJ in the world in Resident Advisor's top 100 DJ charts; he currently is number 43 as of June 2016.\n\nJohn is the brother of 26 times World Clay Shooting Champion George Digweed, MBE.\n\nBULLET::::- 1994: \"Journeys by DJ Volume 4: Silky Mix\" (Music Unites)\nBULLET::::- 1994: Sasha & John Digweed – \"\" (Renaissance)\nBULLET::::- 1995: \"Renaissance: The Mix Collection Part 2\" (Renaissance)\nBULLET::::- 1996: Sasha & John Digweed – \"Northern Exposure\" (Ministry of Sound)\nBULLET::::- 1997: Sasha & John Digweed – \"Northern Exposure 2\" (Ministry of Sound)\nBULLET::::- 1997: \"The Winning Ticket\" (Jackpot)\nBULLET::::- 1998: \"Global Underground 006: Sydney\" (Boxed)\nBULLET::::- 1999: \"Bedrock\" (INCredible)\nBULLET::::- 1999: Sasha & John Digweed – \"\" (INCredible)\nBULLET::::- 1999: \"Global Underground 014: Hong Kong\" (Boxed)\nBULLET::::- 2000: Sasha & John Digweed – \"Communicate\" (INCredible) (\"Billboard\" 200 #149)\nBULLET::::- 2001: \"Global Underground 019: Los Angeles\" (Boxed)\nBULLET::::- 2002: \"MMII\" (Bedrock Records) (Billboard Top Electronic Albums #7)\nBULLET::::- 2003: \" Stark Raving Mad (soundtrack)Stark Raving Mad \" (Thrive Records) (Billboard Electronic #9)\nBULLET::::- 2004: \" Layered Sounds \" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2005: \"fabric 20\" (fabric) (Billboard Electronic #13)\nBULLET::::- 2005: \"Choice – A Collection of Classics\" (Azuli Records)\nBULLET::::- 2005: \"Layered Sounds 2\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2006: \"Transitions\" (Renaissance) (Billboard Electronic #16)\nBULLET::::- 2007: \"Transitions Vol. 2\" (Renaissance)\nBULLET::::- 2007: \" Transitions Vol. 3 \" (Renaissance)\nBULLET::::- 2008: \" Transitions Vol. 4 \" (Renaissance)\nBULLET::::- 2008: \" Bedrock 10: Past Present Future \" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2009: \" Bedrock Eleven \" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2010: \"Structures\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2010: \" Bedrock Twelve \" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2011: \" Structures Two \" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2012: \"Live in Cordoba\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2012: \"Bedrock 14\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2012: \"Live in London\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2013: \"Live in Slovenia\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2013: John Digweed & Nick Muir – Versus (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2013: \"Live in Argentina\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2014: \"Live in Miami\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2014: \"Live in Toronto\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2015: \"Live in South Beach\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2016: \"Live in\" \"Montreal\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2016: \"Live in\" \"Montreal - Finale\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2016: \"Bedrock 18 - Signals\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2017: \"Live in\" \"Brooklyn\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2018: \"Bedrock XX\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2018: \"Live in\" \"Tokyo\" (Bedrock Records)\n\nBULLET::::- 1993: Bedrock – \"For What You Dream Of\" (Stress Records) (UK #25)\nBULLET::::- 1997: Bedrock – \"Set in Stone\" / \"Forbidden Zone\" (Stress Records) (UK #71)\nBULLET::::- 1999: Bedrock – \"Heaven Scent\" (Bedrock Records) (UK #35)\nBULLET::::- 2000: Bedrock – \"Voices\" (Bedrock Records) (UK #44)\nBULLET::::- 2001: Bedrock – \"Beautiful Strange\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2002: Bedrock – \"Emerald\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2003: Bedrock – \"Forge\" (Bedrock Breaks)\nBULLET::::- 2005: Bedrock – \"Santiago\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2006: Bedrock – \"Warung Beach\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2007: John Digweed – \"Gridlock\" (Renaissance)\nBULLET::::- 2009: John Digweed & Nick Muir – \"Tangent\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2010: John Digweed & Nick Muir – \"Satellite / Meteor\" (Bedrock Records)\nBULLET::::- 2010: John Digweed & Nick Muir – \"Satellite / Meteor (Remixes)\" (Bedrock Records)\n\nBULLET::::- 1997: No. 12 (First year that DJ Mag poll was changed to a readership vote)\nBULLET::::- 1998: No. 7 (Up 5)\nBULLET::::- 1999: No. 6 (Up 1)\nBULLET::::- 2000: No. 3 (Up 3)\nBULLET::::- 2001: No. 1 (Up 2)\nBULLET::::- 2002: No. 3 (Down 2)\nBULLET::::- 2003: No. 5 (Down 2)\nBULLET::::- 2004: No. 8 (Down 3)\nBULLET::::- 2005: No. 6 (Up 2)\nBULLET::::- 2006: No. 8 (Down 2)\nBULLET::::- 2007: No. 3 (Up 5)\nBULLET::::- 2008: No. 9 (Down 6)\nBULLET::::- 2009: No. 17 (Down 8)\nBULLET::::- 2010: No. 29 (Down 12)\nBULLET::::- 2011: No. 55 (Down 26)\nBULLET::::- 2012: No. 98 (Down 43)\nBULLET::::- Since 2013: Not on List\n\nBULLET::::- \"Sasha & John Digweed present Delta Heavy\" (System Recordings)\nBULLET::::- \"A Tale of Two Cities, Live in Argentina 2013\" (Bedrock Records & Ourmaninthefield)\nBULLET::::- \"A Tale of Two UK Cities, 2015\" (Bedrock Records & Ourmaninthefield)\n\nBULLET::::- Official Site\nBULLET::::- Bedrock Records\nBULLET::::- Live DJ Sets Videos\nBULLET::::- Transitions – Official Tracklistings\nBULLET::::- Transitions – Complete Archive with Free Streaming\nBULLET::::- Interview John Digweed – Actualites Electroniques\nBULLET::::- Interview John Digweed – Actualites Electroniques\nBULLET::::- 10 years of Bedrock Interview by Laptoprockers\nBULLET::::- Digweed the Bigwig Who Lives Forever in the Future Interview with John Digweed by Popspoken\n"}
{"id": "16115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16115", "title": "James Spader", "text": "James Spader\n\nJames Todd Spader (born February 7, 1960) is an American actor. He is best known for portraying eccentric characters in films such as the drama \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\" (1989), the action science fiction film \"Stargate\" (1994), the controversial psychological thriller \"Crash\" (1996), and the erotic romance \"Secretary\" (2002). In the Marvel Cinematic Universe, he played the titular character of Ultron in \"\" (2015), which he portrayed through voice and motion capture.\n\nHis best-known television roles are those of attorney Alan Shore in \"The Practice\" and its spin-off \"Boston Legal\" (for which he won three Emmy Awards), and Robert California in the comedy-mockumentary \"The Office\". He currently stars as high-profile criminal-turned-FBI-informant Raymond \"Red\" Reddington in the NBC crime drama \"The Blacklist\", for which he has earned two Golden Globe Award nominations.\n\nSpader was born in Boston, Massachusetts, and is the youngest of three children. His parents, Jean (née Fraser) and Stoddard (\"Todd\") Greenwood Spader, were both teachers. Spader grew up in a liberal and progressive home surrounded by \"dominant and influential women...that left a great impression\". During his early education, he attended multiple private schools, including The Pike School, where his mother taught art, and the Brooks School in North Andover, Massachusetts, where his father taught. He later transferred to Phillips Academy before dropping out at the age of seventeen and moving to New York City to pursue his acting career. On his way to becoming a full-time actor, Spader undertook jobs such as bartending, teaching yoga, driving a meat truck, loading railroad cars, and being a stable boy.\n\nSpader's first major film role was in the film \"Endless Love\" (1981), and his first starring role was in \"Tuff Turf\" (1985). He rose to stardom in 1986, when he played the rich, arrogant playboy Steff in \"Pretty in Pink\". He co-starred in \"Mannequin\" (1987) and the film adaptation of \"Less Than Zero\" (1987), in which he played a drug dealer named Rip. Supporting roles in films such as \"Baby Boom\" (1987) and \"Wall Street\" (1987) followed until his breakthrough in \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\" (1989), in which he played a sexual voyeur who complicates the lives of three Baton Rouge, Louisiana residents. For this performance, he received the Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nSpader's roles in the early 1990s included a young, affluent widower opposite Susan Sarandon in the romantic drama \"White Palace\" (1990), a yuppie who meets the mysterious Rob Lowe in the Noir drama \"Bad Influence\" (1990), John Cusack's best friend in the drama \"True Colors\" (1991), and a poker-playing drifter in \"The Music of Chance\" (1993). In 1994 he starred as Egyptologist Daniel Jackson in the sci-fi film \"Stargate\". In 1996 he played car accident fetishist James Ballard in the controversial Canadian film \"Crash\" and assassin Lee Woods in \"2 Days in the Valley\". In 1997 Spader guest starred in the \"Seinfeld\" episode \"The Apology\", as an angry recovering alcoholic who refuses to apologize to George for making fun of him. In 2000 he played a drug-addicted detective tracking down a serial killer in \"The Watcher\". In 2002 he starred as a sadomasochistic boss in \"Secretary\".\n\nFrom 2004 to 2008 Spader starred as Alan Shore in the series \"Boston Legal\", in which he reprised his role from the television series \"The Practice\" (2002). Longtime writer-producer David E. Kelley said of the resistance when he first tried to cast Spader in the role, \"I was told that no one would ever welcome James Spader into their living room.\" Kelley said at a TV Game Changers interview, \"People will watch him in the movies, but they will never let him in their own home.\"\n\nHe won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series in 2004 for his portrayal on \"The Practice\" and won it again in 2005 and 2007 for \"Boston Legal\". With the 2005 win, he became one of only a few actors to win an Emmy award while playing the same character in two different series. Even rarer, he won a second consecutive Emmy while playing the same character in two different series. He also won the Satellite Award for Best Actor in a Series, Comedy or Musical for \"Boston Legal\" in 2006.\n\nIn October 2006 Spader narrated \"\", the first episode of Discovery Channel's documentary series \"Discovery Atlas\". He has also done the voice-over in several television commercials for Acura. He starred in \"Race\", a play written and directed by David Mamet, which opened on December 6, 2009 at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on Broadway. The show closed on August 21, 2010 after 297 performances. In March 2011, he was named to star in the film \"By Virtue Fall\", written and to be directed by Sheldon Turner. , the movie was in pre-production.\n\nSpader guest starred as Robert California in \"Search Committee\", the season 7 finale of \"The Office\". On June 27, 2011, it was announced that he would join the cast on a permanent basis. He planned to stay only through the eighth season, and while the original plan was just to do the guest appearance,\" executive producer Paul Lieberstein said: \"those two scenes became a season\".\n\nSpader stars in the NBC series \"The Blacklist\", which premiered on NBC September 23, 2013. He portrays Raymond \"Red\" Reddington, one of the FBI's most wanted fugitives. He also played villainous robot Ultron in \"\" (2015).\n\nSpader met his ex-wife, decorator Victoria Kheel, while working in a yoga studio after he moved to New York City in the 1980s. They married in 1987 and had two sons. Spader filed for divorce from Kheel in 2004. He began dating his former \"Alien Hunter\" (2003) co-star, Leslie Stefanson, in 2002; they have one son.\n\nSpader has said he has strong obsessive-compulsive issues.\n\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n\nBULLET::::- James Spader at Emmys.com\n"}
{"id": "16117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16117", "title": "Joseph (disambiguation)", "text": "Joseph (disambiguation)\n\nJoseph is a masculine given name.\n\nJoseph may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Joseph (Genesis), an important figure in the Bible's Book of Genesis\nBULLET::::- Saint Joseph, a figure in the gospels who was married to Mary, Jesus' mother, and was Jesus' legal father\nBULLET::::- Joseph (Book of Mormon), a priest and a younger brother of the Prophets Nephi and Jacob\nBULLET::::- Joseph (Dean of Armagh), Dean of Armagh in 1257\nBULLET::::- Joseph (Nestorian patriarch), Patriarch of the Church of the East from 552 to 567\n\nBULLET::::- Joseph, Idaho, a ghost town\nBULLET::::- Joseph, Oregon, a city\nBULLET::::- Joseph, Utah, a town\nBULLET::::- Joseph Canyon, in Oregon and Washington\nBULLET::::- Joseph Peak, Yellowstone National Park, Montana\n\nBULLET::::- \"Joseph\" (opera), by the French composer Étienne Méhul\nBULLET::::- \"Joseph\" (1995 film), a German/Italian/American television movie from 1995, which tells the story of Joseph in the Hebrew Bible\nBULLET::::- \"Joseph\" (2018 film), a 2018 Indian Malayalam-language film\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 2000 direct-to-video animated musical film\nBULLET::::- Joseph (comics), a Marvel Comics character who was briefly a member of the X-Men\nBULLET::::- Joseph, a member of the Saint Shields in the animated series \"Beyblade: V-Force\"\nBULLET::::- Joseph (band), a vocal trio from Oregon\nBULLET::::- \"Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat\", a 1968 musical by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber\nBULLET::::- Joseph Joestar, a fictional character from \"JoJo's Bizarre Adventure\"\n\nBULLET::::- Joseph (surname)\nBULLET::::- Joseph (fashion brand), a retailer founded by Joseph Ettedgui\nBULLET::::- Joseph, the formal name of Big Joe, a church bell\n\nBULLET::::- Saint Joseph (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Joseph, an English houseware manufacturer founded in 2003\nBULLET::::- Joseph & Joseph, an architectural firm founded in 1908 in Louisville, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- \"YosepH\", a 2003 album by Luke Vibert\n"}
{"id": "16118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16118", "title": "Jacob", "text": "Jacob\n\nJacob (; ; \"Yaʿqūb\", , \"Iakṓb\"), later given the name Israel, is regarded as a Patriarch of the Israelites and so is an important figure in Abrahamic religions, such as Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Jacob first appears in the Book of Genesis, the son of Isaac and Rebecca, the grandson of Abraham, Sarah and Bethuel, the nephew of Ishmael. He was the second-born of Isaac's children, the elder being his fraternal twin brother Esau. However, by deceiving Isaac when he was old and blind, Jacob was able to usurp the blessing that belonged to Esau as the firstborn son, and become the leader of their family. Following a severe drought in his homeland Canaan, Jacob and his descendants, with the help of his son Joseph, who had since become a confidante of Pharaoh, moved to Egypt, where he died, aged 147 years, and was buried in the Cave of Machpela.\n\nJacob is said to have had twelve sons by four women, his wives, Leah and Rachel, and his concubines, Bilhah and Zilpah, who were, in order of their birth, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and Benjamin, all of whom became the heads of their own family groups, later known as the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and it is also known that he had a daughter, Dinah. It is possible he had more children than the thirteen named in the Bible, as the passages Gen. 37:35 and Gen. 46:7 both mention the existence of his sons and daughters, which could support the existence of additional children, who were unnamed in religious texts. Jacob displayed favoritism among his wives and children, preferring Rachel and her sons, Joseph and Benjamin, causing tension within the family, culminating in the sale of Joseph by his brothers into slavery.\n\nAccording to the folk etymology found in Genesis 25:26, the name is derived from \"heel\". The historical origin of the name is uncertain. is recorded as a place name in a list by Thutmose III (15th century BC). The hieroglyphs are ambiguous, and can be read as \"Yaqub-Har\", \"Yaqubaal\", or \"Yaqub El\". The same name is recorded earlier still, in c. 1800 BC, in cuneiform inscriptions (spelled \"ya-ah-qu-ub-el\", \"ya-qu-ub-el\"). The suggestion that the personal name may be shortened from this compound name, which would translate to \"may El protect\", originates with Bright (1960). The Septuagint renders the name , whence Latin , English \"Jacob\".\n\nThe name \"Israel\" given to Jacob following the episode of his wrestling with the angel (Genesis 32:22–32) is etymologized as composition of \"el\" \"god\" and the root \"śarah\" \"to rule, contend, have power, prevail over\":  (KJV: \"a prince hast thou power with God\"); alternatively, the \"el\" can be read as the subject, for a translation of \"El rules/contends/struggles\".\n\nThe biblical account of the life of Jacob is found in the Book of Genesis, chapters 25–50.\n\nJacob and his twin brother, Esau, were born to Isaac and Rebecca after 20 years of marriage, when Isaac was 60 years of age (, ). Rebekah was uncomfortable during her pregnancy and went to inquire of God why she was suffering. She received the prophecy that twins were fighting in her womb and would continue to fight all their lives, even after they became two separate nations. The prophecy also said that \"the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger\" (Genesis 25:25 KJV).\n\nWhen the time came for Rebecca to give birth, the firstborn, Esau, came out covered with red hair, as if he were wearing a hairy garment, and his heel was grasped by the hand of Jacob, the secondborn. According to , Isaac and Rebecca named the first son , Esau. The second son they named יעקב, Jacob (Ya`aqob or Ya`aqov, meaning \"heel-catcher\", \"supplanter\", \"leg-puller\", \"he who follows upon the heels of one\", from , \"`aqab\" or \"`aqav\", \"seize by the heel\", \"circumvent\", \"restrain\", a wordplay upon , \"`iqqebah\" or \"`iqqbah\", \"heel\").\n\nThe boys displayed very different natures as they matured. \"... and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; but Jacob was a simple man, dwelling in tents\" (). Moreover, the attitudes of their parents toward them also differed: \"And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebecca loved Jacob\" ().\n\n tells the account of Esau selling his birthright to Jacob. This passage tells that Esau, returning famished from the fields, begged Jacob to give him some of the stew that Jacob had just made. (Esau referred to the dish as \"that same red pottage\", giving rise to his nickname, (\"`Edom\", meaning \"Red\").) Jacob offered to give Esau a bowl of stew in exchange for his birthright, to which Esau agreed.\n\nAs Isaac aged, he became blind and was uncertain when he would die, so he decided to bestow Esau's birthright upon him. He requested that Esau go out to the fields with his weapons (quiver and bow) to kill some venison. Isaac then requested that Esau make \"savory meat\" for him out of the venison, according to the way he enjoyed it the most, so that he could eat it and bless Esau.\n\nRebecca overheard this conversation. It is suggested that she realized prophetically that Isaac's blessings would go to Jacob, since she was told before the twins' birth that the older son would serve the younger. Rebecca blessed Jacob and she quickly ordered Jacob to bring her two kid goats from their flock so that he could take Esau's place in serving Isaac and receiving his blessing. Jacob protested that his father would recognize their deception since Esau was hairy and he himself was smooth-skinned. He feared his father would curse him as soon as he felt him, but Rebecca offered to take the curse herself, then insisted that Jacob obey her. Jacob did as his mother instructed and, when he returned with the kids, Rebekah made the savory meat that Isaac loved. Before she sent Jacob to his father, she dressed him in Esau's garments and laid goatskins on his arms and neck to simulate hairy skin.\n\nDisguised as Esau, Jacob entered Isaac's room. Surprised that Esau was back so soon, Isaac asked how it could be that the hunt went so quickly. Jacob responded, \"Because the LORD your God brought it to me.\" Rashi, on says Isaac's suspicions were aroused even more, because Esau never used the personal name of God. Isaac demanded that Jacob come close so he could feel him, but the goatskins felt just like Esau's hairy skin. Confused, Isaac exclaimed, \"The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau!\" . Still trying to get at the truth, Isaac asked him directly, \"Art thou my very son Esau?\" and Jacob answered simply, \"I am.\" Isaac proceeded to eat the food and to drink the wine that Jacob gave him, and then told him to come close and kiss him. As Jacob kissed his father, Isaac smelled the clothes which belonged to Esau and finally accepted that the person in front of him was Esau. Isaac then blessed Jacob with the blessing that was meant for Esau. Genesis 27:28–29 states Isaac's blessing: \"Therefore God give thee of the dew of heavens, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: Let people serve thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.\"\n\nJacob had scarcely left the room when Esau returned from the hunt to prepare his game and receive the blessing. The realization that he had been deceived shocked Isaac, yet he acknowledged that Jacob had received the blessings by adding, \"Indeed, he will be [or remain] blessed!\" (27:33).\n\nEsau was heartbroken by the deception and begged for his own blessing. Having made Jacob a ruler over his brothers, Isaac could only promise, \"By your sword you shall live, but your brother you shall serve; yet it shall be that when you are aggrieved, you may cast off his yoke from upon your neck\" (27:39–40).\n\nAlthough Esau sold Jacob his own birthright, which was his blessing, for \"red pottage,\" Esau still hated Jacob for receiving his blessing that their father Isaac unknowingly had given to him. He vowed to kill Jacob as soon as Isaac died. When Rebecca heard about his murderous intentions, she ordered Jacob to travel to her brother Laban's house in Haran, until Esau's anger subsided. She convinced Isaac to send Jacob away by telling him that she despaired of his marrying a local girl from the idol-worshipping families of Canaan (as Esau had done). After Isaac sent Jacob away to find a wife, Esau realized his own Canaanite wives were evil in his father's eyes and so he took a daughter of Isaac's half-brother, Ishmael, as another wife.\n\nNear Luz en route to Haran, Jacob experienced a vision of a ladder, or staircase, reaching into heaven with angels going up and down it, commonly referred to as \"Jacob's ladder.\" He heard the voice of God, who repeated many of the blessings upon him, coming from the top of the ladder.\n\nAccording to Midrash Genesis Rabbah, the ladder signified the exiles that the Jewish people would suffer before the coming of the Jewish Messiah: the angels that represented the exiles of Babylonia, Persia, and Greece each climbed up a certain number of steps, paralleling the years of the exile, before they \"fell down\"; but the angel representing the last exile, that of Edom, kept climbing higher and higher into the clouds. Jacob feared that his descendants would never be free of Esau's domination, but God assured him that at the End of Days, Edom too would come falling down.\n\nIn the morning, Jacob awakened and continued on his way to Haran, after naming the place where he had spent the night \"Bethel,\" \"God's house.\"\n\nArriving in Haran, Jacob saw a well where shepherds were gathering their flocks to water them and met Laban's younger daughter, Rachel, Jacob's first cousin; she was working as a shepherdess. Jacob was 77 years old, Rachel was 14, and he loved her immediately. After spending a month with his relatives he asked for her hand in marriage in return for working seven years for Laban the Aramean. Laban agreed to the arrangement. These seven years seemed to Jacob \"but a few days, for the love he had for her.\" When they were complete and he was 84 years old he asked for his wife, but Laban deceived him by switching Rachel for her older sister, Leah, as the veiled bride. In the morning, when the truth became known, Laban justified his action, saying that in his country it was unheard of to give a younger daughter before the older. However, he agreed to give Rachel in marriage as well if Jacob would work another seven years. After the week of wedding celebrations with Leah, Jacob married Rachel, and he continued to work for Laban for another seven years.\n\nJacob, having been celibate until the age of 84, fathered twelve children in the next seven years. He loved Rachel more than Leah, and Leah felt hated. God opened Leah's womb and she gave birth to four sons rapidly: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah. Rachel, however, remained barren. Following the example of Sarah, who gave her handmaid to Abraham after years of infertility, Rachel gave Jacob her handmaid, Bilhah, in marriage so that Rachel could raise children through her. Bilhah gave birth to Dan and Naphtali. Seeing that she had left off childbearing temporarily, Leah then gave her handmaid Zilpah to Jacob in marriage so that Leah could raise more children through her. Zilpah gave birth to Gad and Asher. Afterwards, Leah became fertile again and gave birth to Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah, Jacob's first and only daughter. God remembered Rachel, who gave birth to Joseph and Benjamin.\n\nAfter Joseph was born, Jacob decided to return home to his parents. Laban the Aramean was reluctant to release him, as God had blessed his flock on account of Jacob. Laban asked what he could pay Jacob. Jacob suggested that all the spotted, speckled, and brown goats and sheep of Laban's flock, at any given moment, would be his wages. Jacob placed rods of poplar, hazel, and chestnut, all of which he peeled \"white streaks upon them,\" within the flocks' watering holes or troughs in a performance of sympathetic magic, associating the stripes of the rods with the growth of stripes on the livestock. Despite this practicing of magic, later on Jacob says to his wives that it was God who made the livestock give birth to the convenient offspring, in order to turn the tide against the deceptive Laban. As time passed, Laban's sons noticed that Jacob was taking the better part of their flocks, and so Laban's friendly attitude towards Jacob began to change. The angel of the Lord, in a dream back during the breeding season, told Jacob \"Now lift your eyes and see [that] all the he goats mounting the animals are ringed, speckled, and striped, for I have seen all that Laban is doing to you\", that he is the God whom Jacob met at Bethel, and that Jacob should leave and go back to the land where he was born, which he and his wives and children did without informing Laban. Before they left, Rachel stole the \"teraphim,\" considered to be household idols, from Laban's house.\n\nLaban pursued Jacob for seven days. The night before he caught up to him, God appeared to Laban in a dream and warned him not to say anything good or bad to Jacob. When the two met, Laban said to Jacob, “What have you done, that you have tricked me and driven away my daughters like captives of the sword?\" He also asked for his stolen \"teraphim\" back. Knowing nothing about Rachel's theft, Jacob told Laban that whoever stole them should die and stood aside to let him search. When Laban reached Rachel's tent, she hid the \"teraphim\" by sitting on them and stating she could not get up because she was menstruating. Jacob and Laban then parted from each other with a pact to preserve the peace between them. Laban returned to his home and Jacob continued on his way.\n\nAs Jacob neared the land of Canaan, he sent messengers ahead to his brother Esau. They returned with the news that Esau was coming to meet Jacob with an army of 400 men. With great apprehension, Jacob prepared for the worst. He engaged in earnest prayer to God, then sent on before him a tribute of flocks and herds to Esau, \"A present to my lord Esau from thy servant Jacob.\"\n\nJacob then transported his family and flocks across the ford Jabbok by night, then recrossed back to send over his possessions, being left alone in communion with God. There, a mysterious being appeared (\"man,\" Genesis 32:24, 28; or \"God,\" Genesis 32:28, 30, Hosea 12:3, 5; or \"angel,\" Hosea 12:4), and the two wrestled until daybreak. When the being saw that he did not overpower Jacob, he touched Jacob on the sinew of his thigh (the \"gid hanasheh\", גיד הנשה), and, as a result, Jacob developed a limp (Genesis 32:31). Because of this, \"to this day the people of Israel do not eat the sinew of the thigh that is on the hip socket\" (). This incident is the source of the mitzvah of porging.\n\nJacob then demanded a blessing, and the being declared in Genesis 32:28 that, from then on, Jacob would be called יִשְׂרָאֵל, Israel (\"Yisra`el\", meaning \"one that struggled with the divine angel\" (Josephus), \"one who has prevailed with God\" (Rashi), \"a man seeing God\" (Whiston), \"he will rule as God\" (Strong), or \"a prince with God\" (Morris), from , \"prevail,\" \"have power as a prince\"). While he is still called Jacob in later texts, his name Israel makes some consider him the eponymous ancestor of the Israelites.\n\nJacob asked the being's name, but he refused to answer. Afterwards, Jacob named the place Penuel (\"Penuw`el\", \"Peniy`el\", meaning \"face of God\"), saying: \"I have seen God face to face and lived.\"\n\nBecause the terminology is ambiguous (\"el\" in \"Yisra`el\") and inconsistent, and because this being refused to reveal his name, there are varying views as to whether he was a man, an angel, or God. Josephus uses only the terms \"angel\", \"divine angel,\" and \"angel of God,\" describing the struggle as no small victory. According to Rashi, the being was the guardian angel of Esau himself, sent to destroy Jacob before he could return to the land of Canaan. Trachtenberg theorized that the being refused to identify itself for fear that, if its secret name was known, it would be conjurable by incantations. Literal Christian interpreters like Henry M. Morris say that the stranger was \"God Himself and, therefore, Christ in His preincarnate state\", citing Jacob's own evaluation and the name he assumed thereafter, \"one who fights victoriously with God\", and adding that God had appeared in the human form of the Angel of the Lord to eat a meal with Abraham in Genesis 18. Geller wrote that, \"in the context of the wrestling bout, the name implies that Jacob won this supremacy, linked to that of God's, by a kind of theomachy.\"\n\nIn the morning, Jacob assembled his four wives and 11 sons, placing the maidservants and their children in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph in the rear. Some commentators cite this placement as proof that Jacob continued to favor Joseph over Leah's children, as presumably the rear position would have been safer from a frontal assault by Esau, which Jacob feared. Jacob himself took the foremost position. Esau's spirit of revenge, however, was apparently appeased by Jacob's bounteous gifts of camels, goats and flocks. Their reunion was an emotional one.\nEsau offered to accompany them on their way back to Israel, but Jacob protested that his children were still young and tender (born six to 13 years prior in the narrative); Jacob suggested eventually catching up with Esau at Mount Seir. According to the Sages, this was a prophetic reference to the End of Days, when Jacob's descendants will come to Mount Seir, the home of Edom, to deliver judgment against Esau's descendants for persecuting them throughout the millennia (see ). Jacob actually diverted himself to Succoth and was not recorded as rejoining Esau until, at Machpelah, the two bury their father Isaac, who lived to be 180, and was 60 years older than they were.\n\nJacob then arrived in Shechem, where he bought a parcel of land, now identified as Joseph's Tomb. In Shechem, Jacob's daughter Dinah was kidnapped and raped by the ruler's son, who desired to marry the girl. Dinah's brothers, Simeon and Levi, agreed in Jacob's name to permit the marriage as long as all the men of Shechem first circumcised themselves, ostensibly to unite the children of Jacob in Abraham's covenant of familial harmony. On the third day after the circumcisions, when all the men of Shechem were still in pain, Simeon and Levi put them all to death by the sword and rescued their sister Dinah, and their brothers plundered the property, women, and children. Jacob condemned this act, saying: \"You have brought trouble on me by making me a stench to the Canaanites and Perizzites, the people living in this land.\" He later rebuked his two sons for their anger in his deathbed blessing (Genesis 49:5–7).\n\nJacob returned to Bethel, where he had another vision of blessing. Although the death of Rebecca, Jacob's mother, is not explicitly recorded in the Bible, Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died and was buried at Bethel, at a place that Jacob calls \"Allon Bachuth\" (אלון בכות), \"Oak of Weepings\" (Genesis 35:8). According to the Midrash, the plural form of the word \"weeping\" indicates the double sorrow that Rebecca also died at this time.\nJacob then made a further move while Rachel was pregnant; near Bethlehem, Rachel went into labor and died as she gave birth to her second son, Benjamin (Jacob's twelfth son). Jacob buried her and erected a monument over her grave. Rachel's Tomb, just outside Bethlehem, remains a popular site for pilgrimages and prayers to this day. Jacob then settled in Migdal Eder, where his firstborn, Reuben, slept with Rachel's servant Bilhah; Jacob's response was not given at the time, but he did condemn Reuben for it later, in his deathbed blessing. Jacob was finally reunited with his father Isaac in Mamre (outside Hebron).\n\nWhen Isaac died at the age of 180, Jacob and Esau buried him in the Cave of the Patriarchs, which Abraham had purchased as a family burial plot. At this point in the biblical narrative, two genealogies of Esau's family appear under the headings \"the generations of Esau\". A conservative interpretation is that, at Isaac's burial, Jacob obtained the records of Esau, who had been married 80 years prior, and incorporated them into his own family records, and that Moses augmented and published them.\n\nThe house of Jacob dwelt in Hebron, in the land of Canaan. His flocks were often fed in the pastures of Shechem as well as Dothan. Of all the children in his household, he loved Rachel's firstborn son, Joseph, the most. Thus Joseph's half brothers were jealous of him and they ridiculed him often. Joseph even told his father about all of his half brothers’ misdeeds. When Joseph was 17 years old, Jacob made a long coat or tunic of many colors for him. Seeing this, the half brothers began to hate Joseph. Then Joseph began to have dreams that implied that his family would bow down to him. When he told his brothers about such dreams, it drove them to conspire against him. When Jacob heard of these dreams, he rebuked his son for proposing the idea that the house of Jacob would even bow down to Joseph. Yet, he contemplated his son's words about these dreams. ()\nSometime afterward, the sons of Jacob by Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, were feeding his flocks in Shechem. Jacob wanted to know how things were doing, so he asked Joseph to go down there and return with a report. This was the last time he would ever see his son in Hebron. Later that day, the report that Jacob ended up receiving came from Joseph's brothers who brought before him a coat laden with blood. Jacob identified the coat as the one he made for Joseph. At that moment he cried “It is my son’s tunic. A wild beast has devoured him. Without doubt Joseph is torn to pieces.” He rent his clothes and put sackcloth around his waist mourning for days. No one from the house of Jacob could comfort him during this time of bereavement. ()\n\nThe truth was that Joseph's older brothers had turned on him, apprehended him and ultimately sold him into slavery on a caravan headed for Egypt. ()\n\nTwenty years later, throughout the Middle East a severe famine occurred like none other that lasted seven years. It crippled nations. The word was that the only kingdom prospering was Egypt. In the second year of this great famine, when Israel (Jacob) was about 130 years old, he told his 10 sons of Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, to go to Egypt and buy grain. Israel's youngest son Benjamin, born from Rachel, stayed behind by his father's order to keep him safe. ()\n\nNine of the sons returned to their father Israel from Egypt, stockpiled with grain on their donkeys. They relayed to their father all that had happened in Egypt. They spoke of being accused of as spies and that their brother Simeon, had been taken prisoner. When Reuben, the eldest, mentioned that they needed to bring Benjamin to Egypt to prove their word as honest men, their father became furious with them. He couldn't understand how they were put in a position to tell the Egyptians all about their family. When the sons of Israel opened their sacks, they saw their money that they used to pay for the grain. It was still in their possession, and so they all became afraid. Israel then became angry with the loss of Joseph, Simeon, and now possibly Benjamin.\n\nIt turned out that Joseph, who identified his brothers in Egypt, was able to secretly return that money that they used to pay for the grain, back to them. When the house of Israel consumed all the grain that they brought from Egypt, Israel told his sons to go back and buy more. This time, Judah spoke to his father in order to persuade him about having Benjamin accompany them, so as to prevent Egyptian retribution. In hopes of retrieving Simeon and ensuring Benjamin's return, Israel told them to bring the best fruits of their land, including: balm, honey, spices, myrrh, pistachio nuts and almonds. Israel also mentioned that the money that was returned to their money sacks was probably a mistake or an oversight on their part. So, he told them to bring that money back and use double that amount to pay for the new grain. Lastly, he let Benjamin go with them and said “may God Almighty give you mercy… If I am bereaved, I am bereaved!” ()\n\nWhen the sons of Israel (Jacob) returned to Hebron from their second trip, they came back with 20 additional donkeys carrying all kinds of goods and supplies as well as Egyptian transport wagons. When their father came out to meet them, his sons told him that Joseph was still alive, that he was the governor over all of Egypt and that he wanted the house of Israel to move to Egypt. Israel's heart “stood still” and just couldn't believe what he was hearing. Looking upon the wagons he declared “Joseph my son is still alive. I will go and see him before I die.” ()\n\nIsrael and his entire house of 70, gathered up with all their livestock and began their journey to Egypt. En route, Israel stopped at Beersheba for the night to make a sacrificial offering to his God, Yahweh. Apparently he had some reservations about leaving the land of his forefathers, but God reassured him not to fear that he would rise again. God also assured that he would be with him, he would prosper, and he would also see his son Joseph who would lay him to rest. Continuing their journey to Egypt, when they approached in proximity, Israel sent his son Judah ahead to find out where the caravans were to stop. They were directed to disembark at Goshen. It was here, after 22 years, that Jacob saw his son Joseph once again. They embraced each other and wept together for quite a while. Israel then said, “Now let me die, since I have seen your face, because you are still alive.” ()\n\nThe time had come for Joseph's family to personally meet the Pharaoh of Egypt. After Joseph prepared his family for the meeting, the brothers came before the Pharaoh first, formally requesting to pasture in Egyptian lands. The Pharaoh honored their stay and even made the notion that if there were any competent men in their house, then they may elect a chief herdsman to oversee Egyptian livestock. Finally, Joseph's father was brought out to meet the Pharaoh. Because the Pharaoh had such a high regard for Joseph, practically making him his equal, it was an honor to meet his father. Thus, Israel was able to bless the Pharaoh. The two chatted for a bit, the Pharaoh even inquiring of Israel's age which happened to be 130 years old at that time. After the meeting, the families were directed to pasture in the land of Ramses where they lived in the province of Goshen. The house of Israel acquired many possessions and multiplied exceedingly during the course of 17 years, even through the worst of the seven-year famine. ()\n\nIsrael (Jacob) was 147 years old when he called to his favorite son Joseph and pleaded that he not be buried in Egypt. Rather, he requested to be carried to the land of Canaan to be buried with his forefathers. Joseph swore to do as his father asked of him. Not too long afterward, Israel had fallen ill, losing much of his vision. When Joseph came to visit his father, he brought with him his two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh. Israel declared that they would be heirs to the inheritance of the house of Israel, as if they were his own children, just as Reuben and Simeon were. Then Israel laid his right hand on the younger Ephraim's head and his left hand on the eldest Manasseh's head and blessed Joseph. However, Joseph was displeased that his father's right hand was not on the head of his firstborn, so he switched his father's hands. But Israel refused saying, “but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he.” A declaration he made, just as Israel himself was to his firstborn brother Esau. Then Israel called all of his sons in and prophesied their blessings or curses to all twelve of them in order of their ages. ()\n\nAfterward, Israel died and the family, including the Egyptians, mourned him 70 days. Israel was embalmed and a great ceremonial journey to Canaan was prepared by Joseph. He led the servants of Pharaoh, and the elders of the houses Israel and Egypt beyond the Jordan River to Atad where they observed seven days of mourning. Their lamentation was so great that it caught the attention of surrounding Canaanites who remarked “This is a deep mourning of the Egyptians.” This spot was then named Abel Mizraim. Then they buried him in the cave of Machpelah, the property of Abraham when he bought it from the Hittites. ()\n\nJacob, through his two wives and his two concubines had 12 biological sons; Reuben (), Simeon (), Levi (), Judah\n(), Dan (), Naphtali (),\nGad (), Asher (), Issachar (),\nZebulun (), Joseph\n\nThe offspring of Jacob's sons became the tribes of Israel following the Exodus, when the Israelites conquered and settled in the Land of Israel.\n\nThere are two opinions in the Midrash as to how old Rebekah was at the time of her marriage and, consequently, at the twins' birth. According to the traditional counting cited by Rashi, Isaac was 37 years old at the time of the Binding of Isaac, and news of Rebekah's birth reached Abraham immediately after that event. In that case, since Isaac was 60 when Jacob and Essau were born and they had been married for 20 years, then Isaac was 40 years old when he married Rebekah (Gen. 25:20), making Rebekah three years old at the time of her marriage, and 23 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau. According to the second opinion, Rebekah was 14 years old at the time of their marriage, and 34 years old at the birth of Jacob and Essau. In either case, Isaac and Rebekah were married for 20 years before Jacob and Esau were born. The Midrash says that during Rebekah's pregnancy whenever she would pass a house of Torah study, Jacob would struggle to come out; whenever she would pass a house of idolatry, Esau would agitate to come out.\n\nRashi explained that Isaac, when blessing Jacob instead of Esau, smelled the heavenly scent of Gan Eden (Paradise) when Jacob entered his room and, in contrast, perceived Gehenna opening beneath Esau when the latter entered the room, showing him that he had been deceived all along by Esau's show of piety.\n\nWhen Laban planned to deceive Jacob into marrying Leah instead of Rachel, the Midrash recounts that both Jacob and Rachel suspected that Laban would pull such a trick; Laban was known as the \"Aramean\" (deceiver), and changed Jacob's wages ten times during his employ (Genesis 31:7). The couple therefore devised a series of signs by which Jacob could identify the veiled bride on his wedding night. But when Rachel saw her sister being taken out to the wedding canopy, her heart went out to her for the public shame Leah would suffer if she were exposed. Rachel therefore gave Leah the signs so that Jacob would not realize the switch.\n\nJacob had still another reason for grieving the loss of Joseph. God had promised to him: \"If none of your sons dies during your lifetime, you may look upon it as a token that you will not be put in (Hell of) Gehenna after your death.\" Thinking Joseph to be dead, Jacob had his own destiny to lament because he considered that he was doomed to that Hell.\n\nJewish apocalyptic literature of the Hellenistic period includes many ancient texts with narratives about Jacob, many times with details different from Genesis. The more important are the book of Jubilees and the Book of Biblical Antiquities. Jacob is also the protagonist of the Testament of Jacob, of the Ladder of Jacob and of the Prayer of Joseph, which interpret the experience of this Patriarch in the context of merkabah mysticism.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite see Jacob's dream as a prophecy of the Incarnation of the Logos, whereby Jacob's ladder is understood as a symbol of the Theotokos (Virgin Mary), who, according to Orthodox theology, united heaven and earth in her womb. The biblical account of this vision () is one of the standard Old Testament readings at Vespers on Great Feasts of the Theotokos.\n\nThe Catholic church considers Jacob as a saint along with other biblical patriarchs. Along with other patriarchs his feast day is celebrated in the Byzantine rite of the Catholic Church on the Second Sunday before the Advent (December 11–17), under the title \"the Sunday of the Forefathers\".\n\nJacob is referenced by name sixteen times in the Quran. Two further references to Isra'il (Arabic: إِسْرَآئِیل [\"ˈisraāˈiyl\"]; Classical/ Quranic Arabic: إِسْرَآءِیْل [\"ˈisraāãˈiyl\"]) are believed to be mention of Jacob. The Arabic form Ya'qūb ( may be direct from the Hebrew or indirect through Syriac.\n\nHe is recognized in Islam as a prophet who received inspiration from God. He is acknowledged as a patriarch of Islam. Muslims believe that he preached the same monotheistic faith as his forefathers ʾIbrāhīm, ʾIsḥāq and Ismā'īl. Jacob is mentioned 16 times in the Quran. In the majority of these references, Jacob is mentioned alongside fellow prophets and patriarchs as an ancient and pious prophet. According to the Quran, Jacob remained in the company of the elect throughout his life. (38:47) The Quran specifically mentions that Jacob was guided (6:84) and inspired (4:163) and was chosen to enforce the awareness of the Hereafter. (38:46) Jacob is described as a good-doer (21:72) and the Quran further makes it clear that God inspired Jacob to contribute towards purification and hold the contact prayer. (21:73) Jacob is further described as being resourceful and a possessor of great vision (38:45) and is further spoken of as being granted a \"tongue [voice] of truthfulness to be heard.\" (19:50)\n\nOf the life of Jacob, the Quran narrates two especially important events. The first is the role he plays in the story of his son Joseph. The Quran narrates the story of Joseph in detail, and Jacob, being Joseph's father, is mentioned thrice and is referenced another 25 times. In the narrative, Jacob does not trust some of his older sons (12: 11, 18, 23) because they do not respect him. (12: 8, 16–17) Jacob's prophetic nature is evident from his foreknowledge of Joseph's future greatness (12:6), his foreboding and response to the supposed death of Joseph (12: 13, 18) and in his response to the sons' plight in Egypt. (12: 83, 86–87, 96) Islamic literature fleshes out the narrative of Jacob, and mentions that his wives included Rachel. Jacob is later mentioned in the Quran in the context of the promise bestowed to Zechariah, regarding the birth of John the Baptist. (19:6) Jacob's second mention is in the Quran's second chapter. As Jacob lay on his deathbed, he asked his 12 sons to testify their faith to him before he departed from this world to the next. (2:132) Each son testified in front of Jacob that they would promise to remain Muslim (in submission to God) until the day of their death, that is they would surrender their wholeselves to God alone and would worship only Him.\n\nIn contrast to the Judeo-Christian view of Jacob, one main difference is that the story of Jacob's blessing, in which he deceives Isaac, is not accepted in Islam. The Quran makes it clear that Jacob was blessed by God as a prophet and, therefore, Muslims believe that his father, being a prophet as well, also knew of his son's greatness. Jacob is also cited in the \"Hadith\" as an example of one who was patient and trusting in God in the face of suffering.\n\nThe Nation of Islam and the Five-Percent Nation – Black Muslim movements – teach that the original inhabitants of the world were black (referred to as the \"Asiatic Blackman\"), while the white race are \"devils\" who were created 6,000 years ago on what is today the Greek island of Patmos by the Biblical and Qur'anic Jacob, whom the groups refer to as the \"bigheaded scientist\" Yakub. Per Black Muslim teachings, Yakub was born in Mecca.\n\nAccording to Steven Feldman of the Center for Online Judaic Studies, most scholars would date the stories of the patriarchs to the period of the monarchy. Recent excavations in the Timna Valley dating copper mining to the 10th century BCE also discovered what may be the earliest camel bones found in Israel or even outside the Arabian peninsula, dating to around 930 BCE. This is seen as evidence that the stories of Abraham, Joseph, Jacob, and Esau were written after this time.\n\nNahum M. Sarna indicates that an inability to precisely date the patriarchs, according to the present state of knowledge does not necessarily invalidate the historicity of the narratives. William F. Albright maintained that the narratives contained accurate details of an earlier period.\n\nScholars such as Thomas L. Thompson view the patriarchical narratives, including the life of Jacob, as late (6th and 5th centuries BCE) literary compositions that have ideological and theological purposes but are unreliable for historical reconstruction of the presettlement period of Israel's past. In Thompson's \"The Historicity of the Patriarchal Narratives\", he suggests that the patriarchal narratives arose in a response to some present situation, expressed as an imaginative picture of the past to embody present hope.\n\nGerhard von Rad, in his \"Old Testament Theology\", seems to take a middle view, explaining that the patriarch \"saga\" describes actual events subsequently interpreted by the community through its own experience. It is neither entirely mythical, nor strictly \"historical\", according to the present understanding of the term. Goldingay cites R.J Coggins' analogy of looking to Genesis for the history of ancient Canaan as similar to reading \"Hamlet\" in order to learn Danish history.\n"}
{"id": "16119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16119", "title": "Jehoshaphat", "text": "Jehoshaphat\n\nJehoshaphat,(; alternatively spelled Jehosaphat, Josaphat, or Yehoshafat; ; ; ) according to 1 Kings 15:24, was the son of Asa, and the king of the Kingdom of Judah, in succession to his father. His children included Jehoram, who succeeded him as king. His mother was Azubah. Historically, his name has sometimes been connected with the Valley of Josaphat.\n\nJehoshaphat ascended the throne at the age of thirty-five and reigned for twenty-five years. He spent the first years of his reign fortifying his kingdom against the Kingdom of Israel. His zeal in suppressing the idolatrous worship of the \"high places\" is commended in 2 Chronicles 17:6. In the third year of his reign Jehoshaphat sent out priests and Levites over the land to instruct the people in the Law, an activity that was commanded for a Sabbatical year in . The author of the Books of Chronicles generally praises his reign, stating that the kingdom enjoyed a great measure of peace and prosperity, the blessing of God resting on the people \"in their basket and their store.\"\n\nJehoshaphat also pursued alliances with the northern kingdom. Jehoshaphat's son Jehoram married Ahab's daughter Athaliah. In the eighteenth year of his reign Jehosaphat visited Ahab in Samaria, and nearly lost his life accompanying his ally to the siege of Ramoth-Gilead. While Jehoshaphat safely returned from this battle, he was reproached by the prophet Jehu, son of Hanani, about this alliance. We are told that Jehoshaphat repented, and returned to his former course of opposition to all idolatry, and promoting the worship of God and in the government of his people ().\n\nThe alliance between Israel and Judah for trade of gold with Ophir differs in the Deuteronomistic Historian's account () and the subsequent Chronicler's account (). While the Chronicler claims Jehoshaphat entered into an alliance with Ahaziah of Israel, for the purpose of carrying on maritime commerce with Ophir, the Deuteronomist says Jehoshaphat built the ships on his own, they crashed, and then Ahaziah attempted to join the alliance to obtain gold. According to the Deuteronomist, Jehoshapat refused the offer, most likely, in order to retain profits for his kingdom.\n\nHe subsequently joined Jehoram of Israel, in a war against the Moabites, who were under tribute to Israel. The Moabites were subdued, but seeing Mesha's act of offering his own son as a human sacrifice on the walls of Kir of Moab filled Jehoshaphat with horror, and he withdrew and returned to his own land ().\n\nAccording to \"Chronicles\", the Moabites formed a great and powerful confederacy with the surrounding nations, and marched against Jehoshaphat (). The allied forces were encamped at Ein Gedi. The king and his people were filled with alarm. The king prayed in the court of the Temple, \"O our God, will you not judge them? For we have no power to face this vast army that is attacking us. We do not know what to do; but our eyes are upon you.\" (). The voice of Jahaziel the Levite was heard announcing that the next day all this great host would be overthrown. So it was, for they quarreled among themselves, and slew one another, leaving to the people of Judah only to gather the rich spoils of the slain. Soon after this victory Jehoshaphat died after a reign of twenty-five years at the age of sixty (). According to some sources (such as the eleventh-century Jewish commentator Rashi), he actually died two years later, but gave up his throne earlier for unknown reasons.\n\nHe also had the ambition to emulate Solomon's maritime ventures to Ophir, and built a large vessel for Tarshish. But when this boat was wrecked at Ezion-geber he relinquished the project (I Kings xxii. 48 et seq.; II Chron. xx. 35 et seq.).\n\nIn I Kings xxii. 43 the piety of Jehoshaphat is briefly dwelt on. Chronicles, in keeping with its tendency, elaborates this trait of the king's character. According to its report (II Chron. xvii. 7 et seq., xix. 4 et seq.) Jehoshaphat organized a missionary movement by sending out his officers, the priests, and the Levites to instruct the people throughout the land in the Law of Yhwh, the king himself delivering sermons. Ecclesiastical and secular jurisdictions, according to II Chron. xix. 11, were by royal command kept distinct.\n\nUnderlying this ascription to the king of the purpose to carry out the Priestly Code, is the historical fact that Jehoshaphat took heed to organize the administration of justice on a solid foundation, and was an honest worshiper of Yhwh. In connection with this the statement that Jehoshaphat expelled the \"Ḳedeshim\" (R. V. \"Sodomites\") from the land (I Kings xxii. 46) is characteristic; while II Chron. xix. 3 credits him with having cut down the Asherot. The report (II Chron. xvii. 6) that he took away the \"high places\" (and the Asherim) conflicts with I Kings xxii. 44 (A. V. v. 43) and II Chron.xx. 33. The account of Jehoshaphat's tremendous army (1,160,000 men) and the rich tribute received from (among others) the Philistines and the Arabs (II Chron. xvii. 10 et seq.) is not historical. It is in harmony with the theory worked out in Chronicles that pious monarchs have always been the mightiest and most prosperous.\n\nThe question that puzzled Ewald (\"Gesch. des Volkes Israel,\" iii. 669, note 5) and others, \"Where was the brazen serpent till the time of Hezekiah?\" occupied the Talmudists also. They answered it in a very simple way: Asa and Joshaphat, when clearing away the idols, purposely left the brazen serpent behind, in order that Hezekiah might also be able to do a praiseworthy deed in breaking it (Ḥul. 6b).\n\nWilliam F. Albright has dated the reign of Jehoshaphat to 873–849 BC. E. R. Thiele held that he became coregent with his father Asa in Asa's 39th year, 872/871 BC, the year Asa was infected with a severe disease in his feet, and then became sole regent when Asa died of the disease in 870/869 BC, his own death occurring in 848/847 BC. So Jehoshaphat's dates are taken as one year earlier: co-regency beginning in 873/871, sole reign commencing in 871/870, and death in 849/848 BC.\n\nThe calendars for reckoning the years of kings in Judah and Israel were offset by six months, that of Judah starting in Tishri (in the fall) and that of Israel in Nisan (in the spring). Cross-synchronizations between the two kingdoms therefore often allow narrowing of the beginning and/or ending dates of a king to within a six-month range. For Jehoshaphat, the Scriptural data allow the narrowing of the beginning of his sole reign to some time between Tishri 1 of 871 BC and the day before Nisan 1 of the 870 BC. For calculation purposes, this should be taken as the Judean year beginning in Tishri of 871/870 BC, or more simply 871 BC. His death occurred at some time between Nisan 1 of 848 BC and Tishri 1 of that same BC year, i.e. in the Judean regnal year 849/848 BC, which for calculation purposes can be taken as 849 BC.\n\nThe king's name in the oath \"jumping Jehosaphat\" was likely popularized by the name's utility as a euphemism for Jesus and Jehovah. The phrase, spelled \"Jumpin' Geehosofat\", is first recorded in the 1865-1866 novel \"The Headless Horseman\" by Thomas Mayne Reid. The novel also uses \"Geehosofat\", standing alone, as an exclamation. The longer version \"By the shaking, jumping ghost of Jehosaphat\" is seen in the 1865 novel \"Paul Peabody\" by Percy Bolingbroke St John.\n\nAnother theory is that the reference is to , where the prophet Joel says, speaking of the judgment of the dead, \"Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O LORD. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.\"\n\nIn the 1956 Warner Brothers Merrie Melodies theatrical cartoon short, \"Yankee Dood It,\" based on the fairy tale of The Elves and the Shoemaker, Jehosephat figures prominently as an invocation to turn elves into mice. On the TV series \"Car 54, Where Are You?\", the character Francis Muldoon cited his partner's frequent use of the phrase \"Jumpin' Jehosephat!\" as a source of annoyance in the episode entitled \"Change Your Partners\".\nThe televised \"Batman\" live-action program of the 1960s also featured Robin, played by Burt Ward, uttering the phrase as an emphatic exclamation, and it was also incorporated into the talking alarm clock alarms voiced again by Burt Ward in 1974 in the \"talking Batman & Robin alarm clock\" made by Janex.\n\n'Jehoshaphat!' was the standard curse-word used by Elijah Baley, protagonist of the first three novels of Isaac Asimov's Robot Series. Decades after Baley's death, the word was considered too sacred to be uttered by anyone on Baleyworld.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Jehoshaphat\" at the Jewish Encyclopedia\n"}
{"id": "16120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16120", "title": "Jehu", "text": "Jehu\n\nJehu ( \"Yehu\", meaning \"Yahu is He\"; ; ) was the tenth king of the northern Kingdom of Israel since Jeroboam I, noted for exterminating the house of Ahab. He was the son of Jehoshaphat, grandson of Nimshi, and possibly great-grandson of Omri. His reign lasted for 28 years.\n\nWilliam F. Albright has dated his reign to 842–815 BCE, while E. R. Thiele offers the dates 841–814 BCE. The principal source for the events of his reign comes from .\n\nThe reign of Jehu's predecessor, Jehoram, was marked by the Battle of Ramoth-Gilead against the army of the Arameans. Jehoram was wounded and returned to Jezreel to recover. He was attended by Ahaziah, king of Judah, who was also his nephew, by his sister Athaliah. Meanwhile, according to the writer of the Book of Kings, the prophet Elisha orders one of his students to go to Ramoth-Gilead and separate Jehu, who was a military commander at the time, from his companions. There, he was to anoint Jehu as king in an inner chamber and explain to him that he was to act as an agent of divine judgement against the house of Ahab. The student followed these instructions and upon completion, he ran away. Despite his dismissal of Elisha's student as being a \"madman\", Jehu tells his companions about his anointing. His companions later enthusiastically blew their trumpets and proclaimed him their king.\n\nWith a chosen band, Jehu planned his conspiracy against King Jehoram and secretly entered Jezreel. King Jehoram tried to flee, but Jehu fired an arrow which pierced his heart. Jehu later threw his body on Naboth's vineyard, to avenge Naboth, whom Jehoram's father and mother had murdered. King Ahaziah fled after seeing Jehoram's death but Jehu wounded him. Ahaziah, nonetheless, managed to flee to Megiddo, where he died.\n\nJehu proceeded to enter the premises of the palace at Jezreel. Jezebel watched him from contempt from the palace window and mockingly compared him to King Zimri. Jehu later commanded Jezebel's eunuchs to throw her out of the palace window. They obeyed his commands and Jezebel was instantly killed. Jehu trampled over her body but after he decided to arrange a proper burial due to her royal descent, only her skull, hands and feet remained. The rest of her body was eaten by dogs. \n\nNow master of Jezreel, Jehu wrote to command the chief men in Samaria to hunt down and kill all of the royal princes. They did as ordered, and the next day they piled the seventy heads in two heaps outside the city gate, as Jehu commanded. Ahab's entire family was slain. Shortly afterwards, Jehu encountered the forty-two \"brothers of Ahaziah\" (since the brothers of Ahaziah had previously been taken away and probably killed by the Philistines, these must have been relatives of Ahaziah in a broader sense, like nephews and cousins) at \"Beth-eked of the shepherds\". They told Jehu that they were visting the royal family. Jehu, however, killed them all at \"the pit of Beth-eked\". \n\nFollowing Jehu's slaughter of the Omrides, he met Jehonadab the Rechabite and convinced him that he was pro-Yahwist. Jehonadab quickly allied with him and they entered the capital together. In control of Samaria, he deceptively invited the worshippers of Baal to a ceremony and later, trapped and killed them. After that, he destroyed their idols and their temple and turned it into a latrine.\n\nOther than Jehu's bloody seizure of power and his tolerance for the golden calves at Dan and Bethel (condemned as the \"corrupted\" version of Yahwism by biblical writers), little else is known of his reign. He was hard pressed by Hazael, king of the Arameans, who defeated his armies \"throughout all of the territories of Israel\" beyond the Jordan river, in the lands of Gilead, Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh.\n\nThis suggests that Jehu offered tribute to Shalmaneser III, as depicted on his Black Obelisk, in order to gain a powerful ally against the Arameans. \"Bit-Khumri\" was used by Tiglath-pileser III for the non-Omride kings Pekah (733) & Hoshea (732), hence House/Land/Kingdom of Omri could apply to later Israelite kings not necessarily descended from Omri.\n\nThe destruction of the house of Ahab is commended by the author of 2 Kings as a form of divine punishment. Yahweh even rewards Jehu for being a willing executor of divine judgement by allowing four generations of kings to sit on the throne of Israel (), and Jehoahaz, Jehoash, Jereboam II, Zachariah all descendants of Jehu ruled Israel for a total of 102 years (including the reign of Jehu). Nonetheless, according to the Book of Hosea, the House of Jehu was still punished by God through the hands of the Assyrians for Jehu's massacre at Jezreel. His apparent zeal for Yahweh during his purge of the Omride dynasty is interpreted by some to be in reality, zeal for the golden calves at Dan and Bethel. \n\nAside from the Hebrew Scriptures, Jehu appears in Assyrian documents, notably in the Black Obelisk where he is depicted as kissing the ground in front of Shalmaneser III and presenting a gift (\"maddattu ša Ia-ú-a...kaspu mâdu\" \"tribute of Jehu...much silver\"). In the Assyrian documents, he is simply referred to as \"son of Omri\" (, possibly expressing his having been the ruler of 'the House of Omri,' a later Assyrian designation for the Kingdom of Israel). This tribute is dated 841 BCE. It is the earliest preserved depiction of an Israelite.\n\nAccording to the Obelisk, Jehu severed his alliances with Phoenicia and Judah, and became subject to Assyria.\n\nThe author of the Tel Dan Stele (found in 1993 and 1994) claimed to have slain both Ahaziah of Judah and Jehoram of Israel (whom Ahaziah was visiting). The most likely author of this monument is Hazael of the Arameans.\n\nBULLET::::- List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources\n\nBULLET::::- Jehu Jewish Encyclopedia\n"}
{"id": "16121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16121", "title": "Joshua", "text": "Joshua\n\nJoshua () or Jehoshua ( \"Yehoshuʿa\") is the central figure in the Hebrew Bible's Book of Joshua. According to the books of Exodus, Numbers and Joshua, he was Moses' assistant and became the leader of the Israelite tribes after the death of Moses. His name was Hoshea () the son of Nun, of the tribe of Ephraim, but Moses called him Joshua (), the name by which he is commonly known. According to the Bible he was born in Egypt prior to the Exodus.\n\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Joshua was one of the twelve spies of Israel sent by Moses to explore the land of Canaan. In , and after the death of Moses, he led the Israelite tribes in the conquest of Canaan, and allocated the land to the tribes. According to biblical chronology, Joshua lived some time in the Bronze Age. According to , Joshua died at the age of 110.\n\nJoshua also holds a position of respect among Muslims. According to Islamic tradition, he was, along with Caleb, one of the two believing spies whom Moses had sent to spy the land of Canaan. Muslims also see Joshua as the leader of the faithful following the death of Moses. Some Muslims also believe Joshua to be the \"attendant\" of Moses mentioned in the Quran before Moses meets Khidr. Joshua plays a role in Islamic literature with significant narration in the hadith.\n\nThe English name \"Joshua\" is a rendering of the Hebrew language \"Yehoshua\", interpreted in Christian theology as \"Yahweh is salvation\". This requires a different vocalization of the second name component, reading it as related to Hoshea—the name used in the Torah before Moses added the divine name (). The modern linguistic analysis of the name, however, is \"Yahweh is lordly\".\n\n\"Jesus\" is the English derivative of the Greek transliteration of \"Yehoshua\" via Latin. In the Septuagint, all instances of the word \"Yehoshua\" are rendered as \"\" (Iēsoūs), the closest Greek pronunciation of the , ). Thus, in modern Greek, Joshua is called \"Jesus son of Naue\" () to differentiate him from Jesus. This is also true in some Slavic languages following the Eastern Orthodox tradition (e.g. \"\", \"Iisús Navín\", in Bulgarian, Serbian and Russian, but not Czech).\n\nJoshua was a major figure in the events of the Exodus. He was charged by Moses with selecting and commanding a militia group for their first battle after exiting Egypt, against the Amalekites in Rephidim (), in which they were victorious.\n\nHe later accompanied Moses when he ascended biblical Mount Sinai to commune with God, visualize God's plan for the Israelite tabernacle and receive the Ten Commandments. Joshua was with Moses when he descended from the mountain, heard the Israelites' celebrations around the Golden Calf, and broke the tablets bearing the words of the commandments. Similarly, in the narrative which refers to Moses being able to speak with God in his tent of meeting outside the camp, Joshua is seen as custodian of the tent ('tabernacle of meeting') when Moses returned to the Israelite encampment. However, when Moses returned to the mountain to re-create the tablets recording the Ten Commandments, Joshua was not present, as the biblical text states 'no man shall come up with you'.\n\nLater, Joshua was identified as one of the twelve spies sent by Moses to explore and report on the land of Canaan (), and only he and Caleb gave an encouraging report, a reward for which would be that only these two of their entire generation would enter the promised land ().\n\nAccording to , God appointed Joshua to succeed Moses as leader of the Israelites along with giving him a blessing of invincibility during his lifetime (Joshua 1:5). The first part of the book of Joshua covers the period when he led the conquest of Canaan.\n\nAt the Jordan River, the waters parted, as they had for Moses at the Red Sea. The first battle after the crossing of the Jordan was the Battle of Jericho. Joshua led the destruction of Jericho, then moved on to Ai, a small neighboring city to the west. However, they were defeated with thirty-six Israelite deaths. The defeat was attributed to Achan taking an \"accursed thing\" from Jericho; and was followed by Achan and his family and animals being stoned to death to restore God's favor. Joshua then went to defeat Ai.\n\nThe Israelites faced an alliance of five Amorite kings from Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon. At Gibeon, Joshua asked Yahweh to cause the sun and moon to stand still, so that he could finish the battle in daylight. This event is most notable because \"There has been no day like it before or since, when the Lord heeded the voice of a man, for the Lord fought for Israel\" (). God also fought for the Israelites in this battle, for he hurled huge hailstones from the sky which killed more Canaanites than those which the Israelites slaughtered. From there on, Joshua was able to lead the Israelites to several victories, securing much of the land of Canaan. He presided over the Israelite gatherings at Gilgal and Shiloh which allocated land to the tribes of Israel (Joshua 14:1–5 and 18:1–10), and the Israelites rewarded him with the Ephraimite city of Timnath-heres or Timnath-serah, where he settled (Joshua 19:50).\n\nWhen he was \"old and well advanced in years\", Joshua convened the elders and chiefs of the Israelites and exhorted them to have no fellowship with the native population, because it could lead them to be unfaithful to God. At a general assembly of the clans at Shechem, he took leave of the people, admonishing them to be loyal to their God, who had been so mightily manifested in the midst of them. As a witness of their promise to serve God, Joshua set up a great stone under an oak by the sanctuary of God. Soon afterward he died, at the age of 110, and was buried at Timnath-heres, in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.\n\nThe prevailing scholarly view is that the book of Joshua is not a factual account of historical events. The apparent setting of Joshua is the 13th century BCE, a time of widespread city-destruction, but with a few exceptions (Hazor, Lachish) the destroyed cities are not the ones the Bible associates with Joshua, and the ones it does associate with him show little or no sign of even being occupied at the time. Archaeologists generally agree that the Israelites had Canaanite origins: the culture of the earliest Israelite settlements is Canaanite, their cult objects are those of the Canaanite god El, the pottery remains are in the Canaanite tradition, and the alphabet used is early Canaanite. Almost the sole marker distinguishing the \"Israelite\" villages from Canaanite sites is an absence of pig bones, although whether even this is an ethnic marker or is due to other factors remains a matter of dispute.\n\nThere is a consensus that the Joshua traditions in the Pentateuch are secondary additions. The spy story of Numbers 13–14; Deut. 1:34–7, in an earlier form only mentioned Caleb. E. Meyer and G. Hoelscher deny Joshua's existence as a historical reality and conclude that he is the legendary hero of a Josephite clan.\n\nCarolyn Pressler, in her 2002 commentary for the Westminster Bible Companion series, suggests that readers of the Book of Joshua should give priority to its theological message (\"what passages teach about God\") and be aware of what these would have meant to audiences in the 7th and 6th centuries BCE. Richard Nelson explains, \"The needs of the centralised monarchy favoured a single story of origins combining old traditions of an exodus from Egypt, belief in a national god as 'divine warrior,' and explanations for ruined cities, social stratification and ethnic groups, and contemporary tribes.\"\n\nAuthorship of the biblical Joshua narrative is ascribed to Joshua himself by \"Bava Batra\" 15a (Talmud) and early church fathers, but in 1943 Martin Noth published an argument that behind Joshua and other books was a unified \"Deuteronomistic history\", composed in the early part of the Babylonian captivity (6th century BCE). Most scholars today believe in some such composite, containing the epic history of the premonarchical period.\n\nInternal evidence of the book of Joshua, and the repeated use of the phrase 'to this day' suggests that the events that it recounts took place some time before they were recorded.\n\nThe first record of the name Israel occurs in the Merneptah stele, erected for Egyptian Pharaoh Merneptah c. 1209 BCE, \"Israel is laid waste and his seed is not.\" William Dever sees this \"Israel\" in the central highlands as a cultural and probably political entity, well enough established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their hegemony, but an ethnic group rather than an organised state.\n\nThe number of villages in the highlands increased to more than 300 by the end of Iron Age I (more and larger in the north), with the settled population rising from 20,000 in the twelfth century to 40,000 in the eleventh. The villagers probably shared the highlands with other communities such as pastoral nomads, but only villagers left sufficient remains to determine their settlement patterns. Archaeologists and historians see more continuity than discontinuity between these highland settlements and the preceding Late Bronze Age Canaanite culture. Certain features, such as ceramic repertoire and agrarian settlement plans, have been said to be distinctives of highland sites, and collar-rimmed jars and four-roomed houses have been said to be intrinsically \"Israelite\", but have also been said to belong to a commonly shared culture throughout Iron I Canaan. While some archaeologists interpret the absence of pig bones from the highland sites as an indicator of ethnicity, this is not certain. Villages had populations of up to 300 or 400, which lived by farming and herding and were largely self-sufficient; economic interchange was prevalent.\n\nAccording to Ann E. Killebrew, \"Most scholars today accept that the majority of the conquest narratives in the book of Joshua are devoid of historical reality\".\n\nThe question of the date and degrees of conquest and/or assimilation of the indigenous population is uncertain, as academics and archaeologists differ in their interpretation of the archaeological and other evidence.\n\nIn rabbinic literature Joshua is regarded as a faithful, humble, deserving, wise man. Biblical verses illustrative of these qualities and of their reward are applied to him. \"He that waits on his master shall be honored\" is construed as a reference to Joshua, as is also the first part of the same verse, \"Whoso keeps the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof\" That \"honor shall uphold the humble in spirit\" is proved by Joshua's victory over Amalek. Not the sons of Moses—as Moses himself had expected—but Joshua was appointed as Moses' successor. Moses was shown how Joshua reproved that Othniel.\n\n\"God would speak to Moses face to face, like someone would speak to his friend. Then he would return to the camp. But his attendant, Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, would not leave the tent. Joshua never moved from the tent\". Didn't Joshua leave the tent to eat, sleep or attend to his needs? This praise shows that Joshua had complete faith in Moses, the Tzaddik. One who has this faith is cognizant of the tzaddik in everything he does; he remains steadfastly with the tzaddik whatever he does.\n\nMost modern Bibles translate to identify Jesus as a better Joshua, as Joshua led Israel into the rest of Canaan, but Jesus leads the people of God into \"God's rest\". Among the early Church Fathers, Joshua is considered a type of Jesus Christ.\n\nThe story of Joshua and the Canaanite kings is also alluded to in the 2 Meqabyan, a book considered canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.\n\nJoshua ( \"Yûsha’ Ben Nûn\" ) is not mentioned by name in the Quran, but his name appears in other Islamic literature. In the Quranic account of the conquest of Canaan, Joshua and Caleb are referenced, but not named, as two \"Allah-fearing men\", on whom God \"had bestowed His grace\".\n\nJoshua was regarded by some classical scholars as the prophetic successor to Moses (). Tabari relates in his \"History of the Prophets and Kings\" that Joshua was one of the twelve spies and Muslim scholars believe that the two believing spies referred to in the Qur’ān are Joshua and Caleb. Joshua was exceptional among the Israelites for being one of the few faithful followers of Allah.\n\nJoshua is further mentioned in Islamic literature, and significant events from his Muslim narratives include the crossing of the Jordan river and the conquest of \"Bait al-Maqdis\".\n\nThe traditional Muslim commentary \"al-Jalalayn\" says, \"Ahmad [b. Hanbal] reported in his Musnad, the [following] hadīth, 'The sun was never detained for any human, except for Joshua during those days in which he marched towards the Holy House [of Jerusalem]'.\"\n\nMuslim literature includes traditions of Joshua not found in the Hebrew Bible. Joshua is credited with being present at Moses's death and literature records that Moses's garments were with Joshua at the time of his departure. In Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim, Joshua is mentioned as Yusha' bin Nun and is the attendant to Moses during his meeting with Khidr.\n\nAli ibn Abi Talib, the cousin of Muhammad, was asked about the prophets that had special names. He narrates in Hadith that Yusha' ibn Nun was known as Dhu al-Kifl.\n\nJoshua is believed by some Muslims to be buried on Joshua's Hill in the Beykoz district of Istanbul. Alternative traditional sites for his tomb are situated in Israel (the Shia shrine at Al-Nabi Yusha'), Jordan (An-Nabi Yusha’ bin Noon, a Sunni shrine near the city of Al-Salt), Iran (Historical cemetery of Takht e Foolad in Esfahan) and Iraq (the Nabi Yusha' shrine of Baghdad). A local tradition combining three versions of three different Yushas, including biblical Joshua, places the tomb inside a cave in the Tripoli Mountains, overlooking the coastal town of el-Minyieh near Tripoli, Lebanon\n\nBULLET::::- In the literary tradition of medieval Europe, Joshua is known as one of the Nine Worthies.\nBULLET::::- In \"The Divine Comedy\" Joshua's spirit appears to Dante in the Heaven of Mars, where he is grouped with the other \"warriors of the faith.\"\nBULLET::::- Baroque composer Georg Frideric Handel composed the oratorio \"Joshua\" in 1747. Composer Franz Waxman composed an oratorio \"Joshua\" in 1959.\n\nThe annual commemoration of Joshua's yahrtzeit (the anniversary of his death) is marked on the 26th of Nisan on the Hebrew calendar. Thousands make the pilgrimage to the Tomb of Joshua at Kifl Haris near Nablus, West Bank, on the preceding night.\n\nYom HaAliyah (Aliyah Day; ) is an Israeli national holiday celebrated annually on the tenth of the Hebrew month of Nisan to commemorate Joshua having led the Israelites across the Jordan River into the Land of Israel while carrying the Ark of the Covenant.\n\nLegend has it that Mormon pioneers in the United States first referred to the \"yucca brevifolia\" agave plant as the Joshua tree because its branches reminded them of Joshua stretching his arms upward in supplication, guiding the travelers westward.\n\nJoshua is commemorated in the scientific name of a species of snake, Joshua's blind snake (\"Trilepida joshuai\" ), the holotype of which was collected at Jericó, Antioquia, Colombia.\n\nBULLET::::- Marc-Antoine Charpentier, \"Josue\" H 404 H 404 a, for soloists, double chorus, double orchestra and continuo 1680\n\nBULLET::::- Joshua Roll\nBULLET::::- Yom HaAliyah\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Brettler, Marc Zvi, \"How to read the Bible\" (Jewish Publication Society, 2005).\nBULLET::::- Coogan, Michael D. (ed), \"The Oxford History of the Biblical World\" (Oxford University Press, 1998)\nBULLET::::- Day, John, \"Yahweh and the gods and goddesses of Canaan\" (Sheffield Academic Press, 2002)\nBULLET::::- Dever, William, \"What Did the Biblical Writers Know and When Did They Know It?\" (Eerdmans, 2001)\nBULLET::::- Dever, William, \"Who Were the Early Israelites and Where Did They Come From?\" (Eerdmans, 2003, 2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Eerdmans Commentary on the Bible\" (ed. James D.G. Dunn, John William Rogerson, Eerdmans, 2003)\nBULLET::::- Finkelstein, Israel; Mazar, Amihay; Schmidt, Brian B., \"The Quest for the Historical Israel\" (Society of Biblical Literature, 2007)\nBULLET::::- Garbini, G., \"Myth and history in the Bible\" (Sheffield Academic Press, 2003)\nBULLET::::- Graham, M.P, and McKenzie, Steven L., \"The Hebrew Bible today: an introduction to critical issues\" (Westminster John Knox Press, 1998)\n\nBULLET::::- The Book of Joshua, Douay Rheims Bible Version with annotations By Bishop Challoner\nBULLET::::- Book of Joshua at BibleGateway\nBULLET::::- \"Smith’s Bible Dictionary\"\nBULLET::::- \"Easton's Bible Dictionary & Int. Standard Bible Encyclopedia\"\n"}
{"id": "16122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16122", "title": "Jeremiah (disambiguation)", "text": "Jeremiah (disambiguation)\n\nJeremiah (c. 655–586 BCE), one of the major prophets of the Hebrew Bible\n\nJeremiah or Jeremias may also refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Jeremiah (given name)\nBULLET::::- Jeremiah (surname)\nBULLET::::- Jeremías (born 1973), British-Venezuelan singer\nBULLET::::- Jeremiah (Bulgarian priest), a 10th century priest\n\nBULLET::::- Jeremiah, Kentucky\n\nBULLET::::- \"Book of Jeremiah\", in Judeo-Christian scripture\nBULLET::::- Symphony No. 1 (Bernstein), composed in 1942 by Leonard Bernstein\nBULLET::::- \"Jeremiah\" (play) (1919), by Stefan Zweig\nBULLET::::- \"Jeremiah\" (comics), Belgian series since 1979\nBULLET::::- \"Jeremiah\" (TV series) (2002–2004), in U.S, loosely based on the comic series\nBULLET::::- \"Jeremiah \", a 1998 Biblical film\n\nBULLET::::- Geremia\nBULLET::::- Old Jeremiah, antique British naval gun\nBULLET::::- Jeremiad, a long literary work, usually in prose, but sometimes in verse, in which the author bitterly laments the state of society and its morals in a serious tone of sustained invective, and always contains a prophecy of society's imminent downfall\nBULLET::::- Jerry (given name)\nBULLET::::- Jeremy (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Jeremih (born 1987), /ˈdʒɛrᵻmaɪ/), is an American singer, songwriter, rapper and record producer from Chicago, Illinois\n"}
{"id": "16123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16123", "title": "Jeroboam", "text": "Jeroboam\n\nJeroboam I (; Hebrew: \"Yārāḇə‘ām\"; ) was the first king of the northern Kingdom of Israel. The Hebrew Bible describes the reign of Jeroboam to have commenced following a revolt of the ten northern Israelite tribes against Rehoboam that put an end to the United Monarchy.\n\nJeroboam reigned for 22 years. William F. Albright has dated his reign from 922 to 901 BC, while Edwin R. Thiele offers the dates 931 to 910 BC.\n\nThe name \"Jeroboam\" is commonly held to have been derived from \"riyb\" and \"ʿam\" , signifying \"the people contend\" or \"he pleads the people's cause\". It is alternatively translated to mean \"his people are many\" or \"he increases the people\" (from \"rbb\", meaning \"to increase\"), or even \"he that opposes the people\". In the Septuagint he is called \"Hieroboam\" (Ἱεροβοάμ).\n\nJeroboam was the son of Nebat, a member of the Tribe of Ephraim of Zereda. His mother, named Zeruah (צרוע \"leprous\") was a widow. () He had at least two sons, Abijah and Nadab, who succeeded him on the throne.\n\nWhile still a young man, King Solomon made him over his tribesmen in the building of the fortress Millo in Jerusalem and of other public works, and he naturally became conversant with the widespread discontent caused by the extravagances which marked the reign of Solomon.\n\nInfluenced by the words of the prophet Ahijah (), he began to form conspiracies with the view of becoming king of the ten northern tribes; but these were discovered, and he fled to Egypt, where he remained under the protection of Pharaoh Shishak until the death of Solomon. After this event, he returned and participated in a delegation sent to ask the new king Rehoboam to reduce taxes. After Rehoboam rejected their petition, ten of the tribes withdrew their allegiance to the house of David and proclaimed Jeroboam their king, forming the northern kingdom of Israel (Samaria). Initially, only the tribes of Judah, Simeon and Benjamin remained to form the new kingdom of Judah, loyal to Rehoboam.\n\nJeroboam rebuilt and fortified Shechem as the capital of the northern kingdom, and fearing that pilgrimages to the temple in Jerusalem prescribed by the Law might be an occasion for his people to go back to their old allegiance, he built two state temples with golden calves, one in Bethel and the other in Dan. Although criticised for his cultic activities in , calf worship was not new in Israelite ritual, but a reintroduction of earlier ritual. Bethel and Dan were already established cultic sites.\n\nAccording to , while Jeroboam was engaged in offering incense at Bethel, a \"man of God\" warned him that \"a son named Josiah will be born to the house of David\", who would destroy the altar (referring to King Josiah of Judah who would rule approximately three hundred years later). Attempting to arrest the prophet for his bold words of defiance, Jeroboam's hand was \"dried up\", and the altar before which he stood was rent asunder. At the entreaty of the man of God, his hand was restored to him again, but the miracle made no abiding impression on him. Jeroboam offered hospitality to the man of God but this was declined, not out of contempt but in obedience to the command of God. The prophecy is fulfilled in .\n\nThis \"man of God\" who warned Jeroboam has been equated with a seer named Iddo.\n\nThe wife of Jeroboam is a character in the Hebrew Bible. She is unnamed in the Masoretic Text, but according to the Septuagint, she was an Egyptian princess called Ano:\n\nIn , Jeroboam's son Abijah gets sick, and he sends his wife to the prophet Ahijah. Ahijah's message, however, is that Abijah will die, which he does.\n\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Jeroboam was in \"constant war with the house of Judah\". While the southern kingdom made no serious effort militarily to regain power over the north, there was a long-lasting boundary dispute, fighting over which lasted during the reigns of several kings on both sides before being finally settled.\n\nIn the eighteenth year of Jeroboam's reign, Abijah (also known as Abijam), Rehoboam's son, became king of Judah. During his short reign of three years, Abijah went to considerable lengths to bring the Kingdom of Israel back under his control. He waged a major battle against Jeroboam in the mountains of Ephraim. According to the Book of Chronicles Abijah had a force of 400,000 and Jeroboam 800,000. The Biblical sources mention that Abijah addressed the armies of Israel, urging them to submit and to let the Kingdom of Israel be whole again, but his plea fell on deaf ears. Abijah then rallied his own troops with a phrase which has since become famous: \"God is with us as our leader\". The biblical account states that his elite warriors fended off a pincer movement to rout Jeroboam's troops, killing 500,000 of them.\n\nJeroboam was crippled by this severe defeat to Abijah and posed little threat to the Kingdom of Judah for the rest of his reign. He also lost the towns of Bethel, Jeshanah, and Ephron, with their surrounding villages. Bethel was an important centre for Jeroboam's Golden Calf cult (which used non-Levites as priests), located on Israel's southern border, which had been allocated to the Tribe of Benjamin by Joshua, as was Ephron, which is believed to be the Ophrah that was allocated to the Tribe of Benjamin by Joshua.\n\nJeroboam died soon after Abijam.\n\nThe account of Jeroboam's life, like that of all his successors, ends with the formula \"And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel\" (, ).\n\n\"The Chronicles of the Kings of Israel\", likely compiled by or derived from these kings' own scribes, is likely the source for the basic facts of Jeroboam's life and reign, though the compiler(s) of the extant Book of Kings clearly made selective use of it and added hostile commentaries. His family was eventually wiped out.\n\nThe prophecies of doom concerning the fall of both the House of Jeroboam and the northern kingdom as a whole (\"For the Lord shall smite Israel..., and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river\", ) might have been composed retroactively, after the events described had already come to pass. Alternatively, the prophecy could have been a logical deduction. Judah had just been conquered and turned into a vassal of Egypt, while Israel stood between the Egyptian and Mesopotamian empires.\n\nIt is likely that the story of the golden calf in the wilderness (cf. with ) was composed as a polemic against Jeroboam’s cultic restoration by claiming that its origins were inconsistent with worship of YHWH.\n\nBULLET::::- Jeroboam II\n\nBULLET::::- Jeroboam at the Jewish Encyclopedia\n"}
