{"id": "17068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17068", "title": "Kurds", "text": "Kurds\n\nKurds () are an Iranian ethnic group native to a mountainous region of Western Asia known as Kurdistan, which spans southeastern Turkey, northwestern Iran, northern Iraq, and northern Syria. There are also exclaves of Kurds in central Anatolia and Khorasan. Additionally, there are significant Kurdish diaspora communities in the cities of western Turkey, in particular Istanbul, while a Kurdish diaspora has developed in Western Europe, primarily in Germany. Numerically, the Kurds are estimated to number between 30 and 45 million.\n\nKurds speak the Kurdish languages and the Zaza–Gorani languages, which belong to the Western Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family. A majority of Kurds belong to the Shafi‘i school of Sunni Islam, but significant numbers practise Shia Islam and Alevism, while some are adherents of Yarsanism, Yazidism, Zoroastrianism and Christianity.\n\nAfter World War I and the defeat of the Ottoman Empire, the victorious Western allies made provision for a Kurdish state in the 1920 Treaty of Sevres. However, that promise was nullified three years later, when the Treaty of Lausanne set the boundaries of modern Turkey and made no such provision, leaving Kurds with minority status in their respective countries. This fact has led to numerous genocides and rebellions, along with the current ongoing armed guerrilla conflicts in Turkey, Iran, and Syria / Rojava. Kurds have an autonomous region in Iraq named the Kurdistan Region, while Kurdish nationalist movements continue to pursue greater cultural rights, autonomy, and independence throughout Greater Kurdistan.\n\nKurdish (Kurdish: \"Kurdî\" or کوردی) is a collection of related dialects spoken by the Kurds. It is mainly spoken in those parts of Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey which comprise Kurdistan. Kurdish holds official status in Iraq as a national language alongside Arabic, is recognized in Iran as a regional language, and in Armenia as a minority language.\n\nMost Kurds are either bilingual or multilingual, speaking the language of their respective nation of origin, such as Arabic, Persian, and Turkish as a second language alongside their native Kurdish, while those in diaspora communities often speak three or more languages.\n\nAccording to Mackenzie, there are few linguistic features that all Kurdish dialects have in common and that are not at the same time found in other Iranian languages.\n\nThe Kurdish dialects according to Mackenzie are classified as:\nBULLET::::- Northern group (the Kurmanji dialect group)\nBULLET::::- Central group (part of the Sorani dialect group)\nBULLET::::- Southern group (part of the Sorani dialect group) including Kermanshahi, Ardalani and Laki\n\nThe Zaza and Gorani are ethnic Kurds, but the Zaza–Gorani languages are not classified as Kurdish.\n\nCommenting on the differences between the dialects of Kurdish, Kreyenbroek clarifies that in some ways, Kurmanji and Sorani are as different from each other as is English from German, giving the example that Kurmanji has grammatical gender and case endings, but Sorani does not, and observing that referring to Sorani and Kurmanji as \"dialects\" of one language is supported only by \"their common origin ... and the fact that this usage reflects the sense of ethnic identity and unity of the Kurds.\"\n\nThe number of Kurds living in Southwest Asia is estimated at close to 30 million, with another one or two million living in diaspora. Kurds comprise anywhere from 18% to 20% of the population in Turkey, possibly as high as 25%; 15 to 20% in Iraq; 10% in Iran; and 9% in Syria. Kurds form regional majorities in all four of these countries, \"viz.\" in Turkish Kurdistan, Iraqi Kurdistan, Iranian Kurdistan and Syrian Kurdistan. The Kurds are the fourth largest ethnic group in West Asia after the Arabs, Persians, and Turks.\n\nThe total number of Kurds in 1991 was placed at 22.5 million, with 48% of this number living in Turkey, 18% in Iraq, 24% in Iran, and 4% in Syria.\n\nRecent emigration accounts for a population of close to 1.5 million in Western countries, about half of them in Germany.\n\nA special case are the Kurdish populations in the Transcaucasus and Central Asia, displaced there mostly in the time of the Russian Empire, who underwent independent developments for more than a century and have developed an ethnic identity in their own right. This groups' population was estimated at close to 0.4 million in 1990.\n\n\"The land of Karda\" is mentioned on a Sumerian clay tablet dated to the 3rd millennium BC. This land was inhabited by \"the people of Su\" who dwelt in the southern regions of Lake Van; The philological connection between \"Kurd\" and \"Karda\" is uncertain but the relationship is considered possible. Other Sumerian clay tablets referred to the people, who lived in the land of Karda, as the Qarduchi and the Qurti. Karda/Qardu is etymologically related to the Assyrian term Urartu and the Hebrew term Ararat.\n\nQarti or Qartas, who were originally settled on the mountains north of Mesopotamia, are considered as a probable ancestor of the Kurds. Akkadians were attacked by nomads coming through Qartas territory at the end of 3rd millennium BC. Akkadians distinguished them as Guti. They conquered Mesopotamia in 2150 BC and ruled with 21 kings until defeated by the Sumerian king Utu-hengal.\n\nMany Kurds consider themselves descended from the Medes, an ancient Iranian people, and even use a calendar dating from 612 BC, when the Assyrian capital of Nineveh was conquered by the Medes. The claimed Median descent is reflected in the words of the Kurdish national anthem: \"We are the children of the Medes and Kai Khosrow.\" However, MacKenzie and Asatrian challenge the relation of the Median language to Kurdish. The Kurdish languages, on the other hand, form a subgroup of the Northwestern Iranian languages like Median. Some researchers consider the independent Kardouchoi as the ancestors of the Kurds, while others prefer Cyrtians. The term \"Kurd\", however, is first encountered in Arabic sources of the seventh century. Books from the early Islamic era, including those containing legends such as the Shahnameh and the Middle Persian Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan, and other early Islamic sources provide early attestation of the name \"Kurd\". The Kurds have ethnically diverse origins.\n\nDuring the Sassanid era, in \"Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan\", a short prose work written in Middle Persian, Ardashir I is depicted as having battled the Kurds and their leader, Madig. After initially sustaining a heavy defeat, Ardashir I was successful in subjugating the Kurds. In a letter Ardashir I received from his foe, Ardavan V, which is also featured in the same work, he is referred to as being a Kurd himself. The usage of the term \"Kurd\" during this time period most likely was a social term, designating Northwestern Iranian nomads, rather than a concrete ethnic group.\n\nSimilarly, in AD 360, the Sassanid king Shapur II marched into the Roman province Zabdicene, to conquer its chief city, Bezabde, present-day Cizre. \nHe found it heavily fortified, and guarded by three legions and a large body of Kurdish archers. After a long and hard-fought siege, Shapur II breached the walls, conquered the city and massacred all its defenders. Thereafter he had the strategically located city repaired, provisioned and garrisoned with his best troops.\n\nQadishaye, settled by Kavad in Singara, were probably Kurds and worshiped the martyr Abd al-Masih. They revolted against the Sassanids and were raiding the whole Persian territory. Later they, along with Arabs and Armenians, joined the Sassanids in their war against the Byzantines.\n\nThere is also a 7th-century text by an unidentified author, written about the legendary Christian martyr Mar Qardagh. He lived in the 4th century, during the reign of Shapur II, and during his travels is said to have encountered Mar Abdisho, a deacon and martyr, who, after having been questioned of his origins by Mar Qardagh and his Marzobans, stated that his parents were originally from an Assyrian village called Hazza, but were driven out and subsequently settled in Tamanon, a village in \"the land of the Kurds\", identified as being in the region of Mount Judi.\n\nEarly Syriac sources use the terms \"Hurdanaye, Kurdanaye, Kurdaye\" to refer to the Kurds. According to Michael the Syrian, Hurdanaye separated from Tayaye Arabs and sought refuge with the Byzantine Emperor Theophilus. He also mentions the Persian troops who fought against Musa chief of Hurdanaye in the region of Qardu in 841. According to Barhebreaus, a king appeared to the Kurdanaye and they rebelled against the Arabs in 829. Michael the Syrian considered them as pagan, followers of mahdi and adepts of Magianism. Their mahdi called himself Christ and the Holy Ghost.\n\nIn the early Middle Ages, the Kurds sporadically appear in Arabic sources, though the term was still not being used for a specific people; instead it referred to an amalgam of nomadic western Iranic tribes, who were distinct from Persians. However, in the High Middle Ages, the Kurdish ethnic identity gradually materialized, as one can find clear evidence of the Kurdish ethnic identity and solidarity in texts of the 12th and 13th century, though, the term was also still being used in the social sense. From 11th century onward, the term Kurd is explicitly defined as an ethnonym and this does not suggest synonymity with the ethnographic category nomad. Al-Tabari wrote that in 639, Hormuzan, a Sasanian general originating from a noble family, battled against the Islamic invaders in Khuzestan, and called upon the Kurds to aid him in battle. However, they were defeated and brought under Islamic rule.\n\nIn 838, a Kurdish leader based in Mosul, named Mir Jafar, revolted against the Caliph Al-Mu'tasim who sent the commander Itakh to combat him. Itakh won this war and executed many of the Kurds. Eventually Arabs conquered the Kurdish regions and gradually converted the majority of Kurds to Islam, often incorporating them into the military, such as the Hamdanids whose dynastic family members also frequently intermarried with Kurds.\n\nIn 934 the Daylamite Buyid dynasty was founded, and subsequently conquered most of present-day Iran and Iraq. During the time of rule of this dynasty, Kurdish chief and ruler, Badr ibn Hasanwaih, established himself as one of the most important emirs of the time.\n\nIn the 10th-12th centuries, a number of Kurdish principalities and dynasties were founded, ruling Kurdistan and neighbouring areas:\nBULLET::::- The Shaddadids (951–1174) ruled parts of present-day Armenia and Arran.\nBULLET::::- The Rawadid (955–1221) ruled Azerbaijan.\nBULLET::::- The Hasanwayhids (959–1015) ruled western Iran and upper Mesopotamia.\nBULLET::::- The Marwanids (990–1096) ruled eastern Anatolia.\nBULLET::::- The Annazids (990–1117) ruled western Iran and upper Mesopotamia (succeeded the Hasanwayhids).\nBULLET::::- The Hazaraspids (1148–1424) ruled southwestern Iran.\nBULLET::::- The Ayyubids (1171–1341) ruled Egypt, Syria, Upper Mesopotamia and parts of southeastern Anatolia and the Arabian Peninsula.\n\nDue to the Turkic invasion of Anatolia, the 11th century Kurdish dynasties crumbled and became incorporated into the Seljuk Dynasty. Kurds would hereafter be used in great numbers in the armies of the Zengids. Succeeding the Zengids, the Kurdish Ayyubids established themselves in 1171, first under the leadership of Saladin. Saladin led the Muslims to recapture the city of Jerusalem from the Crusaders at the Battle of Hattin; also frequently clashing with the Hashashins. The Ayyubid dynasty lasted until 1341 when the Ayyubid sultanate fell to Mongolian invasions.\n\nThe Safavid Dynasty, established in 1501, also established its rule over Kurdish-inhabited territories. The paternal line of this family actually had Kurdish roots, tracing back to Firuz-Shah Zarrin-Kolah, a dignitary who moved from Kurdistan to Ardabil in the 11th century. The Battle of Chaldiran in 1514 that culminated in what is nowadays Iran's West Azerbaijan Province, marked the start of the Ottoman-Persian Wars between the Iranian Safavids (and successive Iranian dynasties) and the Ottomans. For the next 300 years, many of the Kurds found themselves living in territories that frequently changed hands between Ottoman Turkey and Iran during the protracted series of Ottoman-Persian Wars.\n\nThe Safavid king Ismail I (r. 1501-1524) put down a Yezidi rebellion which went on from 1506-1510. A century later, the year-long Battle of Dimdim took place, wherein the Safavid king Abbas I (r. 1588-1629) succeeded in putting down the rebellion led by the Kurdish ruler Amir Khan Lepzerin. Thereafter, many Kurds were deported to Khorasan, not only to weaken the Kurds, but also to protect the eastern border from invading Afghan and Turkmen tribes. Other forced movements and deportations of other groups were also implemented by Abbas I and his successors, most notably of the Armenians, the Georgians, and the Circassians, who were moved en masse to and from other districts within the Persian empire.\n\nThe Kurds of Khorasan, numbering around 700,000, still use the Kurmanji Kurdish dialect. Several Kurdish noblemen served the Safavids and rose to prominence, such as Shaykh Ali Khan Zanganeh, who served as the grand vizier of the Safavid shah Suleiman I (r. 1666–1694) from 1669 to 1689. Due to his efforts in reforming the declining Iranian economy, he has been called the \"Safavid Amir Kabir\" in modern historiography. His son, Shahqoli Khan Zanganeh, also served as a grand vizier from 1707 to 1716. Another Kurdish statesman, Ganj Ali Khan, was close friends with Abbas I, and served as governor in various provinces and was known for his loyal service.\n\nAfter the fall of the Safavids, Iran fell under the control of the Afsharid Empire ruled by Nader Shah at its peak. After Nader's death, Iran fell into civil war, with multiple leaders trying to gain control over the country. Ultimately, it was Karim Khan, a Laki general of the Zand tribe who would come to power. \nThe country would flourish during Karim Khan's reign; a strong resurgence of the arts would take place, and international ties were strengthened. Karim Khan was portrayed as being a ruler who truly cared about his subjects, thereby gaining the title Vakil e-Ra'aayaa (meaning Representative of the People in Persian). Though not as powerful in its geo-political and military reach as the preceding Safavids and Afsharids or even the early Qajars, he managed to reassert Iranian hegemony over its integral territories in the Caucasus, and presided over an era of relative peace, prosperity, and tranquility. In Ottoman Iraq, following the Ottoman–Persian War (1775–76), Karim Khan managed to seize Basra for several years.\n\nAfter Karim Khan's death, the dynasty would decline in favour of the rival Qajars due to infighting between the Khan's incompetent offspring. It was not until Lotf Ali Khan, 10 years later, that the dynasty would once again be led by an adept ruler. By this time however, the Qajars had already progressed greatly, having taken a number of Zand territories. Lotf Ali Khan made multiple successes before ultimately succumbing to the rivaling faction. Iran and all its Kurdish territories would hereby be incorporated in the Qajar Dynasty.\n\nThe Kurdish tribes present in Baluchistan and some of those in Fars are believed to be remnants of those that assisted and accompanied Lotf Ali Khan and Karim Khan, respectively.\n\nWhen Sultan Selim I, after defeating Shah Ismail I in 1514, annexed Western Armenia and Kurdistan, he entrusted the organisation of the conquered territories to Idris, the historian, who was a Kurd of Bitlis. He divided the territory into \"sanjaks\" or districts, and, making no attempt to interfere with the principle of heredity, installed the local chiefs as governors. He also resettled the rich pastoral country between Erzerum and Erivan, which had lain in waste since the passage of Timur, with Kurds from the Hakkari and Bohtan districts. For the next centuries, from the Peace of Amasya until the first half of the 19th century, several regions of the wide Kurdish homelands would be contested as well between the Ottomans and the neighbouring rival successive Iranian dynasties (Safavids, Afsharids, Qajars) in the frequent Ottoman-Persian Wars.\n\nThe Ottoman centralist policies in the beginning of the 19th century aimed to remove power from the principalities and localities, which directly affected the Kurdish emirs. Bedirhan Bey was the last emir of the Cizre Bohtan Emirate after initiating an uprising in 1847 against the Ottomans to protect the current structures of the Kurdish principalities. Although his uprising is not classified as a nationalist one, his children played significant roles in the emergence and the development of Kurdish nationalism through the next century.\n\nThe first modern Kurdish nationalist movement emerged in 1880 with an uprising led by a Kurdish landowner and head of the powerful Shemdinan family, Sheik Ubeydullah, who demanded political autonomy or outright independence for Kurds as well as the recognition of a Kurdistan state without interference from Turkish or Persian authorities. The uprising against Qajar Persia and the Ottoman Empire was ultimately suppressed by the Ottomans and Ubeydullah, along with other notables, were exiled to Istanbul.\n\nKurdish nationalism emerged after World War I with the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, which had historically successfully integrated (but not assimilated) the Kurds, through use of forced repression of Kurdish movements to gain independence. Revolts did occur sporadically but only in 1880 with the uprising led by Sheik Ubeydullah did the Kurds as an ethnic group or nation make demands. Ottoman sultan Abdul Hamid II () responded with a campaign of integration by co-opting prominent Kurdish opponents to strengthen Ottoman power with offers of prestigious positions in his government. This strategy appears to have been successful, given the loyalty displayed by the Kurdish Hamidiye regiments during World War I.\n\nThe Kurdish ethno-nationalist movement that emerged following World War I and the end of the Ottoman Empire in 1922 largely represented a reaction to the changes taking place in mainstream Turkey, primarily to the radical secularization, the centralization of authority, and to the rampant Turkish nationalism in the new Turkish Republic.\n\nJakob Künzler, head of a missionary hospital in Urfa, documented the large-scale ethnic cleansing of both Armenians and Kurds by the Young Turks. He has given a detailed account of the deportation of Kurds from Erzurum and Bitlis in the winter of 1916. The Kurds were perceived to be subversive elements who would take the Russian side in the war. In order to eliminate this threat, Young Turks embarked on a large-scale deportation of Kurds from the regions of \"Djabachdjur\", \"Palu\", \"Musch\", \"Erzurum\" and \"Bitlis\". Around 300,000 Kurds were forced to move southwards to Urfa and then westwards to Aintab and Marasch. In the summer of 1917 Kurds were moved to Konya in central Anatolia. Through these measures, the Young Turk leaders aimed at weakening the political influence of the Kurds by deporting them from their ancestral lands and by dispersing them in small pockets of exiled communities. By the end of World War I, up to 700,000 Kurds had been forcibly deported and almost half of the displaced perished.\n\nSome of the Kurdish groups sought self-determination and the confirmation of Kurdish autonomy in the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres, but in the aftermath of World War I, Kemal Atatürk prevented such a result. Kurds backed by the United Kingdom declared independence in 1927 and established the Republic of Ararat. Turkey suppressed Kurdist revolts in 1925, 1930, and 1937–1938, while Iran in the 1920s suppressed Simko Shikak at Lake Urmia and Jaafar Sultan of the Hewraman region, who controlled the region between Marivan and north of Halabja. A short-lived Soviet-sponsored Kurdish Republic of Mahabad (January to December, 1946) existed in an area of present-day Iran.\nFrom 1922–1924 in Iraq a Kingdom of Kurdistan existed. When Ba'athist administrators thwarted Kurdish nationalist ambitions in Iraq, war broke out in the 1960s. In 1970 the Kurds rejected limited territorial self-rule within Iraq, demanding larger areas, including the oil-rich Kirkuk region.\n\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, several large-scale Kurdish revolts took place in Kurdistan. Following these rebellions, the area of Turkish Kurdistan was put under martial law and many of the Kurds were displaced. The Turkish government also encouraged resettlement of Albanians from Kosovo and Assyrians in the region to change the make-up of the population. These events and measures led to long-lasting mutual distrust between Ankara and the Kurds.\n\nKurdish officers from the Iraqi army [...] were said to have approached Soviet army authorities soon after their arrival in Iran in 1941 and offered to form a Kurdish volunteer force to fight alongside the Red Army. This offer was declined.\n\nDuring the relatively open government of the 1950s in Turkey, Kurds gained political office and started working within the framework of the Turkish Republic to further their interests, but this move towards integration was halted with the 1960 Turkish coup d'état. The 1970s saw an evolution in Kurdish nationalism as Marxist political thought influenced some in the new generation of Kurdish nationalists opposed to the local feudal authorities who had been a traditional source of opposition to authority; in 1978 Kurdish students would form the militant separatist organization PKK, also known as the Kurdistan Workers' Party in English. The Kurdistan Workers' Party later abandoned Marxism-Leninism.\n\nKurds are often regarded as \"the largest ethnic group without a state\". The Kurdish claim of \"statelessness\" is rejected by some researchers such as Martin van Bruinessen and some other scholars who seem to agree with the official Turkish position. They argue that while some level of Kurdish cultural, social, political and ideological heterogeneity may exist, the Kurdish community has long thrived over the centuries as a generally peaceful and well-integrated part of Turkish society, with hostilities erupting only in recent years.\nMichael Radu, who worked for the United States's Pennsylvania Foreign Policy Research Institute, notes that the claim of Kurdish \"statelessness\" comes primarily from Kurdish nationalists, Western human-rights activists, and European leftists.\n\nThe exact origins of the name \"Kurd\" are unclear. The underlying toponym is recorded in Assyrian as \"Qardu\" and in Middle Bronze Age Sumerian as \"Kar-da\". Assyrian \"Qardu\" refers to an area in the upper Tigris basin, and it is presumably reflected in corrupted form in Classical Arabic \"Ǧūdī\", re-adopted in Kurdish as \"Cûdî\". The name would be continued as the first element in the toponym \"Corduene\", mentioned by Xenophon as the tribe who opposed the retreat of the Ten Thousand through the mountains north of Mesopotamia in the 4th century BC.\n\nThere are, however, dissenting views, which do not derive the name of the Kurds from \"Qardu\" and \"Corduene\" but opt for derivation from \"Cyrtii\" (\"Cyrtaei\") instead.\n\nRegardless of its possible roots in ancient toponymy, the ethnonym \"Kurd\" might be derived from a term \"kwrt-\" used in Middle Persian as a common noun to refer to \"nomads\" or \"tent-dwellers,\" which could be applied as an attribute to any Iranian group with such a lifestyle.\n\nThe term gained the characteristic of an ethnonym following the Muslim conquest of Persia, as it was adopted into Arabic and gradually became associated with an amalgamation of Iranian and Iranicised tribes and groups in the region.\n\nIt is also hypothesized that \"Kurd\" could derive from the Persian word \"gord\" , because the Arabic script lacks a symbol corresponding uniquely to \"g\" (گ).\n\nSherefxan Bidlisi in the 16th century states that there are four division of \"Kurds\": \"Kurmanj\", \"Lur\", \"Kalhor\" and \"Guran\", each of which speak a different dialect or language variation. Paul (2008) notes that the 16th-century usage of the term \"Kurd\" as recorded by Bidlisi, regardless of linguistic grouping, might still reflect an incipient Northwestern Iranian \"Kurdish\" ethnic identity uniting the Kurmanj, Kalhur, and Guran.\n\nAccording to CIA Factbook, Kurds formed approximately 18% of the population in Turkey (approximately 14 million) in 2008. One Western source estimates that up to 25% of the Turkish population is Kurdish (approximately 18-19 million people). Kurdish sources claim there are as many as 20 or 25 million Kurds in Turkey.\nIn 1980, Ethnologue estimated the number of Kurdish-speakers in Turkey at around five million, when the country's population stood at 44 million. Kurds form the largest minority group in Turkey, and they have posed the most serious and persistent challenge to the official image of a homogeneous society. This classification was changed to the new euphemism of \"Eastern Turk\" in 1980. Nowadays the Kurds, in Turkey, are still known under the name \"Easterner\" (Doğulu).\n\nSeveral large scale Kurdish revolts in 1925, 1930 and 1938 were suppressed by the Turkish government and more than one million Kurds were forcibly relocated between 1925 and 1938. The use of Kurdish language, dress, folklore, and names were banned and the Kurdish-inhabited areas remained under martial law until 1946. The Ararat revolt, which reached its apex in 1930, was only suppressed after a massive military campaign including destruction of many villages and their populations. \nBy the 1970s, Kurdish leftist organizations such as \"Kurdistan Socialist Party-Turkey\" (KSP-T) emerged in Turkey which were against violence and supported civil activities and participation in elections. In 1977, \"Mehdi Zana\" a supporter of KSP-T won the mayoralty of Diyarbakir in the local elections. At about the same time, generational fissures gave birth to two new organizations: the \"National Liberation of Kurdistan\" and the \"Kurdistan Workers Party\".\n\nThe words \"Kurds\", \"Kurdistan\", or \"Kurdish\" were officially banned by the Turkish government. Following the military coup of 1980, the Kurdish language was officially prohibited in public and private life. Many people who spoke, published, or sang in Kurdish were arrested and imprisoned. The Kurds are still not allowed to get a primary education in their mother tongue and they do not have a right to self-determination, even though Turkey has signed the ICCPR. There is ongoing discrimination against and “otherization” of Kurds in society.\n\nThe Kurdistan Workers' Party or PKK (Kurdish: \"Partiya Karkerên Kurdistanê\") is Kurdish militant organization which has waged an armed struggle against the Turkish state for cultural and political rights and self-determination for the Kurds. Turkey's military allies the US, the EU, and NATO label the PKK as a terrorist organization while the UN, Switzerland, Russia, China and India have refused to add the PKK to their terrorist list. Some of them have even supported the PKK.\n\nBetween 1984 and 1999, the PKK and the Turkish military engaged in open war, and much of the countryside in the southeast was depopulated, as Kurdish civilians moved from villages to bigger cities such as Diyarbakır, Van, and Şırnak, as well as to the cities of western Turkey and even to western Europe. The causes of the depopulation included mainly the Turkish state's military operations, state's political actions, Turkish Deep state actions, the poverty of the southeast and PKK atrocities against Kurdish clans which were against them. Turkish State actions have included forced inscription, forced evacuation, destruction of villages, severe harassment, illegal arrests and executions of Kurdish civilians.\n\nSince the 1970s, the European Court of Human Rights has condemned Turkey for the thousands of human rights abuses. The judgments are related to executions of Kurdish civilians, torturing, forced displacements systematic destruction of villages, arbitrary arrests murdered and disappeared Kurdish journalists.\nLeyla Zana, the first Kurdish female MP from Diyarbakir, caused an uproar in Turkish Parliament after adding the following sentence in Kurdish to her parliamentary oath during the swearing-in ceremony in 1994: \"I take this oath for the brotherhood of the Turkish and Kurdish peoples.\"\n\nIn March 1994, the Turkish Parliament voted to lift the immunity of Zana and five other Kurdish DEP members: Hatip Dicle, Ahmet Turk, Sirri Sakik, Orhan Dogan and Selim Sadak. Zana, Dicle, Sadak and Dogan were sentenced to 15 years in jail by the Supreme Court in October 1995. Zana was awarded the Sakharov Prize for human rights by the European Parliament in 1995. She was released in 2004 amid warnings from European institutions that the continued imprisonment of the four Kurdish MPs would affect Turkey's bid to join the EU. The 2009 local elections resulted in 5.7% for Kurdish political party DTP.\n\nOfficially protected death squads are accused of the disappearance of 3,200 Kurds and Assyrians in 1993 and 1994 in the so-called \"mystery killings\".\nKurdish politicians, human-rights activists, journalists, teachers and other members of intelligentsia were among the victims. Virtually none of the perpetrators were investigated nor punished. Turkish government also encouraged Islamic extremist group Hezbollah to assassinate suspected PKK members and often ordinary Kurds. \"Azimet Köylüoğlu\", the state minister of human rights, revealed the extent of security forces' excesses in autumn 1994:\n\"While acts of terrorism in other regions are done by the PKK; in Tunceli it is state terrorism. In Tunceli, it is the state that is evacuating and burning villages. In the southeast there are two million people left homeless.\"\n\nThe Kurdish region of Iran has been a part of the country since ancient times. Nearly all Kurdistan was part of Persian Empire until its Western part was lost during wars against the Ottoman Empire. Following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 Tehran had demanded all lost territories including Turkish Kurdistan, Mosul, and even Diyarbakır, but demands were quickly rejected by Western powers. This area has been divided by modern Turkey, Syria and Iraq. Today, the Kurds inhabit mostly northwestern territories known as Iranian Kurdistan but also the northeastern region of Khorasan, and constitute approximately 7-10% of Iran's overall population (6.5–7.9 million), compared to 10.6% (2 million) in 1956 and 8% (800 thousand) in 1850.\n\nUnlike in other Kurdish-populated countries, there are strong ethnolinguistical and cultural ties between Kurds, Persians and others as Iranian peoples. Some modern Iranian dynasties like the Safavids and Zands are considered to be partly of Kurdish origin. Kurdish literature in all of its forms (Kurmanji, Sorani, and Gorani) has been developed within historical Iranian boundaries under strong influence of the Persian language. The Kurds sharing much of their history with the rest of Iran is seen as reason for why Kurdish leaders in Iran do not want a separate Kurdish state\n\nThe government of Iran has never employed the same level of brutality against its own Kurds like Turkey or Iraq, but it has always been implacably opposed to any suggestion of Kurdish separatism. During and shortly after the First World War the government of Iran was ineffective and had very little control over events in the country and several Kurdish tribal chiefs gained local political power, even established large confederations. At the same time waves of nationalism from the disintegrating Ottoman Empire partly influenced some Kurdish chiefs in border regions to pose as Kurdish nationalist leaders. Prior to this, identity in both countries largely relied upon religion i.e. Shia Islam in the particular case of Iran. In 19th century Iran, Shia–Sunni animosity and the describing of Sunni Kurds as an Ottoman fifth column was quite frequent.\n\nDuring the late 1910s and early 1920s, tribal revolt led by Kurdish chieftain Simko Shikak struck north western Iran. Although elements of Kurdish nationalism were present in this movement, historians agree these were hardly articulate enough to justify a claim that recognition of Kurdish identity was a major issue in Simko's movement, and he had to rely heavily on conventional tribal motives. Government forces and non-Kurds were not the only ones to suffer in the attacks, the Kurdish population was also robbed and assaulted. Rebels do not appear to have felt any sense of unity or solidarity with fellow Kurds. Kurdish insurgency and seasonal migrations in the late 1920s, along with long-running tensions between Tehran and Ankara, resulted in border clashes and even military penetrations in both Iranian and Turkish territory. Two regional powers have used Kurdish tribes as tool for own political benefits: Turkey has provided military help and refuge for anti-Iranian Turcophone Shikak rebels in 1918-1922, while Iran did the same during Ararat rebellion against Turkey in 1930. Reza Shah's military victory over Kurdish and Turkic tribal leaders initiated a repressive era toward non-Iranian minorities. Government's forced detribalization and sedentarization in 1920s and 1930s resulted with many other tribal revolts in Iranian regions of Azerbaijan, Luristan and Kurdistan. In particular case of the Kurds, this repressive policies partly contributed to developing nationalism among some tribes.\nAs a response to growing Pan-Turkism and Pan-Arabism in region which were seen as potential threats to the territorial integrity of Iran, Pan-Iranist ideology has been developed in the early 1920s. Some of such groups and journals openly advocated Iranian support to the Kurdish rebellion against Turkey. Secular Pahlavi dynasty has endorsed Iranian ethnic nationalism which saw the Kurds as integral part of the Iranian nation. Mohammad Reza Pahlavi has personally praised the Kurds as \"pure Iranians\" or \"one of the most noble Iranian peoples\". Another significant ideology during this period was Marxism which arose among Kurds under influence of USSR. It culminated in the Iran crisis of 1946 which included a separatist attempt of KDP-I and communist groups to establish the Soviet puppet government called Republic of Mahabad. It arose along with Azerbaijan People's Government, another Soviet puppet state. The state itself encompassed a very small territory, including Mahabad and the adjacent cities, unable to incorporate the southern Iranian Kurdistan which fell inside the Anglo-American zone, and unable to attract the tribes outside Mahabad itself to the nationalist cause. As a result, when the Soviets withdrew from Iran in December 1946, government forces were able to enter Mahabad unopposed.\n\nSeveral nationalist and Marxist insurgencies continued for decades (1967, 1979, 1989–96) led by KDP-I and Komalah, but those two organization have never advocated a separate Kurdish state or greater Kurdistan as did the PKK in Turkey. Still, many of dissident leaders, among others Qazi Muhammad and Abdul Rahman Ghassemlou, were executed or assassinated. During Iran–Iraq War, Tehran has provided support for Iraqi-based Kurdish groups like KDP or PUK, along with asylum for 1,400,000 Iraqi refugees, mostly Kurds. Kurdish Marxist groups have been marginalized in Iran since the dissolution of the Soviet Union. In 2004 new insurrection started by PJAK, separatist organization affiliated with the Turkey-based PKK and designated as terrorist by Iran, Turkey and the United States. Some analysts claim PJAK do not pose any serious threat to the government of Iran. Cease-fire has been established in September 2011 following the Iranian offensive on PJAK bases, but several clashes between PJAK and IRGC took place after it. Since the Iranian Revolution of 1979, accusations of \"discrimination\" by Western organizations and of \"foreign involvement\" by Iranian side have become very frequent.\n\nKurds have been well integrated in Iranian political life during reign of various governments. Kurdish liberal political Karim Sanjabi has served as minister of education under Mohammad Mossadegh in 1952. During the reign of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi some members of parliament and high army officers were Kurds, and there was even a Kurdish Cabinet Minister. During the reign of the Pahlavis Kurds received many favours from the authorities, for instance to keep their land after the land reforms of 1962. In the early 2000s, presence of thirty Kurdish deputies in the 290-strong parliament has also helped to undermine claims of discrimination. Some of the more influential Kurdish politicians during recent years include former first vice president Mohammad Reza Rahimi and Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, Mayor of Tehran and second-placed presidential candidate in 2013. Kurdish language is today used more than at any other time since the Revolution, including in several newspapers and among schoolchildren. Many Iranian Kurds show no interest in Kurdish nationalism, particularly Kurds of the Shia faith who sometimes even vigorously reject idea of autonomy, preferring direct rule from Tehran. The issue of Kurdish nationalism and Iranian national identity is generally only questioned in the peripheral Kurdish dominated regions where the Sunni faith is prevalent.\n\nKurds constitute approximately 17% of Iraq's population. They are the majority in at least three provinces in northern Iraq which are together known as Iraqi Kurdistan. Kurds also have a presence in Kirkuk, Mosul, Khanaqin, and Baghdad. Around 300,000 Kurds live in the Iraqi capital Baghdad, 50,000 in the city of Mosul and around 100,000 elsewhere in southern Iraq.\n\nKurds led by Mustafa Barzani were engaged in heavy fighting against successive Iraqi regimes from 1960 to 1975. In March 1970, Iraq announced a peace plan providing for Kurdish autonomy. The plan was to be implemented in four years. However, at the same time, the Iraqi regime started an Arabization program in the oil-rich regions of Kirkuk and Khanaqin. The peace agreement did not last long, and in 1974, the Iraqi government began a new offensive against the Kurds. Moreover, in March 1975, Iraq and Iran signed the Algiers Accord, according to which Iran cut supplies to Iraqi Kurds. Iraq started another wave of Arabization by moving Arabs to the oil fields in Kurdistan, particularly those around Kirkuk. Between 1975 and 1978, 200,000 Kurds were deported to other parts of Iraq.\nDuring the Iran–Iraq War in the 1980s, the regime implemented anti-Kurdish policies and a \"de facto\" civil war broke out. Iraq was widely condemned by the international community, but was never seriously punished for oppressive measures such as the mass murder of hundreds of thousands of civilians, the wholesale destruction of thousands of villages and the deportation of thousands of Kurds to southern and central Iraq.\n\nThe genocidal campaign, conducted between 1986 and 1989 and culminating in 1988, carried out by the Iraqi government against the Kurdish population was called \"Anfal\" (\"Spoils of War\"). The Anfal campaign led to destruction of over two thousand villages and killing of 182,000 Kurdish civilians. The campaign included the use of ground offensives, aerial bombing, systematic destruction of settlements, mass deportation, firing squads, and chemical attacks, including the most infamous attack on the Kurdish town of Halabja in 1988 that killed 5000 civilians instantly.\nAfter the collapse of the Kurdish uprising in March 1991, Iraqi troops recaptured most of the Kurdish areas and 1.5 million Kurds abandoned their homes and fled to the Turkish and Iranian borders. It is estimated that close to 20,000 Kurds succumbed to death due to exhaustion, lack of food, exposure to cold and disease. On 5 April 1991, UN Security Council passed resolution 688 which condemned the repression of Iraqi Kurdish civilians and demanded that Iraq end its repressive measures and allow immediate access to international humanitarian organizations. This was the first international document (since the League of Nations arbitration of Mosul in 1926) to mention Kurds by name. In mid-April, the Coalition established \"safe havens\" inside Iraqi borders and prohibited Iraqi planes from flying north of 36th parallel. In October 1991, Kurdish guerrillas captured Erbil and Sulaimaniyah after a series of clashes with Iraqi troops. In late October, Iraqi government retaliated by imposing a food and fuel embargo on the Kurds and stopping to pay civil servants in the Kurdish region. The embargo, however, backfired and Kurds held parliamentary elections in May 1992 and established Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG).\n\nThe Kurdish population welcomed the American troops in 2003 by holding celebrations and dancing in the streets. The area controlled by Peshmerga was expanded, and Kurds now have effective control in Kirkuk and parts of Mosul. The authority of the KRG and legality of its laws and regulations were recognized in the articles 113 and 137 of the new Iraqi Constitution ratified in 2005. By the beginning of 2006, the two Kurdish administrations of Erbil and Sulaimaniya were unified. On 14 August 2007, Yazidis were targeted in a series of bombings that became the deadliest suicide attack since the Iraq War began, killing 796 civilians, wounding 1,562.\n\nKurds account for 9% of Syria's population, a total of around 1.6 million people. This makes them the largest ethnic minority in the country. They are mostly concentrated in the northeast and the north, but there are also significant Kurdish populations in Aleppo and Damascus. Kurds often speak Kurdish in public, unless all those present do not. According to Amnesty International, Kurdish human rights activists are mistreated and persecuted. No political parties are allowed for any group, Kurdish or otherwise.\n\nTechniques used to suppress the ethnic identity of Kurds in Syria include various bans on the use of the Kurdish language, refusal to register children with Kurdish names, the replacement of Kurdish place names with new names in Arabic, the prohibition of businesses that do not have Arabic names, the prohibition of Kurdish private schools, and the prohibition of books and other materials written in Kurdish. Having been denied the right to Syrian nationality, around 300,000 Kurds have been deprived of any social rights, in violation of international law. As a consequence, these Kurds are in effect trapped within Syria. In March 2011, in part to avoid further demonstrations and unrest from spreading across Syria, the Syrian government promised to tackle the issue and grant Syrian citizenship to approximately 300,000 Kurds who had been previously denied the right.\n\nOn 12 March 2004, beginning at a stadium in Qamishli (a largely Kurdish city in northeastern Syria), clashes between Kurds and Syrians broke out and continued over a number of days. At least thirty people were killed and more than 160 injured. The unrest spread to other Kurdish towns along the northern border with Turkey, and then to Damascus and Aleppo.\n\nAs a result of Syrian civil war, since July 2012, Kurds were able to take control of large parts of Syrian Kurdistan from Andiwar in extreme northeast to Jindires in extreme northwest Syria. The Syrian Kurds started the Rojava Revolution in 2013.\n\nKurdish-inhabited Afrin Canton has been occupied by Turkish Armed Forces and Turkish-backed Free Syrian Army since the Turkish military operation in Afrin in early 2018. Between 150,000 and 200,000 people were displaced due to the Turkish intervention.\n\nIn October 2019, Turkey and the Syrian Interim Government began an offensive into Kurdish-populated areas in Syria, prompting about 100,000 civilians to flee from the area fearing that Turkey would commit an ethnic cleansing.\n\nBetween the 1930s and 1980s, Armenia was a part of the Soviet Union, within which Kurds, like other ethnic groups, had the status of a protected minority. Armenian Kurds were permitted their own state-sponsored newspaper, radio broadcasts and cultural events. During the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, many non-Yazidi Kurds were forced to leave their homes since both the Azeri and non-Yazidi Kurds were Muslim.\n\nIn 1920, two Kurdish-inhabited areas of Jewanshir (capital Kalbajar) and eastern Zangazur (capital Lachin) were combined to form the Kurdistan Okrug (or \"Red Kurdistan\"). The period of existence of the Kurdish administrative unit was brief and did not last beyond 1929. Kurds subsequently faced many repressive measures, including deportations, imposed by the Soviet government. As a result of the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, many Kurdish areas have been destroyed and more than 150,000 Kurds have been deported since 1988 by separatist Armenian forces.\n\nAccording to a report by the Council of Europe, approximately 1.3 million Kurds live in Western Europe. The earliest immigrants were Kurds from Turkey, who settled in Germany, Austria, the Benelux countries, the United Kingdom, Switzerland and France during the 1960s. Successive periods of political and social turmoil in the region during the 1980s and 1990s brought new waves of Kurdish refugees, mostly from Iran and Iraq under Saddam Hussein, came to Europe. \nIn recent years, many Kurdish asylum seekers from both Iran and Iraq have settled in the United Kingdom (especially in the town of Dewsbury and in some northern areas of London), which has sometimes caused media controversy over their right to remain. \nThere have been tensions between Kurds and the established Muslim community in Dewsbury, which is home to very traditional mosques such as the Markazi. Since the beginning of the turmoil in Syria many of the refugees of the Syrian Civil War are Syrian Kurds and as a result many of the current Syrian asylum seekers in Germany are of Kurdish descent.\n\nThere was substantial immigration of ethnic Kurds in Canada and the United States, who are mainly political refugees and immigrants seeking economic opportunity. According to a 2011 Statistics Canada household survey, there were 11,685 people of Kurdish ethnic background living in Canada, and according to the 2011 Census, 10,325 Canadians spoke Kurdish language. In the United States, Kurdish immigrants started to settle in large numbers in Nashville in 1976, which is now home to the largest Kurdish community in the United States and is nicknamed \"Little Kurdistan\". Kurdish population in Nashville is estimated to be around 11,000. The total number of ethnic Kurds residing in the United States is estimated by the US Census Bureau to be 20,591. Other sources claim that there are 20,000 ethnic Kurds in the United States.\n\nAs a whole, the Kurdish people are adherents to various religions and creeds, perhaps constituting the most religiously diverse people of West Asia. Traditionally, Kurds have been known to take great liberties with their practices. This sentiment is reflected in the saying \"Compared to the unbeliever, the Kurd is a Muslim\".\n\nToday, the majority of Kurds are Sunni Muslim, belonging to the Shafi school. The Kurdish following of the Shafi legal code has caused some tension when pushed up against Sunni Turks and Sunni Arabs who subscribe to the Hanafi legal code.\n\nThe majority of Sunni Muslim Kurds belonging to the Shafi school speak the Northern Kurdish (Kurmanji) dialect.\n\nThere is also a significant minority of Kurds who are Shia Muslims. A side of sources mention that most of Kurds in Iran are Shias, who primarily living in the Ilam, Kermanshah and Khorasan provinces of Iran; the other Shia Kurds are (often) in eastern Iraq (Feyli Kurds) as well as Shia Kurds who are in Syria and especially in Turkey. Amongst Shia Muslim Kurdish communities, in particular the practitioners of Alevism in Anatolia, the Zaza language is found more commonly.\n\nMystical practices and participation in Sufi orders are also widespread among Kurds, with prominent Kurdish Sufi saints including Piryones.\n\nThe Alevis (usually considered adherents of a branch of Shia Islam with elements of Sufism) are another religious significant minority among the Kurds, living in Eastern Anatolia in Turkey, meanwhile, with somewhere between 10 and 40% of Kurds in Turkey Alevis. Alevism developed out of the teachings of Haji Bektash Veli, a 13th-century mystic from Khorasan. Among the Qizilbash, the militant groups which predate the Alevis and helped establish the Safavid Dynasty, there were numerous Kurdish tribes. The American missionary Stephen van Renssalaer Trowbridge, working at Aintab (present Gaziantep) reported that his Alevi acquaintances considered as their highest spiritual leaders an Ahl-i Haqq sayyid family in the Guran district.\n\nAhl-i Haqq or Yarsanism is a syncretic religion founded by Sultan Sahak in the late 14th century in western Iran. Most of its adherents, estimated at around 500,000 or 1,000,000, are found primarily in western Iran and eastern Iraq and are mostly ethnic Goran Kurds, though there are also smaller groups of Persian, Lori, Azeri and Arab adherents. Its central religious text is the Kalâm-e Saranjâm, written in Gurani. In this text, the religion's basic pillars are summarized as: \"The Yarsan should strive for these four qualities: purity, rectitude, self-effacement and self-abnegation\".\n\nThe Yarsan faith's unique features include millenarism, nativism, egalitarianism, metempsychosis, angelology, divine manifestation and dualism. Many of these features are found in Yazidism, another Kurdish faith, in the faith of Zoroastrians and in ghulat (non-mainstream Shia) groups; certainly, the names and religious terminology of the Yarsan are often explicitly of Muslim origin. Unlike other indigenous Persianate faiths, the Yarsan explicitly reject class, caste and rank, which sets them apart from the Yazidis and Zoroastrians.\n\nThe Ahl-i Haqq consider the Bektashi and Alevi as kindred communities.\n\nYazidism is another syncretic religion practiced among Kurdish communities, founded by Sheikh Adi ibn Musafir, a 12th-century mystic from Lebanon. Their numbers exceed 500,000, with some estimates numbering them at 1.2 million worldwide. Its central religious texts are the Kitêba Cilwe and Meshaf Resh.\n\nAccording to Yazidi beliefs, God created the world but left it in the care of seven holy beings or angels. The most prominent angel is Melek Taus (Kurdish: \"Tawûsê Melek\"), the Peacock Angel, God's representative on earth. Yazidis believe in the periodic reincarnation of the seven holy beings in human form. Yazidis who marry non-Yazidis are automatically considered to be converted to the religion of their spouse and therefore are not permitted to call themselves Yazidis.\n\nThey live primarily in Iraq's Nineveh Governorate. Their holiest shrine and the tomb of the faith's founder is located in Lalish, in northern Iraq.\n\nThe Iranian religion of Zoroastrianism has had a major influence on the Iranian culture, which Kurds are a part of, and has maintained some effect since the demise of the religion in the Middle Ages. The Iranian philosopher Sohrevardi drew heavily from Zoroastrian teachings. Ascribed to the teachings of the prophet Zoroaster, the faith's Supreme Being is Ahura Mazda. Leading characteristics, such as messianism, the Golden Rule, heaven and hell, and free will influenced other religious systems, including Second Temple Judaism, Gnosticism, Christianity, and Islam.\n\nIn 2016, the first official Zoroastrian fire temple of Iraqi Kurdistan opened in Sulaymaniyah. Attendees celebrated the occasion by lighting a ritual fire and beating the frame drum or 'daf'. Awat Tayib, the chief of followers of Zoroastrianism in the Kurdistan region, claimed that many were returning to Zoroastrianism but some kept it secret out of fear of reprisals from Islamists.\n\nAlthough historically there have been various accounts of Kurdish Christians, most often these were in the form of individuals, and not as communities. However, in the 19th and 20th century various travel logs tell of Kurdish Christian tribes, as well as Kurdish Muslim tribes who had substantial Christian populations living amongst them. A significant number of these were allegedly originally Armenian or Assyrian, and it has been recorded that a small number of Christian traditions have been preserved. Several Christian prayers in Kurdish have been found from earlier centuries.\n\nSegments of the Bible were first made available in the Kurdish language in 1856 in the Kurmanji dialect. The Gospels were translated by Stepan, an Armenian employee of the American Bible Society and were published in 1857. Prominent historical Kurdish Christians include the brothers Zakare and Ivane Mkhargrdzeli.\n\nKurdish culture is a legacy from the various ancient peoples who shaped modern Kurds and their society. As most other Middle Eastern populations, a high degree of mutual influences between the Kurds and their neighbouring peoples are apparent. Therefore, in Kurdish culture elements of various other cultures are to be seen.\nHowever, on the whole, Kurdish culture is closest to that of other Iranian peoples, in particular those who historically had the closest geographical proximity to the Kurds, such as the Persians and Lurs. Kurds, for instance, also celebrate Newroz (March 21) as New Year's Day.\n\nA madrasa system was used before the modern era. Mele are Islamic clerics and instructors.\n\nIn general, Kurdish women's rights and equality have improved in the 20th and 21st century due to progressive movements within Kurdish society. However, despite the progress, Kurdish and international women's rights organizations still report problems related to gender equality, forced marriages, honor killings and in Iraqi Kurdistan also female genital mutilation (FGM).\n\nThe Kurds possess a rich tradition of folklore, which, until recent times, was largely transmitted by speech or song, from one generation to the next. Although some of the Kurdish writers' stories were well known throughout Kurdistan; most of the stories told and sung were only written down in the 20th and 21st century. Many of these are, allegedly, centuries old.\n\nWidely varying in purpose and style, among the Kurdish folklore one will find stories about nature, anthropomorphic animals, love, heroes and villains, mythological creatures and everyday life. A number of these mythological figures can be found in other cultures, like the Simurgh and Kaveh the Blacksmith in the broader Iranian Mythology, and stories of Shahmaran throughout Anatolia. Additionally, stories can be purely entertaining, or have an educational or religious aspect.\n\nPerhaps the most widely reoccurring element is the fox, which, through cunning and shrewdness triumphs over less intelligent species, yet often also meets his demise. Another common theme in Kurdish folklore is the origin of a tribe.\n\nStorytellers would perform in front of an audience, sometimes consisting of an entire village. People from outside the region would travel to attend their narratives, and the storytellers themselves would visit other villages to spread their tales. These would thrive especially during winter, where entertainment was hard to find as evenings had to be spent inside.\n\nCoinciding with the heterogeneous Kurdish groupings, although certain stories and elements were commonly found throughout Kurdistan, others were unique to a specific area; depending on the region, religion or dialect. The Kurdish Jews of Zakho are perhaps the best example of this; their gifted storytellers are known to have been greatly respected throughout the region, thanks to a unique oral tradition. Other examples are the mythology of the Yezidis, and the stories of the Dersim Kurds, which had a substantial Armenian influence.\n\nDuring the criminalization of the Kurdish language after the coup d'état of 1980, dengbêj (singers) and çîrokbêj (tellers) were silenced, and many of the stories had become endangered. In 1991, the language was decriminalized, yet the now highly available radios and TV's had as an effect a diminished interest in traditional storytelling. However, a number of writers have made great strides in the preservation of these tales.\n\nKurdish weaving is renowned throughout the world, with fine specimens of both rugs and bags. The most famous Kurdish rugs are those from the Bijar region, in the Kurdistan Province. Because of the unique way in which the Bijar rugs are woven, they are very stout and durable, hence their appellation as the 'Iron Rugs of Persia'. Exhibiting a wide variety, the Bijar rugs have patterns ranging from floral designs, medallions and animals to other ornaments. They generally have two wefts, and are very colorful in design. With an increased interest in these rugs in the last century, and a lesser need for them to be as sturdy as they were, new Bijar rugs are more refined and delicate in design.\n\nAnother well-known Kurdish rug is the Senneh rug, which is regarded as the most sophisticated of the Kurdish rugs. They are especially known for their great knot density and high quality mountain wool. They lend their name from the region of Sanandaj. Throughout other Kurdish regions like Kermanshah, Siirt, Malatya and Bitlis rugs were also woven to great extent.\n\nKurdish bags are mainly known from the works of one large tribe: the Jaffs, living in the border area between Iran and Iraq. These Jaff bags share the same characteristics of Kurdish rugs; very colorful, stout in design, often with medallion patterns. They were especially popular in the West during the 1920s and 1930s.\n\nOutside of weaving and clothing, there are many other Kurdish handicrafts, which were traditionally often crafted by nomadic Kurdish tribes. These are especially well known in Iran, most notably the crafts from the Kermanshah and Sanandaj regions. Among these crafts are chess boards, talismans, jewelry, ornaments, weaponry, instruments etc.\n\nKurdish blades include a distinct jambiya, with its characteristic I-shaped hilt, and oblong blade. Generally, these possess double-edged blades, reinforced with a central ridge, a wooden, leather or silver decorated scabbard, and a horn hilt, furthermore they are often still worn decoratively by older men. Swords were made as well. Most of these blades in circulation stem from the 19th century.\n\nAnother distinct form of art from Sanandaj is 'Oroosi', a type of window where stylized wooden pieces are locked into each other, rather than being glued together. These are further decorated with coloured glass, this stems from an old belief that if light passes through a combination of seven colours it helps keep the atmosphere clean.\n\nAmong Kurdish Jews a common practice was the making of talismans, which were believed to combat illnesses and protect the wearer from malevolent spirits.\n\nAdorning the body with tattoos (\"deq\" in Kurdish) is widespread among the Kurds; even though permanent tattoos are not permissible in Sunni Islam. Therefore, these traditional tattoos are thought to derive from pre-Islamic times.\n\nTattoo ink is made by mixing soot with (breast) milk and the poisonous liquid from the gall bladder of an animal. The design is drawn on the skin using a thin twig and is, by needle, penetrated under the skin. These have a wide variety of meanings and purposes, among which are protection against evil or illnesses; beauty enhancement; and the showing of tribal affiliations. Religious symbolism is also common among both traditional and modern Kurdish tattoos. Tattoos are more prevalent among women than among men, and were generally worn on feet, the chin, foreheads and other places of the body.\n\nThe popularity of permanent, traditional tattoos has greatly diminished among newer generation of Kurds. However, modern tattoos are becoming more prevalent; and temporary tattoos are still being worn on special occasions (such as henna, the night before a wedding) and as tribute to the cultural heritage.\n\nTraditionally, there are three types of Kurdish classical performers: storytellers (\"çîrokbêj\"), minstrels (\"stranbêj\"), and bards (\"dengbêj\"). No specific music was associated with the Kurdish princely courts. Instead, music performed in night gatherings (\"şevbihêrk\") is considered classical. Several musical forms are found in this genre. Many songs are epic in nature, such as the popular \"Lawiks\", heroic ballads recounting the tales of Kurdish heroes such as Saladin. \"Heyrans\" are love ballads usually expressing the melancholy of separation and unfulfilled love, one of the first Kurdish female singers to sing heyrans is Chopy Fatah, while \"Lawje\" is a form of religious music and \"Payizoks\" are songs performed during the autumn. Love songs, dance music, wedding and other celebratory songs (\"dîlok/narînk\"), erotic poetry, and work songs are also popular.\n\nThroughout the Middle East, there are many prominent Kurdish artists. Most famous are Ibrahim Tatlises, Nizamettin Arıç, Ahmet Kaya and the Kamkars. In Europe, well-known artists are Darin Zanyar, Sivan Perwer, and Azad.\n\nThe main themes of Kurdish Cinema are the poverty and hardship which ordinary Kurds have to endure. The first films featuring Kurdish culture were actually shot in Armenia. Zare, released in 1927, produced by Hamo Beknazarian, details the story of Zare and her love for the shepherd Seydo, and the difficulties the two experience by the hand of the village elder.\nIn 1948 and 1959, two documentaries were made concerning the Yezidi Kurds in Armenia. These were joint Armenian-Kurdish productions; with H. Koçaryan and Heciye Cindi teaming up for \"The Kurds of Soviet Armenia\", and Ereb Samilov and C. Jamharyan for \"Kurds of Armenia\".\n\nThe first critically acclaimed and famous Kurdish films were produced by Yılmaz Güney. Initially a popular, award-winning actor in Turkey with the nickname \"Çirkin Kral\" (\"the Ugly King\", after his rough looks), he spent the later part of his career producing socio-critical and politically loaded films. \"Sürü\" (1979), \"Yol\" (1982) and \"Duvar\" (1983) are his best-known works, of which the second won Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival of 1982, the most prestigious award in the world of cinema.\n\nAnother prominent Kurdish film director is Bahman Qubadi. His first feature film was \"A Time for Drunken Horses\", released in 2000. It was critically acclaimed, and went on to win multiple awards. Other movies of his would follow this example, making him one of the best known film producers of Iran of today. Recently, he released \"Rhinos Season\", starring Behrouz Vossoughi, Monica Bellucci and Yilmaz Erdogan, detailing the tumultuous life of a Kurdish poet.\n\nOther prominent Kurdish film directors that are critically acclaimed include Mahsun Kırmızıgül, Hiner Saleem and the aforementioned Yilmaz Erdogan. There's also been a number of films set and/or filmed in Kurdistan made by non-Kurdish film directors, such as \"The Wind Will Carry Us\", \"Triage\", \"The Exorcist\", and \"\".\n\nThe most popular sport among the Kurds is football. Because the Kurds have no independent state, they have no representative team in FIFA or the AFC; however a team representing Iraqi Kurdistan has been active in the Viva World Cup since 2008. They became runners-up in 2009 and 2010, before ultimately becoming champion in 2012.\n\nOn a national level, the Kurdish clubs of Iraq have achieved success in recent years as well, winning the Iraqi Premier League four times in the last five years. Prominent clubs are Erbil SC, Duhok SC, Sulaymaniyah FC and Zakho FC.\n\nIn Turkey, a Kurd named Celal Ibrahim was one of the founders of Galatasaray S.K. in 1905, as well as one of the original players. The most prominent Kurdish-Turkish club is Diyarbakirspor. In the diaspora, the most successful Kurdish club is Dalkurd FF and the most famous player is Eren Derdiyok.\n\nAnother prominent sport is wrestling. In Iranian Wrestling, there are three styles originating from Kurdish regions: \nBULLET::::- Zhir-o-Bal (a style similar to Greco-Roman wrestling), practised in Kurdistan, Kermanshah and Ilam;\nBULLET::::- Zouran-Patouleh, practised in Kurdistan;\nBULLET::::- Zouran-Machkeh, practised in Kurdistan as well.\nFurthermore, the most accredited of the traditional Iranian wrestling styles, the Bachoukheh, derives its name from a local Khorasani Kurdish costume in which it is practised.\n\nKurdish medalists in the 2012 Summer Olympics were Nur Tatar, Kianoush Rostami and Yezidi Misha Aloyan; who won medals in taekwondo, weightlifting and boxing, respectively.\n\nThe traditional Kurdish village has simple houses, made of mud. In most cases with flat, wooden roofs, and, if the village is built on the slope of a mountain, the roof on one house makes for the garden of the house one level higher. However, houses with a beehive-like roof, not unlike those in Harran, are also present.\n\nOver the centuries many Kurdish architectural marvels have been erected, with varying styles. Kurdistan boasts many examples from ancient Iranic, Roman, Greek and Semitic origin, most famous of these include Bisotun and Taq-e Bostan in Kermanshah, Takht-e Soleyman near Takab, Mount Nemrud near Adiyaman and the citadels of Erbil and Diyarbakir.\n\nThe first genuinely Kurdish examples extant were built in the 11th century. Those earliest examples consist of the Marwanid Dicle Bridge in Diyarbakir, the Shadaddid Minuchir Mosque in Ani, and the Hisn al Akrad near Homs.\n\nIn the 12th and 13th centuries the Ayyubid dynasty constructed many buildings throughout the Middle East, being influenced by their predecessors, the Fatimids, and their rivals, the Crusaders, whilst also developing their own techniques. Furthermore, women of the Ayyubid family took a prominent role in the patronage of new constructions. The Ayyubids' most famous works are the Halil-ur-Rahman Mosque that surrounds the Pool of Sacred Fish in Urfa, the Citadel of Cairo and most parts of the Citadel of Aleppo. Another important piece of Kurdish architectural heritage from the late 12th/early 13th century is the Yezidi pilgrimage site Lalish, with its trademark conical roofs.\n\nIn later periods too, Kurdish rulers and their corresponding dynasties and emirates would leave their mark upon the land in the form mosques, castles and bridges, some of which have decayed, or have been (partly) destroyed in an attempt to erase the Kurdish cultural heritage, such as the White Castle of the Bohtan Emirate. Well-known examples are Hosap Castle of the 17th century, Sherwana Castle of the early 18th century, and the Ellwen Bridge of Khanaqin of the 19th century.\n\nMost famous is the Ishak Pasha Palace of Dogubeyazit, a structure with heavy influences from both Anatolian and Iranic architectural traditions. Construction of the Palace began in 1685, led by Colak Abdi Pasha, a Kurdish bey of the Ottoman Empire, but the building would not be completed until 1784, by his grandson, Ishak Pasha. Containing almost 100 rooms, including a mosque, dining rooms, dungeons and being heavily decorated by hewn-out ornaments, this Palace has the reputation as being one of the finest pieces of architecture of the Ottoman Period, and of Anatolia.\n\nIn recent years, the KRG has been responsible for the renovation of several historical structures, such as Erbil Citadel and the Mudhafaria Minaret.\n\nBULLET::::- Kingdom of Kurdistan (1920) - self-proclaimed Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Republic of Ararat (1927–1930) - self-proclaimed Republic\nBULLET::::- Republic of Mahabad (1946) - self-proclaimed State\nBULLET::::- Kurdistan Region (1992 to date) - Autonomous region in Iraq\nBULLET::::- Democratic Federation of Northern Syria (2013 to date) - Autonomy of Syria\n\nBULLET::::- Barth, F. 1953. \"Principles of Social Organization in Southern Kurdistan.\" Bulletin of the University Ethnographic Museum 7. Oslo.\nBULLET::::- Hansen, H.H. 1961. \"The Kurdish Woman's Life.\" Copenhagen. Ethnographic Museum Record 7:1–213.\nBULLET::::- Leach, E.R. 1938. \"Social and Economic Organization of the Rowanduz Kurds.\" London School of Economics Monographs on Social Anthropology 3:1–74.\nBULLET::::- Longrigg, S.H. 1953. \"Iraq, 1900–1950.\" London.\nBULLET::::- Masters, W.M. 1953. \"Rowanduz.\" Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.\nBULLET::::- McKiernan, Kevin. 2006. \"The Kurds, a People in Search of Their Homeland\". New York: St. Martin's Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Samir Amin (October 2016). \"The Kurdish Question Then and Now,\" in Monthly Review, Volume 68, Issue 05\nBULLET::::- \"A People Without a State: The Kurds from the Rise of Islam to the Dawn of Nationalism,\" by Michael Eppel, 2016, University of Texas Press\nBULLET::::- Maisel, Sebastian, ed. The Kurds: An Encyclopedia of Life, Culture, and Society. Abc-Clio, 2018.\n\nBULLET::::- Kurds, Encyclopædia Britannica.\nBULLET::::- Kurd, Encyclopædia Britannica.\nBULLET::::- The Kurds: People without a country, Encyclopædia Britannica.\nBULLET::::- The Kurdish Institute of Paris Kurdish language, history, books and latest news articles.\nBULLET::::- The Encyclopaedia of Kurdistan\nBULLET::::- Istanbul Kurdish Institute\nBULLET::::- The Kurdish Center of International Pen\nBULLET::::- Kurdish Library, supported by the Swedish Government.\nBULLET::::- Ethnic Cleansing and the Kurds\nBULLET::::- The Kurds in the Ottoman Hungary by Zurab Aloian\nBULLET::::- \"The Other Iraq\" Kurdish Information Website\n\nBULLET::::- The Kurdish Issue in Turkey\nBULLET::::- A report on the Kurdish IDP's – 2005\nBULLET::::- A German newspaper's take on the Kurdish issue – 2005\nBULLET::::- The Guardian – \"What's in a name? Too much in Turkey\" – 2001\n"}
{"id": "17070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17070", "title": "Kaluza–Klein theory", "text": "Kaluza–Klein theory\n\nIn physics, Kaluza–Klein theory (KK theory) is a classical unified field theory of gravitation and electromagnetism built around the idea of a fifth dimension beyond the usual four of space and time and considered an important precursor to string theory.\n\nThe five-dimensional theory developed in three steps. The original hypothesis came from Theodor Kaluza, who sent his results to Einstein in 1919, and published them in 1921. Kaluza presented a purely classical extension of general relativity to five dimensions, with a metric tensor of 15 components. Ten components are identified with the four-dimensional spacetime metric, four components with the electromagnetic vector potential, and one component with an unidentified scalar field sometimes called the \"radion\" or the \"dilaton\". Correspondingly, the five-dimensional Einstein equations yield the four-dimensional Einstein field equations, the Maxwell equations for the electromagnetic field, and an equation for the scalar field. Kaluza also introduced the \"cylinder condition\" hypothesis, that no component of the five-dimensional metric depends on the fifth dimension. Without this assumption, terms are introduced that involving derivatives of the fields with respect to the fifth coordinate. This extra degree of freedom is such that the field equations of fully-variable five-dimensional relativity grow enormous in complexity. Standard four-dimensional physics seems to manifest the cylinder condition, and the corresponding simpler mathematics.\n\nIn 1926, Oskar Klein gave Kaluza's classical five-dimensional theory a quantum interpretation, to accord with the then-recent discoveries of Heisenberg and Schrödinger. Klein introduced the hypothesis that the fifth dimension was curled up and microscopic, to explain the cylinder condition. Klein suggested that the geometry of the extra fifth dimension could take the form of a circle, with the radius of . Klein also made a contribution to the classical theory by providing a properly normalized 5D metric.\n\nIn the 1940s the classical theory was completed, and the full field equations including the scalar field were obtained by three independent research groups: Thiry, working in France on his dissertation under Lichnerowicz; Jordan, Ludwig, and Müller in Germany, with critical input from Pauli and Fierz; and Scherrer working alone in Switzerland. Jordan's work led to the scalar–tensor theory of Brans–Dicke; Brans and Dicke were apparently unaware of Thiry or Scherrer. The full Kaluza equations under the cylinder condition are quite complex, and most English-language reviews as well as the English translations of Thiry contain some errors. The curvature tensors for the complete Kaluza equations were evaluated using tensor algebra software in 2015, providing the first publication in the English language of the correct Kaluza field equations, including the scalar field.\n\nIn his 1921 paper, Kaluza established all the elements of the classical five-dimensional theory: the metric, the field equations, the equations of motion, the stress–energy tensor, and the cylinder condition. With no free parameters, it merely extends general relativity to five dimensions. One starts by hypothesizing a form of the five-dimensional metric formula_1, where Latin indices span five dimensions. Let one also introduce the four-dimensional spacetime metric formula_2, where Greek indices span the usual four dimensions of space and time; a 4-vector formula_3 identified with the electromagnetic vector potential; and a scalar field formula_4. Then decompose the 5D metric so that the 4D metric is framed by the electromagnetic vector potential, with the scalar field at the fifth diagonal. This can be visualized as:\n\nOne can write more precisely\n\nwhere the index formula_7 indicates the fifth coordinate by convention even though the first four coordinates are indexed with 0, 1, 2, and 3. The associated inverse metric is\n\nThis decomposition is quite general and all terms are dimensionless. Kaluza then applies the machinery of standard general relativity to this metric. The field equations are obtained from five-dimensional Einstein equations, and the equations of motion from the five-dimensional geodesic hypothesis. The resulting field equations provide both the equations of general relativity and of electrodynamics; the equations of motion provide the four-dimensional geodesic equation and the Lorentz force law, and one finds that electric charge is identified with motion in the fifth dimension.\n\nThe hypothesis for the metric implies an invariant five-dimensional length element formula_9:\n\nThe field equations of the 5-dimensional theory were never adequately provided by Kaluza or Klein because they ignored the scalar field. The full Kaluza field equations are generally attributed to Thiry, who obtained vacuum field equations, although Kaluza originally provided a stress–energy tensor for his theory and Thiry included a stress–energy tensor in his thesis. But as described by Gonner, several independent groups worked on the field equations in the 1940s and earlier. Thiry is perhaps best known only because an English translation was provided by Applequist, Chodos, & Freund in their review book. Applequist et al. also provided an English translation of Kaluza's paper. There are no English translations of the Jordan papers.. The first correct English-language Kaluza field equations, including the scalar field, were provided by .\n\nTo obtain the 5D field equations, the 5D connections formula_11 are calculated from the 5D metric formula_12, and the 5D Ricci tensor formula_13 is calculated from the 5D connections.\n\nThe classic results of Thiry and other authors presume the cylinder condition:\nWithout this assumption, the field equations become much more complex, providing many more degrees of freedom that can be identified with various new fields. Paul Wesson and colleagues have pursued relaxation of the cylinder condition to gain extra terms that can be identified with the matter fields, for which Kaluza otherwise inserted a stress–energy tensor by hand.\n\nIt has been an objection to the original Kaluza hypothesis to invoke the fifth dimension only to negate its dynamics. But Thiry argued that the interpretation of the Lorentz force law in terms of a 5-dimensional geodesic militates strongly for a fifth dimension irrespective of the cylinder condition. Most authors have therefore employed the cylinder condition in deriving the field equations. Furthermore, vacuum equations are typically assumed for which\n\nwhere\nand\nThe vacuum field equations obtained in this way by Thiry and Jordan's group are as follows.\n\nThe field equation for formula_4 is obtained from\nwhere formula_20,\nwhere formula_21, and where formula_22 is a standard, 4D covariant derivative. It shows that the electromagnetic field is a source for the scalar field. Note that the scalar field cannot be set to a constant without constraining the electromagnetic field. The earlier treatments by Kaluza and Klein did not have an adequate description of the scalar field, and did not realize the implied constraint on the electromagnetic field by assuming the scalar field to be constant.\n\nThe field equation for formula_23 is obtained from\nIt has the form of the vacuum Maxwell equations if the scalar field is constant.\n\nThe field equation for the 4D Ricci tensor formula_25 is obtained from\nwhere formula_27 is the standard 4D Ricci scalar.\n\nThis equation shows the remarkable result, called the \"Kaluza miracle\", that the precise form for the electromagnetic stress–energy tensor emerges from the 5D vacuum equations as a source in the 4D equations: field from the vacuum. This relation allows the definitive identification of formula_28 with the electromagnetic vector potential. Therefore, the field needs to be rescaled with a conversion constant formula_29 such that formula_30.\n\nThe relation above shows that we must have\nwhere formula_32 is the gravitational constant and formula_33 is the permeability of free space. In the Kaluza theory, the gravitational constant can be understood as an electromagnetic coupling constant in the metric. There is also a stress–energy tensor for the scalar field. The scalar field behaves like a variable gravitational constant, in terms of modulating the coupling of electromagnetic stress energy to spacetime curvature. The sign of formula_34 in the metric is fixed by correspondence with 4D theory so that electromagnetic energy densities are positive. It is often assumed that the 5th coordinate is spacelike in its signature in the metric.\n\nIn the presence of matter, the 5D vacuum condition can not be assumed. Indeed, Kaluza did not assume it. The full field equations require evaluation of the 5D Einstein tensor\nas seen in the recovery of the electromagnetic stress–energy tensor above. The 5D curvature tensors are complex, and most English-language reviews contain errors in either formula_36 or formula_37, as does the English translation of. See for a complete set of 5D curvature tensors under the cylinder condition, evaluated using tensor algebra software.\n\nThe equations of motion are obtained from the five-dimensional geodesic hypothesis in terms of a 5-velocity formula_38:\n\nThis equation can be recast in several ways, and it has been studied in various forms by authors including Kaluza, Pauli, Gross & Perry, Gegenberg & Kunstatter, and Wesson & Ponce de Leon,\nbut it is instructive to convert it back to the usual 4-dimensional length element formula_40, which is related to the 5-dimensional length element formula_41 as given above:\n\nThen the 5D geodesic equation can be written for the spacetime components of the 4-velocity,\n\nThe term quadratic in formula_45 provides the 4D geodesic equation plus some electromagnetic terms:\n\nThe term linear in formula_45 provides the Lorentz force law:\nThis is another expression of the \"Kaluza miracle\". The same hypothesis for the 5D metric that provides electromagnetic stress–energy in the Einstein equations, also provides the Lorentz force law in the equation of motions along with the 4D geodesic equation. Yet correspondence with the Lorentz force law requires that we identify the component of 5-velocity along the 5th dimension with electric charge:\nwhere formula_50 is particle mass and formula_51 is particle electric charge. Thus, electric charge is understood as motion along the 5th dimension. The fact that the Lorentz force law could be understood as a geodesic in 5 dimensions was to Kaluza a primary motivation for considering the 5-dimensional hypothesis, even in the presence of the aesthetically unpleasing cylinder condition.\n\nYet there is a problem: the term quadratic in formula_52\nIf there is no gradient in the scalar field, the term quadratic in formula_52 vanishes. But otherwise the expression above implies\nFor elementary particles, formula_56. The term quadratic in formula_52 should dominate the equation, perhaps in contradiction to experience. This was the main shortfall of the 5-dimensional theory as Kaluza saw it, and he gives it some discussion in his original article.\n\nThe equation of motion for formula_52 is particularly simple under the cylinder condition. Start with the alternate form of the geodesic equation, written for the covariant 5-velocity:\nThis means that under the cylinder condition, formula_60 is a constant of the 5-dimensional motion:\n\nKaluza proposed a 5D matter stress tensor formula_62 of the form\n\nwhere formula_64 is a density and the length element formula_41 is as defined above.\n\nThen, the spacetime component gives a typical \"dust\" stress energy tensor:\n\nThe mixed component provides a 4-current source for the Maxwell equations:\n\nJust as the five-dimensional metric comprises the 4-D metric framed by the electromagnetic vector potential, the 5-dimensional stress–energy tensor comprises the 4-D stress–energy tensor framed by the vector 4-current.\n\nKaluza's original hypothesis was purely classical and extended discoveries of general relativity. By the time of Klein's contribution, the discoveries of Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and de Broglie were receiving a lot of attention. Klein's \"Nature\" paper suggested that the fifth dimension is closed and periodic, and that the identification of electric charge with motion in the fifth dimension be interpreted as standing waves of wavelength formula_68, much like the electrons around a nucleus in the Bohr model of the atom. The quantization of electric charge could then be nicely understood in terms of integer multiples of fifth-dimensional momentum. Combining the previous Kaluza result for formula_52 in terms of electric charge, and a de Broglie relation for momentum formula_70, Klein obtained an expression for the 0th mode of such waves:\n\nwhere formula_72 is the Planck constant. Klein found formula_73 cm, and thereby an explanation for the cylinder condition in this small value.\n\nKlein's \"Zeitschrift für Physik\" paper of the same year, gave a more detailed treatment that explicitly invoked the techniques of Schroedinger and de Broglie. It recapitulated much of the classical theory of Kaluza described above, and then departed into Klein's quantum interpretation. Klein solved a Schroedinger-like wave equation using an expansion in terms of fifth-dimensional waves resonating in the closed, compact fifth dimension.\n\nA splitting of five-dimensional spacetime into the Einstein equations and Maxwell equations in four dimensions was first discovered by Gunnar Nordström in 1914, in the context of his theory of gravity, but subsequently forgotten. Kaluza published his derivation in 1921 as an attempt to unify electromagnetism with Einstein's general relativity.\n\nIn 1926, Oskar Klein proposed that the fourth spatial dimension is curled up in a circle of a very small radius, so that a particle moving a short distance along that axis would return to where it began. The distance a particle can travel before reaching its initial position is said to be the size of the dimension. This extra dimension is a compact set, and construction of this compact dimension is referred to as compactification.\n\nIn modern geometry, the extra fifth dimension can be understood to be the circle group U(1), as electromagnetism can essentially be formulated as a gauge theory on a fiber bundle, the circle bundle, with gauge group U(1). In Kaluza–Klein theory this group suggests that gauge symmetry is the symmetry of circular compact dimensions. Once this geometrical interpretation is understood, it is relatively straightforward to replace \"U\"(1) by a general Lie group. Such generalizations are often called Yang–Mills theories. If a distinction is drawn, then it is that Yang–Mills theories occur on a flat spacetime, whereas Kaluza–Klein treats the more general case of curved spacetime. The base space of Kaluza–Klein theory need not be four-dimensional spacetime; it can be any (pseudo-)Riemannian manifold, or even a supersymmetric manifold or orbifold or even a noncommutative space.\n\nThe construction can be outlined, roughly, as follows. One starts by considering a principal fiber bundle \"P\" with gauge group \"G\" over a manifold M. Given a connection on the bundle, and a metric on the base manifold, and a gauge invariant metric on the tangent of each fiber, one can construct a bundle metric defined on the entire bundle. Computing the scalar curvature of this bundle metric, one finds that it is constant on each fiber: this is the \"Kaluza miracle\". One did not have to explicitly impose a cylinder condition, or to compactify: by assumption, the gauge group is already compact. Next, one takes this scalar curvature as the Lagrangian density, and, from this, constructs the Einstein–Hilbert action for the bundle, as a whole. The equations of motion, the Euler–Lagrange equations, can be then obtained by considering where the action is stationary with respect to variations of either the metric on the base manifold, or of the gauge connection. Variations with respect to the base metric gives the Einstein field equations on the base manifold, with the energy–momentum tensor given by the curvature (field strength) of the gauge connection. On the flip side, the action is stationary against variations of the gauge connection precisely when the gauge connection solves the Yang–Mills equations. Thus, by applying a single idea: the principle of least action, to a single quantity: the scalar curvature on the bundle (as a whole), one obtains simultaneously all of the needed field equations, for both the spacetime and the gauge field.\n\nAs an approach to the unification of the forces, it is straightforward to apply the Kaluza–Klein theory in an attempt to unify gravity with the strong and electroweak forces by using the symmetry group of the Standard Model, SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1). However, an attempt to convert this interesting geometrical construction into a bona-fide model of reality flounders on a number of issues, including the fact that the fermions must be introduced in an artificial way (in nonsupersymmetric models). Nonetheless, KK remains an important touchstone in theoretical physics and is often embedded in more sophisticated theories. It is studied in its own right as an object of geometric interest in K-theory.\n\nEven in the absence of a completely satisfying theoretical physics framework, the idea of exploring extra, compactified, dimensions is of considerable interest in the experimental physics and astrophysics communities. A variety of predictions, with real experimental consequences, can be made (in the case of large extra dimensions and warped models). For example, on the simplest of principles, one might expect to have standing waves in the extra compactified dimension(s). If a spatial extra dimension is of radius \"R\", the invariant mass of such standing waves would be \"M\" = \"nh\"/\"Rc\" with \"n\" an integer, \"h\" being Planck's constant and \"c\" the speed of light. This set of possible mass values is often called the Kaluza–Klein tower. Similarly, in Thermal quantum field theory a compactification of the euclidean time dimension leads to the Matsubara frequencies and thus to a discretized thermal energy spectrum.\n\nHowever, Klein's approach to a quantum theory is flawed and, for example, leads to a calculated electron mass in the order of magnitude of the Planck mass.\n\nExamples of experimental pursuits include work by the CDF collaboration, which has re-analyzed particle collider data for the signature of effects associated with large extra dimensions/warped models.\n\nBrandenberger and Vafa have speculated that in the early universe, cosmic inflation causes three of the space dimensions to expand to cosmological size while the remaining dimensions of space remained microscopic.\n\nOne particular variant of Kaluza–Klein theory is space–time–matter theory or induced matter theory, chiefly promulgated by Paul Wesson and other members of the Space–Time–Matter Consortium. In this version of the theory, it is noted that solutions to the equation\n\nmay be re-expressed so that in four dimensions, these solutions satisfy Einstein's equations\n\nwith the precise form of the \"T\" following from the Ricci-flat condition on the five-dimensional space. In other words, the cylinder condition of the previous development is dropped, and the stress–energy now comes from the derivatives of the 5D metric with respect to the fifth coordinate. Because the energy–momentum tensor is normally understood to be due to concentrations of matter in four-dimensional space, the above result is interpreted as saying that four-dimensional matter is induced from geometry in five-dimensional space.\n\nIn particular, the soliton solutions of formula_74 can be shown to contain the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric in both radiation-dominated (early universe) and matter-dominated (later universe) forms. The general equations can be shown to be sufficiently consistent with classical tests of general relativity to be acceptable on physical principles, while still leaving considerable freedom to also provide interesting cosmological models.\n\nThe Kaluza–Klein theory has a particularly elegant presentation in terms of geometry. In a certain sense, it looks just like ordinary gravity in free space, except that it is phrased in five dimensions instead of four.\n\nThe equations governing ordinary gravity in free space can be obtained from an action, by applying the variational principle to a certain action. Let \"M\" be a (pseudo-)Riemannian manifold, which may be taken as the spacetime of general relativity. If \"g\" is the metric on this manifold, one defines the action \"S\"(\"g\") as\n\nwhere \"R\"(\"g\") is the scalar curvature and vol(\"g\") is the volume element. By applying the variational principle to the action\n\none obtains precisely the Einstein equations for free space:\n\nHere, \"R\" is the Ricci tensor.\n\nBy contrast, the Maxwell equations describing electromagnetism can be understood to be the Hodge equations of a principal U(1)-bundle or circle bundle with fiber U(1). That is, the electromagnetic field \"F\" is a harmonic 2-form in the space Ω(\"M\") of differentiable 2-forms on the manifold \"M\". In the absence of charges and currents, the free-field Maxwell equations are\n\nwhere ∗ is the Hodge star.\n\nTo build the Kaluza–Klein theory, one picks an invariant metric on the circle \"S\" that is the fiber of the U(1)-bundle of electromagnetism. In this discussion, an \"invariant metric\" is simply one that is invariant under rotations of the circle. Suppose this metric gives the circle a total length of Λ. One then considers metrics formula_80 on the bundle \"P\" that are consistent with both the fiber metric, and the metric on the underlying manifold \"M\". The consistency conditions are:\nBULLET::::- The projection of formula_80 to the vertical subspace formula_82 needs to agree with metric on the fiber over a point in the manifold \"M\".\nBULLET::::- The projection of formula_80 to the horizontal subspace formula_84 of the tangent space at point \"p\" ∈ \"P\" must be isomorphic to the metric \"g\" on \"M\" at π(\"p\").\n\nThe Kaluza–Klein action for such a metric is given by\n\nThe scalar curvature, written in components, then expands to\n\nwhere π is the pullback of the fiber bundle projection . The connection \"A\" on the fiber bundle is related to the electromagnetic field strength as\n\nThat there always exists such a connection, even for fiber bundles of arbitrarily complex topology, is a result from homology and specifically, K-theory. Applying Fubini's theorem and integrating on the fiber, one gets\n\nVarying the action with respect to the component \"A\", one regains the Maxwell equations. Applying the variational principle to the base metric \"g\", one gets the Einstein equations\n\nwith the stress–energy tensor being given by\n\nsometimes called the Maxwell stress tensor.\n\nThe original theory identifies Λ with the fiber metric \"g\", and allows Λ to vary from fiber to fiber. In this case, the coupling between gravity and the electromagnetic field is not constant, but has its own dynamical field, the radion.\n\nIn the above, the size of the loop Λ acts as a coupling constant between the gravitational field and the electromagnetic field. If the base manifold is four-dimensional, the Kaluza–Klein manifold \"P\" is five-dimensional. The fifth dimension is a compact space, and is called the compact dimension. The technique of introducing compact dimensions to obtain a higher-dimensional manifold is referred to as compactification. Compactification does not produce group actions on chiral fermions except in very specific cases: the dimension of the total space must be 2 mod 8 and the G-index of the Dirac operator of the compact space must be nonzero.\n\nThe above development generalizes in a more-or-less straightforward fashion to general principal \"G\"-bundles for some arbitrary Lie group \"G\" taking the place of U(1). In such a case, the theory is often referred to as a Yang–Mills theory, and is sometimes taken to be synonymous. If the underlying manifold is supersymmetric, the resulting theory is a super-symmetric Yang–Mills theory.\n\nNo experimental or observational signs of extra dimensions have been officially reported. Many theoretical search techniques for detecting Kaluza–Klein resonances have been proposed using the mass couplings of such resonances with the top quark. However, until the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) reaches full operational power, observation of such resonances are unlikely. An analysis of results from the LHC in December 2010 severely constrains theories with large extra dimensions.\n\nThe observation of a Higgs-like boson at the LHC establishes a new empirical test which can be applied to the search for Kaluza–Klein resonances and supersymmetric particles.\nThe loop Feynman diagrams that exist in the Higgs interactions allow any particle with electric charge and mass to run in such a loop. Standard Model particles besides the top quark and W boson do not make big contributions to the cross-section observed in the decay, but if there are new particles beyond the Standard Model, they could potentially change the ratio of the predicted Standard Model cross-section to the experimentally observed cross-section. Hence a measurement of any dramatic change to the cross-section predicted by the Standard Model is crucial in probing the physics beyond it.\n\nAnother more recent paper from July 2018 does bode some hope for this theory; in the paper they dispute that gravity is leaking into higher dimensions as in brane theory. However the paper does demonstrate that EM and gravity share the same number of dimensions, and this fact lends support to Kaluza–Klein theory; whether the number of dimensions is really 3+1 or in fact 4+1 is the subject of further debate.\n\nBULLET::::- Classical theories of gravitation\nBULLET::::- Complex spacetime\nBULLET::::- DGP model\nBULLET::::- Quantum gravity\nBULLET::::- Randall–Sundrum model\nBULLET::::- String theory\nBULLET::::- Supergravity\nBULLET::::- Superstring theory\nBULLET::::- https://archive.org/details/sitzungsberichte1921preussi\nBULLET::::- \"(Includes reprints of the above articles as well as those of other important papers relating to Kaluza–Klein theory.)\"\n\nBULLET::::- Kaku, Michio and Robert O'Keefe. \"Hyperspace: A Scientific Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps, and the Tenth Dimension\". New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- The CDF Collaboration, \"Search for Extra Dimensions using Missing Energy at CDF\", (2004) \"(A simplified presentation of the search made for extra dimensions at the Collider Detector at Fermilab (CDF) particle physics facility.)\"\nBULLET::::- John M. Pierre, \"SUPERSTRINGS! Extra Dimensions\", (2003).\nBULLET::::- TeV scale gravity, mirror universe, and ... dinosaurs Article from Acta Physica Polonica B by Z.K. Silagadze.\nBULLET::::- Chris Pope, \"Lectures on Kaluza–Klein Theory\".\nBULLET::::- Edward Witten (2014). \"A Note On Einstein, Bergmann, and the Fifth Dimension\", arXiv:1401.8048; pdf\n"}
{"id": "17072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17072", "title": "Kalsilite", "text": "Kalsilite\n\nKalsilite (KAlSiO) is a vitreous white to grey feldspathoidal mineral that is found in some potassium-rich lavas, such as from Chamengo Crater in Uganda. It has a relative hardness of 5.5.\n\nBULLET::::- Mindat.org\nBULLET::::- Webmineral.com\nBULLET::::- Handbook of Mineralogy\n"}
{"id": "17073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17073", "title": "Kangchenjunga", "text": "Kangchenjunga\n\nKangchenjunga, also spelled Kanchenjunga, is the third highest mountain in the world. It rises with an elevation of in a section of the Himalayas called \"Kangchenjunga Himal\" delimited in the west by the Tamur River, in the north by the Lhonak Chu and Jongsang La, and in the east by the Teesta River. It lies between Nepal and Sikkim, India, with three of the five peaks (Main, Central, and South) directly on the border, and the remaining two (West and Kangbachen) in Nepal's Taplejung District.\n\nUntil 1852, Kangchenjunga was assumed to be the highest mountain in the world, but calculations based on various readings and measurements made by the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India in 1849 came to the conclusion that Mount Everest, known as Peak XV at the time, was the highest. Allowing for further verification of all calculations, it was officially announced in 1856 that Kangchenjunga is the third highest mountain in the world.\n\nKangchenjunga was first climbed on 25 May 1955 by Joe Brown and George Band, who were part of a British expedition. They stopped short of the summit in accordance with the promise given to the Chogyal that the top of the mountain would remain intact. Every climber or climbing group that has reached the summit has followed this tradition. Other members of this expedition included John Angelo Jackson and Tom Mackinon.\n\n\"Kangchenjunga\" is the official spelling adopted by Douglas Freshfield, Alexander Mitchell Kellas, and the Royal Geographical Society that gives the best indication of the Tibetan pronunciation. Freshfield referred to the spelling used by the Indian Government since the late 19th century. There are a number of alternative spellings including \"Kangchendzönga\", \"Khangchendzonga\", and \"Kanchenjunga\".\n\nThe brothers Hermann, Adolf and Robert Schlagintweit explained the local name 'Kanchinjínga' meaning “The five treasures of the high snow” as originating from the Tibetan word \"gangs\" meaning snow, ice; \"chen\" meaning great; \"mzod\" meaning treasure; \"lnga\" meaning five.\n\nLocal Lhopo people believe that the treasures are hidden but reveal to the devout when the world is in peril; the treasures comprise salt, gold, turquoise and precious stones, sacred scriptures, invincible armor or ammunition, grain, and medicine.\n\nKangchenjunga's name in the Limbu language is \"Senjelungma\" or \"Seseylungma\", and is believed to be an abode of the omnipotent goddess Yuma Sammang.\n\nIts name in Chinese is 干城章嘉峰 (Gānchéng zhāngjiāfēng).\n\nThe Kangchenjunga landscape is a complex of three distinct ecoregions: the eastern Himalayan broad-leaved and coniferous forests, the Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows, and the Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands.\nThe Kangchenjunga transboundary landscape is shared by Bhutan, China, India, and Nepal, and comprises 14 protected areas with a total of :\nBULLET::::- Nepal: Kanchenjunga Conservation Area.\nBULLET::::- Sikkim, India: Khangchendzonga National Park, Barsey Rhododendron Sanctuary, Fambong Lho Wildlife Sanctuary, Kyongnosla Alpine Sanctuary, Maenam Wildlife Sanctuary, Shingba Rhododendron Sanctuary, Pangolakha Wildlife Sanctuary\nBULLET::::- Darjeeling, India: Jore Pokhri Wildlife Sanctuary, Singalila National Park, Senchal Wildlife Sanctuary, Mahananda Wildlife Sanctuary, Neora Valley National Park.\nBULLET::::- Bhutan: Torsa Strict Nature Reserve\nThese protected areas are habitats for many globally significant plant species such as rhododendrons and orchids and many endangered flagship species such as snow leopard, Asian black bear, red panda, white-bellied musk deer, blood pheasant, and chestnut-breasted partridge.\n\nThe \"Kangchenjunga Himal\" section of the Himalayas lies both in Nepal and India and encompasses 16 peaks over . In the north, it is limited by the Lhonak Chu, Goma Chu, and Jongsang La, and in the east by the Teesta River. The western limit runs from the Jongsang La down the Gingsang and Kangchenjunga glaciers and the rivers of Ghunsa and Tamur. Kanchenjunga rises about south of the general alignment of the Great Himalayan range about east-southeast of Mount Everest as the crow flies. South of the southern face of Kanchenjunga runs the high Singalila Ridge that separates Sikkim from Nepal and northern West Bengal.\n\nKangchenjunga and its satellite peaks form a huge mountain massif. The massif's five highest peaks are listed in the following table.\n! scope=\"col\"  Name of peak\n! scope=\"col\"  Height (m)\n! scope=\"col\"  Height (ft)\n! scope=\"col\"  Location\n! scope=\"col\"  Prominence (m)\n! scope=\"col\"  Prominence (ft)\n! scope=\"col\"  Nearest Higher Neighbor\n! scope=\"col\"  Location (political)\n! scope=\"row\"  Kangchenjunga Main\n! scope=\"row\"  Kangchenjunga West (Yalung Kang)\n! scope=\"row\"  Kangchenjunga Central\n! scope=\"row\"  Kangchenjunga South\n! scope=\"row\"  Kangbachen\n\nThe main ridge of the massif runs from north-northeast to south-southwest and forms a watershed to several rivers. Together with ridges running roughly from east to west they form a giant cross. These ridges contain a host of peaks between . The northern section includes Yalung Kang, Kangchenjunga Central and South, Kangbachen, Kirat Chuli, and Gimmigela Chuli, and runs up to the Jongsang La. The eastern ridge in Sikkim includes Siniolchu. The southern section runs along the Nepal-Sikkim border and includes Kabru I to III. This ridge extends southwards to the Singalila Ridge. The western ridge culminates in the Kumbhakarna, also known as Jannu.\n\nFour main glaciers radiate from the peak, pointing roughly to the northeast, southeast, northwest, and southwest. The \"Zemu\" glacier in the northeast and the \"Talung\" glacier in the southeast drain to the Teesta River; the \"Yalung\" glacier in the southwest and the \"Kangchen\" glacier in the northwest drain to the Arun and Kosi rivers.\nThe glaciers spread over the area above approximately , and the glacialized area covers about in total. There are 120 glaciers in the Kanchenjunga Himal, of which 17 are debris-covered. Between 1958 and 1992, more than half of 57 examined glaciers had retreated, possibly due to rising of air temperature.\n\nKangchenjunga Main is the highest elevation of the Brahmaputra River basin, which forms part of the southeast Asian monsoon regime and is among the globally largest river basins.\nKangchenjunga is one of six peaks above located in the basin of the Koshi river, which is among the largest tributaries of the Ganges.\nThe Kangchenjunga massif forms also part of the Ganges Basin.\n\nAlthough it is the third highest peak in the world, Kangchenjunga is only ranked 29th by topographic prominence, a measure of a mountain's independent stature. The key col for Kangchenjunga lies at a height of , along the watershed boundary between Arun and Brahmaputra rivers in Tibet. It is however, the 4th most prominent peak in the Himalaya, after Everest, and the western and eastern anchors of the Himalaya, Nanga Parbat, and Namcha Barwa, respectively.\n\nThere are four climbing routes to reach the summit of Kangchenjunga, three of which are in Nepal from the southwest, northwest, and northeast, and one from northeastern Sikkim in India. To date, the northeastern route from Sikkim has been successfully used only three times. The Indian government has banned expeditions to Kanchenjunga; therefore, this route has been closed since 2000.\n\nBULLET::::- Between April 1848 and February 1849, Joseph Dalton Hooker explored parts of northern Sikkim and eastern Nepal, mainly to collect plants and study the distribution of Himalayan flora. He was based in Darjeeling, and made repeated excursions in the river valleys and into the foothills of Kangchenjunga up to an altitude of .\nBULLET::::- In spring 1855, the German explorer Hermann Schlagintweit travelled to Darjeeling but was not allowed to proceed further north due to the Nepalese-Tibetan War. In May, he explored the Singalila Ridge up to the peak of Tonglo for a meteorological survey.\nBULLET::::- In 1879, Sarat Chandra Das and Lama Ugyen-gyatso crossed into Tibet west of \"Kanchanjinga\" via eastern Nepal and the Tashilhunpo Monastery en route to Lhasa. They returned along the same route in 1881.\nBULLET::::- In 1883, a party of William Woodman Graham together with two Swiss mountaineers climbed in the area of Kangchenjunga. They were the first who ascended Kabru within below the summit. They crossed the Kang La pass and climbed a peak of nearly from which they examined Jannu. They concluded it was too late in the year for an attempt and returned once again to Darjeeling.\nBULLET::::- Between October 1885 and January 1886, Rinzin Namgyal surveyed the unexplored north and west sides of Kangchenjunga. He was the first native surveyor to map the circuit of Kangchenjunga and provided sketches of each side of the peak and the adjoining valleys. He also defined the frontiers of Nepal, Tibet, and Sikkim in this area.\nBULLET::::- In 1899, British mountaineer Douglas Freshfield set out with his party comprising the Italian photographer Vittorio Sella. They were the first mountaineers to examine the lower and upper ramparts, and the great western face of Kangchenjunga, rising from the Kangchenjunga Glacier.\nBULLET::::- In 1905, a party headed by Aleister Crowley made the first attempt at climbing the mountain. Aleister Crowley had been part of the team attempting the 1902 ascent of K2. The team reached an estimated altitude of on the southwest side of the mountain before turning back. The exact height reached is somewhat unclear; Crowley stated that on 31 August, \"We were certainly over and possibly over \", when the team was forced to retreat to Camp 5 by the risk of avalanche. On 1 September, they evidently went further; some members of the team, Reymond, Pache, and Salama, \"got over the bad patch\" that had forced them to return to Camp 5 the day before, and progressed \"out of sight and hearing\" before returning to Crowley and the men with packs, who could not cross the dangerous section unassisted with their burdens. It is not clear how far Reymond, Pache, and Salama had ascended – but in summarizing, Crowley ventured \"We had reached a height of approximately .\" Attempting a \"mutinous\" late-in-the-day descent from Camp 5 to Camp 4, climber Alexis Pache (who earlier that day had been one of three to ascend possibly higher than any before), and three local porters, were killed in an avalanche. Despite the insistence of one of the men that \"The demon of Kangchenjunga was propitiated with the sacrifice\", Crowley decided enough was enough and that it was inappropriate to continue.\nBULLET::::- In 1907, two Norwegians set about climbing \"Jongri\" via the Kabru glacier to the south, an approach apparently rejected by Graham's party. Progress was very slow, partly because of problems with supplies and porters, and presumably also lack of fitness and acclimatisation. However, from a high camp at about they were eventually able to reach a point below the summit before they were turned back by strong winds.\nBULLET::::- In 1929, the German Paul Bauer led an expedition team that reached on the northeast spur before being turned back by a five-day storm.\nBULLET::::- In May 1929, the American E. F. Farmer left Darjeeling with native porters, crossed the Kang La into Nepal and climbed up towards the \"Talung Saddle\". When his porters refused to go any further, he climbed alone further upwards through drifting mists but did not return.\nBULLET::::- In 1930, Günter Dyhrenfurth led an international expedition comprising the German Uli Wieland, Austrian Erwin Schneider, and Englishman Frank Smythe who attempted to climb Kangchenjunga. They failed because of poor weather and snow conditions.\nBULLET::::- In 1931, Paul Bauer led a second German expedition team who attempted the northeast spur before being turned back by bad weather, illnesses, and deaths. The team retreated after climbing only a little higher than the 1929 attempt.\nBULLET::::- In 1954, John Kempe led a party comprising J. W. Tucker, S. R. Jackson, G. C. Lewis, T. H. Braham and medical officer D. S. Mathews. They explored the upper Yalung glacier with the intention to discover a practicable route to the great ice-shelf that runs across the southwest face of Kangchenjunga. This reconnaissance led to the route used by the successful 1955 expedition.\n\nIn 1955, Joe Brown and George Band made the first ascent on 25 May, followed by Norman Hardie and Tony Streather on 26 May. The full team also included John Clegg (team doctor), Charles Evans (team leader), John Angelo Jackson, Neil Mather, and Tom Mackinnon.\n\nThe ascent proved that Aleister Crowley's 1905 route (also investigated by the 1954 reconnaissance) was viable. The route starts on the Yalung Glacier to the southwest of the peak, and climbs the Yalung Face, which is high. The main feature of this face is the \"Great Shelf\", a large sloping plateau at around , covered by a hanging glacier. The route is almost entirely on snow, glacier, and one icefall; the summit ridge itself can involve a small amount of travel on rock. The first ascent expedition made six camps above their base camp, two below the Shelf, two on it, and two above it. They started on 18 April, and everyone was back to base camp by 28 May.\n\nBULLET::::- 1973 Yutaka Ageta and Takeo Matsuda of the Japanese expedition summitted Kangchenjunga West (Yalung Kang) by climbing the SW Ridge.\nBULLET::::- 1977 The second ascent of Kangchenjunga, by an Indian Army team led by Colonel Narendra Kumar. They completed the northeast spur, the difficult ridge that defeated German expeditions in 1929 and 1931.\nBULLET::::- 1978 Polish teams made the first successful ascents of the summits Kangchenjunga South (Wojciech Wróż and Eugeniusz Chrobak, 19 May) and Kangchenjunga Central (Wojciech Brański, Zygmunt Andrzej Heinrich, Kazimierz Olech, 22 May).\nBULLET::::- 1979 The third ascent, on 16 May, and the first without oxygen, by Doug Scott, Peter Boardman and Joe Tasker establishing a new route on the North Ridge.\nBULLET::::- 1982 The 6th of May sees Ang Dorje, Friedel Mutschlechner, and Reinhold Messner (suffering from amoebic liver abscess) reach the top by a variation on the North Face route without supplemental oxygen.\nBULLET::::- 1983 Pierre Beghin made the first solo ascent. It was accomplished without the use of supplemental oxygen.\nBULLET::::- 1986 On 11 January, Krzysztof Wielicki and Jerzy Kukuczka, Polish climbers, made the first winter ascent. Otto Guilherme Gerstenberger Junior (Brazilian) and Johann Krigeer (South African) reach the peak without using supplemental oxygen.\nBULLET::::- 1988 First successful American Expedition; led by Carlos Buhler, from the North Face. Summiting were Buhler, Peter Habeler (Austrian), and Martin Zabaleta (Spanish)\nBULLET::::- 1989 A Soviet expedition successfully traversed all four summits of Kangchenjunga that are higher than 8,000m. Two separate teams traversed the summits in opposite directions.\nBULLET::::- 1989 American Expedition led by Lou Whittaker, with six people summiting on the Northwall: George Dunn, Craig van Hoy, Ed Viesturs, Phil Ershler, Larry Nielson, Greg Wilson.\nBULLET::::- 1991 Slovenian Marija Frantar and Joze Rozman attempted the first ascent by a woman. Their bodies were later found below the summit headwall.\nBULLET::::- 1991 Slovenian Andrej Štremfelj and Marko Prezelj completed an alpine-style climb up the south ridge of Kangchenjunga to the south summit (8,494 m).\nBULLET::::- 1992 Carlos Carsolio made the only summit that year. It was in a solo climb without supplementary oxygen.\nBULLET::::- 1992 Wanda Rutkiewicz, the first woman in the world to ascend and descend K2 and a world-renowned Polish climber, died after she insisted on waiting for an incoming storm to pass, which she did not survive.\nBULLET::::- 1995 Benoît Chamoux, Pierre Royer and their Sherpa guide disappeared on 6 October near the summit.\nBULLET::::- 1998 Ginette Harrison was the first woman who climbed Kangchenjunga North face.\nBULLET::::- 2005 Alan Hinkes, a British climber, was the only person to summit in the 50th anniversary of the first ascent year, and it marked his 14th eight-thousander.\nBULLET::::- 2006 Gerlinde Kaltenbrunner, an Austrian mountaineer, was the second woman to reach the summit.\nBULLET::::- 2009 Jon Gangdal and Mattias Karlsson reached the summit, becoming, respectively, the first Norwegian and the first Swedish mountaineer to summit this mountain.\nBULLET::::- 2009 Edurne Pasaban, a Spanish mountaineer, reached the summit becoming the first woman to summit twelve eight-thousanders.\nBULLET::::- In May 2009, Kinga Baranowska was the first Polish woman to reach the summit of Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- 2011 Tunc Findik became the first Turkish man to reach the peak of Kangchenjunga, his seventh eight thousander, with Swiss partner Guntis Brandts via the British 1955 SW Face route.\nBULLET::::- 2011 Indian mountaineers Basanta Singha Roy and Debasish Biswas of Mountaineers' Association of Krishnanagar (MAK), West Bengal, India, successfully scaled Kangchenjunga Main on 20 May 2011.\nBULLET::::- In May 2013, five climbers including Hungarian Zsolt Erőss and Péter Kiss reached the summit, but disappeared during the descent.\nBULLET::::- In May 2014, Bulgarian Boyan Petrov reached the peak without the use of supplemental oxygen. Petrov is a diabetic.\nBULLET::::- In May 2014, Chhanda Gayen became the first Indian woman to summit. She was killed by an avalanche on the descent.\nDespite improved climbing gear the fatality rate of climbers attempting to summit Kanchenjunga is high. Since the 1990s, more than 20% of people died while climbing Kanchenjunga's main peak.\n\nBecause of its remote location in Nepal and the difficulty involved in accessing it from India, the Kangchenjunga region is not much explored by trekkers. It has, therefore, retained much of its pristine beauty. In Sikkim too, trekking into the Kangchenjunga region has just recently been permitted. The Goecha La trek is gaining popularity amongst tourists. It goes to the Goecha La Pass, located right in front of the huge southeast face of Kangchenjunga. Another trek to Green Lake Basin has recently been opened for trekking. This trek goes to the Northeast side of Kangchenjunga along the famous Zemu Glacier. The film Singalila in the Himalaya is journey around Kangchenjunga.\n\nThe area around Kangchenjunga is said to be home to a mountain deity, called \"Dzö-nga\" or \"Kangchenjunga Demon\", a type of yeti or rakshasa. A British geological expedition in 1925 spotted a bipedal creature which they asked the locals about, who referred to it as the \"Kangchenjunga Demon\".\n\nFor generations, there have been legends recounted by the inhabitants of the areas surrounding Mount Kanchenjunga, both in Sikkim and in Nepal, that there is a valley of immortality hidden on its slopes. These stories are well known to both the original inhabitants of the area, the Lepcha people, and those of the Tibetan Buddhist cultural tradition. In Tibetan, this valley is known as Beyul Demoshong. In 1962 a Tibetan Lama by the name of Tulshuk Lingpa led over 300 followers into the high snow slopes of Kanchenjunga to ‘open the way’ to Beyul Demoshong. The story of this expedition is recounted in the 2011 book \"A Step Away from Paradise\".\n\nBULLET::::- In the \"Swallows and Amazons\" series of books by Arthur Ransome, a high mountain (unnamed in the books, but clearly based on the Old Man of Coniston in the English Lake District) is given the name \"Kanchenjunga\" by the children when they climb it in 1931.\nBULLET::::- In \"The Epic of Mount Everest\", first published in 1926, Sir Francis Younghusband: \" For natural beauty Darjiling (Darjeeling) is surely unsurpassed in the world. From all countries travellers come there to see the famous view of Kangchenjunga, in height, and only distant. Darjiling (Darjeeling) itself is above sea-level and is set in a forest of oaks, magnolia, rhododendrons, laurels and sycamores. And through these forests, the observer looks down the steep mountain-sides to the Rangeet River only above sea-level, and then up and up through tier after tier of forest-clad ranges, each bathed in a haze of deeper and deeper purple, till the line of snow is reached; and then still up to the summit of Kangchenjunga, now so pure and ethereal we can scarcely believe it is part of the solid earth on which we stand; and so high it seems part of the very sky itself.\"\nBULLET::::- In 1999, official James Bond author Raymond Benson published \"High Time to Kill\". In this story, a microdot containing a secret formula for aviation technology is stolen by a society called the Union. During their escape, their plane crashes on the slopes of Kangchenjunga. James Bond becomes part of a climbing expedition in order to retrieve the formula.\nBULLET::::- \"The Inheritance of Loss\" by Kiran Desai, which won the 2006 Man Booker Prize, is set partly in Kalimpong, a hill station situated near Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- In \"Legend of the Galactic Heroes\" by Yoshiki Tanaka, which won the Seiun Award for \"Best Novel of the Year\" in 1988 and was adapted into an anime series by Kitty Films, the capital and holiest temple of the Terraist Cult is on Earth beneath the rubble of Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- Michelle Paver's 2016 ghost story \"Thin Air\" concerns a fictional expedition to climb Kangchenjunga in 1935, and an earlier (also fictional) expedition in 1906.\nBULLET::::- The book \"Round Kangchenjunga – A Narrative of Mountain Travel and Exploration\" by Douglas Freshfield gives a complete account of his travel around Kangchenjunga.\n\nBULLET::::- Joseph Dalton Hooker 1855. \"Himalayan Journals\". Assistant-director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.\nBULLET::::- Laurence Waddell 1899. \"Among The Himalayas\". Travels in Sikkim. Book includes the exploration of the south of Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- Aleister Crowley 1905. \"The Confessions of Aleister Crowley\", Chapters 51, 52, & 53, tells of the Kangchenjunga Expedition by him and Dr. Jacot-Guillarmod.\nBULLET::::- Douglas Freshfield 1903. \"Round Kangchenjunga – A Narrative of Mountain Travel and Exploration\". Edward Arnold, London\nBULLET::::- Paul Bauer 1937. \"Himalayan Campaign\". Blackwell is the story of Bauer's two attempts in 1929 and 1931, republished as \"Kangchenjunga Challenge\" (William Kimber, 1955).\nBULLET::::- Paul Bauer \"The German Attack on Kangchenjunga\", The Himalayan Journal, 1930 Vol. II.\nBULLET::::- Lieut. Col. H.W. Tobin \"Exploration and Climbing in The Sikkim Himalaya\" The Himalayan Journal, April 1930 Vol. II. Provides the early exploration and climbing attempts on Kangchenjunga.\n\nBULLET::::- Prof. G. O. Dyhrenfurth \"The International Himalayan Expedition, 1930\", The Himalayan Journal, April 1931, Vol. III. Details their attempt on Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- H.W. Tilman \"The ascent of Nanda Devi\", 7 June 1937, Cambridge University Press. Relates the story of their intention to climb Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- Irving, R. L. G. 1940. \"Ten Great Mountains\". London, J. M. Dent & Sons\nBULLET::::- John Angelo Jackson 1955. \"More than Mountains\" Book containing data on the 1954 Kangchenjunga reconnaissance. Jackson was also a team member of the first ascent of Kangchenjunga in 1955, also relates the \"Daily Mail\" \"Abominable Snowman\" or Yeti Expedition, when the first trek from Everest to Kangchenjunga was accomplished * . Relevant pages 97 onwards with two detailed maps.\nBULLET::::- Charles Evans \"Kangchenjunga The Untrodden Peak\", Hodder & Stoughton, Leader of the 1955 expedition. Principal of the University College of North Wales, Bangor. Foreword by His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G.\nBULLET::::- Joe Brown, \"The Hard Years\", tells his version of the first ascent of Kangchenjunga in 1955.\nBULLET::::- Colonel Narinder Kumar 1978. \"Kangchenjunga: First ascent from the north-east spur\". Vision books. Includes the second ever ascent of Kangchenjunga and the first from the northeast spur on the Indian side of the mountain. See also Himalayan Journal Vol. 36 and 50th Anniversary Edition\nBULLET::::- Peter Boardman 1982. \"Sacred Summits: A Climber's Year\". Includes the 1979 ascent of Kangchenjunga with Joe Tasker and Doug Scott. Also in The Himalayan Journal Vol 36.\nBULLET::::- John Angelo Jackson 2005. \"Adventure Travels in the Himalaya\". Indus Publishing. Recounts in more detail the first ascent of Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- Simon Pierse 2005. \"Kangchenjunga: Imaging a Himalayan Mountain\". University of Wales, School of Art Press, . An anthology of word and image published to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the first ascents of Kangchenjunga. Well illustrated with reproductions of paintings, prints, and photographs describing the climbing history and cultural significance of the mountain. Preface by George Band.\nThe above Himalayan Journal References were all also reproduced in the \"50th Anniversary of the First Ascent of Kangchenjunga\" The Himalayan Club, Kolkata Section 2005.\nBULLET::::- Pema Wangchuk and Mita Zulca \"Khangchendzonga: Sacred Summit\". The book details the stories and legends celebrated by the communities living in the Kangchenjunga's shadow, goes over the exploits of the early explorers and mountaineers. Chapters cover what Khangchendzonga means to Buddhism, mapping, early explorers, Alexander Kellas, early expeditions, the first ascent in 1955, the Indian Army ascent (1977), the second British ascent (1979), women climbers, the Tiger climbers, the yeti, and more. Profusely illustrated with many period photos.\nBULLET::::- The Geographer at High Altitudes, \"\"Climbing on the Himalaya and other Mountain Ranges\"\", By J. Norman Collie, F.R.S. Edinburgh: David Douglas. 1902.\nBULLET::::- The Glaciers of Kangchenjunga Douglas Freshfield The Geographical Journal, Vol. 19, No. 4 Apr., 1902, pp. 453–472\nBULLET::::- Round Kangchenjunga. A Narrative of Mountain Travel and Exploration, Douglas W. Freshfield Bulletin of the American Geographical Society, Vol. 36, No. 2 1904\nBULLET::::- C. K. Howard-Bury. 1922. \"The Mount Everest Expedition\". The Geographical Journal 59 (2): 81–99.\nBULLET::::- \"General Bruce's Illness a Serious handicap\" \"The Times\", (British) World Copyright, Lt. R.F.Norton, 19 April 1924. Expedition in the Kangchenjunga area.\nBULLET::::- Account of a Photographic Expedition to the Southern Glaciers of Kangchenjunga in the Sikkim Himalaya, N. A. Tombazi, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 67, No. 1 Jan., 1926, pp. 74–76\nBULLET::::- An Adventure to Kangchenjunga, Hugh Boustead, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 69, No. 4 (Apr., 1927), pp. 344–350\nBULLET::::- The Times Literary Supplement, Thursday, 11 December 1930. \"The Kangchenjunga Adventure\", F.S. Smythe.\nBULLET::::- Im Kampf um den Himalaja, Paul Bauer. The Kangchenjunga Adventure, F. S. Smythe, Himalaya: Unsere Expedition, G. O. Dyhrenfurth. 1930\nBULLET::::- The Times Literary Supplement, Thursday, 9 April 1931. \"Kangchenjunga\", Paul Bauer.\nBULLET::::- The Imperial Gazetteer of India. Vol. XXVI, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 79, No. 1 Jan., 1932, pp. 53–56\nBULLET::::- Recent Heroes of Modern Adventure, T. C. Bridges; H. Hessell Tiltman, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 81, No. 6 Jun., 1933, p. 568\nBULLET::::- Paul Bauer 1931. Um Den Kantsch: der zweite deutsche Angriff auf den Kangchendzönga, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 81, No. 4 Apr., 1933, pp. 362–363\nBULLET::::- Paul Bauer; Sumner Austin 1938. Himalayan Campaign: The German Attack on Kangchenjunga, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 91, No. 5: 478\nBULLET::::- Charles Evans; George Band 1956. Kangchenjunga Climbed. The Geographical Journal 122 (1): 1–12.\nBULLET::::- Charles Evans 1956. \"Kangchenjunga: The Untrodden Peak\". The Times Literary Supplement.\nBULLET::::- Lou Whittaker, Memoirs of a Mountain guide, 1994\n\nBULLET::::- List of elevation extremes by country\n\nBULLET::::- Kangchenjunga page on Himalaya-Info.org (German)\nBULLET::::- Kangchenjunga page on Summitpost.org\nBULLET::::- Aleister Crowley's detailed account of the 1905 attempt on Kangchenjunga\nBULLET::::- Kangchenjunga History for a more detailed up to date account of the mountain's history and ascents.\nBULLET::::- \"Kāngchenjunga, India/Nepal\" on Peakbagger\nBULLET::::- Kangchenjunga on Peakware – photos\nBULLET::::- Glacier Research Image Project presents photos tracking 24 years of changes in glaciers at Kangchenjunga.\nBULLET::::- Mtxplore Mountain Statistics Statistics of Kangchenjunga.\n"}
{"id": "17076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17076", "title": "Kenilworth Castle", "text": "Kenilworth Castle\n\nKenilworth Castle is located in the town of Kenilworth in Warwickshire, England. Constructed from Norman through to Tudor times, the castle has been described by the architectural historian Anthony Emery as \"the finest surviving example of a semi-royal palace of the later middle ages, significant for its scale, form and quality of workmanship\". Kenilworth has also played an important historical role. The castle was the subject of the six-month-long Siege of Kenilworth in 1266, thought to be the longest siege in Medieval English history, and formed a base for Lancastrian operations in the Wars of the Roses. Kenilworth was also the scene of the removal of Edward II from the English throne, the French insult to Henry V in 1414 (said by John Strecche to have encouraged the Agincourt campaign), and the Earl of Leicester's lavish reception of Elizabeth I in 1575.\n\nThe castle was built over several centuries. Founded in the 1120s around a powerful Norman great tower, the castle was significantly enlarged by King John at the beginning of the 13th century. Huge water defences were created by damming the local streams, and the resulting fortifications proved able to withstand assaults by land and water in 1266. John of Gaunt spent lavishly in the late 14th century, turning the medieval castle into a palace fortress designed in the latest perpendicular style. The Earl of Leicester then expanded the castle once again, constructing new Tudor buildings and exploiting the medieval heritage of Kenilworth to produce a fashionable Renaissance palace.\n\nAlthough now ruined as a result of the partial destruction of the castle by Parliamentary forces in 1649 to prevent it being used as a military stronghold after the English Civil War, Kenilworth illustrates five centuries of English military and civil architecture. The castle is built almost entirely from local new red sandstone.\n\nTo the south-east of the main castle lie the Brays, a corruption of the French word \"braie\", meaning an external fortification with palisades. Only earthworks and fragments of masonry remain of what was an extensive 13th-century barbican structure including a stone wall and an external gatehouse guarding the main approach to the castle. The area now forms part of the car park for the castle. Beyond the Brays are the ruins of the Gallery Tower, a second gatehouse remodelled in the 15th century. The Gallery Tower originally guarded the long, narrow walled-causeway that still runs from the Brays to the main castle. This causeway was called the Tiltyard, as it was used for tilting, or jousting, in medieval times. The Tiltyard causeway acted both as a dam and as part of the barbican defences. To the east of the Tiltyard is a lower area of marshy ground, originally flooded and called the Lower Pool, and to the west an area once called the Great Mere. The Great Mere is now drained and forms a meadow, but would originally have been a large lake covering around , dammed by the Tiltyard causeway.\n\nThe outer bailey of Kenilworth Castle is usually entered through Mortimer's Tower, today a modest ruin but originally a Norman stone gatehouse, extended in the late 13th and 16th centuries. The outer bailey wall, long and relatively low, was mainly built by King John; it has numerous buttresses but only a few towers, being designed to be primarily defended by the water system of the Great Mere and Lower Pool. The north side of the outer bailey wall was almost entirely destroyed during the slighting. Moving clockwise around the outer bailey from Mortimer's Tower, the defences include a west-facing watergate, which would originally have led onto the Great Mere; the King's gate, a late 17th-century agricultural addition; the Swan Tower, a late 13th-century tower with 16th century additions named after the swans that lived on the Great Mere; the early 13th-century Lunn's Tower; and the 14th-century Water Tower, so named because it overlooked the Lower Pool.\n\nKenilworth's inner court consists of a number of buildings set against a bailey wall, originally of Norman origin, exploiting the defensive value of a natural knoll that rises up steeply from the surrounding area. The 12th-century great tower occupies the knoll itself and forms the north-east corner of the bailey. Ruined during the slighting, the great tower is notable for its huge corner turrets, essentially hugely exaggerated Norman pilaster buttresses. Its walls are thick, and the towers high. Although Kenilworth's great tower is larger, it is similar to that of Brandon Castle near Coventry; both were built by the local Clinton family in the 1120s. The tower can be termed a hall keep, as it is longer than it is wide. The lowest floor is filled with earth, possibly taken from the earlier motte that may have been present on the site, and is further protected by a sloping stone plinth around the base. The tall Tudor windows at the top of the tower date from the 1570s.\n\nMuch of the northern part of the inner bailey was built by the 14th-century noble John of Gaunt between 1372 and 1380. This part of the castle is considered by historian Anthony Emery to be \"the finest surviving example of a semi-royal palace of the later middle ages, significant for its scale, form and quality of workmanship\". Gaunt's architectural style emphasised rectangular design, the separation of ground floor service areas from the upper stories and a contrast of austere exteriors with lavish interiors, especially on the 1st floor of the inner bailey buildings. The result is considered \"an early example of the perpendicular style\".\nThe most significant of Gaunt's buildings is his great hall. The great hall replaced an earlier sequence of great halls on the same site, and was heavily influenced by Edward III's design at Windsor Castle. The hall consists of a \"ceremonial sequence of rooms\", approached by a particularly grand staircase, now lost. From the great hall, visitors could look out to admire the Great Mere or the inner court through huge windows. The undercroft to the hall, used by the service staff, was lit with slits, similar to design at the contemporary Wingfield Manor. The roof was built in 1376 by William Wintringham, producing the widest hall, unsupported by pillars, existing in England at the time. There is some debate amongst historians as to whether this roof was a hammerbeam design, a collar and truss-brace design, or a combination of the two.\n\nThere was an early attempt at symmetry in the external appearance of the great hall – the Strong and Saintlowe Towers architecturally act as near symmetrical \"wings\" to the hall itself, while the plinth of the hall is designed to mirror that of the great tower opposite it. An unusual multi-sided tower, the Oriel, provides a counterpoint to the main doorway of the hall and was intended for private entertainment by Gaunt away from the main festivities on major occasions. The Oriel tower is based on Edward III's \"La Rose\" Tower at Windsor, which had a similar function. Gaunt's Strong Tower is so named for being entirely vaulted in stone across all its floors, an unusual and robust design. The great hall influenced the design of Bolton and Raby castles, while the hall's roof design became famous and was copied at Arundel Castle and Westminster Hall.\nOther parts of the castle built by Gaunt include the southern range of state apartments, Gaunt's Tower and the main kitchen. Although now extensively damaged, these share the same style as the great hall; this would have unified the appearance of Gaunt's palace in a distinct break from the more eclectic medieval tradition of design. Gaunt's kitchen replaced the original 12th-century kitchens, built alongside the great tower in a similar fashion to the arrangement at Conisbrough. Gaunt's new kitchen was twice the size of that in equivalent castles, measuring .\n\nThe remainder of the inner court was built by Robert Dudley, the Earl of Leicester, in the 1570s. He built a tower now known as Leicester's building on the south edge of the court as a guest wing, extending out beyond the inner bailey wall for extra space. Leicester's building was four floors high and built in a fashionable contemporary Tudor style with \"brittle, thin walls and grids of windows\". The building was intended to appear well-proportioned alongside the ancient great tower, one of the reasons for its considerable height. Leicester's building set the style for later Elizabethan country house design, especially in the Midlands, with Hardwick Hall being a classic example. Modern viewing platforms, installed in 2014, provide views from Elizabeth I's's former bedroom.\n\nLeicester also built a loggia, or open gallery, beside the great keep to lead to the new formal gardens. The loggia was designed to elegantly frame the view as the observer slowly admired the gardens, and was a new design in the 16th century, only recently imported from Italy.\n\nThe rest of Kenilworth Castle's interior is divided into three areas: the base court, stretching between Mortimer's Tower and Leicester's gatehouse; the left-hand court, stretching south-west around the outside of the inner court; and the right-hand court, to the north-west of the inner court. The line of trees that cuts across the base court today is a relatively modern mid-19th century addition, and originally this court would have been more open, save for the collegiate chapel that once stood in front of the stables. Destroyed in 1524, only the chapel's foundations remain. Each of the courts was designed to be used for different purposes: the base court was considered a relatively public area, with the left and right courts used for more private occasions.\n\nLeicester's gatehouse was built on the north side of the base court, replacing an older gatehouse to provide a fashionable entrance from the direction of Coventry. The external design, with its symbolic towers and, originally, battlements, echoes a style popular a century or more before, closely resembling Kirby Muxloe and the Beauchamp gatehouse at Warwick Castle. By contrast the interior, with its contemporary wood panelling, is in the same, highly contemporary Elizabethan fashion of Leicester's building in the inner court. Leicester's gatehouse is one of the few parts of the castle to remain intact. The stables built by John Dudley in the 1550s also survive and lie along the east side of the base court. The stable block is a large building built mostly in stone, but with a timber-framed, decoratively panelled first storey designed in an anachronistic, vernacular style. Both buildings could have easily been seen from Leicester's building and were therefore on permanent display to visitors. Leciester's intent may have been to create a deliberately anachronistic view across the base court, echoing the older ideals of chivalry and romance alongside the more modern aspects of the redesign of the castle.\n\nMuch of the right-hand court of Kenilworth Castle is occupied by the castle garden. For most of Kenilworth's history the role of the castle garden, used for entertainment, would have been very distinct from that of the surrounding chase, used primarily for hunting. From the 16th century onwards there were elaborate knot gardens in the base court. The gardens today are designed to reproduce as closely as possible the primarily historical record of their original appearance in 1575, with a steep terrace along the south side of the gardens and steps leading down to eight square knot gardens. In Elizabethan gardens \"the plants were almost incidental\", and instead the design focus was on sculptures, including four wooden obelisks painted to resemble porphyry and a marble fountain with a statue of two Greek mythological figures. A timber aviary contains a range of birds. The original garden was heavily influenced by the Italian Renaissance garden at Villa d'Este.\n\nTo the north-west of the castle are earthworks marking the spot of the \"Pleasance\", created in 1414 by Henry V. The Pleasance was a banqueting house built in the style of a miniature castle. Surrounded by two diamond-shaped moats with its own dock, the Pleasance was positioned on the far side of the Great Mere and had to be reached by boat. It resembled Richard II's retreat at Sheen from the 1380s, and was later copied by his younger brother, Duke Humphrey of Gloucester, at Greenwich in the 1430s, as well by his son, John of Lancaster at Fulbrook. The Pleasance was eventually dismantled by Henry VIII and partially moved into the left-hand court inside the castle itself, possibly to add to the anachronistic appearance. These elements were finally destroyed in the 1650s.\n\nKenilworth Castle was founded in the early 1120s by Geoffrey de Clinton, Lord Chamberlain and treasurer to Henry I. The castle's original form is uncertain. It has been suggested that it consisted of a motte, an earthen mound surmounted by wooden buildings; however, the stone great tower may have been part of the original design. Clinton was a local rival to Roger de Beaumont, the Earl of Warwick and owner of the neighbouring Warwick Castle, and the king made Clinton the sheriff in Warwickshire to act as a counterbalance to Beaumont's power. Clinton had begun to lose the king's favour after 1130, and when he died in 1133 his son, also called Geoffrey, was only a minor. Geoffrey and his uncle William de Clinton were forced to come to terms with Beaumont; this set-back, and the difficult years of the Anarchy (1135–54), delayed any further development of the castle.\n\nHenry II succeeded to the throne at the end of the Anarchy but during the revolt of 1173–74 he faced a significant uprising led by his son, Henry, backed by the French crown. The conflict spread across England and Kenilworth was garrisoned by Henry II's forces; Geoffrey II de Clinton died in this period and the castle was taken fully into royal possession, a sign of its military importance. The Clintons themselves moved on to Buckinghamshire. By this point Kenilworth Castle consisted of the great keep, the inner bailey wall, a basic causeway across the smaller lake that preceded the creation of the Great Mere, and the local chase for hunting.\n\nHenry's successor, Richard I, paid relatively little attention to Kenilworth, but under King John significant building resumed at the castle. When John was excommunicated in 1208, he embarked on a programme of rebuilding and enhancing several major royal castles. These included Corfe, Odiham, Dover, Scarborough as well as Kenilworth. John spent £1,115 on Kenilworth Castle between 1210 and 1216, building the outer bailey wall in stone and improving the other defences, including creating Mortimer's and Lunn's Towers. He also significantly improved the castle's water defences by damming the Finham and Inchford Brooks, creating the Great Mere. The result was to turn Kenilworth into one of the largest English castles of the time, with one of the largest artificial lake defences in England. John was forced to cede the castle to the baronial opposition as part of the guarantee of the Magna Carta, before it reverted to royal control early in the reign of his son, Henry III.\n\nHenry III granted Kenilworth in 1244 to Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, who later became a leader in the Second Barons' War (1263–67) against the king, using Kenilworth as the centre of his operations. Initially the conflict went badly for King Henry, and after the Battle of Lewes in 1264 he was forced to sign the Mise of Lewes, under which his son, Prince Edward, was given over to the rebels as a hostage. Edward was taken back to Kenilworth, where chroniclers considered he was held in unduly harsh conditions. Released in early 1265, Edward then defeated Montfort at the Battle of Evesham; the surviving rebels under the leadership of Henry de Hastings, Montfort's constable at Kenilworth, regrouped at the castle the following spring. Edward's forces proceeded to lay siege to the rebels.\n\nThe Siege of Kenilworth Castle in 1266 was \"probably the longest in English history\" according to historian Norman Pounds, and at the time was also the largest siege to have occurred in England in terms of the number of soldiers involved. Simon de Monfort's son, Simon de Montfort the Younger, promised in January 1266 to hand over the castle to the king. Five months later this had not happened, and Henry III laid siege to Kenilworth Castle on 21 June. Protected by the extensive water defences, the castle withstood the attack, despite Edward targeting the weaker north wall, employing huge siege towers and even attempting a night attack using barges brought from Chester. The distance between the royal trebuchets and the walls severely reduced their effectiveness, and heavier trebuchets had to be sent for from London. Papal intervention through the legate Ottobuono finally resulted in the compromise of the Dictum of Kenilworth, under which the rebels were allowed to re-purchase their confiscated lands provided they surrendered the castle; the siege ended on 14 December 1266. The water defences at Kenilworth influenced the construction of later castles in Wales, most notably Caerphilly.\n\nHenry granted Kenilworth to his son, Edmund Crouchback, in 1267. Edmund held many tournaments at Kenilworth in the late 13th century, including a huge event in 1279, presided over by the royal favourite Roger de Mortimer, in which a hundred knights competed for three days in the tiltyard in an event called \"the Round Table\", in imitation of the popular Arthurian legends.\n\nEdmund Crouchback passed on the castle to his eldest son, Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, in 1298. Lancaster married Alice de Lacy, which made him the richest nobleman in England. Kenilworth became the primary castle of the Lancaster estates, replacing Bolingbroke, and acted as both a social and a financial centre for Thomas. Thomas built the first great hall at the castle from 1314 to 1317 and constructed the Water Tower along the outer bailey, as well as increasing the size of the chase. Lancaster, with support from many of the other English barons, found himself in increasing opposition to Edward II. War broke out in 1322, and Lancaster was captured at the Battle of Boroughbridge and executed. His estates, including Kenilworth, were confiscated by the crown. Edward and his wife, Isabella of France, spent Christmas 1323 at Kenilworth, amidst major celebrations.\n\nIn 1326, however, Edward was deposed by an alliance of Isabella and her lover, Roger Mortimer. Edward was eventually captured by Isabella's forces and the custody of the king was assigned to Henry, Earl of Lancaster, who had backed Isabella's invasion. Henry, reoccupying most of the Lancaster lands, was made constable of Kenilworth and Edward was transported there in late 1326; Henry's legal title to the castle was finally confirmed the following year. Kenilworth was chosen for this purpose by Isabella probably both because it was a major fortification, and also because of the symbolism of its former owners' links to popular ideals of freedom and good government. Royal writs were issued in Edward's name by Isabella from Kenilworth until the next year. A deputation of leading barons led by Bishop Orleton was then sent to Kenilworth to first persuade Edward to resign and, when that failed, to inform him that he had been deposed as king. Edward formally resigned as king in the great hall of the castle on 21 January 1327. As the months went by, however, it became clear that Kenilworth was proving a less than ideal location to imprison Edward. The castle was in a prominent part of the Midlands, in an area that held several nobles who still supported Edward and were believed to be trying to rescue him. Henry's loyalty was also coming under question. In due course, Isabella and Mortimer had Edward moved by night to Berkeley Castle, where he died shortly afterwards. Isabella continued to use Kenilworth as a royal castle until her fall from power in 1330.\n\nHenry of Grosmont, the Duke of Lancaster, inherited the castle from his father in 1345 and remodelled the great hall with a grander interior and roof. On his death Blanche of Lancaster inherited the castle. Blanche married John of Gaunt, the third son of Edward III; their union, and combined resources, made John the second richest man in England next to the king himself. After Blanche's death, John married Constance, who had a claim to the kingdom of Castile, and John styled himself the king of Castile and León. Kenilworth was one of the most important of his thirty or more castles in England. John began building at Kenilworth between 1373 and 1380 in a style designed to reinforce his royal claims in Iberia. John constructed a grander great hall, the Strong Tower, Saintlowe Tower, the state apartments and the new kitchen complex. When not campaigning abroad, John spent much of his time at Kenilworth and Leicester, and used Kenilworth even more after 1395 when his health began to decline. In his final years, John made extensive repairs to the whole of the castle complex.\n\nMany castles, especially royal castles, were left to decay in the 15th century; Kenilworth, however, continued to be used as a centre of choice, forming a late medieval \"palace fortress\". Henry IV, John of Gaunt's son, returned Kenilworth to royal ownership when he took the throne in 1399 and made extensive use of the castle. Henry V also used Kenilworth extensively, but preferred to stay in the Pleasance, the mock castle he had built on the other side of the Great Mere. According to the contemporary chronicler John Strecche, who lived at the neighbouring Kenilworth Priory, the French openly mocked Henry in 1414 by sending him a gift of tennis balls at Kenilworth. The French aim was to imply a lack of martial prowess; according to Strecche, the gift spurred Henry's decision to fight the Agincourt campaign. The account was used by Shakespeare as the basis for a scene in his play \"Henry V\".\n\nEnglish castles, including Kenilworth, did not play a decisive role during the Wars of the Roses (1455–85), which were fought primarily in the form of pitched battles between the rival factions of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists. With the mental collapse of King Henry VI, Queen Margaret used the Duchy of Lancaster lands in the Midlands, including Kenilworth, as one of her key bases of military support. Margaret removed Henry from London in 1456 for his own safety and until 1461, Henry's court divided almost all its time among Kenilworth, Leicester and Tutbury Castle for the purposes of protection. Kenilworth remained an important Lancastrian stronghold for the rest of the war, often acting as a military balance to the nearby castle of Warwick. With the victory of Henry VII at Bosworth, Kenilworth again received royal attention; Henry visited frequently and had a tennis court constructed at the castle for his use. His son, Henry VIII, decided that Kenilworth should be maintained as a royal castle. He abandoned the Pleasance and had part of the timber construction moved into the base court of the castle.\n\nThe castle remained in royal hands until it was given to John Dudley in 1553. Dudley came to prominence under Henry VIII and became the leading political figure under Edward VI. Dudley was a patron of John Shute, an early exponent of classical architecture in England, and began the process of modernising Kenilworth. Before his execution in 1553 by Queen Mary for attempting to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne, Dudley had built the new stable block and widened the tiltyard to its current form.\n\nKenilworth was restored to Dudley's son, Robert, Earl of Leicester, in 1563, four years after the succession of Elizabeth I to the throne. Leicester's lands in Warwickshire were worth between £500–£700 but Leicester's power and wealth, including monopolies and grants of new lands, depended ultimately on his remaining a favourite of the queen.\n\nLeicester continued his father's modernisation of Kenilworth, attempting to ensure that Kenilworth would attract the interest of Elizabeth during her regular tours around the country. Elizabeth visited in 1566 and 1568, by which time Leicester had commissioned the royal architect Henry Hawthorne to produce plans for a dramatic, classical extension of the south side of the inner court. In the event this proved unachievable and instead Leicester employed William Spicer to rebuild and extend the castle so as to provide modern accommodation for the royal court and symbolically boost his own claims to noble heritage. After negotiation with his tenants, Leicester also increased the size of the chase once again. The result has been termed an English \"Renaissance palace\".\n\nElizabeth viewed the partially finished results at Kenilworth in 1572, but the complete effect of Leicester's work was only apparent during the queen's last visit in 1575. Leicester was keen to impress Elizabeth in a final attempt to convince her to marry him, and no expense was spared. Elizabeth brought an entourage of thirty-one barons and four hundred staff for the royal visit that lasted an exceptional nineteen days; twenty horsemen a day arrived at the castle to communicate royal messages. Leicester entertained the Queen and much of the neighbouring region with pageants, fireworks, bear baiting, mystery plays, hunting and lavish banquets. The cost was reputed to have amounted to many thousand pounds, almost bankrupting Leicester, though it probably did not exceed £1,700 in reality. The event was considered a huge success and formed the longest stay at such a property during any of Elizabeth's tours, yet the queen did not decide to marry Leicester.\n\nKenilworth Castle was valued at £10,401 in 1588, when Leicester died without legitimate issue and heavily in debt. In accordance with his will, the castle passed first to his brother Ambrose, Earl of Warwick, and after the latter's death in 1590, to his illegitimate son, Sir Robert Dudley.\n\nSir Robert Dudley, having tried and failed to establish his legitimacy in front of the Court of the Star Chamber, went to Italy in 1605. In the same year Sir Thomas Chaloner, governor (and from 1610 chamberlain) to James I's eldest son Prince Henry, was commissioned to oversee repairs to the castle and its grounds, including the planting of gardens, the restoration of fish-ponds and improvement to the game park. During 1611–12 Dudley arranged to sell Kenilworth Castle to Henry, by then Prince of Wales. Henry died before completing the full purchase, which was finalised by his brother, Charles, who bought out the interest of Dudley's abandoned wife, Alice Dudley. When Charles became king, he gave the castle to his wife, Henrietta Maria; he bestowed the stewardship on Robert Carey, Earl of Monmouth, and after his death gave it to Carey's sons Henry and Thomas. Kenilworth remained a popular location for both King James I and his son Charles, and accordingly was well maintained. The most famous royal visit occurred in 1624, when Ben Jonson's \"The Masque of Owls at Kenilworth\" was performed for Charles.\n\nThe First English Civil War broke out in 1642. During its early campaigns, Kenilworth formed a useful counterbalance to the Parliamentary stronghold of Warwick. Kenilworth was used by Charles on his advance to Edgehill in October 1642 as a base for raids on Parliamentary strongholds in the Midlands. After the battle, however, the royalist garrison was withdrawn on the approach of Lord Brooke, and the castle was then garrisoned by parliamentary forces. In April 1643 the new governor of the castle, Hastings Ingram, was arrested as a suspected Royalist double agent. By January 1645 the Parliamentary forces in Coventry had strengthened their hold on the castle, and attempts by Royalist forces to dislodge them from Warwickshire failed. Security concerns continued after the end of the First Civil War in 1646, and in 1649 Parliament ordered the slighting of Kenilworth. One wall of the great tower, various parts of the outer bailey and the battlements were destroyed, but not before the building was surveyed by the antiquarian William Dugdale, who published his results in 1656.\n\nColonel Joseph Hawkesworth, responsible for the implementation of the slighting, acquired the estate for himself and converted Leicester's gatehouse into a house; part of the base court was turned into a farm, and many of the remaining buildings were stripped for their materials. In 1660 Charles II was restored to the throne, and Hawkesworth was promptly evicted from Kenilworth. The Queen Mother, Henrietta Maria, briefly regained the castle, with the Earls of Monmouth acting as stewards once again, but after her death King Charles II granted the castle to Sir Edward Hyde, whom he later created Baron Hyde of Hindon and Earl of Clarendon. The ruined castle continued to be used as a farm, with the gatehouse as the principal dwelling; the King's Gate was added to the outer bailey wall during this period for the use of farm workers.\n\nKenilworth remained a ruin during the 18th and 19th centuries, still used as a farm but increasingly also popular as a tourist attraction. The first guidebook to the castle, \"A Concise history and description of Kenilworth Castle\", was printed in 1777 with many later editions following in the coming decades.\nThe castle's cultural prominence increased after Sir Walter Scott wrote \"Kenilworth\" in 1821 describing the royal visit of Queen Elizabeth. Very loosely based on the events of 1575, Scott's story reinvented aspects of the castle and its history to tell the story of \"the pathetic, beautiful, undisciplined heroine Amy Robsart and the steely Elizabeth I\". Although considered today as a less successful literary novel than some of his other historical works, it popularised Kenilworth Castle in the Victorian imagination as a romantic Elizabethan location. \"Kenilworth\" spawned \"numerous stage adaptations and burlesques, at least eleven operas, popular redactions, and even a scene in a set of dioramas for home display\", including Sir Arthur Sullivan's 1865 cantata \"The Masque at Kenilworth\". J. M. W. Turner painted several watercolours of the castle.\n\nThe number of visitors increased, including Queen Victoria and Charles Dickens. Work was undertaken during the 19th century to protect the stonework from further decline, with particular efforts to remove ivy from the castle in the 1860s.\n\nThe castle remained the property of the Clarendons until 1937, when Lord Clarendon found the maintenance of the castle too expensive and sold Kenilworth to the industrialist Sir John Siddeley. Siddeley, whose tax accounting in the 1930s had been at least questionable, was keen to improve his public image and gave over the running of the castle, complete with a charitable donation, to the Commissioner of Works. In 1958 his son gave the castle itself to the town of Kenilworth and English Heritage has managed the property since 1984 and is open to the public. The castle is classed as a Grade I listed building and as a Scheduled Monument.\n\nBetween 2005 and 2009, English Heritage attempted to restore Kenilworth's garden more closely to its Elizabethan form, using as a basis the description in the Langham letter and details from recent archaeological investigations. The reconstruction cost more than £2 million and was criticised by some archaeologists as being a \"matter of simulation as much as reconstruction\", due to the limited amount of factual information on the nature of the original gardens. In 2008 plans were put forward to re-create and flood the original Great Mere around the castle. As well as re-creating the look of the castle it was hoped that a new mere would be part of the ongoing flood alleviation plan for the area and that the lake could be used for boating and other waterside recreations.\nBULLET::::- Castles in Great Britain and Ireland\nBULLET::::- List of castles in England\n\nBULLET::::- Adams, Simon. (2002) \"Leicester and the Court: Essays on Elizabethan politics.\" Manchester: Manchester University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Allen Brown, Reginald. (1955) \"Royal Castle Building in England, 1154–1216,\" \"English Historical Review\", lxx (1955).\nBULLET::::- Apted, M. R., R. Gilyard-Beer and A. D. Saunders. (eds) (1977) \"Ancient Monuments and their Interpretation: Essays Presented to A. J. Taylor.\" Chichester, England: Phillimore. .\nBULLET::::- Asch, Ronald G. (2004) \"A Difficult Legacy. Elizabeth I's Bequest to the Early Stuarts,\" in Jansohn (ed) 2004.\nBULLET::::- Cammiade, Audrey. (1972) \"Elizabeth the First.\" Whitstable: Latimer Trend. .\nBULLET::::- Carpenter, Christine. (1997) \"The Wars of the Roses: Politics and the Constitution in England, c.1437–1509.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Carpenter, David. (2004) \"The Struggle for Mastery: The Penguin History of Britain 1066–1284.\" London: Penguin. .\nBULLET::::- Cathcart King, David James. (1988) \"The Castle in England and Wales: an Interpretative History.\" London: Croom Helm. .\nBULLET::::- Colvin, Howard M. (1986) \"Royal Gardens in Medieval England,\" in MacDougal (ed) 1986.\nBULLET::::- Crouch, David. (1982) \"Geoffrey de Clinton and Roger, Earl of Warwick: New Men and Magnates in the Reign of Henry I,\" in \"Historical Research\", 55 (1982).\nBULLET::::- Dobres, Marcia-Anne and John E. Robb. (eds) (2000) \"Agency in Archaeology.\" London: Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- Doherty, P.C. (2003) \"Isabella and the Strange Death of Edward II.\" London: Robinson. .\nBULLET::::- Emery, Anthony. (2000) \"Greater Medieval Houses of England and Wales, 1300–1500: East Anglia, Central England and Wales, Volume II.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Emery, Anthony. (2006) \"Greater Medieval Houses of England and Wales, 1300–1500: Southern England.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Greene, Kevin and Tom Moore. (2010) \"Archaeology: An Introduction.\" Abingdon, UK: Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- Hackett, Helen. (2009) \"Shakespeare and Elizabeth: the Meeting of Two Myths.\" Princeton: Princeton University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Hall, Hubert. (2003) \"Society in the Elizabethan Age.\" Whitefish, US: Kessinger Publishing. .\nBULLET::::- Haynes, Alan. (1987) \"The White Bear: The Elizabethan Earl of Leicester.\" London: Peter Owen.\nBULLET::::- Hughes, Ann. (2002) \"Politics, Society and Civil War in Warwickshire, 1620–1660.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Hull, Lise E. (2006) \"Britain's Medieval Castles.\" Westport: Praeger. .\nBULLET::::- Hull, Lise E. and Whitehorne, Stephen. (2008) \"Great Castles of Britain & Ireland.\" London: New Holland Publishers. .\nBULLET::::- Hull, Lise E. (2009) \"Understanding the Castle Ruins of England and Wales: How to Interpret the History and Meaning of Masonry and Earthworks.\" Jefferson, US: MacFarland. .\nBULLET::::- Jansohn, Christa. (ed) (2004) \"Queen Elizabeth I: Past and Present.\" Münster: LIT Verlag. .\nBULLET::::- Johnson, Matthew. (2000) \"Self-Made Men and the Staging of Agency,\" in Dobres and Robb (eds) 2000.\nBULLET::::- Johnson, Matthew. (2002) \"Behind the Castle Gate: From Medieval to Renaissance.\" Abingdon, UK: Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- MacDougal, Elisabeth B. (ed) (1986) \"Medieval Gardens.\" Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks. .\nBULLET::::- Morris, Richard K. (2007) \"A Plan for Kenilworth Castle at Longleat,\" \"English Heritage Historical Review\", 2 (2007).\nBULLET::::- Morris, Richard K. (2010) \"Kenilworth Castle.\" (Second edition) London: English Heritage. .\nBULLET::::- Mortimer, Ian. (2006) \"The Perfect King: The Life of Edward III, Father of the English Nation.\" London: Vintage Press. .\nBULLET::::- Pettifer, Adrian. (1995) \"English Castles: A Guide by Counties.\" Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. .\nBULLET::::- Platt, Colin. (1994) \"Medieval England: A Social History and Archaeology from the Conquest to 1600 AD.\" London: Routledge. .\nBULLET::::- Pounds, Norman John Greville. (1990) \"The Medieval Castle in England and Wales: a Social and Political history.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Prestwich, Michael. (1988) \"Edward I.\" Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. .\nBULLET::::- Roberts, Keith and John Tincey. (2001) \"Edgehill 1642: First Battle of the English Civil War.\" Botley, UK: Osprey. .\nBULLET::::- Sharpe, Henry. (1825) \"Concise History and Description of Kenilworth Castle: From its Foundation to the Present Time, 16th edition.\" Warwick: Sharpe. .\nBULLET::::- Shaw, Harry E. (1983) \"The Forms of Historical Fiction: Sir Walter Scott and his successors.\" New York: Cornell University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Singman, Jeffrey L. (1995) \"Daily life in Elizabethan England.\" Westport, US: Greenwood Press.\nBULLET::::- Smith, Bill. (2005) \"Armstrong Siddeley Motors: The Cars, the Company and the People in Definitive Detail.\" Dorchester, UK: Veloce Publishing. .\nBULLET::::- Stephen, Leslie. (ed) 1887 \"The Dictionary of National Biography : From the Earliest Times to 1900: Volume 9, Canute - Chaloner.\" London, UK: Smith, Elder and Co. .\nBULLET::::- Stokstad, Marilyn. (2005) \"Medieval Castles.\" Westport, US: Greenwood Press. .\nBULLET::::- Thompson, M. W. (1965) \"Two levels of the mere at Kenilworth Castle, Warwickshire,\" in \"The Society of Medieval Archaeology Journal\", 9 (1965).\nBULLET::::- Thompson, M. W. (1977) \"Three Stages in the Construction of the Hall at Kenilworth Castle,\" in Apted, Gilyard-Beer and Saunders (eds) 1977.\nBULLET::::- Thompson, M. W. (1991) \"The Rise of the Castle.\" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Walsingham, Thomas, David Preest and James Clark. (2005) \"The Chronica Maiora of Thomas Walsingham, 1376–1422.\" Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press. .\nBULLET::::- Weir, Alison. (2006) \"Queen Isabella: She-Wolf of France, Queen of England.\" London: Pimlico Books. .\nBULLET::::- Westby-Gibson, John. (1887) \",\" in Stephen (ed) 1887.\n\nBULLET::::- Kenilworth Castle on the English Heritage website\n"}
{"id": "17077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17077", "title": "Konrad Lorenz", "text": "Konrad Lorenz\n\nKonrad Zacharias Lorenz (; 7 November 1903 – 27 February 1989) was an Austrian zoologist, ethologist, and ornithologist. He shared the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Nikolaas Tinbergen and Karl von Frisch. He is often regarded as one of the founders of modern ethology, the study of animal behaviour. He developed an approach that began with an earlier generation, including his teacher Oskar Heinroth.\n\nLorenz studied instinctive behavior in animals, especially in greylag geese and jackdaws. Working with geese, he investigated the principle of imprinting, the process by which some nidifugous birds (i.e. birds that leave their nest early) bond instinctively with the first moving object that they see within the first hours of hatching. Although Lorenz did not discover the topic, he became widely known for his descriptions of imprinting as an instinctive bond. In 1936 he met Tinbergen, and the two collaborated in developing ethology as a separate sub-discipline of biology. A \"Review of General Psychology\" survey, published in 2002, ranked Lorenz as the 65th most cited scholar of the 20th century in the technical psychology journals, introductory psychology textbooks, and survey responses.\n\nLorenz's work was interrupted by the onset of World War II and in 1941 he was recruited into the German Army as a medic. In 1944 he was sent to the Eastern Front where he was captured by the Soviet Red Armyand spent four years as a German prisoner of war. After the war he regretted his membership in the Nazi Party.\n\nLorenz wrote numerous books, some of which, such as \"King Solomon's Ring\", \"On Aggression\", and \"Man Meets Dog\", became popular reading. His last work \"Here I Am – Where Are You?\" is a summary of his life's work and focuses on his famous studies of greylag geese.\n\nIn his autobiographical essay, published in 1973 in \"Les Prix Nobel\" (winners of the prizes are requested to provide such essays), Lorenz credits his career to his parents, who \"were supremely tolerant of my inordinate love for animals\", and to his childhood encounter with Selma Lagerlöf's \"The Wonderful Adventures of Nils\", which filled him with a great enthusiasm about wild geese. \" \n\nAt the request of his father, Adolf Lorenz, he began a premedical curriculum in 1922 at Columbia University, but he returned to Vienna in 1923 to continue his studies at the University of Vienna. He graduated as Doctor of Medicine (MD) in 1928 and became an assistant professor at the Institute of Anatomy until 1935. He finished his zoological studies in 1933 and received his second doctorate (PhD).\n\nWhile still a student, Lorenz began developing what would become a large menagerie, ranging from domestic to exotic animals. In his popular book \"King Solomon's Ring\", Lorenz recounts that while studying at the University of Vienna he kept a variety of animals at his parents' apartment, ranging from fish to a capuchin monkey named Gloria.\n\nIn 1936, at an international scientific symposium on instinct, Lorenz met his great friend and colleague Nikolaas Tinbergen. Together they studied geese—wild, domestic, and hybrid. One result of these studies was that Lorenz \"realized that an overpowering increase in the drives of feeding as well as of copulation and a waning of more differentiated social instincts is characteristic of very many domestic animals\". Lorenz began to suspect and fear \"that analogous processes of deterioration may be at work with civilized humanity.\" This observation of bird hybrids caused Lorenz to believe that domestication resulting from urbanisation in humans might also cause dysgenic effects, and to argue in two papers that the Nazi eugenics policies against this were therefore scientifically justified.\n\nIn 1940 he became a professor of psychology at the University of Königsberg. He was drafted into the Wehrmacht in 1941. He sought to be a motorcycle mechanic, but instead he was assigned as a military psychologist, conducting racial studies on humans in occupied Poznań under Rudolf Hippius. The objective was to study the biological characteristics of \"German-Polish half-breeds\" to determine whether they 'benefitted' from the same work ethics as 'pure' Germans. The degree to which Lorenz participated in the project is unknown, but the project director Hippius referred a couple of times to Lorenz as an \"examining psychologist\".\n\nLorenz later described that he once saw transports of concentration camp inmates at Fort VII near Poznań, which made him \"fully realize the complete inhumanity of the Nazis\".\n\nHe was sent to the Russian front in 1944 where he quickly became a prisoner of war in the Soviet Union from 1944 to 1948. In captivity he continued to work as a medic and \"got quite friendly with some Russians, mostly doctors\". When he was repatriated, he was allowed to keep the manuscript of a book he had been writing, and his pet starling. He arrived back in Altenberg (his family home, near Vienna) both \"with manuscript and bird intact.\" The manuscript became his 1973 book \"\".\n\nThe Max Planck Society established the Lorenz Institute for Behavioral Physiology in Buldern, Germany, in 1950. In his memoirs Lorenz described the chronology of his war years differently from what historians have been able to document after his death. He himself claimed that he was captured in 1942, where in reality he was only sent to the front and captured in 1944, leaving out entirely his involvement with the Poznań project.\n\nIn 1958, Lorenz transferred to the Max Planck Institute for Behavioral Physiology in Seewiesen. He shared the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine \"for discoveries in individual and social behavior patterns\" with two other important early ethologists, Nikolaas Tinbergen and Karl von Frisch. In 1969, he became the first recipient of the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca. \nHe was a friend and student of renowned biologist Sir Julian Huxley (grandson of \"Darwin's bulldog\", Thomas Henry Huxley). Famed psychoanalyst Ralph Greenson and Sir Peter Scott were good friends. Lorenz and Karl Popper were childhood friends; many years after they met, during the celebration of Popper's 80 years, they wrote together a book entitled \"Die Zukunft ist offen\".\n\nHe retired from the Max Planck Institute in 1973 but continued to research and publish from Altenberg and Grünau im Almtal in Austria. He died on 27 February 1989 in Altenberg.\n\nLorenz is recognized as one of the founding fathers of the field of ethology, the study of animal behavior. He is best known for his discovery of the principle of attachment, or imprinting, through which in some species a bond is formed between a new born animal and its caregiver. This principle had been discovered by Douglas Spalding in the 19th century, and Lorenz's mentor Oskar Heinroth had also worked on the topic, but Lorenz's description of \"Prägung\", imprinting, in nidifugous birds such as greylag geese in his 1935 book \"Der Kumpan in der Umwelt des Vogels\" (\"The Companion in the Environment of Birds\") became the foundational description of the phenomenon.\n\nHere, Lorenz used Jakob von Uexküll's concept of Umwelt to understand how the limited perception of animals filtered out certain phenomena with which they interacted instinctively. For example, a young goose instinctively bonds with the first moving stimulus it perceives, whether it be its mother, or a person. Lorenz showed that this behavior of imprinting is what allows the goose to learn to recognize members of its own species, enabling them to be the object of subsequent behavior patterns such as mating. He developed a theory of instinctive behavior that saw behavior patterns as largely innate but triggered through environmental stimuli, for example the hawk/goose effect. He argued that animals have an inner drive to carry out instinctive behaviors, and that if they do not encounter the right stimulus they will eventually engage in the behavior with an inappropriate stimulus.\n\nLorenz's approach to ethology derived from a skepticism towards the studies of animal behavior done in laboratory settings. He considered that in order to understand the mechanisms of animal behavior, it was necessary to observe their full range of behaviors in their natural context. Lorenz did not carry out much traditional fieldwork but observed animals near his home. His method involved empathizing with animals, often using anthropomorphization to imagine their mental states. He believed that animals were capable of experiencing many of the same emotions as humans.\n\nTinbergen, Lorenz's friend with whom he conjointly received the Nobel prize, summarized Lorenz's major contribution to ethology as making behavior a topic of biological inquiry, considering behavior a part of an animal's evolutionary equipment. Tinbergen and Lorenz contributed to making Ethology a recognized sub-discipline within Biology and founded the first specialized journal of the field \"Ethology\" (originally \"Zeitschift für Tierpsychologie\")\n\nLorenz joined the Nazi Party in 1938 and accepted a university chair under the Nazi regime. In his application for party membership he wrote, \"I'm able to say that my whole scientific work is devoted to the ideas of the National Socialists.\" His publications during that time led in later years to allegations that his scientific work had been contaminated by Nazi sympathies. His published writing during the Nazi period included support for Nazi ideas of \"racial hygiene\" couched in pseudoscientific metaphors.\n\nIn his autobiography, Lorenz wrote:\nI was frightened—as I still am—by the thought that analogous genetical processes of deterioration may be at work with civilized humanity. Moved by this fear, I did a very ill-advised thing soon after the Germans had invaded Austria: I wrote about the dangers of domestication and, in order to be understood, I couched my writing in the worst of Nazi terminology. I do not want to extenuate this action. I did, indeed, believe that some good might come of the new rulers. The precedent narrow-minded catholic regime in Austria induced better and more intelligent men than I was to cherish this naive hope. Practically all my friends and teachers did so, including my own father who certainly was a kindly and humane man. None of us as much as suspected that the word \"selection\", when used by these rulers, meant murder. I regret those writings not so much for the undeniable discredit they reflect on my person as for their effect of hampering the future recognition of the dangers of domestication.\n\nAfter the war, Lorenz denied having been a party member, until his membership application was made public; and he denied having known the extent of the genocide, despite his position as a psychologist in the Office of Racial Policy. He was also shown to have made anti-Semitic jokes on 'Jewish characteristics' in letters to his mentor Heinroth. In 2015 the University of Salzburg posthumously rescinded an honorary doctorate awarded to Lorenz in 1983, citing his party membership and his assertions in his application that he was \"always a National Socialist\", and that his work \"stands to serve National Socialist thought\". The university also accused him of using his work to spread \"basic elements of the racist ideology of National Socialism\".\n\nDuring the final years of his life, Lorenz supported the fledgling Austrian Green Party and in 1984 became the figurehead of the Konrad Lorenz Volksbegehren, a grass-roots movement that was formed to prevent the building of a power plant at the Danube near Hainburg an der Donau and thus the destruction of the surrounding woodland.\n\nLorenz has been called 'The father of ethology', by Niko Tinbergen. Perhaps Lorenz's most important contribution to ethology was his idea that behavior patterns can be studied as anatomical organs. This concept forms the foundation of ethological research. However, Richard Dawkins called Lorenz a \"'good of the species' man\", stating that the idea of group selection was \"so deeply ingrained\" in Lorenz's thinking that he \"evidently did not realize that his statements contravened orthodox Darwinian theory.\"\n\nTogether with Nikolaas Tinbergen, Lorenz developed the idea of an innate releasing mechanism to explain instinctive behaviors (fixed action patterns). They experimented with \"supernormal stimuli\" such as giant eggs or dummy bird beaks which they found could release the fixed action patterns more powerfully than the natural objects for which the behaviors were adapted. Influenced by the ideas of William McDougall, Lorenz developed this into a \"psychohydraulic\" model of the motivation of behavior, which tended towards group selectionist ideas, which were influential in the 1960s. Another of his contributions to ethology is his work on imprinting. His influence on a younger generation of ethologists; and his popular works, were important in bringing ethology to the attention of the general public.\n\nLorenz claimed that there was widespread contempt for the descriptive sciences. He attributed this to the denial of perception as the source of all scientific knowledge: \"a denial that has been elevated to the status of religion.\" He wrote that in comparative behavioral research, \"it is necessary to describe various patterns of movement, record them, and above all, render them unmistakably recognizable.\"\n\nThere are three research institutions named after Lorenz in Austria: the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research (KLI) was housed in Lorenz' family mansion at Altenberg before moving to Klosterneuburg in 2013 ; the Konrad Lorenz Forschungsstelle (KLF) at his former field station in Grünau; and the Konrad Lorenz Institute of Ethology, an external research facility of the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna.\n\nLorenz predicted the relationship between market economics and the threat of ecological catastrophe. In his 1973 book, \"Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins\", Lorenz addresses the following paradox:\n\nAll the advantages that man has gained from his ever-deepening understanding of the natural world that surrounds him, his technological, chemical and medical progress, all of which should seem to alleviate human suffering... tends instead to favor humanity's destruction\n\nLorenz adopts an ecological model to attempt to grasp the mechanisms behind this contradiction. Thus \"all species... are adapted to their environment... including not only inorganic components... but all the other living beings that inhabit the locality.\" p31.\n\nFundamental to Lorenz's theory of ecology is the function of negative feedback mechanisms, which, in hierarchical fashion, dampen impulses that occur beneath a certain threshold. The thresholds themselves are the product of the interaction of contrasting mechanisms. Thus pain and pleasure act as checks on each other:\n\nTo gain a desired prey, a dog or wolf will do things that, in other contexts, they would shy away from: run through thorn bushes, jump into cold water and expose themselves to risks which would normally frighten them. All these inhibitory mechanisms... act as a counterweight to the effects of learning mechanisms... The organism cannot allow itself to pay a price which is not worth paying. p53.\n\nIn nature, these mechanisms tend towards a 'stable state' among the living beings of an ecology:\n\nA closer examination shows that these beings... not only do not damage each other, but often constitute a community of interests. It is obvious that the predator is strongly interested in the survival of that species, animal or vegetable, which constitutes its prey. ... It is not uncommon that the prey species derives specific benefits from its interaction with the predator species... pp31–33.\n\nLorenz states that humanity is the one species not bound by these mechanisms, being the only one that has defined its own environment:\n\n[The pace of human ecology] is determined by the progress of man's technology (p35)... human ecology (economy) is governed by mechanisms of POSITIVE feedback, defined as a mechanism which tends to encourage behavior rather than to attenuate it (p43). Positive feedback always involves the danger of an 'avalanche' effect... One particular kind of positive feedback occurs when individuals OF THE SAME SPECIES enter into competition among themselves... For many animal species, environmental factors keep... intraspecies selection from [leading to] disaster... But there is no force which exercises this type of healthy regulatory effect on humanity's cultural development; unfortunately for itself, humanity has learned to overcome all those environmental forces which are external to itself p44.\n\nRegarding aggression in human beings, Lorenz states:\n\nLet us imagine that an absolutely unbiased investigator on another planet, perhaps on Mars, is examining human behavior on earth, with the aid of a telescope whose magnification is too small to enable him to discern individuals and follow their separate behavior, but large enough for him to observe occurrences such as migrations of peoples, wars, and similar great historical events. He would never gain the impression that human behavior was dictated by intelligence, still less by responsible morality. If we suppose our extraneous observer to be a being of pure reason, devoid of instincts himself and unaware of the way in which all instincts in general and aggression in particular can miscarry, he would be at a complete loss how to explain history at all. The ever-recurrent phenomena of history do not have reasonable causes. It is a mere commonplace to say that they are caused by what common parlance so aptly terms \"human nature.\" Unreasoning and unreasonable human nature causes two nations to compete, though no economic necessity compels them to do so; it induces two political parties or religions with amazingly similar programs of salvation to fight each other bitterly, and it impels an Alexander or a Napoleon to sacrifice millions of lives in his attempt to unite the world under his scepter. We have been taught to regard some of the persons who have committed these and similar absurdities with respect, even as \"great\" men, we are wont to yield to the political wisdom of those in charge, and we are all so accustomed to these phenomena that most of us fail to realize how abjectly stupid and undesirable the historical mass behavior of humanity actually is \n\nLorenz does not see human independence from natural ecological processes as necessarily bad. Indeed, he states that:\n\nA completely new [ecology] which corresponds in every way to [humanity's] desires... could, theoretically, prove as durable as that which would have existed without his intervention (36).\n\nHowever, the principle of competition, typical of Western societies, destroys any chance of this:\n\nThe competition between human beings destroys with cold and diabolic brutality... Under the pressure of this competitive fury we have not only forgotten what is useful to humanity as a whole, but even that which is good and advantageous to the individual. [...] One asks, which is more damaging to modern humanity: the thirst for money or consuming haste... in either case, fear plays a very important role: the fear of being overtaken by one's competitors, the fear of becoming poor, the fear of making wrong decisions or the fear of not being up to snuff... pp45–47.\n\nIn this book, Lorenz proposes that the best hope for mankind lies in our looking for mates based on the kindness of their hearts rather than good looks or wealth. He illustrates this with a Jewish story, explicitly described as such.\n\nLorenz was one of the early scientists who recognised the significance of human overpopulation. The number one deadly sin of civilized man in his book is overpopulation, which is what leads to aggression.\n\nIn his 1973 book \"\", Lorenz considers the old philosophical question of whether our senses correctly inform us about the world as it is, or provide us only with an illusion. His answer comes from evolutionary biology. Only traits that help us survive and reproduce are transmitted. If our senses gave us wrong information about our environment, we would soon be extinct. Therefore, we can be sure that our senses give us correct information, for otherwise we would not be here to be deceived.\n\nBULLET::::- Austrian Decoration for Science and Art in 1964\nBULLET::::- Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1964\nBULLET::::- Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science in 1969\nBULLET::::- Gold Medal of the Humboldt Society in 1972\nBULLET::::- Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1973\nBULLET::::- Honorary Doctorate, University of Salzburg, 1983, revoked in 2015\nBULLET::::- Grand Cross with Star and Sash of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (\"Großes Verdienstkreuz mit Stern und Schulterband\") in 1984\nBULLET::::- Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art in 1984\n\nLorenz's best-known books are \"King Solomon's Ring\" and \"On Aggression\", both written for a popular audience. His scientific work appeared mainly in journal articles, written in German; it became widely known to English-speaking scientists through its description in Tinbergen's 1951 book \"The Study of Instinct\", though many of his papers were later published in English translation in the two volumes titled \"Studies in Animal and Human Behavior\".\nBULLET::::- \"King Solomon's Ring\" (1949) (\"Er redete mit dem Vieh, den Vögeln und den Fischen\", 1949)\nBULLET::::- \"Man Meets Dog\" (1950) (\"So kam der Mensch auf den Hund\", 1950)\nBULLET::::- \"Evolution and Modification of Behaviour\" (1965)\nBULLET::::- \"On Aggression\" (1966) (\"Das sogenannte Böse. Zur Naturgeschichte der Aggression\", 1963)\nBULLET::::- \"Studies in Animal and Human Behavior, Volume I\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"Studies in Animal and Human Behavior, Volume II\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"Motivation of Human and Animal Behavior: An Ethological View\". With Paul Leyhausen (1973). New York: D. Van Nostrand Co.\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1973) (\"Die Rückseite des Spiegels. Versuch einer Naturgeschichte menschlichen Erkennens\", 1973)\nBULLET::::- \"Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins\" (1974) (\"Die acht Todsünden der zivilisierten Menschheit\", 1973)\nBULLET::::- \"The Year of the Greylag Goose\" (1979) (\"Das Jahr der Graugans\", 1979)\nBULLET::::- \"The Foundations of Ethology\" (1982)\nBULLET::::- \"The Waning of Humaneness\" (1987) (\"Der Abbau des Menschlichen\", 1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Here I Am – Where Are You? – A Lifetime's Study of the Uncannily Human Behaviour of the Greylag Goose\". (1988). Translated by Robert D. Martin from \"Hier bin ich – wo bist du?\".\nBULLET::::- \"The Natural Science of the Human Species: An Introduction to Comparative Behavioral Research – The Russian Manuscript (1944–1948)\" (1995)\n\nBULLET::::- Animal mobbing behavior\nBULLET::::- Imprinting (psychology)\n\nBULLET::::- Short Autobiography on the Nobel Foundation website\nBULLET::::- A chapter from \"On Aggression\" (1963)\nBULLET::::- Review of \"Biologists Under Hitler\"\nBULLET::::- Konrad Lorenz Institutes:\nBULLET::::- Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research in Altenberg\nBULLET::::- Konrad Lorenz Research Station, Grünau im Almtal\nBULLET::::- Konrad Lorenz Institute for Ethology\n"}
{"id": "17078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17078", "title": "K. W. Jeter", "text": "K. W. Jeter\n\nKevin Wayne Jeter (born March 26, 1950), known both personally and professionally as K. W. Jeter, is an American science fiction and horror author known for his literary writing style, dark themes, and paranoid, unsympathetic characters. He has written novels set in the \"Star Trek\" and \"Star Wars\" universes, and has written three sequels to \"Blade Runner\".\n\nJeter attended college at California State University, Fullerton where he became friends with James P. Blaylock and Tim Powers, and through them, Philip K. Dick. Jeter was actually the inspiration for \"Kevin\" in Dick's semi-autobiographical novel, \"Valis\". Many of Jeter's books focus on the subjective nature of reality in a way reminiscent of Dick's.\n\nPhilip K. Dick enthusiastically recommended Jeter's early cyberpunk novel, \"Dr. Adder\". Due to its violent and sexually provocative content, it took Jeter around ten years to find a publisher for it. Jeter would also coin the term steampunk, in reference to cyberpunk in a letter to \"Locus\" in April 1987, in order describe the steam-technology, alternate-history works that he published along with his friends, Blaylock and Powers. Jeter's steampunk novels are \"Morlock Night\", \"Infernal Devices\", and its sequel \"Fiendish Schemes\" (2013).\n\nAs well as his own original novels, K. W. Jeter has written three authorized novel sequels to the critically acclaimed 1982 motion picture \"Blade Runner\", which was adapted from Philip K. Dick's novel \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Seeklight\" (1975)\nBULLET::::- \"The Dreamfields\" (1976)\nBULLET::::- \"Morlock Night\" (1979; a sequel to H. G. Wells' \"The Time Machine\")\nBULLET::::- \"Soul Eater\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"Dark Seeker\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Mantis\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Farewell Horizontal\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"In the Land of the Dead\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"The Night Man\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Alligator Alley\" (1989), with Mink Mole a.k.a. Tim MacNamara\nBULLET::::- \"Madlands\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Wolf Flow\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Noir\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"The Kingdom of Shadows\" (2011)\nBULLET::::- \"Death's Apprentice\" (2012), with Gareth Jefferson Jones\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dr. Adder\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"The Glass Hammer\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Death Arms\" (1987)\n\nBULLET::::1. \"Infernal Devices\" (1987)\nBULLET::::2. \"Fiendish Schemes\" (2013)\nBULLET::::3. \"Grim Expectations\" (2017)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Ninja Two-Fifty\" (2006)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Mandalorian Armor\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Slave Ship\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Hard Merchandise\" (1999)\n\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2000)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Bloodletter\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Warped\" (1995)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mister E\" (DC) (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"N-Vector\" (Wildstorm) (2000)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Real Dangerous Girl\" (Editions Herodiade Oct. 2011)\nBULLET::::- \"Real Dangerous Job\" (Editions Herodiade Oct. 2011)\nBULLET::::- \"Real Dangerous People\" (Editions Herodiade Oct. 2011)\nBULLET::::- \"Real Dangerous Place\" (Editions Herodiade July 2012)\nBULLET::::- \"Real Dangerous Fun\" (Editions Herodiade July 2014)\nBULLET::::- \"Real Dangerous Ride\" (Editions Herodiade Mar. 2015)\n\nBULLET::::- K. W. Jeter website\nBULLET::::- Cyberpunk timeline at cyberpunkreview.com.\n"}
{"id": "17079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17079", "title": "Kay Redfield Jamison", "text": "Kay Redfield Jamison\n\nKay Redfield Jamison (born June 22, 1946) is an American clinical psychologist and writer. Her work has centered on bipolar disorder, which she has had since her early adulthood. She holds the post of the Dalio Professor in Mood Disorders and Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and is an Honorary Professor of English at the University of St Andrews.\n\nJamison began her study of clinical psychology at University of California, Los Angeles in the late 1960s, receiving both B.A. and M.A. degrees in 1971. She continued on at UCLA, receiving a C.Phil. in 1973 and a Ph.D. in 1975, and became a faculty member at the university. She went on to found and direct the school's Affective Disorders Clinic, a large teaching and research facility for outpatient treatment. She also studied zoology and neurophysiology as an undergraduate at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.\n\nAfter several years as a tenured professor at UCLA, Jamison was offered a position as Assistant Professor and then Professor of Psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Jamison has given visiting lectures at a number of different institutions while maintaining her professorship at Hopkins. She was distinguished lecturer at Harvard University in 2002 and the Litchfield lecturer at the University of Oxford in 2003. She was Honorary President and Board Member of the Canadian Psychological Association from 2009–2010. In 2010, she was a panelist in the series of discussions on the latest research into the brain, hosted by Charlie Rose with series scientist Eric Kandel on PBS.\n\nJamison has won numerous awards and published over 100 academic articles. She has been named one of the \"Best Doctors in the United States\" and was chosen by \"Time\" as a \"Hero of Medicine.\" She was also chosen as one of the five individuals for the public television series \"Great Minds of Medicine\". Jamison is the recipient of the National Mental Health Association's William Styron Award (1995), the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention Research Award (1996), the Community Mental Health Leadership Award (1999), and was a 2001 MacArthur Fellowship recipient.\nIn 2010, Jamison was conferred with an Honorary Degree of Doctor of Letters from the University of St Andrews in recognition of all her life's work. In May 2011, The General Theological Seminary of the Episcopal Church, New York, made her a Doctor of Divinity \"honoris causa\" at its annual Commencement. In 2017 Jamison was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (CorrFRSE).\n\nHer latest book, \"Robert Lowell: Setting the River on Fire\" was a Pulitzer Prize Finalist for Biography in 2018. \n\nHer book \"Manic-Depressive Illness\", first published in 1990 and co-authored with psychiatrist Frederick K. Goodwin is considered a classic textbook on bipolar disorder. The Acknowledgements section states that Goodwin \"received unrestricted educational grants to support\nthe production of this book from Abbott, AstraZeneca, Bristol Meyers Squibb, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Eli\nLilly, Pfizer, and Sanofi\", but that although Jamison has \"received occasional lecture honoraria\nfrom AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Eli Lilly\" she \"has received no research support from any pharmaceutical or biotechnology company\" and donates her royalties to a non-profit foundation.\n\nHer seminal works among laypeople are her memoir \"An Unquiet Mind\", which details her experience with severe mania and depression, and \"Night Falls Fast: Understanding Suicide\", providing historical, religious, and cultural responses to suicide, as well as the relationship between mental illness and suicide. In \"Night Falls Fast\", Jamison dedicates a chapter to American public policy and public opinion as it relates to suicide. Her second memoir, \"Nothing Was the Same\", examines her relationship with her second husband, the psychiatrist Richard Jed Wyatt, who was Chief of the Neuropsychiatry Branch of the National Institute of Mental Health until his death in 2002.\n\nIn her study \"Exuberance: The Passion for Life\", she cites research that suggests that 15 percent of people who could be diagnosed as bipolar may never actually become depressed; in effect, they are permanently \"high\" on life. She mentions President Theodore Roosevelt as an example.\n\n\"Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament\" is Jamison's exploration of how bipolar disorder can run in artistic or high-achieving families. As an example, she cites Lord Byron and his relatives.\n\nJamison wrote \"An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and Madness\" in part to help clinicians see what patients find helpful in therapy. J. Wesley Boyd, an Assistant Professor at the Department of Psychiatry at Tufts University's School of Medicine, wrote, \"Jamison's description [of the debt she owed her psychiatrist] illustrates the importance of merely being present for our patients and not trying to soothe them with platitudes or promises of a better future.\"\n\nJamison has said she is an \"exuberant\" person who longs for peace and tranquility but in the end prefers \"tumultuousness coupled to iron discipline\" to a \"stunningly boring life.\" In \"An Unquiet Mind\", she concluded:\n\nI long ago abandoned the notion of a life without storms, or a world without dry and killing seasons. Life is too complicated, too constantly changing, to be anything but what it is. And I am, by nature, too mercurial to be anything but deeply wary of the grave unnaturalness involved in any attempt to exert too much control over essentially uncontrollable forces. There will always be propelling, disturbing elements, and they will be there until, as Lowell put it, the watch is taken from the wrist. It is, at the end of the day, the individual moments of restlessness, of bleakness, of strong persuasions and maddened enthusiasms, that inform one's life, change the nature and direction of one's work, and give final meaning and color to one's loves and friendships.\n\nJamison was born to Dr. Marshall Verdine Jamison (1916–2012), an officer in the Air Force, and Mary Dell Temple Jamison (1916–2007). Jamison's father, and many others in his family, had bipolar disorder.\n\nAs a result of Jamison's military background, she grew up in many different places, including Florida, Puerto Rico, California, Tokyo, and Washington, D.C.. She has two older siblings, a brother and a sister, who are three years and half a year older, respectively. Her niece is writer Leslie Jamison. Jamison's interest in science and medicine began at a young age and was fostered by her parents. She worked as a candy striper at the hospital on the Andrews Air Force Base .\n\nJamison moved to California during adolescence, and soon thereafter began to struggle with bipolar disorder. She continued to struggle in college at UCLA. At first she wanted to become a doctor, but because of her increasing manic episodes she decided she could not maintain the rigorous discipline needed for medical school. She then found her calling in psychology. She flourished in this field and was extremely interested in mood disorders. Despite her studies, Jamison did not realize she was bipolar until three months into her first job as a professor in UCLA's Department of Psychology. After her diagnosis, she was put on lithium (medication), a common drug used to contain moods. At times, she would refuse the medication because it impaired her motor skills, but after a greater depression she decided to continue to take it. Jamison once attempted suicide by overdosing on lithium during a severe depressive episode.\n\nJamison is an Episcopalian, and was married to her first husband, Alain André Moreau, an artist, during her graduate school years. She then married Dr. Richard Wyatt in 1994; they remained married until his death in 2002. Wyatt was a psychiatrist who studied schizophrenia at the National Institutes of Health. Their romance is detailed in her memoir \"Nothing Was the Same\".\n\nIn 2010, Jamison married Thomas Traill, a cardiologist and colleague of hers at Johns Hopkins.\n\nBULLET::::- (includes a study of Lord Byron's illness)\n\nBULLET::::- A Conversation With Kay Redfield Jamison, Professor of Psychiatry by Grace Bello, \"The Atlantic\"\nBULLET::::- An Interview with Kay Jamison on Charlie Rose Show - 17 mins video\n"}
{"id": "17080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17080", "title": "Karaoke", "text": "Karaoke\n\nKaraoke (, ; , clipped compound of Japanese \"kara\" \"empty\" and \"ōkesutora\" \"orchestra\") is a type of dining interactive entertainment or video game developed in Japan in which an amateur singer sings along with recorded music (a music video) using a microphone. The music is normally an instrumental version of a well-known popular song. Lyrics are usually displayed on a video screen, along with a moving symbol, changing colour, or music video images, to guide the singer. In several Asian countries such as China, Cambodia and the Philippines, a karaoke box is called a KTV. The global karaoke market has been estimated to be worth nearly $10 billion.\n\nFrom 1961 to 1966, the American TV network NBC carried a karaoke-like series, \"Sing Along with Mitch\", featuring host Mitch Miller and a chorus, which superimposed the lyrics to their songs near the bottom of the TV screen for home audience participation. The primary difference between Karaoke and sing-along songs is the absence of the lead vocalist.\n\nSing-alongs (present since the beginning of singing) fundamentally changed with the introduction of new technology. In the late 1960s and into the 1970s, stored audible materials began to dominate the music recording industry and revolutionized the portability and ease of use of band and instrumental music by musicians and entertainers as the demand for entertainers increased globally. This may have been attributable to the introduction of music cassette tapes, technology that arose from the need to customize music recordings and the desire for a \"handy\" format that would allow fast and convenient duplication of music and thereby meet the requirements of the entertainers' lifestyles and the 'footloose' character of the entertainment industry.\n\nThe karaoke-styled machine was developed in various places in Japan. Japanese engineer Shigeichi Negishi, who ran a car audio system assembly business in Tokyo, made the first prototype in 1967. 3 years later, Toshiharu Yamashita, who worked as a singing coach sold an 8-track playback deck and kick-started the karaoke trend.\n\nIt was 1971 that a musician Daisuke Inoue, who was believed as an inventor of karaoke, devised karaoke equipment in Kobe, although the audio company Clarion was the first commercial producer of the machine due to there being no patent.\n\nIn Japan, it has long been common to provide musical entertainment at a dinner or a party. Inoue, a drummer, was frequently asked by guests in the Utagoe Kissa where he performed to provide recordings of his performances so that they could sing along. Realizing the potential for the market, he made a tape recorder-like machine that played songs for a 100-yen coin each.\n\nInstead of giving his karaoke machines away, Inoue leased them out so that stores did not have to buy new songs on their own. Originally, it was considered a somewhat expensive fad, as it lacked the live atmosphere of a real performance and 100 yen in the 1970s was the price of two typical lunches, but it caught on as a popular kind of entertainment. Karaoke machines were initially placed in restaurants and hotel rooms; soon, new businesses called karaoke boxes, with compartmented rooms, became popular. In 2004, Daisuke Inoue was awarded the tongue-in-cheek Ig Nobel Peace Prize for inventing karaoke, \"thereby providing an entirely new way for people to learn to tolerate each other.\"\n\nThe patent holder of the karaoke machine is Roberto del Rosario. He developed the karaoke's sing-along system in 1975.\n\nShortly after the development of LaserDisc Pioneer started to offer Video Karaoke machines, capable of displaying lyrics over a music video, in addition to the existing audio functionality. \nKaraoke soon spread to the rest of Asia and other countries all over the world. In-home karaoke machines soon followed but lacked success in the American and Canadian markets. When creators became aware of this problem, karaoke machines were no longer being sold strictly for the purpose of karaoke but as home theater systems to enhance television watching to \"movie theater like quality\". Home theater systems took off, and karaoke went from being the main purpose of the stereo system to a side feature.\n\nAs more music became available for karaoke machines, more people within the industry saw karaoke as a profitable form of lounge and nightclub entertainment. It is not uncommon for some bars to have karaoke performances seven nights a week. commonly with high-end sound equipment superior to the small, stand-alone consumer versions. Dance floors and lighting effects are also becoming common sights in karaoke bars. Lyrics are often displayed on multiple television screens around the bar.\n\nA basic karaoke machine consists of a music player, microphone inputs, a means of altering the pitch of the played music, and an audio output. Some low-end machines attempt to provide vocal suppression so that one can feed regular songs into the machine and remove the voice of the original singer; however, this is rarely effective. Most common machines are CD+G, Laser Disc, VCD or DVD players with microphone inputs and an audio mixer built in. CD+G players use a special track called subcode to encode the lyrics and pictures displayed on the screen while other formats natively display both audio and video.\n\nMost karaoke machines have technology that electronically changes the pitch of the music so that amateur singers can choose a key that is appropriate for their vocal range, while maintaining the original tempo of the song. (Old systems which used cassettes changed the pitch by altering playback speed, but none are still on the market, and their commercial use is virtually nonexistent.)\n\nA popular game using karaoke is to type in a random number and call up a song, which participants attempt to sing. In some machines, this game is pre-programmed and may be limited to a genre so that they cannot call up an obscure national anthem that none of the participants can sing. This game has come to be called \"Kamikaze Karaoke\" or \"Karaoke Roulette\" in some parts of the United States and Canada.\n\nMany low-end entertainment systems have a karaoke mode that attempts to remove the vocal track from regular audio CDs, using an Out Of Phase Stereo (OOPS) technique. This is done by center channel extraction, which exploits the fact that in most stereo recordings the vocals are in the center. This means that the voice, as part of the music, has equal volume on both stereo channels and no phase difference. To get the quasi-karaoke (mono) track, the left channel of the original audio is subtracted from the right channel. The Sega Saturn also has a \"mute vocals\" feature that is based on the same principle and is also able to adjust the pitch of the song to match the singer's vocal range.\nThis crude approach results in the often-poor performance of voice removal. Common effects are hearing the reverberation effects on the voice track (due to stereo reverb on the vocals not being in the center); also, other instruments (snare/bass drum, bass guitar and solo instruments) that happen to be mixed into the center get removed, degrading this approach to hardly more than a gimmick in those devices. Recent years have seen the development of new techniques based on the Fast Fourier Transform. Although still not perfect, the results are usually much better than the old technique, because the stereo left-right comparison can be done on individual frequencies.\n\nEarly karaoke machines used 8-track cartridges (The Singing Machine) and cassette tapes, with printed lyric sheets, but technological advances replaced this with CDs, VCDs, laserdiscs and, currently, DVDs. In the late 1980s and 1990s, Pioneer Electronics dominated the international karaoke music video market, producing high quality karaoke music videos (inspired by the music videos such as those on MTV). \n\nIn 1992, Taito introduced the X2000, which fetched music via a dial-up telephone network. Its repertoire of music and graphics was limited, but its smaller size and the advantage of continuous updates saw it gradually replace traditional machines. Karaoke machines which are connected via fiber-optic links enabling them to provide instant high-quality music and video are becoming increasingly popular.\n\n\"Karaoke direct\" is an Internet division established in 1997 been serving the public online since 1998. They released the first karaoke player that supports MP3+G and now the KDX2000 model supporting karaoke in DIVX Format.\n\nThe earliest karaoke-based music video game, called \"Karaoke Studio\", was released for the Nintendo Famicom in 1985, but its limited computing ability made for a short catalog of songs and therefore reduced replay value. As a result, karaoke games were considered little more than collector's items until they saw release in higher-capacity DVD formats.\n\n\"Karaoke Revolution\", created for the PlayStation 2 by Harmonix and released by Konami in North America in 2003, is a console game in which a single player sings along with on-screen guidance and receives a score based on pitch, timing, and rhythm. The game soon spawned several follow-ups including \"Karaoke Revolution Vol. 2\", \"Karaoke Revolution Vol. 3\", \"Karaoke Revolution Party Edition\", \"CMT Presents Karaoke Revolution: Country\" and \"Karaoke Revolution Presents: American Idol\". While the original \"Karaoke Revolution\" was also eventually released for the Microsoft Xbox console in late 2004, the new online-enabled version included the ability to download additional song packs through the console's exclusive Xbox Live service.\n\nA similar series, \"SingStar\", published by Sony Computer Entertainment Europe, is particularly popular in the European and Australasian markets. Other music video game titles that involve singing by the player include \"Boogie\" and its sequel \"Boogie Superstar\", \"Disney Sing It\", \"Get On Da Mic\", the \"Guitar Hero\" series starting with \"World Tour\", \"\", \"Lips\", the \"Rock Band\" series, \"SingSong\", \"UltraStar\", and \"Xbox Music Mixer\".\n\nAn Xbox Live App with the same name created by iNiS and powered by The Karaoke Channel/Stingray Karaoke was released in 12 December 2012. The app uses Unreal Engine 3.\n\nMany VCD players in Southeast Asia have a built-in karaoke function. On stereo recordings, one speaker will play the music with the vocal track, and the other speaker will play the music without the vocal track. So, to sing karaoke, users play the music-only track through both speakers. In the past, there were only pop-song karaoke VCDs. Nowadays, different types of karaoke VCDs are available. Cantonese opera karaoke VCD is now a big hit among the elderly in Hong Kong.\n\nIn 2003, several companies started offering a karaoke service on mobile phones, using a Java MIDlet that runs with a text file containing the words and a MIDI file with the music. More usual is to contain the lyrics within the same MIDI file. Often the file extension is then changed from .mid to .kar, both are compatible with the standard for MIDI files.\n\nResearchers have also developed karaoke games for cell phones to boost music database training. In 2006, the Interactive Audio Lab at Northwestern University released a game called Karaoke Callout for the Nokia Series 60 phone. The project has since then expanded into a web-based game and will be released soon as an iPhone application.\n\nKaraoke is now available for the Android, iPhone and other playback devices at many internet storefronts.\n\nSince 2003, much software has been released for hosting karaoke shows and playing karaoke songs on a personal computer. Instead of having to carry around hundreds of CD-Gs or laserdiscs, KJs can \"rip\" their entire libraries onto their hard drives and play the songs and lyrics from the computer.\n\nAdditionally, new software permits singers to sing and listen to one another over the Internet.\n\nKaraoke devices in the 2000s saw a shift towards the use of hard drives to store large collections of karaoke tracks and touch screen devices that allows users to select their songs. This trend was driven by the decline cost of hard drive storage and improvement in touchscreen technology in the consumer space.\n\nIn 2010, a new concept of home karaoke system through the use of live streaming from a cloud server emerged. The earliest cloud based streaming device, KaraOK!, was released by StarHub on 14 January 2010, licensing songs from RIMMS. The use of cloud streaming allows for smaller devices with over the air updates compared to costly and bulky hard drive-based systems.\n\nIn August 2017, ROXI home music system launched in the UK, and later that year in the US, providing on-demand music streaming and a karaoke singalong feature called Sing with the Stars. ROXI matches songs in its cloud based licensed music streaming catalogue to a lyrics database to provide real time scrolling on-screen lyrics. The music system also uses a hand-held Wii style point and click controller with built-in microphone allowing users to select and sing along to thousands of songs from its catalogue.\n\nIn July 2019, YouTube channel Sing King Karaoke reached 6 million subscribers, making it the largest karaoke channel on the platform.\n\nTaxicabs equipped with sound systems and a microphone appeared in South Korea in the 1990s.\n\nChinese automobile maker Geely Automobile received much press in 2003 for being the first to equip a car, their Beauty Leopard, with a karaoke machine as standard equipment. Europe's first commercial \"karaokecab\" which was a London TX4 taxi with a karaoke machine inside for occupants of the cab to use to sing whilst in the cab. The idea and installation were made by Richard Harfield of karaokeshop.com and was featured on Channel 4's Big Breakfast and several German TV stations featured the karaokecab. Granada TV also featured the cab, which is now in its 4th vehicle and operates in Bolton, Greater Manchester as Clint's Karaoke Cab. Karaoke is often also found as a feature in aftermarket in-car DVD players.\n\nIn 2010, karaoke taxis were available in London, England in the 'Kabeoke' fleet of private hire vehicles.\n\nThe CD+G format of a karaoke disc, which contains the lyrics on a specially encoded subcode track, has heretofore required special—and expensive—equipment to play. Commercial players have come down in price, though, and some unexpected devices (including the Sega Saturn video game console and XBMC Media Center on the first Xbox) can decode the graphics; in fact, karaoke machines, including video and sometimes recording capability, are often popular electronics items for sale in toy stores and electronics stores.\n\nAdditionally, there is software for Windows, Pocket PC, Linux, and Macintosh PCs that can decode and display karaoke song tracks, though usually these must be ripped from the CD first, and possibly compressed.\n\nIn addition to CD+G and software-based karaoke, microphone-based karaoke players enjoy popularity mainly in North America and some Asian countries such as the Philippines. Microphone-based karaoke players only need to be connected to a TV—and in some cases to a power outlet; in other cases they run on batteries. These devices often support advanced features, such as pitch correction and special sound effects. Some companies offer karaoke content for paid download to extend the song library in microphone-based karaoke systems.\n\nCD+G, DVD, VCD and microphone-based players are most popular for home use. Due to song selection and quality of recordings, CD+G is the most popular format for English and Spanish. It is also important to note that CD+G has limited graphical capabilities, whereas VCD and DVD usually have a moving picture or video background. VCD and DVD are the most common format for Asian singers due to music availability and largely due to the moving picture/video background.\n\nBULLET::::- Jūhachiban\nBULLET::::- Karamovie or Movioke\nBULLET::::- Karaoke jockey or KJ\nBULLET::::- Hitokara\n\nIn Asia, a karaoke box is the most popular type of karaoke venue. A karaoke box is a small or medium-sized room containing karaoke equipment rented by the hour or half-hour, providing a more intimate atmosphere. Karaoke venues of this type are often dedicated businesses, some with multiple floors and a variety of amenities including food service, but hotels and business facilities sometimes provide karaoke boxes as well. In South Korea, karaoke boxes are called \"norebangs\". In Taiwan and China, a karaoke establishment is called a KTV.\n\nIn some traditional Chinese restaurants, there are so-called \"mahjong-karaoke rooms\" where the elderly play mahjong while teenagers sing karaoke. The result is fewer complaints about boredom, but more noise. Noise regulations can be an issue, especially when karaoke is brought into residential areas.\n\nViolent reactions to karaoke singing have made headlines in Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines, with reports of killings by listeners disturbed by the singing. In the Philippines, at least half a dozen killings of people singing \"My Way\" caused newspapers there to label the phenomenon \"My Way killings\"; some bars refuse to allow the song, and some singers refrain from vocalizing it among strangers.\n\nProstitution has been an issue in certain karaoke boxes in Cambodia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and other parts of Southeast Asia despite being illegal in these countries. In Thailand, \"karaoke girls\" are brought in not only from Thailand but from neighboring countries and are sent to other parts of the world.\n\nAsian karaoke establishments are often fronts for gentlemen's clubs, where men pay for female hosts to drink, sing, and dance with them. In Japan, such a business is called a piano bar.\n\nA karaoke bar, restaurant, club or lounge is a bar or restaurant that provides karaoke equipment so that people can sing publicly, sometimes on a small stage. Most of these establishments allow patrons to sing for free, with the expectation that sufficient revenue will be made selling food and drink to the singers. Less commonly, the patron wishing to sing must pay a small fee for each song they sing. Both are financially beneficial for the establishment by not having to pay a professional singer or a cabaret tax which is usually applied to any entertainment of more than 1 person.\n\nMany establishments offer karaoke on a weekly schedule, while some have shows every night. Such establishments commonly invest more in both equipment and song discs, and are often extremely popular, with an hour or more wait between a singer's opportunities to take the stage (called the \"rotation\").\n\nPrivate karaoke rooms, similar to Asia's karaoke boxes, are commonplace in communities such as Toronto, Los Angeles, Chicago, New York City and San Francisco. Toronto's Koreatown is one example of an area where popularity is growing to the point that private karaoke rooms require reservations on the weekends.\n\nKaraoke is very popular in Scotland with dedicated karaoke venues in most reasonably large towns. Aberdeen is home to a number of notable karaoke bars including Wagleys, The Spirit Level, Bardot's Karaoke Bar, Sing City.\n\nThroughout much of North America, live band karaoke is also popular. With live band karaoke, singers sing with a live band instead of the prerecorded backing track.\n\nRock critic Rob Sheffield claims that the 1986 music video for the song \"Wild Wild Life\" by the Talking Heads was the first depiction of karaoke in American popular culture. The video features a variety of characters taking turns singing portions of the song to an audience at a bar.\n\nAlso popular among the international performing arts community in Europe, a group of Finnish producers organized an international karaoke competition called KWC (Karaoke World Championships). Their 2011 international karaoke competition has attracted ABC producers to help host America's karaoke competition in Las Vegas Nevada called Karaoke Battle USA. The competition is promised to select 1 male and 1 female contestant to represent the U.S. in the international arena. Largely supported by the Broadway community in Times Square, Pulse Karaoke Lounge sponsored 2011's New York state karaoke finals to select individuals representing New York in the eastern finals.\n\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", the dozens of karaoke bars in Portland, Oregon make it not just \"the capital of karaoke\" in the United States, but \"one of the most exciting music scenes in America.\"\n\nIn Taiwan, karaoke bars similar to those in Japan and South Korea are called KTVs, which stands for karaoke television. Karaoke is a highly popular form of recreation in Taiwan. The biggest KTV chains in Taiwan are Partyworld Cashbox, Holiday KTV and NewCBParty.\n\nA noraebang (Hangul: 노래방) refers to a singing venue in South Korea where private sound-proof rooms are available for rent, equipped for singing – typically microphones, remote controls, a large video screen, couches, and mood décor such as disco lights and tambourines. The term noraebang is a Korean compound word, blending norae (Hangul: 노래, English: song) and bang (Hangul: 방, English: room). It is the regional equivalent to the Karaoke box in Japan.\n\nSinging is an important part of social life in Korea, where people will perform, and be persuaded to perform, an impromptu song at virtually any social occasion. As such, noraebangs are popular and widespread, often identifiable by bright neon signs with musical notes or microphones.\n\nOften the last stop after a night of alcohol-lined entertainment for youths and businesspeople alike, noraebangs are also a favorite family pastime, and many are surprisingly dry venues. People also frequent noraebangs as a form of stress relief, and some noraebangs cater to those who seek to sing alone.\n\nKaraoke has become a pastime activity in the Philippines especially when entertaining friends at home. The 'minus-one' music on tapes during the late 1960s with prevailing songs such as the Beatles pop songs had become favorite songs. Singing contests during town festivals would attract contestants who carry with them cassette tapes with instrumental versions of their songs to use during their renditions.\n\nSharp Corporation produced a karaoke party system, HK-Z20, with double cassette decks, one for synchronizing/recording and one for continuous playback. This model became a popular device and had been exported to other countries.\n\nOne long-running popular device from the 1990s has been the MagicSing, a plug and play microphone that houses about 2000+ songs and with extendable song chips in it and connected directly to a TV unit. This device also provides singing scores, and later models (some now known as WOW MagicSing) have a recording feature.\n\nKaraoke in the Philippines is also known for the My Way killings, a number of fatal disputes which arose due to the singing of the song \"My Way\", popularized by Frank Sinatra, in karaoke or \"videoke\" bars. A \"The New York Times\" article estimated the number of killings to be about six up to 2010. Another source estimated at least 12 between 2002 and 2012. Opinions differ over whether the possible connection is due to the coincidence that the song was simply frequently sung amid the nation's karaoke bars where violence is common or to the aggressive lyrics of the song itself.\n\nThe current best-selling karaoke in the Philippines is The Grand Videoke, released in 2013 and produced and manufactured by the same company who handles Wow Fiesta. Other karaoke brands are currently available, such as Platinum Karaoke, Megapro Plus, HDT Hyundai, TJ Media, Megavision, Karavision, & among others.\n\nIn Australia, karaoke was gradually popularized in the late 1980s. A number of Filipino migrants brought with them their own 'minus-one' music from cassette music tapes and video tapes purchased mainly in the Philippines. A number of Philippine-imported karaoke units with two cassette drives were used in private households. Video TV tapes, mainly consisted of popular and contemporary songs rendered by Filipino artists, and with a mix of English and Tagalog songs were soon used. Projected lyrics on TV screens became very common as the main source of karaoke renditions. These tapes were soon replaced by CD+Gs, but a plug-n-play karaoke microphone that housed a factory built-in songchip loaded with hundreds of karaoke songs quickly became a favourite. This unit would usually be purchased in the Philippines and brought into Australia, becoming a common household item and is popularly used during gatherings.\n\nCommercially, karaoke was first introduced into Australia in 1989 by Robin Hemmings who had seen karaoke operating in Fiji. Prior to this, karaoke was generally unknown to the broader population. Hemmings, of Adelaide, South Australia, offered systems manufactured by Pioneer which used 12in (30 cm) double-sided laser discs containing a maximum of 24 songs with accompanying video track and subtitled lyrics.\n\nDespite some initial resistance, Adelaide hoteliers The Booze Brothers offered limited access to their hotels and the karaoke phenomenon was born. Hemmings business, Karaoke Hire Systems, operated seven machines on a casual rental basis to numerous hotels, clubs and private parties in and around Adelaide with an additional machine on snow-season lease at Jindabyne, NSW. Each system came complete with up to 24 discs containing a maximum of 576 music video tracks. In Adelaide, karaoke reached its zenith in 1991 with virtually every hotel offering at least one karaoke night per week with many having undertaken alterations to their premises with the addition of purpose built stages and sound systems. Karaoke rental suppliers had proliferated during this period and Hemmings is known to have sold his business in late 1991 as a going concern.\n\nKaraoke's popularity in Adelaide waned from mid 1992 and was virtually extinguished by early 1993. Despite periodic attempts by hoteliers and clubs to revitalise karaoke, it has never managed to re-establish its former popularity.\n\nIn the mid-2000s, a number of karaoke bars sprouted in Sydney with karaoke boxes frequented by Japanese students and tourists and a few locals, especially on Thursday nights and weekends. A number of clubs such as RSL, League Clubs and restaurants and bars mainly feature karaoke nights to entice more customers and to entertain guests. Sunfly Karaoke is probably the major karaoke brand in Australia as well as the UK.\n\nKaraoke is very popular in Asian countries, and many artists distribute a karaoke track at the same time the song is released. The most common form of karaoke nowadays is released in MIDI format with on-screen lyrics on a DVD background video.\n\nIn Europe and North America, karaoke tracks are almost never done by the original artist, but are re-recorded by other musicians.\n\nSouth Korean firms T.J. Media and Kumyoung produce digital music content in MIDI format and manufacture computer music players for the Asian market.\n\nSince the rise of karaoke around the world, karaoke contests have become a phenomenon of mainstream culture, giving non-professional singers opportunity to showcase their talent, win prizes, and at times, travel the world. Contest participants are usually rated 50% by customer votes and 50% by judges' votes, but this may vary, depending on the venue and the level of competition.\n\nKaraoke World Championship is one of the most popular karaoke contests and has been around since 2003. In September 2011, Karaoke World Championships took place in Killarney, Ireland.\n\nAs of 2009, the world record for the most people singing karaoke was at Bristol Motor Speedway in the United States. Over 160,000 people began to sing Garth Brooks' song \"Friends in Low Places\" before the NASCAR Sharpie 500 race began.\n\nHungary holds the record for the longest Karaoke marathon with multiple participants for an event organized in the Honey Grill Restaurant by Gabor Dániel Szabó (REVVOX Music). It lasted for 1011 hours, 1 minute, between 20 July 2011, and 31 August 2011. Each song was over 3 minutes long and the gap between songs was no longer than 30 seconds. No song was repeated in any 2-hour period.\n\nThe record for the longest Karaoke solo marathon is held by the Italian Leonardo Polverelli, who sang 1295 songs in 101 hours, 59 minutes, and 15 seconds.\n\nBULLET::::- Closed captioning\nBULLET::::- Fansub\nBULLET::::- List of English words of Japanese origin\nBULLET::::- Music Minus One\nBULLET::::- Powerpoint-Karaoke\nBULLET::::- Same language subtitling\nBULLET::::- Subtitling\nBULLET::::- Surtitles\nBULLET::::- Utagoe Kissa\n"}
{"id": "17083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17083", "title": "Keykode", "text": "Keykode\n\nKeykode (also written as either KeyKode or KeyCode) is an Eastman Kodak Company advancement on edge numbers, which are letters, numbers and symbols placed at regular intervals along the edge of 35 mm and 16 mm film to allow for frame-by-frame specific identification. It was introduced in 1990.\n\nKeykode is a variation of timecode used in the post-production process which is designed to uniquely identify film frames in a film stock.\n\nEdge numbers (also called key numbers or footage numbers) are a series of numbers with key lettering printed along the edge of a 35 mm negative at intervals of one foot (16 frames or 64 perforations) and on a 16 mm negative at intervals of six inches (twenty frames). The numbers are placed on the negative at the time of manufacturing by one of two methods:\n\nThe edge numbers serve a number of purposes. Every key frame is numbered with a multi-digit identifier that may be referred to later. In addition, a date of manufacturing is imprinted, then the type of emulsion and the batch number. This information is transferred from the negative (visible once developed) to the positive prints. The print may be edited and handled while the original negative remains safely untouched. When the film editing is complete, the edge numbers on the final cut film correspond back to their identical frames on the original negative so that a conform edit can be made of the original negative to match the work print.\n\nLaboratories can also imprint their own edge numbers on the processed film negative or print to identify the film for their own means. This is normally done in yellow ink. A common workflow for film editing involves edge-coding printed film simultaneously with the film's synchronized audio track, on 35mm magnetic film, so that a foot of film and its synchronized audio have identical edge numbers.\n\nEastman Kodak began using latent image edge numbering on their manufactured 35mm raw film stocks in 1919.\n\nWith the popularity of telecine transfers and video edits, Kodak invented a machine readable edge number that could be recorded via computer, read by the editing computer and automatically produce a \"cut list\" from the video edit of the film.\n\nTo do this, Kodak utilized the USS-128 barcode alongside the human-readable edge numbers. They also improved the quality and readability of the human-readable information to make it easier to identify. The Keykode consists of 12 characters in human-readable form followed by the same information in barcode form. Keykode is a form of metadata identifier for film negatives.\n\nAn example Keykode:\n\nKU 22 9611 1802+02.3\n\nBULLET::::- The first two letters in the Keykode are the manufacturer code (codice_1 and codice_2 both stand for Kodak, codice_3 stands for Fuji, etc.) and the stock identifier, respectively (in this case Kodak's codice_4 standing for 5279 emulsion); each manufacturer has different stocks' naming convention for their emulsion codes.\nBULLET::::- The next six numbers in the Keykode (usually split in 2+4 digits) are the identification number for that roll of film. On Kodak film stocks, it remains consistent for the entire roll. Fuji Stocks will increment this number when the frame number advances past \"9999\".\nBULLET::::- Computers read the (optional) frame offset (marked every four perforations on actual film by a single \"-\" dash) by adding digits to the Keykode after the plus sign. In this case, a frame offset of two frames (with respect to the film foot) is specified. The number of frames within a film foot depends on both the film width and the frame pulldown itself, and can also be \"uneven\" within the same roll, but rather repeat periodically (like in the 35mm 3perf. pulldown).\nBULLET::::- The last (optional), dot-separated number is the perforation offset which, if preceded by a frame offset like in the above example, is a bias \"within\" the just-specified frame; otherwise (as interpreted by most DI software) this considered to be an offset within the whole film foot.\n\nEASTMAN 5279 167 3301 122 KD\n\nBULLET::::- These numbers are consistent for a whole batch of film and may not change in many rolls. EASTMAN is the film manufacturer, 5279 is the stock type identifier. The next three numbers (167) is the emulsion batch number. The next series of four digits (3301) is the roll and part code, followed by the printer identification number that made the Keykode (122) and finally a two letter date designation (KD). In this case, KD=1997.\n\nBULLET::::- 35 mm film\nBULLET::::- Color motion picture film\nBULLET::::- Film stock\nBULLET::::- List of motion picture film stocks\nBULLET::::- Film base\nBULLET::::- Timecode\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kodak Motion Picture Film (H1)\" (4th ed). Eastman Kodak Company.\nBULLET::::- \"The Kodak Worldwide Student Program Student Filmmaker's Handbook: Motion Picture and Television Imaging (H-19)\" (1991) (2nd Ed). Eastman Kodak Company.\nBULLET::::- Konigsberg, Ira (1987). The Complete Film Dictionary Meridan PAL books. .\n\nBULLET::::- Kodak Keykode home page\n"}
{"id": "17086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17086", "title": "Knout", "text": "Knout\n\nA knout is a heavy scourge-like multiple whip, usually made of a bunch of rawhide thongs attached to a long handle, sometimes with metal wire or hooks incorporated. The English word stems from a spelling-pronunciation of a French transliteration of the Russian word кнут (\"knut\"), which simply means \"whip\".\n\nSome claim it was a Tatar invention and was introduced into Russia in the 15th century, perhaps by Grand Duke Ivan III the Great (1462–1505). Others trace the word to Varangians and derive it from the Swedish \"knutpiska\", a kind of whip with \"knots\". Still others maintain it is of generic Germanic origin, not necessarily Scandinavian, comparing it with the German \"Knute\", Dutch \"knoet\" (both meaning knout) and with Old Norse \"knutr\", Anglo-Saxon \"cnotta\" and English \"knot\".\n\nThe Russian knout had different forms. One was a lash of rawhide, long, attached to a wooden handle, long. The lash ended in a metal ring, to which was attached a second lash as long, ending also in a ring, to which in turn was attached a few inches of hard leather ending in a beak-like hook. Another kind consisted of many thongs of skin plaited and interwoven with wire, ending in loose wired ends, like the cat-o-nine tails. \n\nA variation, known as the \"great knout\", consisted of a handle about long, to which was fastened a flat leather thong about twice the length of the handle, terminating with a large copper or brass ring to which was affixed a strip of hide about broad at the ring, and terminating at the end of in a point. This was soaked in milk and dried in the sun to make it harder.\nKnouts were used in Russia for flogging as formal corporal punishment of criminals and political offenders. The victim was tied to a post or on a triangle of wood and stripped, receiving the specified number of strokes on the back. A sentence of 100 or 120 lashes was equivalent to a death sentence. Even twenty lashes could maim, and with the specially extended Great Knout, twenty blows could kill, with death sometimes being attributed to the breaking of the spine.\n\nThe executioner was usually a criminal who had to pass through a probation and regular training, being let off his own penalties in return for his services. Peter the Great is traditionally accused of knouting his son Alexis to death; the latter was tortured by knouting to extract confessions.\n\nEmperor Nicholas I abolished the punishment by knout in 1845, and replaced it with the \"pleti\", lashes with three thongs which could end in lead balls. They were later abolished throughout Russia and reserved for the penal settlements, mainly in Siberia. Prisoners transported to Siberia in the late 19th century were sometimes branded on their foreheads with irons with the letters VRNK meaning V thief, R robber, and NK punished by the knout. This branding led to the Siberian slang word \"varnok\", meaning either a settler or deportee.\n\nThe dreaded instrument became synonymous in Western European languages with what was seen as the tyrannical cruelty of the autocratic government of Russia, much as the \"sjambok\" brought to mind the apartheid government of South Africa or the bullwhip was associated with the period of slavery and Jim Crow laws in America.\nThe expression \"under the knout\" is used to designate any harsh totalitarianism, and by extension its equivalent in a private context, e.g., a grim patriarch ruling his household \"with an iron rod\". In Dutch, \"onder de knoet houden\" is commonly used for strict party discipline, e.g., eliminating actual debate when passing a law (compare the whip function in English).\n\nBULLET::::- Nagyka\n"}
{"id": "17087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17087", "title": "Konstantin Tsiolkovsky", "text": "Konstantin Tsiolkovsky\n\nKonstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovsky (; \n19 September 1935)\nwas a Russian and Soviet rocket scientist and pioneer of the astronautic theory. Along with the French Robert Esnault-Pelterie, the German Hermann Oberth and the American Robert H. Goddard, he is considered to be one of the founding fathers of modern rocketry and astronautics. His works later inspired leading Soviet rocket engineers such as Sergei Korolev and Valentin Glushko and contributed to the success of the Soviet space program.\n\nTsiolkovsky spent most of his life in a log house on the outskirts of Kaluga, about southwest of Moscow. A recluse by nature, his unusual habits made him seem bizarre to his fellow townsfolk.\nTsiolkovsky was born in Izhevskoye (now in Spassky District, Ryazan Oblast), in the Russian Empire, to a middle-class family. His father, Makary Edward Erazm Ciołkowski was a Polish forester of Roman Catholic faith who emigrated to Russia; his Russian Orthodox mother was of mixed Volga Tatar and Russian origin. His father was successively a forester, teacher, and minor government official. At the age of 10, Konstantin caught scarlet fever and became hard of hearing. When he was 13, his mother died. He was not admitted to elementary schools because of his hearing problem, so he was self-taught. As a reclusive home-schooled child, he passed much of his time by reading books and became interested in mathematics and physics. As a teenager, he began to contemplate the possibility of space travel.\n\nTsiolkovsky spent three years attending a Moscow library where Russian cosmism proponent Nikolai Fyodorov worked. He later came to believe that colonizing space would lead to the perfection of the human species, with immortality and a carefree existence.\n\nAdditionally, inspired by the fiction of Jules Verne, Tsiolkovsky theorized many aspects of space travel and rocket propulsion. He is considered the father of spaceflight and the first person to conceive the space elevator, becoming inspired in 1895 by the newly constructed Eiffel Tower in Paris.\n\nDespite the youth's growing knowledge of physics, his father was concerned that he would not be able to provide for himself financially as an adult and brought him back home at the age of 19 after learning that he was overworking himself and going hungry. Afterwards, Tsiolkovsky passed the teacher's exam and went to work at a school in Borovsk near Moscow. He also met and married his wife Varvara Sokolova during this time. Despite being stuck in Kaluga, a small town far from major learning centers, Tsiolkovsky managed to make scientific discoveries on his own.\n\nThe first two decades of the 20th century were marred by personal tragedy. Tsiolkovsky's son Ignaty committed suicide in 1902, and in 1908 many of his accumulated papers were lost in a flood. In 1911, his daughter Lyubov was arrested for engaging in revolutionary activities.\n\nTsiolkovsky stated that he developed the theory of rocketry only as a supplement to philosophical research on the subject. He wrote more than 400 works including approximately 90 published pieces on space travel and related subjects. Among his works are designs for rockets with steering thrusters, multistage boosters, space stations, airlocks for exiting a spaceship into the vacuum of space, and closed-cycle biological systems to provide food and oxygen for space colonies.\n\nTsiolkovsky's first scientific study dates back to 1880–1881. He wrote a paper called \"Theory of Gases,\" in which he outlined the basis of the kinetic theory of gases, but after submitting it to the Russian Physico-Chemical Society (RPCS), he was informed that his discoveries had already been made 25 years earlier. Undaunted, he pressed ahead with his second work, \"The Mechanics of the Animal Organism\". It received favorable feedback, and Tsiolkovsky was made a member of the Society. Tsiolkovsky's main works after 1884 dealt with four major areas: the scientific rationale for the all-metal balloon (airship), streamlined airplanes and trains, hovercraft, and rockets for interplanetary travel.\n\nIn 1892, he was transferred to a new teaching post in Kaluga where he continued to experiment. During this period, Tsiolkovsky began working on a problem that would occupy much of his time during the coming years: an attempt to build an all-metal dirigible that could be expanded or shrunk in size.\n\nTsiolkovsky developed the first aerodynamics laboratory in Russia in his apartment. In 1897, he built the first Russian wind tunnel with an open test section and developed a method of experimentation using it. In 1900, with a grant from the Academy of Sciences, he made a survey using models of the simplest shapes and determined the drag coefficients of the sphere, flat plates, cylinders, cones, and other bodies. Tsiolkovsky's work in the field of aerodynamics was a source of ideas for Russian scientist Nikolay Zhukovsky, the father of modern aerodynamics and hydrodynamics. Tsiolkovsky described the airflow around bodies of different geometric shapes, but because the RPCS did not provide any financial support for this project, he was forced to pay for it largely out of his own pocket.\n\nTsiolkovsky studied the mechanics of lighter-than-air powered flying machines. He first proposed the idea of an all-metal dirigible and built a model of it. The first printed work on the airship was \"A Controllable Metallic Balloon\" (1892), in which he gave the scientific and technical rationale for the design of an airship with a metal sheath. Tsiolkovsky was not supported on the airship project, and the author was refused a grant to build the model. An appeal to the General Aviation Staff of the Russian army also had no success. In 1892, he turned to the new and unexplored field of heavier-than-air aircraft. Tsiolkovsky's idea was to build an airplane with a metal frame. In the article \"An Airplane or a Birdlike (Aircraft) Flying Machine\" (1894) are descriptions and drawings of a monoplane, which in its appearance and aerodynamics anticipated the design of aircraft that would be constructed 15 to 18 years later. In an Aviation Airplane, the wings have a thick profile with a rounded front edge and the fuselage is faired. But work on the airplane, as well as on the airship, did not receive recognition from the official representatives of Russian science, and Tsiolkovsky's further research had neither monetary nor moral support. In 1914, he displayed his models of all-metal dirigibles at the Aeronautics Congress in St. Petersburg but met with a lukewarm response.\n\nDisappointed at this, Tsiolkovsky gave up on space and aeronautical problems with the onset of World War I and instead turned his attention to the problem of alleviating poverty. This occupied his time during the war years until the Russian Revolution in 1917.\n\nStarting in 1896, Tsiolkovsky systematically studied the theory of motion of rocket apparatus. Thoughts on the use of the rocket principle in the cosmos were expressed by him as early as 1883, and a rigorous theory of rocket propulsion was developed in 1896. Tsiolkovsky derived the formula, which he called the \"formula of aviation\", establishing the relationship between:\nBULLET::::- change in the rocket's speed (formula_1)\nBULLET::::- exhaust velocity of the engine (formula_2)\nBULLET::::- initial (formula_3) and final (formula_4) mass of the rocket\n\nAfter writing out this equation, Tsiolkovsky recorded the date: 10 May 1897. In the same year, the formula for the motion of a body of variable mass was published in the thesis of the Russian mathematician I. V. Meshchersky (\"Dynamics of a Point of Variable Mass,\" I. V. Meshchersky, St. Petersburg, 1897).\n\nHis most important work, published in May 1903, was \"Exploration of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices\" (). Tsiolkovsky calculated, using the Tsiolkovsky equation, that the horizontal speed required for a minimal orbit around the Earth is 8,000 m/s (5 miles per second) and that this could be achieved by means of a multistage rocket fueled by liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. In the article \"Exploration of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices\", it was proved for the first time that a rocket could perform space flight. In this article and its subsequent sequels (1911 and 1914), he developed some ideas of missiles and considered the use of liquid rocket engines.\n\nThe outward appearance of Tsiolkovsky's spacecraft design, published in 1903, was a basis for modern spaceship design. The design had a hull divided into three main sections. The pilot and copilot were in the first section, the second and third sections held the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen needed to fuel the spacecraft.\n\nHowever, the result of the first publication was not what Tsiolkovsky expected. No foreign scientists appreciated his research, which today is a major scientific discipline. In 1911 he published the second part of the work \"Exploration of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices\". Here Tsiolkovsky evaluated the work needed to overcome the force of gravity, determined the speed needed to propel the device into the solar system (\"escape velocity\"), and examined calculation of flight time. The publication of this article made a splash in the scientific world, Tsiolkovsky found many friends among his fellow scientists.\n\nIn 1926–1929, Tsiolkovsky solved the practical problem regarding the role played by rocket fuel in getting to escape velocity and leaving the Earth. He showed that the final speed of the rocket depends on the rate of gas flowing from it and on how the weight of the fuel relates to the weight of the empty rocket.\n\nTsiolkovsky conceived a number of ideas that have been later used in rockets. They include: gas rudders (graphite) for controlling a rocket's flight and changing the trajectory of its center of mass, the use of components of the fuel to cool the outer shell of the spacecraft (during re-entry to Earth) and the walls of the combustion chamber and nozzle, a pump system for feeding the fuel components, the optimal descent trajectory of the spacecraft while returning from space, etc. In the field of rocket propellants, Tsiolkovsky studied a large number of different oxidizers and combustible fuels and recommended specific pairings: liquid oxygen and hydrogen, and oxygen with hydrocarbons. Tsiolkovsky did much fruitful work on the creation of the theory of jet aircraft, and invented his chart Gas Turbine Engine. In 1927 he published the theory and design of a train on an air cushion. He first proposed a \"bottom of the retractable body\" chassis. However, space flight and the airship were the main problems to which he devoted his life. Tsiolkovsky had been developing the idea of the hovercraft since 1921, publishing a fundamental paper on it in 1927, entitled \"Air Resistance and the Express Train\" (). In 1929, Tsiolkovsky proposed the construction of multistage rockets in his book \"Space Rocket Trains\" ().\n\nTsiolkovsky championed the idea of the diversity of life in the universe and was the first theorist and advocate of human spaceflight.\n\nTsiolkovsky never built a rocket; he apparently did not expect many of his theories to ever be implemented.\n\nHearing problems did not prevent the scientist from having a good understanding of music, as outlined in his work \"The Origin of Music and Its Essence.\"\n\nAlthough Tsiolkovsky supported the Bolshevik Revolution, he did not particularly flourish under a communist system. Eager to promote science and technology, the new Soviet government elected him a member of the Socialist Academy in 1918. He worked as a high school mathematics teacher until retiring in 1920 at the age of 63. In 1921, he received a lifetime pension.\n\nOnly late in his lifetime was Tsiolkovsky honored for his pioneering work. In particular, his support of eugenics made him politically unpopular. However, from the mid 1920s onwards the importance of his other work was acknowledged, and he was honoured for it and the Soviet state provided financial backing for his research. He was initially popularized in Soviet Russia in 1931–1932 mainly by two writers: Yakov Perelman and Nikolai Rynin. Tsiolkovsky died in Kaluga on 19 September 1935 after undergoing an operation for stomach cancer. He bequeathed his life's work to the Soviet state.\n\nAlthough many called his ideas impractical, Tsiolkovsky influenced later rocket scientists throughout Europe, like Wernher von Braun. Soviet search teams at Peenemünde found a German translation of a book by Tsiolkovsky of which \"almost every page...was embellished by von Braun's comments and notes.\" Leading Soviet rocket-engine designer Valentin Glushko and rocket designer Sergey Korolev studied Tsiolkovsky's works as youths, and both sought to turn Tsiolkovsky's theories into reality. In particular, Korolev saw traveling to Mars as the more important priority, until in 1964 he decided to compete with the American Project Apollo for the Moon.\n\nIn 1989, Tsiolkovsky was inducted into the International Air & Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air & Space Museum.\n\nTsiolkovsky wrote a book called \"The Will of the Universe. The Unknown Intelligence\" in 1928 in which he propounded a philosophy of panpsychism. He believed humans would eventually colonize the Milky Way galaxy. His thought preceded the Space Age by several decades, and some of what he foresaw in his imagination has come into being since his death. Tsiolkovsky also did not believe in traditional religious cosmology, but instead (and to the chagrin of the Soviet authorities) he believed in a cosmic being that governed humans as \"marionettes, mechanical puppets, machines, movie characters\", thereby adhering to a mechanical view of the universe, which he believed would be controlled in the millennia to come through the power of human science and industry.\n\nBULLET::::- In 1964, The Monument to the Conquerors of Space was erected to celebrate the achievements of the Soviet people in space exploration. Located in Moscow, the monument is 107 meters (350 feet) tall and covered with titanium cladding. The main part of the monument is a giant obelisk topped by a rocket and resembling in shape the exhaust plume of the rocket. A statue of Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the precursor of astronautics, is located in front of the obelisk.\nBULLET::::- The State Museum of the History of Cosmonautics in Kaluga now bears his name.\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky's residence during the final months of his life (also in Kaluga) was converted into a memorial museum a year after his death.\nBULLET::::- The town Uglegorsk in Amur Oblast was renamed Tsiolkovsky by Russian president Vladimir Putin in 2015.\nBULLET::::- The crater Tsiolkovskiy (the most prominent crater on the far side of the Moon) was named after him, while asteroid 1590 Tsiolkovskaja was named after his wife. (The Soviet Union obtained naming rights by operating Luna 3, the first space device to successfully transmit images of the side of the Moon not seen from Earth.)\nBULLET::::- There is a statue of Konstantin Tsiolkovsky directly outside the Sir Thomas Brisbane Planetarium in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.\nBULLET::::- There is a Google Doodle honoring the famous pioneer.\nBULLET::::- There is a Tsiolkovsky exhibit on display at the Museum of Jurassic Technology in Los Angeles, California.\n\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky was consulted for the script to the early Soviet science-fiction film, \"Kosmicheskiy reys\".\nBULLET::::- SF writer Alexander Beliaev has written a book in which a city and a space station are named after him.\nBULLET::::- A lunar station is named Tsiolkovsky in Stanisław Lem's novel \"Tales of Pirx the Pilot\", story \"The Conditional Reflex\".\nBULLET::::- The Soviet ship in Harry Turtledove's 1990 Mars exploration novel \"A World of Difference\" is named \"Tsiolkovsky\".\nBULLET::::- In Princeton physicist and space colony advocate Gerard K. O'Neill's book of futurism, \"\", the protagonist rides a spaceship named the \"Konstantin Tsiolokovsky\" from his home in a space colony at twice the orbital radius of Pluto to the Earth of 2081.\nBULLET::::- A space station is named Tsiolkovsky 1 in William Gibson's short story \"Hinterlands\".\nBULLET::::- The character Aeolia Schenberg in the anime series \"Mobile Suit Gundam 00\" is based on Tsiolkovsky.\nBULLET::::- The Zvezda module of the International Space Station has photos of Tsiolkovsky and Yuri Gagarin posted on the wall above the aft hatchway.\nBULLET::::- The Mars-based space elevators in the Horus Heresy novel \"Mechanicum\" by Graham McNeill set in the Warhammer 40k universe are called \"Tsiolkovsky Towers\".\nBULLET::::- The science ship in the \"\" episode \"The Naked Now\" is named after him.\nBULLET::::- Episode eight of \"Denpa Onna to Seishun Otoko\" is called \"Tsiolkovsky's Prayer\".\nBULLET::::- In the book \"Limit\", written by Frank Schätzing in 2009, the theory of the Space Elevator is applied in a hypothetical future.\nBULLET::::- The video-games \"Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri\" and \"Sid Meier's Alien Crossfire\" use one of Konstantin Tsiolkovsky's quotes when the technology of the Space Elevator is developed.\nBULLET::::- In the video-game \"Mass Effect 2\", one of Konstantin Tsiolkovsky's quotes is used in an in-game advertisement.\nBULLET::::- In the comic book series \"\", the leader of the Assassin Order reads from The Will of the Universe.\nBULLET::::- In a 2015 episode of \"Murdoch Mysteries\", set in about 1905, an inventor works with Tsiolkovsky's daughter to build a suborbital rocket based on his ideas and be the first man in space; a second rocket built to the same design is adapted as a ballistic missile for purposes of extortion.\n\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin E., Collection of over 210 philosophical works available online (Russian)\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin E., Collection of philosophical works available online (English)\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin E., Application for iPad & iPhone with collection of philosophical works (Russian)\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin E., Application for iPad & iPhone with collection of philosophical works (English)\n\nBULLET::::- Cosmonauts Alley, a Russian monument park where Tsiolkovsky is honored\nBULLET::::- History of the internal combustion engine\nBULLET::::- Robert Esnault-Pelterie, a Frenchman who independently arrived at Tsiolkovsky's rocket equation\nBULLET::::- Russian philosophy\nBULLET::::- Timeline of hydrogen technologies\n\nBULLET::::- Review\nBULLET::::- Georgiy Stepanovich Vetrov, \"S. P. Korolyov and space. First steps. — 1994 M. Nauka, .\n\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky's house The house museum of Tsiolkovsky\nBULLET::::- Virtual Matchbox Labels Museum – Russian labels – Space – Page 2 – Konstantin Tsiolkovsky Historic images\nBULLET::::- Tsiolkovsky from Russianspaceweb.com\nBULLET::::- Spaceflight or Extinction: Konstantin Tsiolkovsky Excerpts from \"The Aims of Astronautics\", \"The Call of the Cosmos\"\nBULLET::::- The Foundations of the Space Age. The life and work of Tsiolkovskiy, by Vladimir V. Lytkin, Tsiolkovskiy Museum, Kaluga.\n"}
{"id": "17090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17090", "title": "KAOS", "text": "KAOS\n\nKAOS or Kaos may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Kaos One (born 1971), Italian rapper\nBULLET::::- Kaos of Iberia, an ancient king of Causasian Iberia\nBULLET::::- Kenny Kaos or Kaos (born 1970), American professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- Wych Kaosayananda or Kaos (born 1974), Thai film director\n\nBULLET::::- KAOS (\"Get Smart\"), a fictional criminal spy agency in \"Get Smart\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kaos\" (film), a 1984 Italian film by Paolo and Vittorio Taviani\nBULLET::::- \"Kaos\" (TV series), 2018\nBULLET::::- The Ancient One (\"Ronin Warriors\") or Kaos, a character from \"Ronin Warriors\"\nBULLET::::- Kaos, a character from \"Battle Angel Alita\"\nBULLET::::- Kaos, pen name of a character in the manga series \"Comic Girls\"\n\nBULLET::::- Kaos Studios, a defunct video game developer\nBULLET::::- KAOS, a character in \"\"\nBULLET::::- KAOS, a fictional computer from \"\"\nBULLET::::- Kaos, the main antagonist character from the \"Skylanders\" video game series\n\nBULLET::::- KAOS (FM), a radio station in Olympia, Washington, United States\nBULLET::::- \"Kaos\" (Bo Kaspers Orkester album), 2001\nBULLET::::- \"Kaos\" (Anita Tijoux album), 2007\nBULLET::::- \"KAOS\", a 1958 novelty 45 RPM record by Stanley Ralph Ross and Bob Arbogast\n\nBULLET::::- KAoS, a policy services framework\nBULLET::::- KAOS (software development), a goal modeling method\nBULLET::::- KaOS (Linux distribution) a linux distro\n\nBULLET::::- Kaos Worldwide, a maker of technical clothing systems\nBULLET::::- Assassin (game) or KAOS (Killing as organized sport), a live-action game\n\nBULLET::::- k-os (born 1972)\nBULLET::::- Radio KAOS (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Chaos (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "17091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17091", "title": "Khornerstone", "text": "Khornerstone\n\nIn computer performance testing, Khornerstone is a multipurpose benchmark from Workstation Labs used in various periodicals such as \"UNIX Review\".\n\nThe benchmark consists of 22 separate tests, including public domain components (such as Sieve and Dhrystone) as well as proprietary components. Since it contains proprietary components, the source is not free. The results of the 22 tests are normalized, producing a result measured in \"Khornerstones\".\n\nThe benchmark was introduced in 1986 and was commonly used until the mid-1990s.\n"}
{"id": "17094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17094", "title": "Ket", "text": "Ket\n\nKet or KET may also refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Ket people, a people of Siberia\nBULLET::::- Ket language, the language of the Ket people\nBULLET::::- Ket Sivan (born 1981), Cambodian swimmer who specialized in sprint freestyle events\n\nBULLET::::- Ket River, a river in Siberia\nBULLET::::- Keť, a village in south-west Slovakia\n\nBULLET::::- Ket (Greyhawk), a fictional nation in the \"Dungeons and Dragons\" World of Greyhawk campaign setting\nBULLET::::- Ket and Wig, figures in the \"Gesta Danorum\" Danish history\n\nBULLET::::- Cet mac Mágach, a character in Irish myth\nBULLET::::- A name of the Celtic legendary figure Ceridwen\n\nBULLET::::- KET, or Kentucky Educational Television, a non-commercial public television network\nBULLET::::- Ketamine, a general dissociative anaesthetic\nBULLET::::- Kettering railway station (National Rail station code KET), a station serving the town of Kettering in Northamptonshire, England\nBULLET::::- Kengtung Airport, Burma/Myanmar (IATA airport code KET)\nBULLET::::- Key English Test, an international examination sanctioning a basic level of the English language\nBULLET::::- Key Enabling Technology, the technology that underlies the production of given goods or services\nBULLET::::- \"Ket vallomas\" or \"Two Confessions\", a 1957 Hungarian crime film\nBULLET::::- The right part of bra–ket notation, formula_1\nBULLET::::- Ket (software), an open source algebra editor\n\nBULLET::::- Kit (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "17095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17095", "title": "Kary Mullis", "text": "Kary Mullis\n\nKary Banks Mullis (December 28, 1944 – August 7, 2019) was an American biochemist. In recognition of his invention of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique, he shared the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Michael Smith and was awarded the Japan Prize in the same year. His invention became a central technique in biochemistry and molecular biology, described by \"The New York Times\" as \"highly original and significant, virtually dividing biology into the two epochs of before PCR and after PCR.\"\n\nMullis was born in Lenoir, North Carolina, near the Blue Ridge Mountains, on December 28, 1944. His family had a background in farming in this rural area. As a child, Mullis said, he was interested in observing organisms in the countryside. He grew up in Columbia, South Carolina, where he attended Dreher High School, graduating in the class of 1962. His interest in chemistry started when he learned how to chemically synthesize and build solid-state fuel propulsion rockets as a high school student during the 1950s.\n\nHe earned a B.S. in chemistry from the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta in 1966, during which time he married his first wife and started a business. He earned his Ph.D. in 1973 in biochemistry at the University of California, Berkeley , in J. B. Neilands' laboratory, which focused on synthesis and structure of bacterial iron transporter molecules. As a graduate student, he published a sole-author paper in Nature in the field of astrophysics. Following his graduation, Mullis completed postdoctoral fellowships in pediatric cardiology at the University of Kansas Medical Center (1973-1977) and pharmaceutical chemistry at the University of California, San Francisco (1977-1979).\n\nAfter receiving his doctorate, Mullis briefly left science to write fiction before accepting the University of Kansas fellowship. During his postdoctoral work, he managed a bakery for two years. Mullis returned to science at the encouragement of friend Thomas White, who later helped Mullis land a position with the biotechnology company Cetus Corporation of Emeryville, California. Mullis worked as a DNA chemist at Cetus for seven years; it was there, in 1983, that Mullis invented the polymerase chain reaction. After leaving Cetus in 1986, Mullis served as director of molecular biology for Xytronyx, Inc. in San Diego for two years. While inventing a UV-sensitive ink at Xytronyx, he became skeptical of the existence of the ozone hole.\n\nMullis served as a consultant for multiple corporations on nucleic acid chemistry. While writing a National Institutes of Health grant progress report on the development of a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test for Specialty Labs, he became skeptical that HIV was the cause of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). In 1992, Mullis founded a business to sell pieces of jewelry containing the amplified DNA of deceased famous people like Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe. Also in 1992 he founded Atomic Tags, in La Jolla, California. Atomic Tags sought to develop technology using atomic-force microscopy and bar-coded antibodies tagged with heavy metals to create highly multiplexed, parallel immunoassays.\n\nMullis was a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board. In 2014, he was named a distinguished researcher at the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute in Oakland, California.\n\nIn 1983, Mullis was working for Cetus Corporation as a chemist. Late one night while driving with his girlfriend, who was also a chemist at Cetus, he had the idea to use a pair of primers to bracket the desired DNA sequence and to copy it using DNA polymerase; a technique that would allow rapid amplification of a small stretch of DNA and become a standard procedure in molecular biology laboratories. Cetus took Mullis off his usual projects to concentrate on PCR full-time. Mullis succeeded in demonstrating PCR December 16, 1983. In his Nobel Prize lecture, he remarked that the success did not make up for his girlfriend breaking up with him. \"I was sagging as I walked out to my little silver Honda Civic. Neither [assistant] Fred, empty Beck's bottles, nor the sweet smell of the dawn of the age of PCR could replace Jenny. I was lonesome.\" He received a $10,000 bonus from Cetus for the invention.\n\nOther Cetus scientists, including Randall Saiki and Henry Erlich, were placed on PCR projects to work on determining if PCR could amplify a specific human gene (betaglobin) from genomic DNA. Saiki generated the needed data and Erlich authored the first paper to include utilization of the technique, while Mullis was still working on a paper that would describe PCR itself. Mullis' 1985 paper with R. K. Saiki and H. A. Erlich, \"Enzymatic Amplification of β-globin Genomic Sequences and Restriction Site Analysis for Diagnosis of Sickle Cell Anemia\"—the polymerase chain reaction invention (PCR) -- was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society in 2017.\n\nA drawback of the technique was that the DNA polymerase in the reaction was destroyed by the high heat used at the start of each replication cycle and had to be replaced. In 1986, Saiki started to use \"Thermophilus aquaticus\" (Taq) DNA polymerase to amplify segments of DNA. The Taq polymerase was heat resistant and only need to be added to the reaction once, making the technique dramatically more affordable and subject to automation. This modification of Mullis' invention revolutionized biochemistry, molecular biology, genetics, medicine, and forensics.\n\nMullis also invented a UV-sensitive plastic that changes color in response to light.\n\nHe founded Altermune LLC in 2011 to pursue new ideas on the immune system. Mullis described the company's novel technology in a presentation:\nThe first proof-of-principle of this technology, re-targeting pre-existing antibodies to the surface of a pathogenic strep bacteria using an alpha-gal modified aptamer (\"alphamer\"), was published in 2015 in collaboration with scientists at the University of California, San Diego.\n\nA concept similar to that of PCR had been described before Mullis' work. Nobel laureate H. Gobind Khorana and Kjell Kleppe, a Norwegian scientist, authored a paper 17 years earlier describing a process they termed \"repair replication\" in the \"Journal of Molecular Biology\". Using repair replication, Kleppe duplicated and then quadrupled a small synthetic molecule with the help of two primers and DNA polymerase. The method developed by Mullis, used repeated thermal cycling, which allowed the rapid and exponential amplification of large quantities of any desired DNA sequence from an extremely complex template. Later a heat-stable DNA polymerase was incorporated into the process.\n\nHis co-workers at Cetus, who were embittered by his abrupt departure from the company,\ncontested that Mullis was solely responsible for the idea of using Taq polymerase in PCR. However, other scientists have written that the \"full potential [of PCR] was not realized\" until Mullis' work in 1983, and that Mullis' colleagues failed to see the potential of the technique when he presented it to them. As a result, some controversy surrounds the balance of credit that should be given to Mullis versus the team at Cetus. In practice, credit has accrued to both the inventor and the company (although not its individual workers) in the form of a Nobel Prize and a $10,000 Cetus bonus for Mullis and $300 million for Cetus when the company sold the patent to Roche Molecular Systems. After DuPont lost out to Roche on that sale, the company unsuccessfully disputed Mullis' patent on the alleged grounds that PCR had been previously described in 1971. Mullis and Erlich took Cetus' side in the case, and Khorana refused to testify for DuPont; the jury upheld Mullis' patent in 1991. However, in February 1999, the patent of Hoffman-La Roche (United States Patent No. 4,889,818) was found by the courts to be unenforceable, after Dr. Thomas Kunkel testified in the case \"Hoffman-La Roche v. Promega Corporation\" on behalf of the defendants (Promega Corporation) that \"prior art\" (i.e. articles on the subject of Taq polymerase published by other groups prior to the work of Gelfand and Stoffel, and their patent application regarding the purification of Taq polymerase) existed, in the form of two articles, published by Alice Chien et al. in 1976, and A. S. Kaledin et al. in 1980.\n\nThe anthropologist Paul Rabinow wrote a book on the history of the PCR method in 1996 (entitled \"Making PCR\") in which he discussed whether Mullis \"invented\" PCR or \"merely\" came up with the concept of it. Rabinow, a Foucault scholar interested in issues of the production of knowledge, used the topic to argue against the idea that scientific discovery is the product of individual work, writing, \"Committees and science journalists like the idea of associating a unique idea with a unique person, the lone genius. PCR is thought by some to be an example of teamwork, but by others as the genius of one who was smart enough to put things together which were present to all, but overlooked. For Mullis, the light bulb went off, but for others it did not. This is consistent with the idea, that the prepared (educated) mind who is careful to observe and not overlook, is what separates the genius scientist from his many also smart scientists. The proof is in the fact that the person who has the light bulb go off never forgets the \"Ah!\" experience, while the others never had this photochemical reaction go off in their brains.\"\n\nMullis was quoted saying \"the never-ending quest for more grants and staying with established dogmas\" has hurt science. He believed that \"science is being practiced by people who are dependent on being paid for what they are \"going\" to find out,\" not for what they actually produce. Mullis was described by some as an \"impatient and impulsive researcher\" who finds routine laboratory work boring and instead thinks about his research while driving and surfing. He came up with the idea of the polymerase chain reaction while driving along a highway.\n\nIn his 1998 humorous autobiography, Mullis expressed disagreement with the scientific evidence supporting climate change and ozone depletion, the evidence that HIV causes AIDS, and asserted his belief in astrology.\nMullis claimed climate change and the HIV/AIDS connection are due to a conspiracy of environmentalists, government agencies, and scientists attempting to preserve their careers and earn money, rather than scientific evidence. \nMullis has been criticized for his association with HIV skeptic Peter Duesberg, claiming that AIDS is an arbitrary diagnosis used when HIV antibodies are found in a patient's blood. The medical and scientific consensus is that Duesberg's hypothesis is pseudoscience, HIV having been conclusively proven to be the cause of AIDS and that global warming is occurring because of human activities. Seth Kalichman, AIDS researcher and author of \"Denying AIDS\", \"[admits] that it seems odd to include a Nobel laureate among the who's who of AIDS pseudoscientists\". Mullis also wrote the foreword to the book \"What If Everything You Thought You Knew About AIDS Was Wrong?\" by Christine Maggiore, an HIV-positive AIDS denialist who, along with her 3-years-old daughter, died of an AIDS-related illness. A \"New York Times\" article listed Mullis as one of several scientists who, after success in their area of research, go on to make unfounded, sometimes bizarre statements in other areas. An article in the \"Skeptical Inquirer\" described Mullis as an \"AIDS denialist with scientific credentials [who] has never done any scientific research on HIV or AIDS.\" However, he consulted for Specialty Labs, in Santa Monica, developing a nucleic acid based HIV test. While writing a NIH grant progress report, he was unable to find a peer-reviewed reference that HIV was the cause of AIDS. Mullis published an alternative theory of AIDS in 1994. He questioned the scientific validity of the link between HIV and AIDS, leading some to label him an \"AIDS denialist.\"\n\nMullis detailed his experiences synthesizing and testing various psychedelic amphetamines and a difficult trip on DET in his autobiography. In a Q&A interview published in the September 1994 issue of \"California Monthly\", Mullis said, \"Back in the 1960s and early '70s I took plenty of LSD. A lot of people were doing that in Berkeley back then. And I found it to be a mind-opening experience. It was certainly much more important than any courses I ever took.\" During a symposium held for centenarian Albert Hofmann, Hofmann said Mullis had told him that LSD had \"helped him develop the polymerase chain reaction that helps amplify specific DNA sequences\".\n\nKnown for his quick wit and colorful stories, Mullis enjoyed surfing. He married four times, and had a total of three children by two of his wives. At the time of his death, he had two grandchildren. He used profanities to make a point and often said, \"Oh, Lord,\" in response to the absurdities experienced in life. Mullis reported an encounter with a \"standard extraterrestrial raccoon\" at his cabin in the woods of northern California around midnight one night in 1985; he denied being on psychedelic drugs at the time.\n\nMullis died of pneumonia on August 7, 2019 at age 74 in Newport Beach, California.\n\nBULLET::::- Kary Mullis, \"Cosmological Significance of Time Reversal.\" Nature\",\" 218: 663-664, 1968.\nBULLET::::- K.F. Mullis, F. Faloona, S. Scharf, R. Saiki, G. Horn and H. Erlich, 1986, \"Specific enzymatic amplification of DNA in vitro: The polymerase chain reaction\". Cold Spring Harbor Symposium in Quantitative Biology, 51:263–273.\nBULLET::::- K. Mullis, 1990, \"The unusual origin of the polymerase chain reaction\". Scientific American, April 56–65.\nBULLET::::- \"The Polymerase Chain Reaction\", 1994, co-edited Francious Ferre and Richard A. Gibbs (Basel: Birkhauser) .\nBULLET::::- Kary Mullis, \"A hypothetical disease of the immune system that may bear some relation ti the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.\" Genetca 95: 195 — 197, 1995.\nBULLET::::- Mullis' 1998 humorous autobiography \"Dancing Naked in the Mind Field\" (), gives his account of the commercial development of PCR, as well as providing insights into his opinions and experiences. In the book, Mullis chronicles his romantic relationships, use of LSD, synthesis and self-testing of novel psychoactive substances, belief in astrology and an encounter with an extraterrestrial in the form of a fluorescent raccoon.\n\nBULLET::::- 1990 — William Allan Memorial Award of the American Society of Human Genetics, Preis Biochemische Analytik of the German Society of Clinical Chemistry and Boehringer Mannheim\nBULLET::::- 1991 — National Biotechnology Award, Gairdner Award, R&D Scientist of the Year, John Scott Award of the City Trusts of Philadelphia\nBULLET::::- 1992 — California Scientist of the Year Award\nBULLET::::- 1992 — Robert Koch Prize\nBULLET::::- 1993 — Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Japan Prize, Thomas A. Edison Award\nBULLET::::- 1994 — Honorary degree of Doctor of Science from the University of South Carolina\nBULLET::::- 1998 — Inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame, Ronald H. Brown American Innovator Award\nBULLET::::- 2004 — Honorary degree in Pharmaceutical Biotechnology from the University of Bologna, Italy\nBULLET::::- 2010 — Honorary degree of Doctor honoris causa in the field of biological sciences from Masaryk University, Czech Republic\n\nBULLET::::- House of Numbers\nBULLET::::- Luc Montagnier — Nobel prize winning HIV researcher who now endorses homeopathy\nBULLET::::- Nobel Prize controversies\n\nBULLET::::- Paul Rabinow, \"Making PCR: a story of biotechnology\" (University of Chicago Press, 1996).\nBULLET::::- Anthony Liversidge, , \"Omni\" magazine (April 1992).\nBULLET::::- Kary Mullis, \"Dancing Naked in the Mind Field\". Vintage Books (1998). .\n\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- regarding his views on HIV/AIDS.\n"}
{"id": "17096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17096", "title": "Kinsey Reports", "text": "Kinsey Reports\n\nThe Kinsey Reports are two scholarly books on human sexual behavior, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) and Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (1953), written by Alfred Kinsey, Wardell Pomeroy, Clyde Martin, and (for \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\") Paul Gebhard and published by W.B. Saunders. The two best-selling books were highly controversial from the start, both within the scientific community and among the general public, due to their previously taboo subject matter as well as questions regarding their scientific validity. Kinsey was a zoologist at Indiana University and the founder of the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction (more widely known as the Kinsey Institute).\n\nThe sociological data underlying the analysis and conclusions found in \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" was collected from approximately 5,300 males over a fifteen year period. \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" was based on personal interviews with approximately 6,000 women. In the latter, Kinsey analyzed data for the frequency with which women participate in various types of sexual activity and looked at how factors such as age, social-economic status and religious adherence influence sexual behavior. Comparisons are made of female and male sexual activities. Kinsey's evidence suggested that women were less sexually active than men.\n\nThe publications were immediately controversial among the general public. The findings caused shock and outrage, both because they challenged conventional beliefs about sexuality and because they discussed subjects that had previously been taboo.\n\nKinsey's methodology used to collect data has received criticism. It has been suggested that some data in the reports could not have been obtained without collaborations with child molesters. The Kinsey Institute denies this charge, though it acknowledges that men who have had sexual experiences with children were interviewed, with Kinsey balancing what he saw as the need for their anonymity to solicit \"honest answers on such taboo subjects\" against the likelihood that their crimes would continue. Additionally, concerns over the sample populations used were later addressed by the Kinsey Institute. The conclusion of the Kinsey Institute was that none of Kinsey's original estimates was significantly affected by these data sources.\n\nMore recent researchers believe that Kinsey overestimated the rate of same-sex attraction because of flaws in his sampling methods. Nonetheless, his work is considered pioneering and some of the most well known sex research of all time.\n\nParts of the Kinsey Reports regarding diversity in sexual orientations are frequently used to support the common estimate of 10% for homosexuality in the general population. Instead of three categories (heterosexual, bisexual and homosexual), a seven-point Kinsey scale system was used.\n\nThe reports also state that nearly 46% of the male subjects had \"reacted\" sexually to persons of both sexes in the course of their adult lives, and 37% had at least one homosexual experience. 11.6% of white males (ages 20–35) were given a rating of 3 (about equal heterosexual and homosexual experience/response) throughout their adult lives. The study also reported that 10% of American males surveyed were \"more or less exclusively homosexual for at least three years between the ages of 16 and 55\" (in the 5 to 6 range).\n\nSeven percent of single females (ages 20–35) and four percent of previously married females (ages 20–35) were given a rating of 3 (about equal heterosexual and homosexual experience/response) on Kinsey Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale for this period of their lives. 2 to 6% of females, aged 20–35, were more or less exclusively homosexual in experience/response, and 1 to 3% of unmarried females aged 20–35 were exclusively homosexual in experience/response.\n\nAcademic criticisms were made pertaining to sample selection and sample bias in the reports' methodology. This was despite the fact that Kinsey sought to work on a more 'complete' report that would have involved 100,000 interviews and that the initial 1948 publication was merely considered by him to be a sample progress report. Two main problems cited were that significant portions of the samples come from prison populations and male prostitutes, and that people who volunteer to be interviewed about taboo subject are likely to create a self-selection bias. Both undermine the usefulness of the sample in terms of determining the tendencies of the overall population. In 1948, the same year as the original publication, a committee of the American Statistical Association, including notable statisticians such as John Tukey, condemned the sampling procedure. Tukey was perhaps the most vocal critic, saying, \"A random selection of three people would have been better than a group of 300 chosen by Mr. Kinsey.\" Psychologist Abraham Maslow stated that Kinsey did not consider \"volunteer bias\". The data represented only those volunteering to participate in discussion of taboo topics. Most Americans were reluctant to discuss the intimate details of their sex lives even with their spouses and close friends. Before the publication of Kinsey's reports, Maslow tested Kinsey's volunteers for bias. He concluded that Kinsey's sample was unrepresentative of the general population. In 1954, leading statisticians, including William Gemmell Cochran, Frederick Mosteller, John Tukey, and W. O. Jenkins issued for the American Statistical Association a critique of Kinsey's 1948 report on the human male, stating:\n\n“Critics are justified in their objections that many of the most interesting and provocative statements in the [Kinsey 1948] book are not based on the data presented therein, and it is not made clear to the reader on what evidence the statements are based. Further, the conclusions drawn from data presented in the book are often stated by KPM [Kinsey, Pomeroy, and Martin] in much too bold and confident a manner. Taken cumulatively, these objections amount to saying that much of the writing in the book falls below the level of good scientific writing.”\n\nIn response, Paul Gebhard, Kinsey's close colleague, “Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" co-author, and successor as director of the Kinsey Institute for Sex Research, cleaned the Kinsey data of purported contaminants, removing, for example, all material derived from prison populations in the basic sample. In 1979, Gebhard (with Alan B. Johnson) published \"The Kinsey Data: Marginal Tabulations of the 1938–1963 Interviews Conducted by the Institute for Sex Research\". Their conclusion, to Gebhard's surprise he claimed, was that none of Kinsey's original estimates were significantly affected by this bias: that is, the prison population and male prostitutes had the same statistical tendency as those who willingly participated in discussion of previously taboo sexual topics. The results were summarized by historian, playwright, and gay-rights activist Martin Duberman, \"Instead of Kinsey's 37% (men who had at least one homosexual experience), Gebhard and Johnson came up with 36.4%; the 10% figure (men who were \"more or less exclusively homosexual for at least three years between the ages of 16 and 55\"), with prison inmates excluded, came to 9.9% for white, college-educated males and 12.7% for those with less education.\n\nMore recent researchers have criticized Kinsey's sampling methods and believe that he overestimated the frequency of nonheterosexual behaviors and attractions.\n\nHistorian Peter Gay described \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" as \"methodologically far from persuasive\".\n\nSociologist Edward Laumann stated that the Kinsey Reports were limited to the biology of sex and lacked psychological and clinical information and analysis and that this \"meant that sex research did not move into the mainstream of academic credibility. People took their reputations in their hands if they attempted to pursue it.\" Laumann also acknowledged that \"The Kinsey report was a cultural event of enormous consequence.\"\n\nThe Kinsey scale is used to measure a person's overall balance of heterosexuality and homosexuality, and takes into account both sexual experience and psychosexual reactions. The scale ranges from 0 to 6, with 0 being completely heterosexual and 6 completely homosexual. An additional category, X, was mentioned to describe those who had \"no socio-sexual contacts or reactions,\" which has been cited by scholars to mean asexuality. The scale was first published in \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" (1948) by Kinsey, Wardell Pomeroy and others, and was also prominent in the complementary work \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" (1953). Introducing the scale, Kinsey wrote:\n\nThe scale is as follows:\n!Rating\n!style=\"text-align: left\"Description\nExclusively heterosexual\nPredominantly heterosexual, only incidentally homosexual\nPredominantly heterosexual, but more than incidentally homosexual\nEqually heterosexual and homosexual \nPredominantly homosexual, but more than incidentally heterosexual\nPredominantly homosexual, only incidentally heterosexual\nExclusively homosexual\nNo socio-sexual contacts or reactions\n\nBULLET::::- Men: 11.6% of white males aged 20–35 were given a rating of 3 for this period of their lives.\nBULLET::::- Women: 7% of single females aged 20–35 and 4% of previously married females aged 20–35 were given a rating of 3 for this period of their lives. 2 to 6% of females, aged 20–35, were given a rating of 5 and 1 to 3% of unmarried females aged 20–35 were rated as 6.\n\nThe average frequency of marital sex reported by women was 2.8 times a week in the late teens, 2.2 times a week by age 30, and 1.0 times a week by age 50. Kinsey estimated that approximately 50% of all married males had some extramarital experience at some time during their married lives. Among the sample, 26% of females had extramarital sex by their forties. Between 1 in 6 and 1 in 10 females from age 26 to 50 were engaged in extramarital sex. However, Kinsey classified couples who have lived together for at least a year as \"married\", inflating the statistics for extra-marital sex.\n\n12% of females and 22% of males reported having an erotic response to a sadomasochistic story.\n\nResponses to being bitten:\n! Erotic Responses\n! By Females\n! By Males\n! Definite and/or frequent\n! Some response\n! Never\n! Number of cases\n\nData was gathered primarily by means of subjective report interviews, conducted according to a structured questionnaire memorized by the experimenters (but not marked on the response sheet in any way). The response sheets were encoded in this way to maintain the confidentiality of the respondents, being entered on a blank grid using response symbols defined in advance. The data were later computerized for processing. All of this material, including the original researchers' notes, remains available from the Kinsey Institute to qualified researchers who demonstrate a need to view such materials. The institute also allows researchers to use statistical software in order to analyze the data.\n\nThe Kinsey Reports, which together sold three-quarters of a million copies and were translated into thirteen languages, may be considered as some of the most successful and influential scientific books of the 20th century. They were also associated with a change in the public perception of sexuality. In the 1960s, following the introduction of the first oral contraceptive, this change was to be expressed in the sexual revolution. Additionally, in 1966 Masters and Johnson would publish the first of two texts cataloguing their investigations into the physiology of sex, breaking taboos and misapprehensions similar to those Kinsey had confronted more than a decade earlier in a closely related field.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kinsey\", a film based on the life of Alfred Kinsey\nBULLET::::- Klein Sexual Orientation Grid\n\nBULLET::::- Kinsey Institute home page\nBULLET::::- \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" - Project MUSE - Johns Hopkins University\nBULLET::::- Kinsey's Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale\n"}
{"id": "17098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17098", "title": "Kendo", "text": "Kendo\n\nKendo is an activity that combines martial arts practices and values with strenuous sport-like physical activity.\n\nSwordsmen in Japan established schools of \"kenjutsu\" (the ancestor of kendo), which continued for centuries and which form the basis of kendo practice today. The formal kendo exercises known as \"kata\" were developed several centuries ago as \"kenjutsu\" practice for warriors. They are still studied today, in a modified form.\n\nThe introduction of bamboo practice swords (\"shinai\") and armour (\"bōgu\") to sword training is attributed to Naganuma Shirōzaemon Kunisato during the Shotoku Era(1711–1715). Naganuma developed the use of \"bōgu\" and established a training method using the \"shinai\".\n\nIn addition, the inscription on the gravestone of third on , the 8th headmaster of the Kashima Shinden Jikishinkage-ryū Kenjutsu, states that his exploits included improving the bokuto and shinai, and refining the armor by adding a metal grille to the \"men\" (head piece) and thick cotton protective coverings to the \"kote\" (gauntlets). Kunisato inherited the tradition from his father Heizaemon in 1708, and the two of them worked hard together to improve the bogu until Heizaemon's death.\n\nChiba Shusaku Narimasa, founder of the Hokushin Ittō-ryū Hyōhō (北辰一刀流兵法), introduced \"gekiken\" (撃剣) (full contact duels with shinai and bogu) to the curriculum of this koryū in the 1820s. Due to the popularity and the large number of students of the Hokushin Ittō-ryū Hyōhō at the end of the Edo period, this kind of practice contributed greatly to the spread of shinai and bōgu all over Japan. Also there are many waza, or techniques, such as Suriage-Men, Oikomi-Men etc. in modern kendo which were originally Hokushin Ittō-ryū techniques, named by Chiba Shusaku Narimasa for his school. After the Meiji Restoration in the late 1800s Sakakibara Kenkichi popularised public \"gekiken\" for commercial gain, but also generated an increased interest in kendo and kenjutsu as a result.\n\nIn 1876, five years after a voluntary surrender of swords, the government banned the use of swords by the surviving samurai and initiated sword hunts. Meanwhile, in an attempt to standardize the sword styles (\"kenjutsu\") used by policemen, Kawaji Toshiyoshi recruited swordsmen from various schools to come up with a unified swordsmanship style. This led to the rise of the \"Battotai\" (抜刀隊, lit. \"Drawn Sword Corps\"), which mainly featured sword-bearing policemen. However, it proved difficult to integrate all sword arts, which led to a compromise of ten practice moves (\"kata\") for police training. Difficulties of integration notwithstanding, this integration effort led to the development of kendo, which remains in use to date. In 1878, Kawaji wrote a book on swordsmanship, titled \"Gekiken Saikō-ron\" (Revitalizing Swordsmanship), wherein he stressed that sword styles should not disappear with modernization, considering that other countries have been fascinated with them, but should be integrated as necessary skills for the police. He draws a particular example from his experience with the Satsuma Rebellion. The \"Junsa Kyōshūjo\" (Patrolman's Training Institute), founded in 1879, provided a curriculum which allowed policemen to study the sword arts during their off-hours (\"gekiken\"). In the same year, Kawaji wrote another book on swordsmanship, titled \"Kendo Saikō-ron\" (Revitalizing Kendo), wherein he defended the significance of such sword art training for the police. While the institute remained active only until 1881, the police continued to support such practice.\n\nThe DNBK changed the name of the sporting form of swordsmanship, called \"gekiken\", (Kyūjitai: 擊劍; Shinjitai: 撃剣, \"hitting sword\") to \"kendō\" in 1920.\n\nKendo (along with other martial arts) was banned in Japan in 1946 by the occupying powers. This was part of \"the removal and exclusion from public life of militaristic and ultra nationalistic persons\" in response to the wartime militarisation of martial arts instruction in Japan. The DNBK was also disbanded. Kendo was allowed to return to the curriculum in 1950 (first as and then as kendo from 1952).\n\nThe All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF or ZNKR) was founded in 1952, immediately after Japan's independence was restored and the ban on martial arts in Japan was lifted. It was formed on the principle of kendo not as a martial art but as educational sport, and it has continued to be practiced as such to this day.\n\nThe International Kendo Federation (FIK) was founded in April 1970; it is an international federation of national and regional kendo federations and the world governing body for kendo. The FIK is a non-governmental organisation, and its aim is to promote and popularise kendo, iaido and jodo.\n\nThe International Martial Arts Federation (IMAF), established in Kyoto 1952, was the first international organisation after WWII to promote the development of martial arts worldwide. Today, IMAF includes kendo as one of the Japanese disciplines.\n\nPractitioners of kendo are called , meaning \"someone who practices kendo\", or occasionally , meaning \"swordsman\". The old term of \"kendoists\" is sometimes used.\n\nThe \"Kodansha Meibo\" (a register of \"dan\" graded members of the All Japan Kendo Federation) shows that as of September 2007, there were 1.48 million registered \"dan\" graded \"kendōka\" in Japan. According to the survey conducted by the All Japan Kendo Federation, the number of active kendo practitioners in Japan is 477,000 in which 290,000 \"dan\" holders are included. From these figures, the All Japan Kendo Federation estimates that the number of \"kendōka\" in Japan is 1.66 million, with over 6 million practitioners worldwide, by adding the number of the registered \"dan\" holders and the active kendo practitioners without \"dan\" grade.\n\nIn 1975, the All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF) developed then published \"The Concept and Purpose of Kendo\" which is reproduced below.\n\nKendo is a way to discipline the human character through the application of the principles of the \"katana\".\n\nKendo is practiced wearing a traditional Japanese style of clothing, and using one or, less commonly, two .\nThe \"shinai\" is meant to represent a Japanese sword (katana) and is made up of four bamboo slats, which are held together by leather fittings. A modern variation of a \"shinai\" with carbon fiber reinforced resin slats is also used. .\n\n\"Kendōka\" also use hard to practice \"kata\".\n\nKendo employs strikes involving both one edge and the tip of the \"shinai\" or \"bokutō\".\n\nProtective armour is worn to protect specified target areas on the head, arms and body. The head is protected by a stylised helmet, called , with a to protect the face, a series of hard leather and to protect the throat, and padded to protect the side of the neck and shoulders. The forearms, wrists, and hands are protected by long, thickly padded fabric gloves called . The torso is protected by a , while the waist and groin area is protected by the , consisting of three thick vertical fabric flaps or faulds.\n\nThe clothing worn under the \"bōgu\" comprise a jacket (\"kendogi\" or \"keikogi\") and \"hakama\", a garment separated in the middle to form two wide trouser legs.\n\nA is wrapped around the head, under the \"men\", to absorb perspiration and provide a base for the \"men\" to fit comfortably.\n\nKendo training is quite noisy in comparison to some other martial arts or sports. This is because \"kendōka\" use a shout, or , to express their fighting spirit when striking. Additionally, \"kendōka\" execute , an action similar to a stamp of the front foot, when making a strike.\n\nLike some other martial arts, \"kendōka\" train and fight barefoot. Kendo is ideally practiced in a purpose-built \"dōjō\", though standard sports halls and other venues are often used. An appropriate venue has a clean and well-sprung wooden floor, suitable for \"fumikomi-ashi\".\n\nKendo techniques comprise both strikes and thrusts. Strikes are only made towards specified on the wrists, head, or body, all of which are protected by armour. The targets are \"men\", \"sayu-men\" or \"yoko-men\" (upper, left or right side of the \"men\"), the right \"kote\" at any time, the left \"kote\" when it is in a raised position, and the left or right side of the \"dō\". are only allowed to the throat. However, since an incorrectly performed thrust could cause serious injury to the opponent's neck, thrusting techniques in free practice and competition are often restricted to senior \"dan\" graded \"kendōka\".\nOnce a \"kendōka\" begins practice in armour, a practice session may include any or all of the following types of practice.\n\nTechniques are divided into \"shikake-waza\" (to initiate a strike) and \"ōji-waza\" (a response to an attempted strike).\n\"Kendoka\" who wish to use such techniques during practice or competitions, often practice each technique with a \"motodachi\". This is a process that requires patience. First practising slowly and then as familiarity and confidence builds, the \"kendoka\" and \"motodachi\" increase the speed to match and competition level.\n\nThese attack techniques are used to create \"suki\" in an opponent by initiating an attack, or strike boldly when your opponent has created a \"suki\". Such techniques include:\nThis is a technique used when one's opponent has weak \"kisei\" (spirit, vigour) or when they yield a \"suki\" under pressure. Always hold \"kisei\" and strike quickly.\nBody and \"shinai\" will lose balance as you strike or when being attacked. This technique takes advantage of this to help execute a strike. A good example is \"Hikibana-kote\", when a strike is made to an opponent's \"kote\" as they feel threatened and raise their \"kensen\" as you push forward.\nThis provides a surprise attack, by lifting the \"shinai\" over your shoulder before striking. Here a skilful use of the \"kensen\" and spirited attack is crucial for effective \"katsugi-waza\" or luring your opponent into breaking his/her posture.\nThere are two types. The first is for moving to the next \"waza\" after a failed first strike, and the second holds your opponent's attention and posture to create the \"suki\" for a second strike. The former requires a continuous rhythm of correct strikes. The latter requires continuous execution of \"waza\", to take advantage of your opponent's \"suki\".\nThis can be used if one's opponent's \"kamae\" has no \"suki\" when your opponent tries to attack. Your opponent's \"shinai\" is either knocked down from above or swept up from below with a resulting strike just when his/her \"kamae \" is broken.\nThis technique involves striking your opponent as you realise he/she is about to strike. This is because their concentration will be on striking and their posture will have no flexibility to respond. Thus \"debana-waza\" is ideal. This can be to any part of your opponent's body, with valid strikes being: \"debana-men\", \"debana-kote\", and \"debana-tsuki\".\n\nThese counter-attack techniques are performed by executing a strike after responding or avoiding an attempted strike by your opponent. This can also be achieved by inducing the opponent to attack, then employing one of the \"oji-waza\".\nAvoiding an attack from another, then instantly responding. Here, timing has to be correct. A response that is too slow or fast may not be effective. Therefore, close attention to an opponent's every move is required.\nIf struck by an opponent's \"shinai\", this technique sweeps up their \"shinai\" in a rising-slide motion, with the right (\"ura\") or left (\"omote\") side of the \"shinai\". Then strike in the direction of their \"shinai\", or at the \"suki\" resulting from their composure's collapse. This technique needs to be smooth. That is, don't separate the rising-slide motion and the upward-sweeping motion or it will not be successful. Valid strikes include: \"men-suriage-men\", \"kote-suriage-men\", \"men-suriage-do\", \"kote-suriage-kote\", and \"tsuki-suriage-men\".\nThis \"waza\" knocks an opponent's \"shinai\" to the right or left. This neutralises a potential strike and gives the ideal chance to strike as an opponent is off-balance. For success, an opponent's \"maai\" has to be correctly perceived and then one knocks down their \"shinai\" before their arm fully extends. Valid examples are: \"do-uchiotoshi-men\" and \"tsuki-uchiotoshi-men\".\nThis technique is a response. As an opponent strikes, you parry their \"shinai\" with yours. Then flip over (turn over your hands) and strike their opposite side. Valid strikes include:\"men-kaeshi-men\", \"men-kaeshi-kote\", \"men-kaeshi-do\", \"kote-kaeshi-men\", \"kote-kaeshi-kote\", and \"do-kaeshi-men\".\n\nA scorable in a \"kendo\" competition (\"tai-kai\") is defined as an accurate strike or thrust made onto a \"datotsu-bui\" of the opponent's \"kendo-gu\" with the \"shinai\" making contact at its \"datotsu-bu\", the competitor displaying high spirits, correct posture and followed by \"zanshin\".\n\n\"Datotsu-bui\" or point scoring targets in \"kendo\" are defined as:\nBULLET::::- \"Men-bu\", the top or sides of the head protector (\"sho-men\" and \"sayu-men\").\nBULLET::::- \"Kote-bu\", a padded area of the right or left wrist protector (\"migi-kote\" and \"hidari-kote\").\nBULLET::::- \"Do-bu\", an area of the right or left side of the armour that protects the torso \" (\"migi-do\" and \"hidari-do\").\nBULLET::::- \"Tsuki-bu\", an area of the head protector in front of the throat (\"tsuki-dare\").\n\n\"Datotsu-bu\" of the 'shinai' is the forward, or blade side (\"jin-bu\") of the top third (\"monouchi\") of the \"shinai\".\n\n, or continuation of awareness, must be present and shown throughout the execution of the strike, and the \"kendōka\" must be mentally and physically ready to attack again.\n\nIn competition, there are usually three . Each referee holds a red flag and a white flag in opposing hands. To award a point, a referee raises the flag corresponding to the colour of the ribbon worn by the scoring competitor. Usually at least two referees must agree for a point to be awarded. The match continues until a pronouncement of the point that has been scored.\n\nKendo competitions are usually a three-point match. The first competitor to score two points, therefore wins the match. If the time limit is reached and only one competitor has a point, that competitor wins.\n\nIn the case of a tie, there are several options:\nBULLET::::- : The match is declared a draw.\nBULLET::::- : The match is continued until either competitor scores a point.\nBULLET::::- : The victor is decided by the referees. The three referees vote for victor by each raising one of their respective flags simultaneously.\n\nThe All Japan Kendo Championship is regarded as the most prestigious kendo championship. Despite it being the national championship for only Japanese kendoka, kendo practitioners all over the world consider the All Japan Kendo Championship as the championship with the highest level of competitive kendo. The World Kendo Championships have been held every three years since 1970. They are organised by the International Kendo Federation (FIK) with the support of the host nation's kendo federation. The European championship is held every year, except in those years in which there is a world championship. Kendo is also one of the martial arts in the World Combat Games.\n\nTechnical achievement in kendo is measured by advancement in grade, rank or level. The and grading system, created in 1883, is used to indicate one's proficiency in kendo. The \"dan\" levels are from to . There are usually six grades below first-dan, known as \"kyu\". The \"kyu\" numbering is in reverse order, with being the grade immediately below first dan, and being the lowest grade. There are no visible differences in dress between kendo grades; those below dan-level may dress the same as those above dan-level.\n\nBULLET::::- Ogawa Kinnosuke 小川 金之助 (1884-1962)- awarded 1957\nBULLET::::- Moriji Mochida (aka Mochida Moriji) 持田 盛二 (1885-1974)- awarded 1957\nBULLET::::- Nakano Sousuke 中野 宗助 (1885-1963)- awarded 1957\nBULLET::::- Saimura Gorou 斎村 五郎 (1887-1969)- awarded 1957\nBULLET::::- Ooasa Yuuji 大麻 勇次 (1887-1974)- awarded 1962\n\nAll candidates for examination face a panel of examiners. A larger, more qualified panel is usually assembled to assess the higher \"dan\" grades. Kendo examinations typically consist of \"jitsugi\", a demonstration of the skill of the applicants, \"Nihon Kendo Kata\" and a written exam. The eighth-dan kendo exam is extremely difficult, with a reported pass rate of less than 1 percent.\n\n+Requirements for \"dan\" grade examination within FIK affiliated organisations\n!Grade!!Requirement!!Age requirement\n1-dan1-kyūAt least 13 years old\n2-danAt least 1 year of training after receiving 1-dan\n3-danAt least 2 years of training after receiving 2-dan\n4-danAt least 3 years of training after receiving 3-dan\n5-danAt least 4 years of training after receiving 4-dan\n6-danAt least 5 years of training after receiving 5-dan\n7-danAt least 6 years of training after receiving 6-dan\n8-danAt least 10 years of training after receiving 7-danAt least 46 years old\n\n can be earned in addition to the above \"dan\" grades by \"kendōka\" of a defined dan grade. These are , , and . The title is affixed to the front of the \"dan\" grade when said, for example . The qualifications for each title are below.\n\n!Title!!Required grade!!Conditions\n6-danAfter receiving 6-dan, one must wait 1 or more years, pass screening by the kendo organisation, receive a recommendation from the regional organisation president then pass an exam on \"kendo\" theory.\nrenshi 7-danAfter receiving 7-dan, one must wait 2 or more years, pass screening by the kendo organisation, and receive a recommendation from the regional organisation president then pass an exam on \"kendo\" theory.\nkyōshi 8-danAfter receiving 8-dan, one must wait 8 or more years, pass screening by the kendo organisation, receive a recommendation from the regional organisation president and the national kendo organisation president then pass an exam on \"kendo\" theory.\n\nKata are fixed patterns that teach kendoka the basic elements of swordsmanship. The \"kata\" include fundamental techniques of attacking and counter-attacking, and have useful practical application in general kendo. There are ten . These are generally practised with . Occasionally, real swords or swords with a blunt edge, called or , may be used for display of \"kata\".\n\nAll are performed by two people: the , the teacher, and , the student. The \"uchidachi\" makes the first move or attack in each \"kata\". As this is a teaching role, the \"uchidachi\" is always the losing side, thus allowing the \"shidachi\" to learn and to gain confidence.\n\n\"Kata\" one to seven are performed with both partners using a normal length wooden sword. \"Kata\" eight to ten are performed with uchidachi using a normal length weapon and shidachi using a shorter one (\"kodachi\").\n\nThe forms of the were finalised in 1933 based on the \"Dai nihon Teikoku Kendo Kata\", composed in 1912. \"It is impossible to link the individual forms of \"Dai nihon Teikoku Kendo Kata\" to their original influences, although the genealogical reference diagram does indicate the masters of the various committees involved, and it is possible from this to determine the influences and origins of Kendo and the Kata.\"\n\nIn 2003, the All Japan Kendo Federation introduced , a set of basic exercises using a bokuto. This form of practice, is intended primarily for \"kendōka\" up to , but is very useful for all kendo students which are organised under FIK.\n\nKata can also be treated as competitions where players are judged upon their performance and technique.\n\nMany national and regional organisations manage and promote kendo activities outside Japan. The major organising body is the International Kendo Federation (FIK). The FIK is a non-governmental international federation of national and regional kendo organisations. An aim of the FIK is to provide a link between Japan and the international kendo community and to promote and popularise kendo, iaido and jodo. The FIK was established in 1970 with 17 national federations. The number of affiliated and recognised organisations has increased over the years to 57 (as of May 2015). The FIK is recognised by SportAccord as a 'Full Member'. and by the World Anti-Doping Agency.\n\nOther organisations that promote the study of Japanese martial arts, including kendo, are the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai (DNBK) and the International Martial Arts Federation (IMAF). The current DNBK has no connection to the pre-war organisation, although it shares the same goals. The International Martial Arts Federation (IMAF) was established in Kyoto in 1952 and is dedicated to the promotion and development of the martial arts worldwide, including kendo.\n\nBULLET::::- Angampora\nBULLET::::- Banshay\nBULLET::::- Bataireacht\nBULLET::::- Bōjutsu\nBULLET::::- Gatka\nBULLET::::- Jūkendō\nBULLET::::- Kalaripayattu\nBULLET::::- Krabi–krabong\nBULLET::::- Kuttu Varisai\nBULLET::::- Mardani khel\nBULLET::::- Silambam\nBULLET::::- Silambam Asia\nBULLET::::- Tahtib\nBULLET::::- Thang-ta\nBULLET::::- Varma kalai\nBULLET::::- World Silambam Association\nBULLET::::- Gendai budō - modern Japanese martial arts\nBULLET::::- Kenjutsu\nBULLET::::- Iaidō - sword drawing\nBULLET::::- Jōdō - a martial art using a short wooden staff, or stick\nBULLET::::- Kumdo - Korean kendo\nBULLET::::- Naginata - a martial art using a halberd-like weapon\nBULLET::::- Fencing\nBULLET::::- Swordsmanship\n\nBULLET::::- International Kendo Federation (FIK)\nBULLET::::- All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF)\nBULLET::::- Dai Nippon Butoku Kai (DNBK)\n"}
{"id": "17100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17100", "title": "Kingfisher", "text": "Kingfisher\n\nKingfishers or Alcedinidae are a family of small to medium-sized, brightly colored birds in the order Coraciiformes. They have a cosmopolitan distribution, with most species found in the tropical regions of Africa, Asia, and Oceania. The family contains 114 species and is divided into three subfamilies and 19 genera. All kingfishers have large heads, long, sharp, pointed bills, short legs, and stubby tails. Most species have bright plumage with only small differences between the sexes. Most species are tropical in distribution, and a slight majority are found only in forests. They consume a wide range of prey usually caught by swooping down from a perch. While kingfishers are usually thought to live near rivers and eat fish, many species live away from water and eat small invertebrates. Like other members of their order, they nest in cavities, usually tunnels dug into the natural or artificial banks in the ground. Some kingfishers nest in arboreal termite nests. A few species, principally insular forms, are threatened with extinction. In Britain, the word \"kingfisher\" normally refers to the common kingfisher.\n\nThe kingfishers family Alcedinidae is in the order Coraciiformes, which also includes the motmots, bee-eaters, todies, rollers and ground-rollers. The name of the family was introduced (as Alcedia) by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815. It is divided into three subfamilies, the tree kingfishers (Halcyoninae), the river kingfishers (Alcedininae) and the water kingfishers (Cerylinae). The name Daceloninae is sometimes used for the tree kingfisher subfamily but it was introduced by Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1841 while Halcyoninae introduced by Nicholas Aylward Vigors in 1825 is earlier and has priority. A few taxonomists elevate the three subfamilies to family status. In spite of the word \"kingfisher\" in their English vernacular names, many of these birds are not specialist fish-eaters; none of the species in Halcyoninae are.\n\nThe centre of kingfisher diversity is the Australasian region, but the group is not thought to have originated there. Instead, they originated in the Indomalayan region around 27 million years ago and invaded the Australasian region a number of times. Fossil kingfishers have been described from Lower Eocene rocks in Wyoming and Middle Eocene rocks in Germany, around 30–40 million years ago. More recent fossil kingfishers have been described in the Miocene rocks of Australia (5–25 million years old). Several fossil birds have been erroneously ascribed to the kingfishers, including \"Halcyornis\", from the Lower Eocene rocks in Kent, which has also been considered a gull, but is now thought to have been a member of an extinct family.\n\nAmongst the three subfamilies, the Alcedininae are basal to the other two subfamilies. The few species found in the Americas, all from the subfamily Cerylinae, suggest that the sparse representation in the Western Hemisphere resulted from just two original colonising events. The subfamily is a comparatively recent split from the Halcyoninae, diversifying in the Old World as recently as the Miocene or Pliocene.\n\nThe smallest species of kingfisher is the African dwarf kingfisher (\"Ispidina lecontei\"), which averages in length and between in weight. The largest kingfisher in Africa is the giant kingfisher (\"Megaceryle maxima\"), which is in length and in weight. The familiar Australian kingfisher known as the laughing kookaburra (\"Dacelo novaeguineae\") is the heaviest species with females reaching nearly in weight.\n\nThe plumage of most kingfishers is bright, with green and blue being the most common colours. The brightness of the colours is neither the product of iridescence (except in the American kingfishers) or pigments, but is instead caused by the structure of the feathers, which causes scattering of blue light (the Tyndall effect). In most species, no overt differences between the sexes exist; when differences occur, they are quite small (less than 10%).\n\nThe kingfishers have long, dagger-like bills. The bill is usually longer and more compressed in species that hunt fish, and shorter and more broad in species that hunt prey off the ground. The largest and most atypical bill is that of the shovel-billed kookaburra, which is used to dig through the forest floor in search of prey. They generally have short legs, although species that feed on the ground have longer tarsi. Most species have four toes, three of which are forward-pointing.\n\nThe irises of most species are dark brown. The kingfishers have excellent vision; they are capable of binocular vision and are thought in particular to have good colour vision. They have restricted movement of their eyes within the eye sockets, instead using head movements to track prey. In addition, they are capable of compensating for the refraction of water and reflection when hunting prey underwater, and are able to judge depth under water accurately. They also have nictitating membranes that cover the eyes to protect them when they hit the water; the pied kingfisher has a bony plate which slides across the eye when it hits the water.\n\nThe kingfishers have a cosmopolitan distribution, occurring throughout the world's tropical and temperate regions. They are absent from the polar regions and some of the world's driest deserts. A number of species have reached islands groups, particularly those in the south and east Pacific Ocean. The Old World tropics and Australasia are the core areas for this group. Europe and North America north of Mexico are very poorly represented, with only one common kingfisher (common kingfisher and belted kingfisher, respectively), and a couple of uncommon or very local species each: (ringed kingfisher and green kingfisher in the southwestern United States, pied kingfisher and white-throated kingfisher in southeastern Europe). The six species occurring in the Americas are four closely related green kingfishers in the genus \"Chloroceryle\" and two large crested kingfishers in the genus \"Megaceryle\". Even tropical South America has only five species plus the wintering belted kingfisher. In comparison, the African country of the Gambia has eight resident species in its area.\n\nIndividual species may have massive ranges, like the common kingfisher, which ranges from Ireland across Europe, North Africa, and Asia as far as the Solomon Islands in Australasia, or the pied kingfisher, which has a widespread distribution across Africa and Asia. Other species have much smaller ranges, particularly insular species which are endemic to single small islands. The Kofiau paradise kingfisher is restricted to the island of Kofiau off New Guinea.\n\nKingfishers occupy a wide range of habitats. While they are often associated with rivers and lakes, over half the world's species are found in forests and forested streams. They also occupy a wide range of other habitats. The red-backed kingfisher of Australia lives in the driest deserts, although kingfishers are absent from other dry deserts like the Sahara. Other species live high in mountains, or in open woodland, and a number of species live on tropical coral atolls. Numerous species have adapted to human-modified habitats, particularly those adapted to woodlands, and may be found in cultivated and agricultural areas, as well as parks and gardens in towns and cities.\n\nKingfishers feed on a wide variety of prey. They are most famous for hunting and eating fish, and some species do specialise in catching fish, but other species take crustaceans, frogs and other amphibians, annelid worms, molluscs, insects, spiders, centipedes, reptiles (including snakes), and even birds and mammals. Individual species may specialise in a few items or take a wide variety of prey, and for species with large global distributions, different populations may have different diets. Woodland and forest kingfishers take mainly insects, particularly grasshoppers, whereas the water kingfishers are more specialised in taking fish. The red-backed kingfisher has been observed hammering into the mud nests of fairy martins to feed on their nestlings. Kingfishers usually hunt from an exposed perch; when a prey item is observed, the kingfisher swoops down to snatch it, then returns to the perch. Kingfishers of all three families beat larger prey on a perch to kill the prey and to dislodge or break protective spines and bones. Having beaten the prey, it is manipulated and then swallowed. The shovel-billed kookaburra uses its massive, wide bill as a shovel to dig for worms in soft mud.\n\nKingfishers are territorial, some species defending their territories vigorously. They are generally monogamous, although cooperative breeding has been observed in some species and is quite common in others, for example the laughing kookaburra, where helpers aid the dominant breeding pair in raising the young.\n\nLike all Coraciiformes, the kingfishers are cavity nesters, with most species nesting in holes dug in the ground. These holes are usually in earth banks on the sides of rivers, lakes or man-made ditches. Some species may nest in holes in trees, the earth clinging to the roots of an uprooted tree, or arboreal nests of termites (termitarium). These termite nests are common in forest species. The nests take the form of a small chamber at the end of a tunnel. Nest-digging duties are shared between the genders\n. During the initial excavations, the bird may fly at the chosen site with considerable force, and birds have injured themselves fatally while doing this. The length of the tunnels varies by species and location; nests in termitariums are necessarily much shorter than those dug into the earth, and nests in harder substrates are shorter than those in soft soil or sand. The longest tunnels recorded are those of the giant kingfisher, which have been found to be long.\n\nThe eggs of kingfishers are invariably white and glossy. The typical clutch size varies by species; some of the very large and very small species lay as few as two eggs per clutch, whereas others may lay 10 eggs, the typical is around three to six eggs. Both sexes incubate the eggs. The offspring of the kingfisher usually stay with the parents for 3–4 months.\n\nA number of species are considered threatened by human activities and are in danger of extinction. The majority of these are forest species with limited distribution, particularly insular species. They are threatened by habitat loss caused by forest clearance or degradation and in some cases by introduced species. The Marquesan kingfisher of French Polynesia is listed as critically endangered due to a combination of habitat loss and degradation caused by introduced cattle, and possibly due to predation by introduced species.\n\nKingfishers are generally shy birds, but in spite of this, they feature heavily in human culture, generally due to the large head supporting its powerful mouth, their bright plumage, or some species' interesting behavior.\n\nFor the Dusun people of Borneo, the Oriental dwarf kingfisher is considered a bad omen, and warriors who see one on the way to battle should return home. Another Bornean tribe considers the banded kingfisher an omen bird, albeit generally a good omen.\n\nThe sacred kingfisher, along with other Pacific kingfishers, was venerated by the Polynesians, who believed it had control over the seas and waves.\n\nModern taxonomy also refers to the winds and sea in naming kingfishers after a classical Greek myth. The first pair of the mythical-bird Halcyon (kingfishers) were created from a marriage of Alcyone and Ceyx. As gods, they lived the sacrilege of referring to themselves as Zeus and Hera. They died for this, but the other gods, in an act of compassion, made them into birds, thus restoring them to their original seaside habitat. In addition, special \"halcyon days\" were granted. These are the seven days on either side of the winter solstice when storms shall never again occur for them. The Halcyon birds' \"days\" were for caring for the winter-hatched clutch (or brood), but the phrase \"Halcyon days\" also refers specifically to an idyllic time in the past, or in general to a peaceful time.\n\nVarious kinds of kingfishers and human cultural artifacts are named after the couple, in reference to this metamorphosis myth:\nBULLET::::- The genus \"Ceyx\" (within the river kingfishers family) is named after him.\nBULLET::::- The kingfisher family Halcyonidae (tree kingfishers) is named after his wife, as is the genus \"Halcyon\".\nBULLET::::- The belted kingfisher's specific name (\"Megaceryle alcyon\") also references her name.\n\nNot all the kingfishers are named in this way. The etymology of kingfisher (\"Alcedo atthis\") is obscure; the term comes from \"king's fisher\", but why that name was applied is not known.\n\n\nBULLET::::- ARKive – images and movies of the kingfisher \"(Alcedo atthis)\"\nBULLET::::- Kingfisher videos on the Internet Bird Collection\n"}
{"id": "17102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17102", "title": "Kesgrave", "text": "Kesgrave\n\nKesgrave is a small town containing two large estates in the English county of Suffolk on the eastern edge of Ipswich.\n\nThe area was recorded as \"Gressgrava\" in the Domesday Book, by the late 15th century its name had become Kesgrave. Kesgrave remained a small agricultural settlement with just a church, inn and a few farmsteads for over 700 years.\nIn 1921 the population was only 103 housed in 20 dwellings. Since then great changes have taken place.\n\nBy 1988 Kesgrave covered an area of more than . \nKesgrave parish council officially adopted the title of a town in January 2000.\n\nKesgrave High School is a large 11-18 comprehensive co-educational school with nearly 2000 pupils. A study for Sustrans noted that 61% of the pupils cycled to the school. This is largely due to the installation of a large cycle lane through the local housing development and along the main road. The school actively encourages walking or cycling and provides bicycle storage facilities.\n\nThe five primary schools in the immediate vicinity of Kesgrave are Beacon Hill Primary School, Birchwood Primary School, Cedarwood Primary School the building of which was awarded a Civic Trust Award in 2003, Gorseland Primary School and Heath Primary School.\n\nKesgrave was home to a number of private day and boarding schools based at Kesgrave Hall\n\nBULLET::::- St. Edmund's School (1946–1975)\nBULLET::::- Kesgrave Hall School (1976–1993)\nBULLET::::- Shawe Manor (1993)\nBULLET::::- Ryes School (2004–2007)\n\nBULLET::::- Lawrence Ward, former Serjeant at Arms of the British House of Commons.\n\nBULLET::::- Sinks Valley, Kesgrave\n\nBULLET::::- Kesgrave Community Portal\nBULLET::::- Photos of Kesgrave\n"}
{"id": "17103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17103", "title": "Kurt Waldheim", "text": "Kurt Waldheim\n\nKurt Josef Waldheim (; 21 December 1918 – 14 June 2007) was an Austrian diplomat and politician. Waldheim was the fourth Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1972 to 1981, and President of Austria from 1986 to 1992. While he was running for the latter office in the 1986 election, the revelation of his service in Thessaloniki, Greece and in Yugoslavia, as an intelligence officer in Nazi Germany's \"Wehrmacht\" during World War II raised international controversy.\n\nWaldheim was born in Sankt Andrä-Wördern, near Vienna, on 21 December 1918. His father was a Roman Catholic school inspector of Czech origin named Watzlawick (original Czech spelling Václavík) who changed his name that year as the Habsburg monarchy collapsed. Waldheim served in the Austrian Army (1936–37) and attended the Vienna Consular Academy, where he graduated in 1939. Waldheim's father was active in the Christian Social Party. Waldheim himself was politically unaffiliated during these years at the Academy.\n\nThree weeks after the German annexation of Austria in 1938, Waldheim applied for membership in the National Socialist German Students' League (NSDStB), a division of the Nazi Party. Shortly thereafter he became a registered member of the mounted corps of the SA.\n\nOn 19 August 1944, he married Elisabeth Ritschel in Vienna; their first daughter, Lieselotte, was born the following year. A son, Gerhard, and another daughter, Christa, followed.\n\nIn early 1941, Waldheim was drafted into the \"Wehrmacht\" and posted to the Eastern Front where he served as a squad leader. In December, he was wounded but returned to service in 1942. His service in the \"Wehrmacht\" from 1942 to 1945 was the subject of international review in 1985 and 1986. In his 1985 autobiography, he stated that he was discharged from further service at the front and, for the remainder of the war, finished his law degree at the University of Vienna, in addition to marrying in 1944. After publication, documents and witnesses came to light that revealed Waldheim’s military service continued until 1945, during which time he rose to the rank of \"Oberleutnant\".\n\nWaldheim's functions within the staff of German Army Group E from 1942 until 1945, as determined by the International Commission of Historians, were:\nBULLET::::- Interpreter and liaison officer with the 5th Alpine Division\n(Italy) in Pljevlja from 22 March 1942 to July 1942.\nBULLET::::- \"O2\" (2nd Assistant Adjutant) to the \"1b\" (General Staff Quartermaster) with \"Kampfgruppe West\" in Bosnia in June/August 1942,\nBULLET::::- Interpreter with the liaison staff attached to the Italian 9th Army in Tirana in early summer 1942,\nBULLET::::- \"O1\" (1st Assistant Adjutant) to the \"1a\" (General Staff Chief of Operations) in the German liaison staff with the Italian 11th Army and in the staff of the Army Group South in Greece in July/October 1943, and\nBULLET::::- \"O3\" (3rd Assistant Adjutant) to the \"1c\" (General Staff Chief Intelligence Officer) officer on the staff of Army Group E in Arksali, Kosovska Mitrovica and Sarajevo from October 1943 to January/February 1945.\n\nBy 1943, Waldheim was serving in the capacity of an aide-de-camp in Army Group E which was headed by General Alexander Löhr. In 1986, Waldheim said that he had served only as an interpreter and a clerk and had no knowledge either of reprisals against local Serb civilians or of massacres in neighboring provinces of Yugoslavia. He said that he had known about some of the things that had happened, and had been horrified, but could not see what else he could have done.\n\nMuch historical interest has centred on Waldheim's role in Operation Kozara in 1942. According to one post-war investigator, prisoners were routinely shot within only a few hundred meters (yards) of Waldheim's office, and away at the Jasenovac concentration camp. Waldheim later stated that \"he did not know about the murder of civilians there\".\n\nWaldheim's name appears on the \"Wehrmacht\"s \"honour list\" of those responsible for the militarily successful operation. The Nazi puppet state, the Independent State of Croatia, awarded Waldheim the Medal of the Crown of King Zvonimir in silver with an oak branches cluster. Decades later, during the lobbying for his election as U.N. Secretary General, Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito, who had led anti-German forces during the war, awarded Waldheim one of the highest Yugoslav orders, not knowing of his prior military service.\n\nWaldheim denied that he knew war crimes were taking place in Bosnia at the height of the battles between the Nazis and Tito's partisans in 1943. According to Eli Rosenbaum, in 1944, Waldheim reviewed and approved a packet of anti-Semitic propaganda leaflets to be dropped behind Soviet lines, one of which ended: \"Enough of the Jewish war, kill the Jews, come over.\"\n\nIn 1945, Waldheim surrendered to British forces in Carinthia, at which point he said he had fled his command post within Army Group E, where he was serving with General Löhr, who was seeking a special deal with the British.\n\nWaldheim joined the Austrian diplomatic service in 1945, after finishing his studies in law at the University of Vienna. He served as First Secretary of the Legation in Paris from 1948, and in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Vienna from 1951 to 1956. In 1956 he was made Ambassador to Canada, returning to the Ministry in 1960, after which he became the Permanent Representative of Austria to the United Nations in 1964. For two years beginning in 1968, he was the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs for the Austrian People's Party, before going back as Permanent Representative to the U.N. in 1970. Shortly afterwards, he ran and was defeated in the 1971 Austrian presidential elections.\n\nAfter losing the presidential election, Waldheim ran for Secretary-General of the United Nations in the 1971 selection. Waldheim was supported by the Soviet Union and led the first two rounds of voting. However, he was opposed by China, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Waldheim won an accidental victory in the third round of voting when those three permanent members failed to coordinate their vetoes and all abstained. Waldheim succeeded U Thant as United Nations Secretary-General in 1972.\n\nAs Secretary-General, Waldheim opened and addressed a number of major international conferences convened under United Nations auspices. These included the third session of the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development (Santiago, April 1972), the U.N. Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm, June 1972), the third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea (Caracas, June 1974), the Third World Population Conference (Bucharest, August 1974) and the World Food Conference (Rome, November 1974). However, his diplomatic efforts particularly in the Middle East were overshadowed by the diplomacy of then U.S. Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger.\nOn 11 September 1972, Ugandan dictator Idi Amin sent a telegram to Waldheim, copies of which went to Yasser Arafat and Golda Meir. In the telegram, Amin \"applauded the massacre of the Israeli Olympic athletes in Munich and said Germany was the most appropriate locale for this because it was where Hitler burned more than six million Jews.\" Amin also called \"to expel Israel from the United Nations and to send all the Israelis to Britain, which bore the guilt for creating the Jewish state.\" Amidst international protest, \"the UN spokesman said [in his daily press conference] it was not the secretary-general's practice to comment on telegrams sent him by heads of government. He added that the secretary-general condemned any form of racial discrimination and genocide.\"\n\nAfter Operation Entebbe on 7 July 1976 — in which Israeli commandos freed more than 100 Israeli and Jewish passengers held captive in Entebbe Airport (Uganda's main airport) by Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and German Revolutionary Cells fighters protected by forces of dictator Idi Amin, and where all the hijackers, three hostages, and 45 Ugandan soldiers were killed — Waldheim described the raid as a \"serious violation of the national sovereignty of a United Nations member state\".\n\nWaldheim ran for a second term in the 1976 UN Secretary-General selection. However, China was still opposed to Waldheim and approached several Third World countries seeking challengers. Outgoing Mexican President Luis Echeverría finally entered the race in October 1976, making Waldheim the only Secretary-General to face a contested re-selection campaign. Waldheim resoundingly defeated Echeverría in the first round of voting. China cast a single symbolic veto against Waldheim in the first round and voted for him in the second round, handing him an easy victory with 14 of 15 votes on the Security Council.\n\nWaldheim and then-U.S. President Jimmy Carter both recorded statements for the Voyager Golden Records, which were launched into deep space on the Voyager spacecraft in 1977. He was the first Secretary-General to visit North Korea, in 1979. In 1980, Waldheim flew to Iran in an attempt to negotiate the release of the American hostages held in Tehran, but Ayatollah Khomeini refused to see him. While in Tehran, it was announced that an attempt on Waldheim's life had been foiled. Near the end of his tenure as Secretary-General, Waldheim and British popular musician Paul McCartney organized a series of concerts for the People of Kampuchea to help Cambodia recover from the damage done by Pol Pot.\n\nWaldheim ran for an unprecedented third full term as Secretary-General in the 1981 selection. China was determined to unseat him this time and lined up a strong candidate in Salim Ahmed Salim of Tanzania. In the first round of voting, Waldheim lost to Salim by one vote. However, Salim was vetoed by the United States, while Waldheim was vetoed by China. The veto duel between China and the United States lasted a record 16 rounds. After six weeks of deadlock, Waldheim and Salim both withdrew from the race. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar of Peru won the selection and succeeded Waldheim as Secretary-General of the United Nations. The events of 1981 established a two-term limit on the office, and no Secretary-General since Waldheim has run for a third term.\n\nWaldheim had unsuccessfully sought election as President of Austria in 1971, but his second attempt on 8 June 1986 proved successful. During his campaign for the presidency in 1985, what became known internationally as the \"Waldheim affair\" began. Before the presidential elections, investigative journalist Alfred Worm revealed in the Austrian weekly news magazine \"Profil\" that there had been several omissions about Waldheim's life between 1938 and 1945 in his recently published autobiography.\n\nWaldheim had previously claimed to have received a medical discharge after being wounded in winter 1942. His aides at the United Nations even accused the Israeli mission of spreading rumors that he supported the Nazis. Israeli ambassador Yehuda Zvi Blum denied the charges, saying, \"We don't believe Waldheim ever supported the Nazis and we never said he did. We have many differences with him, but that isn't one of them.\"\n\nA short time later, beginning on 4 March 1986, the World Jewish Congress alleged that Waldheim had lied about his service in the mounted corps of the \"SA\" and had concealed his service as a special missions staff officer (Ordonnanzoffizier) for Germany's Army Group E in Yugoslavia and Greece, from 1942 to 1944, based primarily on captured German wartime records held at the United States National Archives in Washington, DC, and in other archives. The 23 March 1986 public disclosure by the World Jewish Congress that the organization had unearthed the fact that the United Nations War Crimes Commission concluded after the war that Waldheim was implicated in Nazi mass murder and should be arrested arguably transformed the Waldheim affair into the most sensational of all postwar Nazi scandals.\n\nWaldheim called the allegations, which grew in magnitude in the ensuing months, \"pure lies and malicious acts\". Nevertheless, he admitted that he had known about German reprisals against partisans: \"Yes, I knew. I was horrified. But what could I do? I had either to continue to serve or be executed.\" He said that he had never fired a shot or even seen a partisan. His former immediate superior at the time stated that Waldheim had \"remained confined to a desk\". Former Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky, of Jewish origin, denounced the actions of the World Jewish Congress as an \"extraordinary infamy\", adding that Austrians would not \"allow the Jews abroad to ... tell us who should be our President.\"\n\nPart of the reason for the controversy was Austria's refusal to address its national role in the Holocaust. (Many leading Nazis, including Adolf Hitler, were Austrians, and Austria became part of the Third Reich.) Austria refused to pay compensation to Nazi victims, and from 1970 onwards refused to investigate Austrian citizens who were senior Nazis. Stolen Jewish art remained public property a generation after the Waldheim affair.\n\nBecause the revelations leading to the Waldheim affair came shortly before the presidential election, there has been speculation about the background of the affair.\n\nDeclassified documents from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency show that the CIA had been aware of some details of his wartime past since 1945. Information about Waldheim's wartime past was also previously published by a pro-German Austrian newspaper, \"Salzburger Volksblatt\", during the 1971 presidential election campaign, including the claim of an SS membership, but the matter was supposedly regarded as unimportant or even advantageous for the candidate at that time.\n\nAccording to several of Waldheim's obituarists, his wartime past and the discrepancies in his autobiography, \"In the Eye of the Storm\", must have been known to both superpowers before he was elected UN Secretary-General, and there were rumours that the KGB had blackmailed him during his UN time (for example here and here).\n\nIn 1994, former Mossad officer Victor Ostrovsky claimed in his book \"The Other Side of Deception\" that Mossad doctored Waldheim's file while he was serving as Secretary-General to implicate him in Nazi crimes. These allegedly false documents were subsequently \"discovered\" by Benjamin Netanyahu in the UN file and triggered the \"Waldheim Affair\". Ostrovsky says that this was motivated by Waldheim's criticism of Israel's war in Lebanon. Controversy surrounds Ostrovsky because many of his revelations have not been sourced or otherwise confirmed, leading several critics to say that most of his work (including \"The Other Side of Deception\") is fictional. Ostrovsky's service in Mossad was confirmed when the Israeli government unsuccessfully attempted to stop publication of the book.\n\nIn view of the ongoing international controversy, the Austrian government decided to appoint an international committee of historians to examine Waldheim's life between 1938 and 1945. Their report found no evidence of any personal involvement in those crimes. Although Waldheim had stated that he was unaware of any crimes taking place, the committee cited evidence that Waldheim must have known about war crimes.\n\nIn response to Waldheim's denial that he knew about war crimes, Simon Wiesenthal stated that Waldheim was stationed from Thessaloniki while, over the course of several weeks, the Jewish community, which formed one-third of the population there, was sent to Auschwitz:\n\nI could only reply what the committee of historians likewise made clear in its report: \"I cannot believe you.\"\n\nWiesenthal, whose conduct in the Waldheim affair was sharply criticized by the World Jewish Congress and others, and whose \"adamant defense of Waldheim\" and \"public, personal attacks against the WJC investigators\" \"ultimately tarnished his prominent global reputation,\" stated the committee found no evidence that Waldheim took part in any war crimes but was guilty of lying about his military record. The International Committee in February 1988 concluded that he could not stop what was going on in Yugoslavia and Greece even if he knew:\n\nIn favour of Waldheim is, that he only had very minor possibilities to act against the injustices happening. Actions against these, depending on which level the resistance occurred, were of very different importance. For a young member of the staff, who did not have any military authority on the army group level, the practical possibilities for resistance were very limited and with a high probability would not have led to any actual results. Resistance would have been limited to a formal protest or on the refusal to serve any longer in the army, which would have seemed to be a courageous act, however would have not led to any practical achievement.\n\nOn 27 April 1987, the United States Department of Justice and the United States Department of State announced that evidence amassed in an investigation conducted by the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations (OSI) had established a prima facie case that Waldheim participated in Nazi-sponsored persecution during World War II and therefore that his entry into the United States was prohibited by federal statute. This marked the first time that a head of state had been put on an immigration watchlist. The 232-page internal Department of Justice 9 April 1987 investigative report was released in 1994 by that agency, and it is available at the agency's website. The report catalogues evidence that, the U.S. government concluded, proved that Waldheim had taken part in, among other actions: the transfer of civilian prisoners to the SS for exploitation as slave labor; the mass deportation of civilians—including Jews from Greek islands and the town of Banja Luka, Yugoslavia—to concentration and death camps; the utilization of anti-Semitic propaganda; the mistreatment and execution of Allied prisoners; and reprisal executions of hostages and other civilians. Additional allegations of participation in Nazi crimes, with citations to captured Nazi documents and other records, were leveled in a 1993 book by Eli Rosenbaum, the former U.S. federal prosecutor who had directed the World Jewish Congress investigation that led to the New York Times' initial exposure of Waldheim's hidden Nazi-era past in 1986. The authors also cited evidence that the governments of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia had covered up Waldheim's wartime past and used it to blackmail him before and during his tenure as United Nations Secretary General, and that the U.S. intelligence community had committed a major error in failing to detect the Cold War weaponization of that information by the two communist governments.\n\nHarold H. Tittmann III, an American lawyer and author based in Europe, harshly criticized the Justice Department's OSI investigation and its report in his 2000 book, \"The Waldheim Affair: Democracy Subverted\". According to this author, the report was only released because of legal pressure brought by John Mapother, a retired CIA officer who had served in Austria and \"had been skeptical about the existence of evidence the OSI claimed to have uncovered.\" Tittmann argued that OSI exceeded its statutory authority in producing the report and that it relied too heavily on material from the World Jewish Congress. Throughout, the book also strongly criticized U.S. media treatment of Waldheim. It concluded that \"American reporting . . . was often biased, inaccurate, or incomplete. True, the Waldheim story was unusually complex and required much research for a proper understanding, but this complexity cannot excuse the one-sided opinions that emanated from editorial desks.\"\n\nThroughout his term as President (1986–1992), Kurt Waldheim was officially deemed \"persona non grata\" by the United States and, officially or informally, by nearly every other nation in the world outside the Arab world.\n\nAfter his term ended in 1992, Waldheim did not seek re-election. The same year, he was made an honorary member of \"K.H.V. Welfia Klosterneuburg\", a Roman Catholic student fraternity part of the Austrian \"Cartellverband\". In 1994, Pope John Paul II awarded Waldheim a knighthood in the Order of Pius IX and his wife a papal honor. He died on 14 June 2007, at the age of 88 from heart failure. On 23 June, his funeral was held at St. Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna, and he was buried at the Presidential Vault in the \"Zentralfriedhof\" (\"central cemetery\").\n\nIn his speech at the Cathedral, Federal President Heinz Fischer called Waldheim \"a great Austrian\" who had been wrongfully accused of having committed war crimes. Fischer also praised Waldheim for his efforts to solve international crises and for his contributions to world peace.\nAt Waldheim's own request, no foreign heads of states or governments were invited to attend his funeral except Hans-Adam II, the Prince of Liechtenstein. Also present was Luis Durnwalder, governor of the Italian province of South Tyrol. Japan and Syria were the only two countries that laid wreaths on his grave. Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, issued a message 'voicing sadness'. In a two-page letter, published posthumously by the Austrian Press Agency the day after he died, Waldheim admitted making \"mistakes\" (\"but these were certainly not those of a follower let alone an accomplice of a criminal regime\") and asked his critics for forgiveness.\n\nBULLET::::- W. G. Sebald's novel \"The Rings of Saturn\" (1995; English trans., 1998) refers to Waldheim, though not by name.\nBULLET::::- As a much-heralded invited guest on Dame Edna Everage's talk show \"The Dame Edna Experience\", a dignified \"Kurt Waldheim\" began a grand entrance, except that halfway down the staircase, he abruptly fell through a hidden chute and disappeared: the band's fanfare stopped as Dame Edna explained she had decided at the last minute to \"abort\" Dr. Waldheim's appearance because it would have been \"too political\". The episode aired 12 September 1987.\nBULLET::::- A running segment on \"The Howard Stern Show\" is called \"Guess Who's the Jew\" and features Fred Norris portraying a Nazi Kurt Waldheim, Jr.\nBULLET::::- Musician Lou Reed's 1989 \"New York\" album contains a song called \"Good Evening Mr. Waldheim.\"\nBULLET::::- Harry Turtledove's 2003 alternate history novel, \"In the Presence of Mine Enemies\", in which Germany won the Second World War, a \"Kurt Haldweim\" is the third Führer of Germany, and parts of Haldweim's biography closely parallel Waldheim's. For instance, both Waldheim and Haldweim were born in Austria in 1918 and served in the \"Wehrmacht\" in Thessaloniki during World War II.\nBULLET::::- In a 1988 ice hockey film entitled \"Hockey, The Lighter Side\", former New York Rangers goaltender John Davidson is explaining his fictional goaltender school, and as hockey highlights play, he exclaims, \"You'll have more shots taken at you than Kurt Waldheim.\"\nBULLET::::- In episode 3, series 2 of \"The Million Pound Radio Show\", Andy Hamilton announces next week's special guest as Waldheim, \"although he'll deny [his appearance on the show] in 40 years time.\"\nBULLET::::- In an episode of \"The New Statesman\", aired in 1989, Alan B'Stard (Rik Mayall) attempts to blackmail an aged former Nazi officer, who complains that, \"it's not fair; I'm living here in the tripe capital of Europe, while Kurt Waldheim is President of Austria — and he was beneath me!\"\nBULLET::::- American poet Srikanth Reddy's 2011 book \"Voyager\" presents a collection of poems and fragments created by erasing large sections of Waldheim's memoir \"In the Eye of the Storm.\"\nBULLET::::- Marjane Satrapi's graphic novel \"Persepolis\" and its film adaptation reference the election in Austria.\nBULLET::::- In the 2015 fiction novel \"The Lady From Zagreb\" by Philip Kerr, the protagonist, Captain Bernie Gunther, encounters a young Intelligence Officer, Lieutenant Kurt Waldheim while on a mission in Yugoslavia in 1942.\nBULLET::::- In the 2015 film \"Woman in Gold\", Hubertus Czernin shows Maria Altmann an issue of \"Profil\" uncovering Waldheim's Nazi past.\nBULLET::::- The 2018 Ruth Beckermann-directed documentary \"The Waldheim Waltz\" is about the 1986 Austrian presidential campaign and the controversy over Waldheim's actions during World War II.\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- Bassett, Richard (1988). \"Waldheim and Austria\", Penguin Books.\nBULLET::::- Herzstein, Robert Edwin (1988). \"Waldheim, the Missing Years\". First ed. New York: W. Morrow and Co., 1988. 303 p., ill. with b&w photos.\nBULLET::::- Rosenbaum, Eli M. with William Hoffer. \"Betrayal: The Inside Story of the Kurt Waldheim Investigation and Cover-Up\", New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989.\nBULLET::::- Office of Special Investigations, United States Department of Justice Criminal Division internal investigative report: \"In the Matter of Kurt Waldheim\", at https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/criminal-hrsp/legacy/2011/02/04/04-09-87waldheim-rpt.pdf\nBULLET::::- Eli M. Rosenbaum, \"The Kurt Waldheim Affair,\" in Ronald S. Lauder (Foreword) and Menachem Z. Rosensaft (Editor). \"The World Jewish Congress, 1936-2016,\" New York: World Jewish Congress LLC, 2017.\nBULLET::::- Harold H. Tittmann III, \"The Waldheim Affair: Democracy Subverted\". Dunkirk, NY: Olin Frederick, 2000. .\n\nBULLET::::- Official UN Secretary-General Biography\nBULLET::::- Austria and Nazism: Owning Up to the Past (A BBC Report)\nBULLET::::- The Waldheim Report: International Commission of Historians at Google Books\nBULLET::::- Video of Kurt Waldheim sworn in as UN Secretary-General\nBULLET::::- GREEK JEWS CHALLENGING WALDHEIM by HENRY KAMM\n"}
{"id": "17104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17104", "title": "AMD K6", "text": "AMD K6\n\nThe K6 microprocessor was launched by AMD in 1997. The main advantage of this particular microprocessor is that it was designed to fit into existing desktop designs for Pentium-branded CPUs. It was marketed as a product that could perform as well as its Intel Pentium II equivalent but at a significantly lower price. The K6 had a considerable impact on the PC market and presented Intel with serious competition.\n\nThe AMD K6 is a superscalar P5 Pentium-class microprocessor, manufactured by AMD, which superseded the K5. \nThe AMD K6 is based on the Nx686 microprocessor that NexGen was designing when it was acquired by AMD. Despite the name implying a design evolving from the K5, it is in fact a totally different design that was created by the NexGen team, including chief processor architect Greg Favor, and adapted after the AMD purchase. The K6 processor included a feedback dynamic instruction reordering mechanism, MMX instructions, and a floating-point unit (FPU). It was also made pin-compatible with Intel's Pentium, enabling it to be used in the widely available \"Socket 7\"-based motherboards. Like the AMD K5, Nx586, and Nx686 before it, the K6 translated x86 instructions on the fly into dynamic buffered sequences of micro-operations. A later variation of the K6 CPU, K6-2, added floating-point-based SIMD instructions, called 3DNow!. \n\nThe K6 was originally launched in April 1997, running at speeds of 166 and 200 MHz. It was followed by a 233 MHz version later in 1997. Initially, the AMD K6 processors used a Pentium II-based performance rating (PR2) to designate their speed. The PR2 rating was dropped because the rated frequency of the processor was the same as the real frequency. The release of the 266 MHz version of this chip was not until the second quarter of 1998, when AMD was able to move to the 0.25-micrometre manufacturing process. The lower voltage and higher multiplier of the K6-266 meant that it was not fully compatible with some Socket 7 motherboards, similar to the later K6-2 processors. The final iteration of the K6 design was released in May 1998, running at 300 MHz.\n\nBULLET::::- 8.8 million transistors in 350 nm\nBULLET::::- L1-Cache: 32 + 32 KB (data + instructions)\nBULLET::::- MMX\nBULLET::::- Socket 7\nBULLET::::- Front side bus: 66 MHz\nBULLET::::- First release: April 2, 1997\nBULLET::::- VCore: 2.9 V (166/200) 3.2/3.3 V (233)\nBULLET::::- Clockrate: 166, 200, 233 MHz\n\nBULLET::::- CPUID: family 5, model 7, stepping 0\nBULLET::::- 8.8 million transistors in 250 nm\nBULLET::::- L1-Cache: 32 + 32 KB (data + instructions)\nBULLET::::- MMX\nBULLET::::- Socket 7\nBULLET::::- Front side bus: 66 MHz\nBULLET::::- First release: January 6, 1998\nBULLET::::- VCore: 2.2 V\nBULLET::::- Clockrate: 200, 233, 266, 300 MHz\n\nBULLET::::- Gwennap, Linley (31 March 1997). \"K6 Is World's Fastest x86 Chip\". \"Microprocessor Report\".\nBULLET::::- Slater, Michael (28 October 1998). \"K6 to Boost AMD's Position in 1997\". \"Microprocessor Report\".\n\nBULLET::::- AMD K6, first of an impressive dynasty\nBULLET::::- Technical overview of the AMD-K6 series\nBULLET::::- technical dissection of the 6th generation x86 CPUs\n"}
{"id": "17105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17105", "title": "K7", "text": "K7\n\nK7, K07 or K-7 may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- A complete graph with 7 Vertices\nBULLET::::- Bluebird K7, a high speed hydroplane raced by Donald Campbell\nBULLET::::- Daewoo Precision Industries K7, a submachine gun with an integrated suppressor\nBULLET::::- Deep Space Station K7, a fictional space station featured in the Star Trek episodes \"The Trouble With Tribbles\" and \"Trials and Tribble-ations\"\nBULLET::::- K7 (mountain), a mountain of the Karakoram range, in Pakistan\nBULLET::::- K-7 (Kansas highway), a state highway in Kansas\nBULLET::::- Kalinin K-7, a heavy experimental aircraft designed and tested in the Soviet Union in the early 1930s\nBULLET::::- Kronprinsens husarregemente, a Swedish Army cavalry regiment disbanded 1927\nBULLET::::- Pentax K-7, a DSLR camera by Hoya Corporation\nBULLET::::- Schleicher K7, a 2-seater glider plane made from wood and steel\nBULLET::::- AMD K7, codename for certain AMD CPUs, including the Athlon and Duron microprocessors\n\nBULLET::::- Ibanez K7, a series of guitars\nBULLET::::- K7 (musician) (born 1967), American rapper\nBULLET::::- Studio !K7, German record label\nBULLET::::- Violin Sonata No. 2 (Mozart), by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart\n\nBULLET::::- , a British submarine of the First World War\nBULLET::::- , a 1914 United States Navy K-class submarine\n"}
{"id": "17106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17106", "title": "KA9Q", "text": "KA9Q\n\nKA9Q, also called KA9Q NOS or simply NOS, was a popular early implementation of TCP/IP and associated protocols for amateur packet radio systems and smaller personal computers connected via serial lines. It was named after the amateur radio callsign of Phil Karn, who first wrote the software for a CP/M system and then ported it to DOS on the IBM PC. As the KA9Q code was open-source, many radio amateurs modified it, so many different versions were available at the same time.\n\nKA9Q was later maintained by Anthony Frost (callsign G8UDV) and Adam Goodfellow. It was ported to the Acorn Archimedes by Jonathan Naylor (G4KLX). Until 1995 it was the standard access software provided by British dial-up internet service provider Demon Internet.\n\nMost modern operating systems provide a built-in implementation of TCP/IP protocol; Linux especially includes all the necessary kernel functions and support utilities for TCP/IP over amateur radio systems, as well as basic AX.25 and NET/ROM functionality. Therefore, NOS is regarded as obsolete by its original developer. It still may have its uses for embedded systems that are too small for Linux.\n\nKA9Q is also a name for the IP-over-IP Tunneling protocol.\n\nBULLET::::- Phil Karn's web page on KA9Q NOS\n"}
{"id": "17112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17112", "title": "HMAC", "text": "HMAC\n\nIn cryptography, an HMAC (sometimes expanded as either keyed-hash message authentication code or hash-based message authentication code) is a specific type of message authentication code (MAC) involving a cryptographic hash function and a secret cryptographic key. It may be used to simultaneously verify both the \"data integrity\" and the \"authenticity\" of a message, as with any MAC. Any cryptographic hash function, such as SHA-256 or SHA-3, may be used in the calculation of an HMAC; the resulting MAC algorithm is termed HMAC-X, where X is the hash function used (e.g. HMAC-SHA256 or HMAC-SHA3). The cryptographic strength of the HMAC depends upon the cryptographic strength of the underlying hash function, the size of its hash output, and the size and quality of the key.\n\nHMAC uses two passes of hash computation. The secret key is first used to derive two keys – inner and outer. The first pass of the algorithm produces an internal hash derived from the message and the inner key. The second pass produces the final HMAC code derived from the inner hash result and the outer key. Thus the algorithm provides better immunity against length extension attacks.\n\nAn iterative hash function breaks up a message into blocks of a fixed size and iterates over them with a compression function. For example, SHA-256 operates on 512-bit blocks. The size of the output of HMAC is the same as that of the underlying hash function (e.g., 256 and 1600 bits in the case of SHA-256 and SHA-3, respectively), although it can be truncated if desired.\n\nHMAC does not encrypt the message. Instead, the message (encrypted or not) must be sent alongside the HMAC hash. Parties with the secret key will hash the message again themselves, and if it is authentic, the received and computed hashes will match.\n\nThe definition and analysis of the HMAC construction was first published in 1996 in a paper by Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti, and Hugo Krawczyk, and they also wrote RFC 2104 in 1997. The 1996 paper also defined a nested variant called NMAC. FIPS PUB 198 generalizes and standardizes the use of HMACs. HMAC is used within the IPsec and TLS protocols and for JSON Web Tokens.\n\nThis definition is taken from RFC 2104:\n\nwhere\n\nThe following pseudocode demonstrates how HMAC may be implemented. Blocksize is 64 (bytes) when using one of the following hash functions: SHA-1, MD5, RIPEMD-128/160.\n\nThe design of the HMAC specification was motivated by the existence of attacks on more trivial mechanisms for combining a key with a hash function. For example, one might assume the same security that HMAC provides could be achieved with MAC = H(\"key\"  \"message\"). However, this method suffers from a serious flaw: with most hash functions, it is easy to append data to the message without knowing the key and obtain another valid MAC (\"length-extension attack\"). The alternative, appending the key using MAC = H(\"message\"  \"key\"), suffers from the problem that an attacker who can find a collision in the (unkeyed) hash function has a collision in the MAC (as two messages m1 and m2 yielding the same hash will provide the same start condition to the hash function before the appended key is hashed, hence the final hash will be the same). Using MAC = H(\"key\"  \"message\"  \"key\") is better, but various security papers have suggested vulnerabilities with this approach, even when two different keys are used.\n\nNo known extension attacks have been found against the current HMAC specification which is defined as H(\"key\"  H(\"key\"  \"message\")) because the outer application of the hash function masks the intermediate result of the internal hash. The values of \"ipad\" and \"opad\" are not critical to the security of the algorithm, but were defined in such a way to have a large Hamming distance from each other and so the inner and outer keys will have fewer bits in common. The security reduction of HMAC does require them to be different in at least one bit.\n\nThe Keccak hash function, that was selected by NIST as the SHA-3 competition winner, doesn't need this nested approach and can be used to generate a MAC by simply prepending the key to the message, as it is not susceptible to length-extension attacks.\n\nThe cryptographic strength of the HMAC depends upon the size of the secret key that is used. The most common attack against HMACs is brute force to uncover the secret key. HMACs are substantially less affected by collisions than their underlying hashing algorithms alone. In particular, in 2006 Mihir Bellare proved that HMAC is a PRF under the sole assumption that the compression function is a PRF. Therefore, HMAC-MD5 does not suffer from the same weaknesses that have been found in MD5.\n\nRFC2104 requires that \"keys longer than \"B\" bytes are first hashed using \"H\"\" which leads to a confusing pseudo-collision: if the key is longer than the hash block size (e.g. 64 characters for SHA-1), then codice_1 is computed as codice_2This property is sometimes raised as a possible weakness of HMAC in password-hashing scenarios: it has been demonstrated that it's possible to find a long ASCII string and a random value whose hash will be also an ASCII string, and both values will produce the same HMAC output. \n\nIn 2006, Jongsung Kim, Alex Biryukov, Bart Preneel, and Seokhie Hong showed how to distinguish HMAC with reduced versions of MD5 and SHA-1 or full versions of HAVAL, MD4, and SHA-0 from a random function or HMAC with a random function. Differential distinguishers allow an attacker to devise a forgery attack on HMAC. Furthermore, differential and rectangle distinguishers can lead to second-preimage attacks. HMAC with the full version of MD4 can be forged with this knowledge. These attacks do not contradict the security proof of HMAC, but provide insight into HMAC based on existing cryptographic hash functions.\n\nIn 2009, Xiaoyun Wang et al. presented a distinguishing attack on HMAC-MD5 without using related keys. It can distinguish an instantiation of HMAC with MD5 from an instantiation with a random function with 2 queries with probability 0.87.\n\nIn 2011 an informational RFC 6151 was published to summarize security considerations in MD5 and HMAC-MD5. For HMAC-MD5 the RFC summarizes that – although the security of the MD5 hash function itself is severely compromised – the currently known \"\"attacks on HMAC-MD5 do not seem to indicate a practical vulnerability when used as a message authentication code\"\", but it also adds that \"\"for a new protocol design, a ciphersuite with HMAC-MD5 should not be included\"\".\n\nIn May 2011, RFC 6234 was published detailing the abstract theory and source code for SHA-based HMACS.\n\nHere are some non-empty HMAC values, assuming 8-bit ASCII or UTF-8 encoding:\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\n\nBULLET::::- Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti and Hugo Krawczyk, Keying Hash Functions for Message Authentication, CRYPTO 1996, pp. 1–15 (PS or PDF).\nBULLET::::- Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti and Hugo Krawczyk, Message authentication using hash functions: The HMAC construction, \"CryptoBytes\" 2(1), Spring 1996 (PS or PDF).\nBULLET::::- RFC2104\nBULLET::::- Online HMAC Calculator for dozens of underlying hashing algorithms\nBULLET::::- Online HMAC Generator / Tester Tool\nBULLET::::- FIPS PUB 198-1, \"The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC)\"\nBULLET::::- C HMAC implementation\nBULLET::::- Python HMAC implementation\nBULLET::::- Java implementation\nBULLET::::- HMAC-SHA-256 online tester tool\n"}
{"id": "17114", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17114", "title": "Key escrow", "text": "Key escrow\n\nKey escrow (also known as a “fair” cryptosystem) is an arrangement in which the keys needed to decrypt encrypted data are held in escrow so that, under certain circumstances, an authorized third party may gain access to those keys. These third parties may include businesses, who may want access to employees' private Communications, or Governments, who may wish to be able to view the contents of encrypted communications.\n\nThe technical problem is a largely structural one since access to protected information must be provided \"only\" to the intended recipient and at least one third party. The third party should be permitted access only under carefully controlled conditions, as for instance, a court order. Thus far, no system design has been shown to meet this requirement fully on a technical basis alone. All proposed systems also require correct functioning of some social linkage, as for instance the process of request for access, examination of request for 'legitimacy' (as by a court), and granting of access by technical personnel charged with access control. All such linkages / controls have serious problems from a system design security perspective. Systems in which the key may not be changed easily are rendered especially vulnerable as the accidental release of the key will result in many devices becoming totally compromised, necessitating an immediate key change or replacement of the system.\n\nOn a national level, this is controversial in many countries due to technical mistrust of the security of the escrow arrangement (due to a long history of less than adequate protection of others' information by assorted organizations, public and private, even when the information is held only under an affirmative legal obligation to protect it from unauthorized access), and to a mistrust of the entire system even if it functions as designed. Thus far, no key escrow system has been designed which meets both objections and nearly all have failed to meet even one. \n\nKey escrow is proactive, anticipating the need for access to keys; a retroactive alternative is key disclosure law, where users are required to surrender keys upon demand by law enforcement, or else face legal penalties. Key disclosure law avoids some of the technical issues and risks of key escrow systems, but also introduces new risks like loss of keys and legal issues such as involuntary self-incrimination. The ambiguous term \"key recovery\" is applied to both types of systems.\n\nBULLET::::- Cryptography\nBULLET::::- Key management\nBULLET::::- Clipper chip\nBULLET::::- Data Securities International\nBULLET::::- Related-key attack\nBULLET::::- Backdoor\n\nBULLET::::- Encryption Policy: Memo for the Vice President CIA memo to Al Gore on suggested US policy on key recovery, 11. September 1996. Archived from the original on 2012-10-15\n"}
{"id": "17116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17116", "title": "Key frame", "text": "Key frame\n\nA keyframe in animation and filmmaking is a drawing that defines the starting and ending points of any smooth transition. The drawings are called \"frames\" because their position in time is measured in frames on a strip of film. A sequence of keyframes defines which movement the viewer will see, whereas the position of the keyframes on the film, video, or animation defines the timing of the movement. Because only two or three keyframes over the span of a second do not create the illusion of movement, the remaining frames are filled with inbetweens.\n\nIn software packages that support animation, especially 3D graphics, there are many parameters that can be changed for any one object. One example of such an object is a light (In 3D graphics, lights function similarly to real-world lights. They cause illumination, cast shadows, and create specular highlights). Lights have many parameters including light intensity, beam size, light color, and the texture cast by the light. Supposing that an animator wants the beam size to change smoothly from one value to another within a predefined period of time, that could be achieved by using keyframes. At the start of the animation, a beam size value is set. Another value is set for the end of the animation. Thus, the software program automatically interpolates the two values, creating a smooth transition.\n\nIn non-linear digital video editing, as well as in video compositing software, a keyframe is a frame used to indicate the beginning or end of a change made to a parameter. For example, a keyframe could be set to indicate the point at which audio will have faded up or down to a certain level.\n\nIn video compression, a keyframe, also known as an \"intra-frame\", is a frame in which a complete image is stored in the data stream. In video compression, only changes that occur from one frame to the next are stored in the data stream, in order to greatly reduce the amount of information that must be stored. This technique capitalizes on the fact that most video sources (such as a typical movie) have only small changes in the image from one frame to the next. Whenever a drastic change to the image occurs, such as when switching from one camera shot to another, or at a scene change, a keyframe must be created. The entire image for the frame must be output when the visual difference between the two frames is so great that representing the new image incrementally from the previous frame would require more data than recreating the whole image.\n\nBecause video compression only stores incremental changes between frames (except for keyframes), it is not possible to fast forward or rewind to any arbitrary spot in the video stream. That is because the data for a given frame only represents how that frame was different from the preceding one. For that reason, it is beneficial to include keyframes at arbitrary intervals while encoding video. For example, a keyframe may be output once for each 10 seconds of video, even though the video image does not change enough visually to warrant the automatic creation of the keyframe. That would allow seeking within the video stream at a minimum of 10-second intervals. The down side is that the resulting video stream will be larger in size because many keyframes are added when they are not necessary for the frame's visual representation. This drawback, however, does not produce significant compression loss when the bitrate is already set at a high value for better quality (as in the DVD MPEG-2 format).\n\nBULLET::::- Blocking (animation)\nBULLET::::- Morphing\n"}
{"id": "17120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17120", "title": "Kurfürstendamm", "text": "Kurfürstendamm\n\nThe Kurfürstendamm (; colloquially Ku'damm, ) is one of the most famous avenues in Berlin. The street takes its name from the former \"Kurfürsten\" (prince-electors) of Brandenburg. This very broad, long boulevard can be considered the Champs-Élysées of Berlin—lined with shops, houses, hotels and restaurants. In particular, many fashion designers have their shops there, as well as several car manufacturers' show rooms.\n\nThe avenue includes four lines of plane trees and runs for through the city. It branches off from the Breitscheidplatz, where the ruins of the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church stand, and leads southwestward up to the district of Grunewald.\n\nAt the junction with Joachimstaler Straße it passes the Café Kranzler, successor of the Café des Westens, a famous venue for artists and bohémiens of the pre–World War I era. The Kurfürstendamm U-Bahn station and the Swissôtel Berlin can be found at the same junction. One block farther, near Uhlandstraße U-Bahn station, is the Kempinski hotel as well as the Theater am Kurfürstendamm, at the site of a former exhibition hall of the Berlin Secession art association.\n\nAt Adenauerplatz the boulevard reaches the district of Wilmersdorf, where it passes the Schaubühne theatre on Lehniner Platz. The more sober western or \"upper\" end of the Kurfürstendamm is marked by the Berlin-Halensee railway station on the Ringbahn line and the junction with the Bundesautobahn 100 \"(Stadtring)\" at the Rathenauplatz roundabout, featuring the long-disputed 1987 \"Beton Cadillacs\" sculpture by Wolf Vostell.\n\nLuxury boutiques located on the Kurfürstendamm include Aigner, Bally, Bogner, Bottega Veneta, Brunello Cucinelli, Bucherer, Bvlgari, Burberry, Cartier, Chanel, Chopard, Dior, Dolce & Gabbana, Ermenegildo Zegna, Escada, Giorgio Armani, Gucci, Hermès, Hublot, Hugo Boss, Jil Sander, Longchamp, Louis Vuitton, Maybach, MCM, G&H Jewellers (Opening Soon), Michael Kors, Moncler, Philipp Plein, Porsche Design, Prada, Roberto Cavalli, Rolex, Saint Laurent Paris, Salvatore Ferragamo, Steiff, Tumi, Valentino, Versace, Wolford, Wunderkind, and Zilli.\n\nUnlike the adjacent streets, the Kurfürstendamm developed out of a historic corduroy road () laid out by the Brandenburg margraves to reach the Grunewald hunting lodge, which was erected about 1542 at the behest of the Hohenzollern elector Joachim II Hector. Although the exact date of the building is unknown, an unnamed causeway leading from the Stadtschloss through the swampy area between the settlements of Charlottenburg (then called \"Lietzow\") and Wilmersdorf to Grunewald is already depicted in a 1685 map. The name \"Churfürsten Damm\" was first mentioned between 1767 and 1787.\nFrom 1875 the former bridlepath was embellished as a boulevard with a breadth of on the personal initiative of chancellor Otto von Bismarck, who also proposed the building of the Grunewald mansions colony at its western end. In 1882, Ernst Werner von Siemens presented his Elektromote trolley bus concept at an experimental track near Halensee station. The nearby Lunapark opened in 1909, then Europe's largest amusement park, modelled on Coney Island, where boxer Max Schmeling won his first title of a German Lightheavyweight Champion in 1926. After a long period of decline the park was finally closed in 1933. Large parts are today covered by the Stadtautobahn.\nIn 1913 the new Marmorhaus cinema opened. A number of major film premieres were held here during the silent era.\n\nEspecially during the \"Golden Twenties\" the Kurfürstendamm area of the \"New West\" was a centre of leisure and nightlife in Berlin, an era that ended with the Great Depression and the Nazi \"Machtergreifung\" in 1933. The shops and businesses owned by Jewish tradespeople became the target of several pogroms, culminating in the \"Reichskristallnacht\" of 9 November 1938. In World War II the boulevard suffered severe damage from air raids and the Battle of Berlin.\n\nNevertheless, after the war rebuilding started quickly, and when Berlin was separated into East and West Berlin, the Kurfürstendamm became the leading commercial street of West Berlin in its Wirtschaftswunder days. It was therefore the site of protests and major demonstrations by the German student movement, while on 11 April 1968 spokesman Rudi Dutschke was shot in the head while leaving the office of the Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund on Kurfürstendamm No. 140.\n\nAfter German reunification the Kurfürstendamm had to compete with central places like Potsdamer Platz, Friedrichstraße, and Alexanderplatz, which led to the closing of numerous cafés and cinemas. It retained the character of a flâneur and upscale shopping street as the western continuation of the Tauentzienstraße with its large department stores.\n\nThe globally unique international art project United Buddy Bears was presented in Berlin on the Kurfürstendamm during the summer of 2011.\n\nBULLET::::- City West\n\nBULLET::::- Kurfürstendamm 360° Panorama\nBULLET::::- kurfuerstendamm.de cityguide\nBULLET::::- \"23rd Hour, 23rd Psalm\" Chapter includes midnight visit by Americans to the Ku'damm in 1969-71 period.\n"}
{"id": "17121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17121", "title": "Kurt Schwitters", "text": "Kurt Schwitters\n\nKurt Hermann Eduard Karl Julius Schwitters (20 June 1887 – 8 January 1948) was a German artist who was born in Hanover, Germany.\n\nSchwitters worked in several genres and media, including dadaism, constructivism, surrealism, poetry, sound, painting, sculpture, graphic design, typography, and what came to be known as installation art. He is most famous for his collages, called \"Merz Pictures\".\n\nKurt Schwitters was born on 20 June 1887 in Hanover, at Rumannstraße No.2, now: No. 8, the only child of Eduard Schwitters and his wife Henriette (née Beckemeyer). His father was (co-)proprietor of a ladies' clothes shop. The business was sold in 1898, and the family used the money to buy some properties in Hanover, which they rented out, allowing the family to live off the income for the rest of Schwitters' life in Germany. In 1893, the family moved to Waldstraße (later Waldhausenstraße) 5, future site of the \"Merzbau\". In 1901, Schwitters suffered his first epileptic seizure, a condition that would exempt him from military service in World War I until late in the war, when conscription was loosened.\n\nAfter studying art at the Dresden Academy alongside Otto Dix and George Grosz, (although Schwitters seems to have been unaware of their work, or indeed of contemporary Dresden artists Die Brücke), 1909–1915, Schwitters returned to Hanover and started his artistic career as a post-impressionist. In 1911 he took part in his first exhibition, in Hanover. As the First World War progressed his work became darker, gradually developing a distinctive expressionist tone.\n\nSchwitters spent the last one-and-half years of the war working as a drafter in a factory just outside Hanover. He was conscripted into the 73rd Hanoverian Regiment in March 1917, but exempted on medical grounds in June of the same year. By his own account, his time as a draftsman influenced his later work, and inspired him to depict machines as metaphors of human activity.\n\n\"In the war [at the machine factory at Wülfen] I discovered my love for the wheel and realized that machines are abstractions of the human spirit.\"\nHe married his cousin Helma Fischer on 5 October 1915. Their first son, Gerd, died within a week of birth, 9 September 1916; their second, Ernst, was born on 16 November 1918, and was to remain close to his father for the rest of his life, up to and including a shared exile in Britain together.\n\nIn 1918, his art was to change dramatically as a direct consequence of Germany's economic, political, and military collapse at the end of the First World War.\n\n\"In the war, things were in terrible turmoil. What I had learned at the academy was of no use to me and the useful new ideas were still unready... Everything had broken down and new things had to be made out of the fragments; and this is Merz. It was like a revolution within me, not as it was, but as it should have been.\"\nSchwitters was to come into contact with Herwarth Walden after exhibiting expressionist paintings at the Hanover Secession in February 1918. He showed two \"Abstraktionen\" (semi-abstract expressionist landscapes) at Walden's gallery Der Sturm, in Berlin, in June 1918. This resulted in meetings with members of the Berlin Avant-garde, including Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Höch, and Hans Arp in the autumn of 1918.\n\n\"[I remember] the night he introduced himself in the Café des Westens. \"I'm a painter,\" he said, \"and I nail my pictures together.\" Raoul Hausmann\n\nWhilst Schwitters still created work in an expressionist style into 1919 (and would continue to paint realist pictures up to his death in 1948), the first abstract collages, influenced in particular by recent works by Hans Arp, would appear in late 1918, which Schwitters dubbed \"Merz\" after a fragment of found text from the phrase \"Commerz Und Privatbank\" (commerce and private bank) in his work \"Das Merzbild\", completed in the winter of 1918–19. By the end of 1919 he had become a well-known artist, after his first one-man exhibition at Der Sturm gallery, in June 1919, and the publication, that August, of the poem \"An Anna Blume\" (translated as 'To Anna Flower', or 'To Eve Blossom'), a dadaist, non-sensical love poem.\nAs Schwitters's first overtures to Zurich and Berlin Dada made explicit mention of Merz pictures, there are no grounds for the widespread claim that he invented Merz because he was rejected by Berlin Dada.\n\nSchwitters asked to join Berlin Dada either in late 1918 or early 1919, according to the memoirs of Raoul Hausmann. Hausmann claimed that Richard Huelsenbeck rejected the application because of Schwitters' links to Der Sturm and to Expressionism in general, which were seen by the Dadaists as hopelessly romantic and obsessed with aesthetics.\nRidiculed by Huelsenbeck as 'the Caspar David Friedrich of the Dadaist Revolution', he would reply with an absurdist short story \"Franz Mullers Drahtfrühling, Ersters Kapitel: Ursachen und Beginn der grossen glorreichen Revolution in Revon\" published in Der Sturm (xiii/11, 1922), which featured an innocent bystander who started a revolution 'merely by being there'.\n\nHausmann's anecdote about Schwitters asking to join Berlin Dada is, however, somewhat dubious, for there is well-documented evidence that Schwitters and Huelsenbeck were on amicable terms at first. When they first met in 1919, Huelsenbeck was enthusiastic about Schwitters's work and promised his assistance, while Schwitters reciprocated by finding an outlet for Huelsenbeck's Dada publications. When Huelsenbeck visited him at the end of the year, Schwitters gave him a lithograph (which he kept all his life) and though their friendship was by now strained, Huelsenbeck wrote him a conciliatory note. \"You know I am well-disposed towards you. I think too that certain disagreements we have both noticed in our respective opinions should not be an impediment to our attack on the common enemy, the bourgeoisie and philistinism.\" It was not until mid-1920 that the two men fell out, either because of the success of Schwitters's poem \"An Anna Blume\" (which Huelsenbeck considered unDadaistic) or because of quarrels about Schwitters' contribution to Dadaco, a projected Dada atlas edited by Huelsenbeck. It is unlikely that Schwitters ever considered joining Berlin Dada, however, for he was under contract to Der Sturm, which offered far better long-term opportunities than Dada's quarrelsome and erratic venture. If Schwitters contacted Dadaists at this time, it was generally because he was searching for opportunities to exhibit his work.\nThough not a direct participant in Berlin Dada's activities, Schwitters employed Dadaist ideas in his work, used the word itself on the cover of \"An Anna Blume\", and would later give Dada recitals throughout Europe on the subject with Theo van Doesburg, Tristan Tzara, Hans Arp and Raoul Hausmann. In many ways his work was more in tune with Zürich Dada's championing of performance and abstract art than Berlin Dada's agit-prop approach, and indeed examples of his work were published in the last Zürich Dada publication, \"Der Zeltweg\", November 1919, alongside the work of Arp and Sophie Tauber. Whilst his work was far less political than key figures in Berlin Dada, such as George Grosz and John Heartfield, he would remain close friends with various members, including Hannah Höch and Raoul Hausmann, for the rest of his career.\n\nIn 1922 Theo van Doesburg organised a series of Dada performances in the Netherlands. Various members of Dada were invited to join, but declined. Eventually the programme comprised acts and performances by Theo van Doesburg, Nelly van Doesburg as Petrò Van Doesburg, Kurt Schwitters and sometimes Vilmos Huszàr. The Dada performances took place in various cities, amongst which Amsterdam, Leiden, Utrecht and The Hague. Schwitters also performed on solo evenings, one of which took place on 13 April 1923 in Drachten, Friesland. Schwitters later on visited Drachten quite frequently, staying with a local painter, . Schwitters created several collages there, probably together with Thijs Rinsema. Their collages can sometimes hardly be distinguished from each other. From 1921 onwards there are signs of correspondence between Schwitters and an intarsia worker. From this co-operation several new works originated, where the collage technique was applied to woodwork, by incorporating several kinds of wood as a means to delineate images and letters. Thijs Rinsema also used this technique.\n\nMerz has been called 'Psychological Collage'. Most of the works attempt to make coherent aesthetic sense of the world around Schwitters, using fragments of found objects. These fragments often make witty allusions to current events. (\"Merzpicture 29a, Picture with Turning Wheel\", 1920 for instance, combines a series of wheels that only turn clockwise, alluding to the general drift Rightwards across Germany after the Spartacist Uprising in January that year, whilst \"Mai 191(9)\", alludes to the strikes organized by the Bavarian Workers' and Soldiers' Council.) Autobiographical elements also abound; test prints of graphic designs; bus tickets; ephemera given by friends. Later collages would feature proto-pop mass media images. (\"En Morn\", 1947, for instance, has a print of a blonde young girl included, prefiguring the early work of Eduardo Paolozzi, whilst many works seem to have directly influenced Robert Rauschenberg, who said after seeing an exhibition of Schwitters' work at the Sidney Janis Gallery, 1959, that \"I felt like he made it all just for me.\")\n\nWhilst these works were usually collages incorporating found objects, such as bus tickets, old wire and fragments of newsprint, Merz also included artists' periodicals, sculptures, sound poems and what would later be called \"installations\". Schwitters was to use the term Merz for the rest of the decade, but, as Isabel Schulz has noted, 'though the fundamental compositional principles of Merz remained the basis and centre of [Schwitters'] creative work [...] the term Merz disappears almost entirely from the titles of his work after 1931'.\n\nAs the political climate in Germany became more liberal and stable, Schwitters' work became less influenced by Cubism and Expressionism. He started to organize and participate in lecture tours with other members of the international avant-garde, such as Hans Arp, Raoul Hausmann and Tristan Tzara, touring Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, and Germany with provocative evening recitals and lectures.\n\nSchwitters published a periodical, also called \"Merz\", between 1923 and 1932, in which each issue was devoted to a central theme. \"Merz 5\" 1923, for instance, was a portfolio of prints by Hans Arp, \"Merz 8/9\", 1924, was edited and typeset by El Lissitsky, \"Merz 14/15\", 1925, was a typographical children's story entitled \"The Scarecrow\" by Schwitters, Kätte Steinitz and Theo van Doesburg. The last edition, \"Merz 24\", 1932, was a complete transcription of the final draft of the \"Ursonate\", with typography by Jan Tschichold.\n\nHis work in this period became increasingly Modernist in spirit, with far less overtly political context and a cleaner style, in keeping with contemporary work by Hans Arp and Piet Mondrian. His friendship around this time with El Lissitzky proved particularly influential, and \"Merz\" pictures in this period show the direct influence of Constructivism.\n\nThanks to Schwitters' lifelong patron and friend Katherine Dreier, his work was exhibited regularly in the US from 1920 onwards. In the late 1920s he became a well-known typographer; his best-known work was the catalogue for the Dammerstocksiedlung in Karlsruhe. After the demise of \"Der Sturm Gallery\" in 1924 he ran an advertising agency called \"Merzwerbe\", which held the accounts for Pelikan inks and Bahlsen biscuits, amongst others, and became the official typographer for Hanover town council between 1929 and 1934. Many of these designs, as well as test prints and proof sheets, were to crop up in contemporary Merz pictures. In a manner similar to the typographic experimentation by Herbert Bayer at the Bauhaus, and Jan Tschichold's \"Die neue Typographie\", Schwitters experimented with the creation of a new more phonetic alphabet in 1927. Some of his types were cast and used in his work. In the late 1920s Schwitters joined the \"Deutscher Werkbund\" (German Work Federation).\n\nAlongside his collages, Schwitters also dramatically altered the interiors of a number of spaces throughout his life. The most famous was the \"Merzbau\", the transformation of six (or possibly more) rooms of the family house in Hanover, Waldhausenstrasse 5. This took place very gradually; work started in about 1923, the first room was finished in 1933, and Schwitters subsequently extended the Merzbau to other areas of the house until he fled to Norway in early 1937. Most of the house was let to tenants, so that the final extent of the Merzbau was less than is normally assumed. On the evidence of Schwitters' correspondence, by 1937 it had spread to two rooms of his parents' apartment on the ground floor, the adjoining balcony, the space below the balcony, one or two rooms of the attic and possibly part of the cellar. In 1943 it was destroyed in an Allied bombing raid.\n\nEarly photos show the \"Merzbau\" with a grotto-like surface and various columns and sculptures, possibly referring to similar pieces by Dadaists, including the \"Great Plasto-Dio-Dada-Drama\" by Johannes Baader, shown at the first International Dada Fair, Berlin, 1920. Work by Hannah Höch, Raoul Hausmann and Sophie Tauber, amongst others, were incorporated into the fabric of the installation. By 1933, it had been transformed into a sculptural environment, and three photos from this year show a series of angled surfaces aggressively protruding into a room painted largely in white, with a series of tableaux spread across the surfaces. In his essay 'Ich und meine Ziele' in Merz 21, Schwitters referred to the first column of his work as the \"Cathedral of Erotic Misery\". There is no evidence that he used this name after 1930, however. The first use of the word 'Merzbau' occurs in 1933.\n\nPhotos of the \"Merzbau\" were reproduced in the journal of the Paris-based group abstraction-création in 1933-34, and were exhibited in MoMA in New York in late 1936.\n\nThe Sprengel Museum in Hanover has a reconstruction of the first room of the \"Merzbau\".\n\nSchwitters later created a similar environment in the garden of his house in Lysaker, near Oslo, known as the Haus am Bakken (the house on the slope). This was almost complete when Schwitters left Norway for the United Kingdom in 1940. It burnt down in 1951 and no photos survive. The last Merzbau, in Elterwater, Cumbria, England, remained incomplete on Schwitters' death in January 1948. A further environment that also served as a living space can still be seen on the island of near Molde, Norway. It is sometimes described as a fourth Merzbau, although Schwitters himself only ever referred to three. The interior has now been removed and will eventually be exhibited in the Romsdal Museum in Molde, Norway.\n\nSchwitters composed and performed an early example of sound poetry, \"Ursonate\" (1922–1932; a translation of the title is \"Original Sonata\" or \"Primeval Sonata\"). The poem was influenced by Raoul Hausmann's poem \"fmsbw\" which Schwitters heard recited by Hausmann in Prague, 1921. Schwitters first performed the piece on 14 February 1925 at the home of Irmgard Kiepenheuer in Potsdam. He subsequently performed it regularly, both developing and extending it. He published his notations for the recital in the last Merz periodical in 1932, although he would continue to develop the piece for at least the next ten years.\n\nAs the political situation in Germany under the Nazis continued to deteriorate throughout the 1930s, Schwitters' work began to be included in the \"Entartete Kunst\" (Degenerate Art) touring exhibition organised by the Nazi party from 1933. He lost his contract with Hanover City Council in 1934 and examples of his work in German museums were confiscated and publicly ridiculed in 1935. By the time his close friends Christof and Luise Spengemann and their son Walter were arrested by the Gestapo in August 1936 the situation had clearly become perilous.\n\nOn 2 January 1937 Schwitters, wanted for an \"interview\" with the Gestapo, fled to Norway to join his son Ernst, who had already left Germany on 26 December 1936. His wife Helma decided to remain in Hanover, to manage their four properties. In the same year, his \"Merz\" pictures were included in the \"Entartete Kunst\" exhibition titled in Munich, making his return impossible.\n\nHelma visited Schwitters in Norway for a few months each year up to the outbreak of World War II. The joint celebrations for his mother Henriette's 80th birthday and his son Ernst's engagement, held in Oslo on 2 June 1939, would be the last time the two met.\n\nSchwitters started a second \"Merzbau\" while in exile in Lysaker nearby Oslo, in 1937 but abandoned it in 1940 when the Nazis invaded; this Merzbau was subsequently destroyed in a fire in 1951. His hut on the Norwegian island of Hjertøya, near Molde, is also frequently regarded as a Merzbau. For decades this building was more or less left to rot, but measures have now been taken to preserve the interior.\n\nFollowing Nazi Germany's invasion of Norway, Schwitters was amongst a number of German citizens who were interned by the Norwegian authorities at in Kabelvåg on the Lofoten Islands, Following his release, Schwitters fled to Leith, Scotland with his son and daughter-in-law on the Norwegian patrol vessel between 8 and 18 June 1940. By now officially an 'enemy alien', he was moved between various internment camps in Scotland and England before arriving on 17 July 1940 in Hutchinson Camp in the Isle of Man.\nThe camp was situated in a collection of terraced houses around Hutchinson Square in Douglas. The camp soon comprised some 1,205 internees by end of July 1940, almost all of whom were German or Austrian. The camp was soon known as \"the artist's camp\", comprising as it did many artists, writers, university professors and other intellectuals. In this environment, Schwitters was popular as a character, a raconteur and as an artist.\n\nHe was soon provided studio space and took on students, many of whom would later become significant artists in their own right. He produced over 200 works during his internment, including more portraits than at any other time in his career, many of which he charged for.\nHe contributed at least two portraits to the second art exhibition within the camp in November 1940, and in December he contributed (in English) to the camp newsletter, \"The Camp\".\n\nAt least in the early days of the camp's existence, there was a shortage of art supplies which meant that the internees had to be resourceful to obtain the materials they needed: they would mix brick dust with sardine oil for paint, dig up clay when out on walks for sculpture, and rip up the lino floors to make cuttings which they then pressed through the clothes mangle to make linocut prints. Schwitters’ Merz extension of this included making sculptures in porridge:\n\n\"The room stank. A musty, sour, indescribable stink which came from three Dada sculptures which he had created from porridge, no plaster of Paris being available. The porridge had developed mildew and the statues were covered with greenish hair and bluish excrements of an unknown type of bacteria.\" Fred Uhlman in his memoir\n\nSchwitters was well-liked in the camp and was a welcome distraction from the internment they were suffering. Fellow internees would later recall fondly his curious habits of sleeping under his bed and barking like a dog, as well as his regular Dadaist readings and performances. However, the epileptic condition which had not surfaced since his childhood began to recur whilst in the camp. His son attributed this to Schwitters’ depression at internment which he kept hidden from others in the camp.\n\nFor the outside world he always tried to put up a good show, but in the quietness of the room I shared with him [...], his painful disillusion was clearly revealed to me. [...] Kurt Schwitters worked with more concentration than ever during internment to stave off bitterness and hopelessness.\n\nSchwitters applied as early as October 1940 for release (with the appeal written in English: \"As artist, I can not be interned for a long time without danger for my art\"), but he was refused even after his fellow internees began to be released.\n\"I am now the last artist here – all the others are free. But all things are equal. If I stay here, then I have plenty to occupy myself. If I am released, then I will enjoy freedom. If I manage to leave for the U.S., then I will be over there. You carry your own joy with you wherever you go.\" Letter to Helma Schwitters, April 1941.\nSchwitters was finally released on 21 November 1941, with the help of an intervention from Alexander Dorner, Rhode Island School of Design.\n\nAfter obtaining his freedom Schwitters moved to London, hoping to make good on the contacts that he had built up over his period of internment. He first moved to an attic flat at 3 St. Stephen's Crescent, Paddington. It was here that he met his future companion, Edith Thomas:\n\n“He knocked on her door to ask how the boiler worked, and that was that. [...] She was 27 – half his age. He called her Wantee, because she was always offering tea.\" Gretel Hinrichsen quoted in \"The Telegraph\"\n\nIn London he made contact with and mixed with a range of artists, including Naum Gabo, László Moholy-Nagy and Ben Nicholson. He exhibited in a number of galleries in the city but with little success; at his first solo exhibition at The Modern Art Gallery in December 1944, forty works were displayed, priced between 15 and 40 guineas, but only one was bought.\n\nDuring his years in London, the shift in Schwitters’ work continued towards an organic element that augmented the mass-produced ephemera of previous years with natural forms and muted colours. Pictures such as \"Small Merzpicture With Many Parts\" 1945-6, for example, used objects found on a beach, including pebbles and smooth shards of porcelain.\n\nIn August 1942 he moved with his son to 39 Westmoreland Road, Barnes, London. In October 1943 he learnt that his Merzbau in Hanover had been destroyed in allied bombing. In April 1944 he suffered his first stroke, at the age of 56, which left him temporarily paralyzed on one side of his body. His wife Helma died of cancer on 29 October 1944, although Schwitters only heard of her death in December.\n\nSchwitters first visited the Lake District on holiday with Edith Thomas in September 1942. He moved there permanently on 26 June 1945, to 2 Gale Crescent Ambleside. However, after another stroke in February of the following year and further illness, he and Edith moved to a more easily accessible house at 4 Millans Park.\n\nDuring his time in Ambleside Schwitters created a sequence of proto-pop art pictures, such as \"For Käte\", 1947, after the encouragement from his friend, Käte Steinitz. Having emigrated to the United States in 1936, Steinitz sent Schwitters letters describing life in the emerging consumer society, and wrapped the letters in pages of comics to give a flavour of the new world, which she encouraged Schwitters to ‘Merz’.\n\nIn March 1947, Schwitters decided to recreate the Merzbau and found a suitable location in a barn at Cylinders Farm, Elterwater, which was owned by Harry Pierce, whose portrait Schwitters had been commissioned to paint. Having been forced by a lack of other income to paint portraits and popularist landscape pictures suitable for sale to the local residents and tourists, Schwitters received notification shortly before his 60th birthday that he had been awarded a £1,000 fellowship to be transferred to him via the Museum of Modern Art in New York City in order to enable him to repair or re-create his previous Merz constructions in Germany or Norway. Instead he used it for the \"Merzbarn\" in Elterwater. Schwitters worked on the Merzbarn daily, travelling the five miles between his home and the barn, except for when illness kept him away. On 7 January 1948 he received the news that he had been granted British citizenship. The following day, on 8 January, Schwitters died from acute pulmonary edema and myocarditis, in Kendal Hospital.\n\nHe was buried on 10 January at St. Mary's Church, Ambleside. His grave was unmarked until 1966 when a stone was erected with the inscription \"Kurt Schwitters – Creator of Merz\". The stone remains as a memorial even though his body was disinterred and reburied in the Engesohde Cemetery in Hanover in 1970, the grave being marked with a marble copy of his 1929 sculpture \"Die Herbstzeitlose\".\n\nOne entire wall of the Merzbarn was removed to the Hatton Gallery in Newcastle for safe keeping. The shell of the barn remains in Elterwater, near Ambleside.\n\nMany artists have cited Schwitters as a major influence, including Ed Ruscha, Robert Rauschenberg, Damien Hirst, Al Hansen, and Arman.\n\"The language of Merz now finds common acceptance and today there is scarcely an artist working with materials other than paint who does not refer to Schwitters in some way. In his bold and wide-ranging experiments he can be seen as the grandfather of Pop Art, Happenings, Concept Art, Fluxus, multimedia art and post-modernism.\" Gwendolyn Webster\nSchwitters’ \"Ja-Was?-Bild\" (1920), an abstract work made of oil, paper, cardboard, fabric, wood and nails, was sold £13.9 million at Christie's London in 2014.\n\nSchwitters' son, Ernst, largely entrusted the artistic estate of his father to Gilbert Lloyd, director of the Marlborough Gallery. However, Ernst fell victim to a crippling stroke in 1995, moving control of the estate as a whole to Kurt's grandson, Bengt Schwitters. Controversy erupted when Bengt, who has said he has \"no interest in art and his grandfather's works\", terminated the standing agreement between the family and the Marlborough Gallery. The Marlborough Gallery filed suit against the Schwitters estate in 1996, after confirming Ernst Schwitters' desire to have Mr. Lloyd continue to administer the estate in his will.\n\nProfessor Henrick Hanstein, an auctioneer and art expert, provided key testimony in the case, stating that Schwitters was virtually forgotten after his death in exile in England in 1948, and that the Marlborough Gallery had been vital in ensuring the artist's place in art history. The verdict, which was eventually upheld by Norway's highest court, awarded the gallery USD 2.6 million in damages.\n\nSchwitters' visual work has now been completely catalogued in the Catalogue Raisonné. Forgeries of collages by Schwitters turn up almost weekly on eBay. Before purchasing any work supposedly by Schwitters, it is best to consult the Kurt Schwitters Archive at the Sprengel Museum in Hanover, Germany.\n\nBULLET::::- Brian Eno sampled Schwitters' recording of \"Ursonate\" for the \"Kurt's Rejoinder\" track on his 1977 album, \"Before and after Science\".\nBULLET::::- Electronic music duo Matmos used \"Ursonate\" in \"Schwitt/Urs\" on Quasi-Objects.\nBULLET::::- DJ Spooky included \"Anna Blume\" in a mix in his \"Sound Unbound\" project.\nBULLET::::- Japanese musician Merzbow took his name from Schwitters.\nBULLET::::- A fictionalised account of Schwitters' time in London is the subject of \"\", an opera by Michael Nyman and Michael Hastings.\nBULLET::::- The German hip-hop band Freundeskreis quoted from his poem \"An Anna Blume\" in their hit single \"ANNA\".\nBULLET::::- The krautrock band Faust have a song entitled \"Dr. Schwitters snippet\".\nBULLET::::- Billy Childish made a short film on Schwitters life, titled \"The Man with Wheels\", (1980, directed by Eugean Doyan).\nBULLET::::- Chumbawamba include a decidedly energetic take on \"Ursonate\" in their song \"Ratatatay\", featured on the album \"ABCDEFG\". The song is about George Melly and in particular his story of spontaneously reciting \"Ursonate\", in order to scare off a pair of robbers who confronted him one evening in Manchester.\nBULLET::::- Einstürzende Neubauten include samples of member N. U. Unruh reciting \"Ursonate\" in the song \"Let's Do It A Dada\" on the album \"Alles wieder offen\".\nBULLET::::- Contemporary artists Jutta Koether, Carl Michael von Hausswolff, Kenneth Goldsmith, Eline McGeorge and Karl Holmqvist were commissioned to make new installation works in 2009 in response to Kurt Schwitters as part of the \"Senses\" exhibition which took place in Ålesund, Norway (2009) and at Chisenhale Gallery, London (2010).\nBULLET::::- Three members of the band British Sea Power were brought up near Schwitters' home in Cumbria. They have referenced his work in their songs and used a recording of \"Ursonate\" at their live shows. Jan Scott Wilkinson of the band contributed to Tate Britain's Schwitters retrospective in 2013.\nBULLET::::- Tonio K dedicated the track \"Merzsuite – Let Us Join Together in a Tune, Umore, Futt Futt Futt\" on his album \"Amerika\" to Kurt Schwitters.\nBULLET::::- American author Paul Auster uses the name Anna Blume repeatedly in his works. For example the main character in \"In the Country of Last Things\" is named Anna Blume.\n\nBULLET::::- Burns Gamard, Elizabeth. \"Kurt Schwitters' Merzbau: The Cathedral of Erotic Misery\", Princeton Architectural Press 2000,\nBULLET::::- Cardinal, Roger and Gwendolen Webster, \"Kurt Schwitters\", Hatje Cantz, Stuttgart, 2011. (versions in English and in German)\nBULLET::::- Crossley, Barbara. \"The Triumph of Kurt Schwitters\", Armitt Trust Ambleside, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Elderfield, John. \"Kurt Schwitters\", Thames and Hudson, London 1985.\nBULLET::::- Elsner, John and Roger Cardinal (ed.), \"The Cultures of Collecting\", Reaktion Books, London 1994.\nBULLET::::- Feaver, William. \"Alien at Ambleside\", \"The Sunday Times Magazine\", 18 Aug 1974, 27–34\nBULLET::::- Fiske, Lars and Kverneland, Steffen. \"Kanon\" (3 volumes) – A Norwegian comic biography.\nBULLET::::- Germundson, Curt. \"Montage and Totality: Kurt Schwitters’ relationship to tradition and avant-garde\", in Dafydd Jones (ed.), \"Dada Culture: Critical Texts on the Avant-Garde\", Rodopi, Amsterdam/New York 2006, 156–186.\nBULLET::::- Hausmann, Raoul and Schwitters, Kurt; ed. Jasia Reichardt. \"PIN\", Gaberbocchus Press (1962); Anabas-Verlag, Giessen (1986).\nBULLET::::- Luke, Megan R., \"Kurt Schwitters: Space, Image, Exile\", Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2013,\nBULLET::::- McBride, Patrizia C. \"The Game of Meaning: Collage, Montage, And Parody In Kurt Schwitters' Merz.\" \"Modernism/Modernity\" 14.2 (2007): 249–272\nBULLET::::- McBride, Patrizia. \"Montage And Violence In Weimar Culture: Kurt Schwitters' Reassembled Individuals.\" \"Contemplating Violence: Critical Studies in Modern German Culture\". 245–265. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi, 2011.\nBULLET::::- Notz, Adrian and Obrist, Hans Ulrich (ed.), 'Processing the Complicated Order. The Merzbau Today'. With contributions by Peter Bissegger, Stefano Boeri, Dietmar Elger, Yona Friedman, Thomas Hirschhorn, Karin Orchard, Gwendolen Webster.\nBULLET::::- Ramade, Bénédicte. (2005) \"Dada: L'exposition/The Exhibition\", Union-Distribution. .\nBULLET::::- Rothenberg, Jerome and Pierre Joris (ed.) \"Kurt Schwitters, poems, performance, pieces, proses, play poetics\", Temple University Press, Philadelphia 1993.\nBULLET::::- Schwitters, Kurt (ed.) \"Merz 1923–32\". Hanover, 1923–1932 [numbered 1–24; nos. 10, 22–23 never published: see also the University of Iowa Dada archive.\nBULLET::::- Themerson, Stefan. \"Kurt Schwitters in England 1940–1948\", Gaberbocchus Press (1958) [includes poems and writings by Schwitters]\nBULLET::::- Themerson, Stefan. \"Kurt Schwitters on a Time-Chart\" in Typographica 16, December 1967, 29–48\nBULLET::::- Uhlman, Fred. \"The Making of an Englishman\", Gollancz (1960).\nBULLET::::- Webster, Gwendolen. 'Kurt Schwitters' Merzbau' doctoral dissertation, Open University 2007.\nBULLET::::- Webster, Gwendolen. \"Kurt Merz Schwitters, a Biographical Study\", University of Wales Press 1997,\nBULLET::::- Webster, Gwendolen. \"Kurt Schwitters and Katherine Dreier\" in German Life and Letters 1999, vol. 52, no. 4, 443–56.\nBULLET::::- Exhibition catalogue, \"In the Beginning was Merz – From Kurt Schwitters to the Present Day\", Sprengel Museum Hanover, Hatje Cantz, Ostfildern, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Exhibition catalogue, \"Kurt Schwitters in Exile: The late work, 1937–1948\", Marlborough Fine Art, 1981.\nBULLET::::- Exhibition catalogue, \"Kurt Schwitters\", Galerie Gmurzynska, 1978.\n\nBULLET::::- Gallery of his works, with information on each (German)\nBULLET::::- Kurt Schwitters Archive, Sprengel Museum, Hanover (information about Schwitters and his work, at present only in German)\nBULLET::::- Kurt Schwitters Society UK\nBULLET::::- Scans of Schwitters' publication \"Merz\"\nBULLET::::- Works from the Guggenheim Collection\nBULLET::::- \"Cut & Paste: A History of Photomontage\"\nBULLET::::- Information on copyright from the Kurt Schwitters Foundation\nBULLET::::- \"Schwitters@Newcastle\" a project run by the German Studies Section at the School of Modern Languages at Newcastle University\n"}
{"id": "17122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17122", "title": "Kenneth Noland", "text": "Kenneth Noland\n\nKenneth Noland (April 10, 1924 – January 5, 2010) was an American painter. He was one of the best-known American Color Field painters, although in the 1950s he was thought of as an abstract expressionist and in the early 1960s he was thought of as a minimalist painter. Noland helped establish the Washington Color School movement. In 1977, he was honored by a major retrospective at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York that then traveled to the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, D.C. and Ohio's Toledo Museum of Art in 1978. In 2006, Noland's \"Stripe Paintings\" were exhibited at the Tate in London.\n\nA son of Harry Caswell Noland (1896–1975), a pathologist, and his wife, Bessie (1897–1980), Kenneth Clifton Noland was born in Asheville, North Carolina. He had four siblings: David, Bill, Neil and Harry Jr.\n\nNoland enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1942 after completing high school. A veteran of World War II, Noland took advantage of the G.I. Bill to study art at the experimental Black Mountain College in his home state of North Carolina. At Black Mountain, where two of his brothers also studied art, Noland studied with Ilya Bolotowsky, a professor who introduced him to neoplasticism and the work of Piet Mondrian. There, Noland also studied Bauhaus theory and color under Josef Albers and became interested in Paul Klee, specifically Klee's sensitivity to color.\n\nIn 1948 and 1949 Noland worked with Ossip Zadkine in Paris, and had his first exhibition of his paintings there. After returning to the U.S., he taught in Washington, D.C. at Catholic University (1951–1960) and the Institute of Contemporary Arts. In the early 1950s he met Morris Louis in D.C. while teaching night classes at the Washington Workshop Center for the Arts. He became friends with Louis, and after being introduced by Clement Greenberg to Helen Frankenthaler and seeing her new paintings at her studio in New York City in 1953, he and Louis adopted her \"soak-stain\" technique of allowing thinned paint to soak into unprimed canvases.\n\nMost of Noland's paintings fall into one of four groups: circles (or targets), chevrons, stripes and shaped canvases. His preoccupation with the relationship of the image to the containing edge of the picture led him to a series of studies of concentric rings or bullseyes, commonly referred to as targets, which, like the one reproduced here called \"Beginning\" from 1958, used unlikely color combinations. This also led Noland away from Morris Louis in 1958. In 1964, he was included in the exhibition \"Post-Painterly Abstraction\" curated by Clement Greenberg, which traveled the country and helped to firmly establish Color Field painting as an important new movement in the contemporary art of the 1960s. Noland pioneered the shaped canvas, initially with a series of symmetrical and asymmetrical diamonds or chevrons. In these paintings, the edges of the canvas become as structurally important as the center. During the 1970s and 1980s his shaped canvases were highly irregular and asymmetrical. These resulted in increasingly complex structures of highly sophisticated and controlled color and surface integrity.\n\nInstead of painting the canvas with a brush, Noland's style was to stain the canvas with color. This idea sought to remove the artist through brushstrokes. This made the piece about the art, not the artist. He emphasized spatial relationships in his work by leaving unstained, bare canvas as a contrast against the colors used throughout his paintings. Noland used simplified abstraction so the design would not detract from the use of color.\n\nNoland also taught; the sculptor Jennie Lea Knight was among his pupils.\n\nNoland was married to:\n\nBULLET::::- Cornelia Langer, a daughter of a Republican U.S. senator from North Dakota, William Langer. The couple married in 1950 and later divorced. They had three children: daughters Cady and Lyndon (a.k.a. Lyn) and a son, William.\nBULLET::::- Stephanie Gordon, a psychologist, lived with Noland from November 1964 until June 1970. They married in April 1967 and divorced in June 1970.\nBULLET::::- Peggy L. Schiffer, an art historian and daughter of Dr. Morton A. Schiffer. Married circa 1970, the Nolands had one son, Samuel Jesse.\nBULLET::::- Paige Rense, editor in chief of \"Architectural Digest\", whom he married in Bennington, Vermont on April 10, 1994. Noland was her fifth husband; her previous spouses included Arthur F. Rense.\n\nNoland had an affair in the 1960s with artist and socialite Mary Pinchot Meyer.\n\nNoland died of kidney cancer at his home in Port Clyde, Maine, on January 5, 2010 at the age of 85.\n\nNoland had his first solo exhibition at Galerie Raymond Creuze in Paris in 1948. In 1957, he had his first New York solo exhibition at the Tibor de Nagy Gallery. In 1964, Noland occupied half the American pavilion at the Venice Biennale. In 1965, his work was exhibited at the Washington Gallery of Modern Art and the Jewish Museum (New York). Noland's final solo exhibition, \"Kenneth Noland Shaped Paintings 1981-82\", opened on October 29, 2009 at the Leslie Feely Fine Art Gallery on E.68th St. in New York City and was scheduled to close on January 9, 2010, though the closing date was later extended to January 16. In 2010, Noland was honored with a solo presentation of his work at the Guggenheim Museum, entitled \"Kenneth Noland, 1924–2010: A Tribute\". In addition, his work has been the subject of solo exhibitions at a range of international institutions, including the Museo de Arte Moderno, Mexico City (1983); Museo de Bellas Artes de Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain (1985); Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (2004); Tate, Liverpool (2006); and Butler Institute of American Art, Youngstown, Ohio (1986 and 2007).\n\nBULLET::::- Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York\nBULLET::::- Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- Australian National Gallery, Canberra\nBULLET::::- Baltimore Museum of Art, Baltimore, Maryland\nBULLET::::- Butler Institute of American Art, Youngstown, Ohio\nBULLET::::- St. Louis Art Museum, St. Louis, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Columbus Gallery of Fine Arts, Columbus, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.\nBULLET::::- Des Moines Art Center, Des Moines, Iowa\nBULLET::::- Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan\nBULLET::::- Art Gallery of South Australia, Adelaide\nBULLET::::- Fogg Art Museum, Cambridge, Massachusetts\nBULLET::::- Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller Empire State Plaza Art Collection, Albany, New York\nBULLET::::- Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- Kunsthaus, Zurich\nBULLET::::- Kunstmuseum, Basel\nBULLET::::- Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf\nBULLET::::- Los Angeles County Museum of Art, California\nBULLET::::- Louisiana Museum, Humlebaek, Denmark\nBULLET::::- Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York\nBULLET::::- Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin\nBULLET::::- Minneapolis Institute of Arts, Minneapolis, Minnesota\nBULLET::::- Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris\nBULLET::::- Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts\nBULLET::::- Museum of Modern Art, New York\nBULLET::::- National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh, North Carolina\nBULLET::::- Norton Simon Museum, Pasadena, California\nBULLET::::- Phillips Collection, Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- Rose Art Museum, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts\nBULLET::::- Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York\nBULLET::::- Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam\nBULLET::::- Tate Gallery, London\nBULLET::::- Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford, Connecticut\nBULLET::::- Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota\nBULLET::::- Whitney Museum of American Art, New York\n\nBULLET::::- Gowing, L (ed.) 1995, \"A Biographical Dictionary of Artists\", Rev. edn, Andromeda Oxford Limited, Oxfordshire.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kenneth Noland.\" \"Contemporary Artists\", 4th ed. St. James Press, 1996. Reproduced in Biography Resource Center. Farmington Hills, Mich.: Thomson Gale. 2005.\nBULLET::::- \"Kenneth Noland: Color, Format and Abstract Art.\" Interview by Diane waldman (1977), in: \"Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art\", edited by K. Stiles and P. Selz, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996, pp. 94–98.\nBULLET::::- \"Kenneth Noland.\" \"Encyclopedia of World Biography\", 2nd ed. 17 Vols. Gale Research, 1998. Reproduced in Biography Resource Center. Farmington Hills, Mich.: Thomson Gale. 2005.\nBULLET::::- \"Painting: Bold Emblems\", an 18 April 1969 profile of Kenneth Noland in \"Time\" magazine\nBULLET::::- \"Art: Pure, Uncluttered Hedonism\", a 2 May 1977 review of Kenneth Noland's work by Robert Hughes of \"Time\" magazine\nBULLET::::- \"Painting: Peacock Duo\", an 8 May 1965 examination of Kenneth Noland's work\n\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Noland in the National Gallery of Australia's Kenneth Tyler collection\nBULLET::::- Tate08 Series: Kenneth Noland: The Stripe Paintings exhibition at Tate Liverpool, England, 2006\nBULLET::::- TheArtStory.com/Kenneth_Noland\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Noland at The Phillips Collection\nBULLET::::- \"New York Times\" artblog by Roberta Smith\nBULLET::::- Noland's works at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum\nBULLET::::- \"New York Times\" Obituary\nBULLET::::- \"Washington Post\" Obituary\nBULLET::::- \"The Guardian\" Obituary and letter from Anthony Caro\nBULLET::::- \"The Independent\" Obituary\n"}
{"id": "17123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17123", "title": "Karachi", "text": "Karachi\n\nKarachi (; ALA-LC: , ; is the capital of the Pakistani province of Sindh. It is the most populous city in Pakistan, and fifth-most-populous city proper in the world. Ranked as a beta-global city, the city is Pakistan's premier industrial and financial centre. It is the cultural, economic, philanthropic, educational, and political hub of the country, and Pakistan's most cosmopolitan city. Situated on the Arabian Sea, Karachi serves as a transport hub, and is home to Pakistan's two largest seaports, the Port of Karachi and Port Bin Qasim, as well as Pakistan's busiest airport, Jinnah International Airport.\n\nThough the Karachi region has been inhabited for millennia, the city was founded as the fortified village of \"Kolachi\" in 1729. The settlement drastically increased in importance with the arrival of British East India Company in the mid 19th century, who not only embarked on major works to transform the city into a major seaport, but also connected it with their extensive railway network. By the time of the Partition of British India, the city was the largest in Sindh with an estimated population of 400,000. Following the independence of Pakistan, the city's population increased dramatically with the arrival of hundreds of thousands of Muslim refugees from India. The city experienced rapid economic growth following independence, attracting migrants from throughout Pakistan and South Asia. Karachi is one of Pakistan's most secular and socially liberal cities. It is also the most linguistically, ethnically, and religiously diverse city in Pakistan. Karachi's population was enumerated at 14.9 million in the 2017 census. Karachi is one of the world's fastest growing cities, and has communities representing almost every ethnic group in Pakistan. Karachi is home to over 2 million Bangladeshi immigrants, 1 million Afghan refugees, and up to 400,000 Rohingyas from Myanmar.\n\nKarachi is now Pakistan's premier industrial and financial centre. The city has a formal economy estimated to be worth $113 billion which is the largest in Pakistan. Karachi collects over a third of Pakistan's tax revenue, and generates approximately 20% of Pakistan's GDP. Approximately 30% of Pakistani industrial output is from Karachi, while Karachi's ports handle approximately 95% of Pakistan's foreign trade. Approximately 90% of the multinational corporations operating in Pakistan are headquartered in Karachi. Karachi is considered to be Pakistan's fashion capital, and has hosted the annual Karachi Fashion Week since 2009.\n\nKnown as the \"City of Lights\" in the 1960s and 1970s for its vibrant nightlife, Karachi was beset by sharp ethnic, sectarian, and political conflict in the 1980s with the arrival of weaponry during the Soviet–Afghan War. The city had become well known for its high rates of violent crime, but recorded crimes sharply decreased following a controversial crackdown operation against criminals, the MQM political party, and Islamist militants initiated in 2013 by the Pakistan Rangers. As a result of the operation, Karachi went from being ranked the world's 6th most dangerous city for crime in 2014, to 71 by mid 2019.\n\nKarachi was reputedly founded in 1729 as the settlement of \"Kolachi\". The new settlement is said to have been named in honour of Mai Kolachi, whose son is said to have slain a man-eating crocodile in the village after his elder brothers had already been killed by it.\n\nThe city's inhabitants are referred to by the demonym \"Karachiite\" in English, and \"Karāchīwālā\" in Urdu.\n\nLate Palaeolithic and Mesolithic sites discovered by a team from Karachi University on the Mulri Hills constitute one of the most important archaeological discoveries made in Sindh during the last 50 years. The earliest inhabitants of the Karachi region are believed to have been hunter-gatherers, with ancient flint tools discovered at several sites. A sea port called Barbarikon by the Greeks was situated in Karachi.\n\nThe Karachi region is believed to have been known to the ancient Greeks. The region may be the site of Krokola, where Alexander the Great once camped to prepare a fleet for Babylonia, as well as Morontobara which may possibly be Karachi's Manora neighbourhood.\n\nIn 711 CE, Muhammad bin Qasim conquered the Sindh and Indus Valley. The Karachi region is believed to have been known to the Arabs as Debal, from where Muhammad Bin Qasim launched his forces into South Asia in 712 C.E.\n\nUnder Mirza Ghazi Beg, the Mughal administrator of Sindh, the development of coastal Sindh and the Indus delta was encouraged. Under his rule, fortifications in the region acted as a bulwark against Portuguese incursions into Sindh. The Ottoman admiral, Seydi Ali Reis, mentioned Debal and Manora Island in his book Mir'ât ül Memâlik in 1554.\n\nKarachi was founded in 1729 as the settlement of \"Kolachi\" under the rule of the ethnically Baloch Talpur Mirs of Sindh. The founders of the settlement are said to arrived from the nearby town of Karak Bandar after the harbour there silted in 1728 after heavy rains. The settlement was fortified, and defended with cannons imported by Sindhi sailors from Muscat, Oman. The name \"Karachee\" was used for the first time in a Dutch document from 1742, in which a merchant ship \"de Ridderkerk\" is shipwrecked near the original settlement. The city continued to be ruled by the Talpur Mirs until it was occupied by forces under the command of John Keane in February 1839.\n\nThe British East India Company captured Karachi on 3 February 1839 after opened fire and quickly destroyed the local mud fort at Manora. The town was annexed to British India in 1843. Later a large part Sindh region was captured by Major General Charles James Napier after the victory in the Battle of Miani, and the city was declared capital of the newly formed Sindh province.\n\nThe city was recognized for its strategic importance, prompting the British to establish the Port of Karachi in 1854. Karachi rapidly became a transportation hub for British India owing to newly built port and rail infrastructure, as well as the increase in agricultural exports from the opening of productive tracts of newly irrigated land in Punjab and interior Sindh. The British also developed the Karachi Cantonment as a military garrison to aid the British war effort in the First Anglo-Afghan War.\n\nDuring the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, the 21st Native Infantry, then stationed in Karachi, mutinied and declared allegiance to rebel forces in September 1857, though the British were able to quickly defeat the rebels and reassert control over the city. Following the Rebellion, British colonial administrators continued to develop the city. In 1864, the first telegraphic message was sent from South Asia to England from Karachi. Public building works were undertaken, including the construction of Frere Hall in 1865 and the later Empress Market. In 1878, the British Raj connected Karachi with the network of British India's vast railway system.\n\nBy 1899, Karachi had become the largest wheat-exporting port in the East. British development projects in Karachi resulted in an influx of economic migrants from several ethnicities and religions, including Anglo-British, Parsis, Marathis, and Goan Christians, among others. Karachi's newly arrived Jewish population established the city's first synagogue in 1893. Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, was born in Karachi's Wazir Mansion in 1876 to migrants from Gujarat. By the end of the 19th century, Karachi's population was estimated to be 105,000.\n\nUnder British rule, the city's municipal government was established. Known as the \"Father of Modern Karachi\", mayor Seth Harchandrai Vishandas led the municipal government to improve sanitary conditions in the Old City, as well as major infrastructure works in the New Town after his election in 1911.\n\nAt the dawn of independence following the success of the Pakistan Movement in 1947, Karachi was Sindh's largest city with a population of over 400,000. Despite communal violence across India and Pakistan, Karachi remained relatively peaceful compared to cities further north in Punjab. The city became the focus for the resettlement of Muslim Muhajirs migrating from India, leading to a dramatic expansion of the city's population. This migration lasted until the 1960s. This immigration ultimately transformed the city's demographics and economy.\n\nKarachi was selected as the first capital of Pakistan and served as such until the capital was shifted to Rawalpindi in 1958. While foreign embassies shifted away from Karachi, the city is host to numerous consulates and honorary consulates. Between 1958 and 1970, Karachi's role as capital of Sindh was ceased due to the One Unit programme enacted by President Iskander Mirza.\n\nKarachi of the 1960s was regarded as an economic role model around the world, with Seoul, South Korea borrowing from the city's second \"Five-Year Plan.\" The 1970s saw major labour struggles in Karachi's industrial estates. The 1980s and 1990s saw an influx of thousands of Afghan refugees from the Soviet–Afghan War into Karachi; who were in turn followed in smaller numbers by refugees escaping from post-revolution Iran.\n\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, Karachi was rocked by political conflict, while crime rates drastically increased with the arrival of weaponry from the War in Afghanistan. Conflict between the MQM party, and ethnic Sindhis, Pashtuns, and Punjabis was sharp. The party and its vast network of supporters were targeted by Pakistani security forces as part of the controversial Operation Clean-up in 1992 – an effort to restore peace in the city that lasted until 1994. Anti-Hindu riots also broke out in Karachi in 1992 in retaliation for the demolition of the Babri Mosque in India by a group of Hindu nationalists earlier that year. Karachi had become widely known for its high rates of violent crime, but recorded crimes sharply decreased following a controversial crackdown operation against criminals, the MQM party, and Islamist militants initiated in 2013 by the Pakistan Rangers.\n\nKarachi is located on the coastline of Sindh province in southern Pakistan, along a natural harbour on the Arabian Sea. Karachi is built on a coastal plains with scattered rocky outcroppings, hills and coastal marshlands. Coastal mangrove forests grow in the brackish waters around the Karachi Harbour, and farther southeast towards the expansive Indus River Delta. West of Karachi city is the Cape Monze, locally known as Ras Muari, which is an area characterised by sea cliffs, rocky sandstone promontories and undeveloped beaches.\nWithin the city of Karachi are two small ranges: the Khasa Hills and Mulri Hills, which lie in the northwest and act as a barrier between North Nazimabad Town and Orangi Town. Karachi's hills are barren and are part of the larger Kirthar Range, and have a maximum elevation of .\n\nBetween the hills are wide coastal plains interspersed with dry river beds and water channels. Karachi has developed around the Malir River and Lyari Rivers, with the Lyari shore being the site of the settlement for \"Kolachi\". To the west of Karachi lies the Indus River flood plain.\n\nKarachi has an arid climate (Köppen: \"BWh\") dominated by a long \"Summer Season\" while moderated by oceanic influence from the Arabian Sea. The city has low annual average precipitation levels (approx. per annum), the bulk of which occurs during the July–August monsoon season. While the summers are hot and humid, cool sea breezes typically provide relief during hot summer months, though Karachi is prone to deadly heat waves, though a text-message based early warning system is now in place that helped prevent any fatalities during an unusually strong heatwave in October 2017. The winter climate is dry and lasts between December and February. It is dry and pleasant relative to the warm hot season, which starts in March and lasts until monsoons arrive in June. Proximity to the sea maintains humidity levels at near-constant levels year-round.\n\nThe city's highest monthly rainfall, , occurred in July 1967. The city's highest rainfall in 24 hours occurred on 7 August 1953, when about of rain lashed the city, resulting in major flooding.\nKarachi's highest recorded temperature is which was recorded on 9 May 1938, and the lowest is recorded on 21 January 1934.\nThe city first developed around the Karachi Harbour, and owes much of its growth to its role as a seaport at the end of the 18th century, contrasted with Pakistan's millennia-old cities such as Lahore, Multan, and Peshawar. Karachi's Mithadar neighbourhood represents the extent of \"Kolachi\" prior to British rule.\n\nBritish Karachi was divided between the \"New Town\" and the \"Old Town,\" with British investments focused primarily in the New Town. The Old Town was a largely unplanned neighbourhood which housed most of the city's indigenous residents, and had no access to sewerage systems, electricity, and water. The New Town was subdivided into residential, commercial, and military areas. Given the strategic value of the city, the British developed the Karachi Cantonment as a military garrison in the New Town to aid the British war effort in the First Anglo-Afghan War.\nThe city's development was largely confined to the area north of the Chinna Creek prior to independence, although the seaside area of Clifton was also developed as a posh locale under the British, and its large bungalows and estates remain some of the city's most desirable properties. The aforementioned historic areas form the oldest portions of Karachi, and contain its most important monuments and government buildings, with the I. I. Chundrigar Road being home to most of Pakistan's banks, including the Habib Bank Plaza which was Pakistan's tallest building from 1963 until the early 2000s.\nSituated on a coastal plain northwest of Karachi's historic core lies the sprawling district of Orangi Town. North of the historic core is the largely middle-class district of Nazimabad, and upper-middle class North Nazimabad, which were developed in the 1950s. To the east of the historic core is the area known as Defence – an expansive upscale suburb developed and administered by the Pakistan Army. Karachi's coastal plains along the Arabian Sea south of Clifton were also developed much later as part of the greater Defence Housing Authority project.\nKarachi's city limits also include several islands, including Baba and Bhit Islands, Oyster Rocks, and Manora, a former island which is now connected to the mainland by a thin 12-kilometre long shoal known as Sandspit. The city has been described as one divided into sections for those able to afford to live in planned localities with access to urban amenities, and those who live in unplanned communities with inadequate access to such services. Up to 60% of Karachi's residents live in such unplanned communities.\n\nKarachi is Pakistan's financial and commercial capital. Since Pakistan's independence, Karachi has been the centre of the nation's economy, and remain's Pakistan's largest urban economy despite the economic stagnation caused by sociopolitical unrest during the late 1980s and 1990s. The city forms the centre of an economic corridor stretching from Karachi to nearby Hyderabad, and Thatta.\n\nWith an estimated GDP of $113 billion , Karachi contributes the bulk of Sindh's gross domestic product. and accounts for approximately 20% of the total GDP of Pakistan. The city has a large informal economy which is not typically reflected in GDP estimates. The informal economy may constitute up to 36% of Pakistan's total economy, versus 22% of India's economy, and 13% of the Chinese economy. The informal sector employs up to 70% of the city's workforce. In 2018 The Global Metro Monitor Report ranked Karachi's economy as the best performing metropolitan economy in Pakistan.\n\nToday along with Pakistan's continued economic expansion Karachi is now ranked third in the world for consumer expenditure growth with its market anticipated to increase by 6.6% in real terms in 2018 It is also ranked among the top cities in the world by anticipated increase of number of households (1.3 million households) with annual income above $20,000 dollars measured at PPP exchange rates by year 2025. The Global FDI Intelligence Report 2017/2018 published by Financial Times ranks Karachi amongst the top 10 Asia pacific cities of the future for FDI strategy.\n\nMost of Pakistan's public and private banks are headquartered on Karachi's I. I. Chundrigar Road, which is known as \"Pakistan's Wall Street\", with a large percentage of the cashflow in the Pakistani economy taking place on I. I. Chundrigar Road. Most major foreign multinational corporations operating in Pakistan have their headquarters in Karachi. Karachi is also home to the Pakistan Stock Exchange, which was rated as Asia's best performing stock market in 2015 on the heels of Pakistan's upgrade to emerging-market status by MSCI.\n\nKarachi has been the pioneer in cable networking in Pakistan with the most sophisticated of the cable networks of any city of Pakistan,\nand has seen an expansion of information and communications technology and electronic media. The city has become a software outsourcing hub for Pakistan. Several independent television and radio stations are based in Karachi, including Business Plus, AAJ News, Geo TV, KTN, Sindh TV, CNBC Pakistan, TV ONE, Express TV, ARY Digital, Indus Television Network, Samaa TV, Abb Tak, BoL TV, and Dawn News, as well as several local stations.\n\nIndustry contributes a large portion of Karachi's economy, with the city home to several of Pakistan's largest companies dealing in textiles, cement, steel, heavy machinery, chemicals, and food products. The city is home to approximately 30 percent of Pakistan's manufacturing sector, and produces approximately 42 percent of Pakistan's value added in large scale manufacturing. At least 4500 industrial units form Karachi's formal industrial economy. Karachi's informal manufacturing sector employs far more people than the formal sector, though proxy data suggest that the capital employed and value added from such informal enterprises is far smaller than that of formal sector enterprises. An estimated 63% of the Karachi's workforce is employed in trade and manufacturing.\n\nKarachi Export Processing Zone, SITE, Korangi, Northern Bypass Industrial Zone, Bin Qasim and North Karachi serve as large industrial estates in Karachi. The Karachi Expo Centre also complements Karachi's industrial economy by hosting regional and international exhibitions.\n\n! Name of estate !! Location !! Established !! Area in acres\nSITE Karachi SITE Town 1947 4700\nKorangi Industrial Area Korangi Town 1960 8500\nLandhi Industrial Area Landhi Town 1949 11000\nNorth Karachi Industrial Area New Karachi Town 1974 725\nFederal B Industrial Area Gulberg Town 1987 \nKorangi Creek Industrial Park Korangi Creek Cantonment 2012250\nBin Qasim Industrial Zone Bin Qasim Town 1970 25000\nKarachi Export Processing Zone Landhi Town 1980 315\nPakistan Textile City Bin Qasim Town 2004 1250\nWest Wharf Industrial Area Keamari Town 430\nSITE Super Highway Phase-I Super Highway 1983 300\nSITE Super Highway Phase-II Super Highway 1992 1000\n\nAs home to Pakistan's largest ports and a large portion of its manufacturing base, Karachi contributes a large share of Pakistan's collected tax revenue. As most of Pakistan's large multinational corporations are based in Karachi, income taxes are paid in the city even though income may be generated from other parts of the country. As home to the country's two largest ports, Pakistani customs officials collect the bulk of federal duty and tariffs at Karachi's ports, even if those imports are destined for one of Pakistan's other provinces. Approximately 25% of Pakistan's national revenue is \"generated\" in Karachi.\n\nAccording to the Federal Board of Revenue's 2006–2007 year book, tax and customs units in Karachi were responsible for 46.75% of direct taxes, 33.65% of federal excise tax, and 23.38% of domestic sales tax. Karachi accounts for 75.14% of customs duty and 79% of sales tax on imports, and collects 53.38% of the total collections of the Federal Board of Revenue, of which 53.33% are customs duty and sales tax on imports.\n\nKarachi is the most linguistically, ethnically, and religiously diverse city in Pakistan. The city is a melting pot of ethno-linguistic groups from throughout Pakistan, as well as migrants from other parts of Asia. The city's inhabitants are referred to by the demonym \"Karachiite\". The 2017 census numerated Karachi's population to be 14,910,352, having grown 2.49% per year since the 1998 census, which had listed Karachi's population at approximately 9.3 million.\n\nAt the end of the 19th century, Karachi had an estimated population of 105,000. By the dawn of Pakistan's independence in 1947, the city had an estimated population of 400,000. The city's population grew dramatically with the arrival of hundreds of thousands of Muslim refugees from the newly independent Republic of India. Rapid economic growth following independence attracted further migrants from throughout Pakistan and South Asia. The 2017 census numerated Karachi's population to be 14,910,352, having grown 2.49% per year since the 1998 census, which had listed Karachi's population at approximately 9.3 million.\n\nLower than expected population figures from the census suggest that Karachi's poor infrastructure, law and order situation, and weakened economy relative to other parts of Pakistan made the city less attractive to in-migration than previously thought. The figure is disputed by all the major political parties in Sindh. Karachi's population grew by 59.8% since the 1998 census to 14.9 million, while Lahore city grew 75.3% – though Karachi's census district had not been altered by the provincial government since 1998, while Lahore's had been expanded by Punjab's government, leading to some of Karachi's growth to have occurred outside the city's census boundaries. Karachi's population had grown at a rate of 3.49% between the 1981 and 1998 census, leading many analysts to estimate Karachi's 2017 population to be approximately 18 million by extrapolating a continued annual growth rate of 3.49%. Some had expected that the city's population to be between 22 and 30 million, which would require an annual growth rate accelerating to between 4.6% and 6.33%.\n\nPolitical parties in the province have suggested the city's population has been underestimated in a deliberate attempt to undermine the political power of the city and province. Senator Taj Haider from the PPP claimed he had official documents revealing the city's population to be 25.6 million in 2013, while the Sindh Bureau of Statistics, part of by the PPP-led provincial administration, estimated Karachi's 2016 population to be 19.1 million.\n\nThe oldest portions of modern Karachi reflect the ethnic composition of the first settlement, with Balochis and Sindhis continuing to make up a large portion of the Lyari neighbourhood, though many of the residents are relatively recent migrants. Following Partition, large numbers of Hindus left Pakistan for the newly-independent Dominion of India (later the Republic of India), while a larger percentage of Muslim migrant and refugees from India settled in Karachi. The city grew 150% during the ten period between 1941 and 1951 with the new arrivals from India, who made up 57% of Karachi's population in 1951. The city is now considered a melting pot of Pakistan, and is the country's most diverse city. In 2011, an estimated 2.5 million foreign migrants lived in the city, mostly from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka.\n\nMuch of Karachi's citizenry descend from Urdu-speaking migrants and refugees from North India who became known by the Arabic term for \"Migrant\" – Muhajir. The first Muhajirs of Karachi arrived in 1946 in the aftermath of the Great Calcutta Killings and subsequent 1946 Bihar riots. The city's wealthy Hindus opposed the resettlement of refugees near their homes, and so many refugees were accommodated in the older and more congested parts of Karachi. The city witnessed a large influx of Muhajirs following Partition, who were drawn to the port city and newly designated federal capital for its white-collar job opportunities. Muhajirs continued to migrate to Pakistan throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, with Karachi remaining the primary destination of Indian Muslim migrants throughout those decades. The Muhajir Urdu-speaking community in the 2017 census forms slightly less than 45% of the city's population. Muhajirs form the bulk of Karachi's middle class. Muhajirs are regarded as the city's most secular community, while other minorities such as Christians and Hindus increasingly regard themselves as part of the Muhajir community.\n\nKarachi is home to a wide array of non-Urdu speaking Muslim peoples from what is now the Republic of India. The city has a sizable community of Gujarati, Marathi, Konkani-speaking refugees. Karachi is also home to a several-thousand member strong community of Malabari Muslims from Kerala in South India. These ethno-linguistic groups are being assimilated in the Urdu-speaking community.\n\nDuring the period of rapid economic growth in the 1960s, large numbers Pashtuns from the NWFP migrated to Karachi with Afghan Pashtun refugees settling in Karachi during the 80's. By some estimates, Karachi is home to the world's largest urban Pashtun population, with more Pashtun citizens than the FATA. While generally considered to be one of Karachi's most conservative communities, Pashtuns in Karachi generally vote for the secular Awami National Party rather than religious parties. Pashtuns from Afghanistan are regarded as the most conservative community. Pashtuns from Pakistan's Swat Valley, in contrast, are generally seen as more liberal in social outlook. The Pashtun community forms the bulk of manual labourers and transporters.\n\nMigrants from Punjab began settling in Karachi in large numbers in the 1960s, and now make up an estimated 14% of Karachi's population. The community forms the bulk of the city's police force, and also form a large portion of Karachi's entrepreneurial classes and direct a larger portion of Karachi's service-sector economy. The bulk of Karachi's Christian community, which makes up 2.5% of the city's population, is Punjabi.\n\nDespite being the capital of Sindh province, only 6–8% of the city is Sindhi. Sindhis form much of the municipal and provincial bureaucracy. 4% of Karachi's population speaks Balochi as its mother tongue, though most Baloch speakers are of Sheedi heritage – a community that traces its roots to Africa.\n\nFollowing the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 and independence of Bangladesh, thousands of Urdu-speaking Biharis arrived in the city, preferring to remain Pakistani rather than live in the newly-independent country. Large numbers of Bengalis also migrated from Bangladesh to Karachi during periods of economic growth in the 1980s and 1990s. Karachi is now home to an estimated 2.5 to 3 million ethnic Bengalis living in Pakistan. Rohingya refugees from Myanmar, who speak a dialect of Bengali and are sometimes regarded as Bengalis, also live in the city. Karachi is home to an estimated 400,000 Rohingya residents. Large scale Rohingya migration to Karachi made Karachi one of the largest population centres of Rohingyas in the world outside of Myanmar.\n\nCentral Asian migrants from Uzbekistan and Kyrghyzstan have also settled in the city. Domestic workers from the Philippines are employed in Karachi's posh locales, while many of the city's teachers hail from Sri Lanka. Expatriates from China began migrating to Karachi in the 1940s, to work as dentists, chefs and shoemakers, while many of their decedents continue to live in Pakistan. The city is also home to a small number of British and American expatriates.\n\nDuring World War II, about 3,000 Polish refugees from the Soviet Union, with some Polish families who chose to remain in the city after Partition. Post-Partition Karachi also once had a sizable refugee community from post-revolutionary Iran.\n\nKarachi is one of Pakistan's most religiously diverse cities. \"Karachiites\" adhere to numerous sects and sub-sects of Islam, as well as Protestant Christianity, and community of Goan Catholics. The city also is home to large numbers of Hindus, and a small community of Zoroastrians.\n\nPrior to Pakistan's independence in 1947, the population of the city was estimated to be 50% Muslim, 40% Hindu, with the remaining 10% primarily Christians (both British and native), with a small numbers of Jews. Following the independence of Pakistan, much of Karachi's Sindhi Hindu population left for India while Muslim refugees from India in turn settled in the city. The city continued to attract migrants from throughout Pakistan, who were overwhelmingly Muslim, and city's population nearly doubled again in the 1950s. As a result of continued migration, over 96.5% of the city currently is estimated to be Muslim.\n\nKarachi is overwhelmingly Muslim, though the city is one of Pakistan's most secular cities. Approximately 85% of Karachi's Muslims are Sunnis, while 15% are Shi'ites. Sunnis primarily follow the Hanafi school of jurisprudence, with Sufism influencing religious practices by encouraging reverence for Sufi saints such as Abdullah Shah Ghazi and Mewa Shah. Shi'ites are predominantly Twelver, with a significant Ismaili minority which is further subdivided into Nizaris, Mustaalis, Dawoodi Bohras, and Sulaymanis.\n\nApproximately 2.5% of Karachi's population is Christian. The city's Christian community is primarily composed of Punjabi Christians, who converted from Sikhism to Christianity during the British Raj. Karachi has a community of Goan Catholics who are typically better-educated and more affluent than their Punjabi co-religionists. The Goan community dates from 1820 and has a population estimated to be 12,000–15,000 strong.\n\nWhile most of the city's Hindu population left \"en masse\" for India following Pakistan's independence, Karachi still has a large Hindu community with an estimated population of 250,000 based on 2013 data, with several active temples in central Karachi. The Hindu community is split into a more affluent Sindhi Hindu and small Punjabi Hindu group that forms part of Karachi's educated middle class, while poorer Hindus of Rajasthani and Marwari descent form the other part and typically serve as menial and day laborers. Wealthier Hindus live primarily in Clifton and Saddar, while poorer ones live and have temples in Narayanpura and Lyari. Many streets in central Karachi still retain Hindu names, especially in Mithadar, Aram Bagh (formerly Ram Bagh), and Saddar.\n\nKarachi's affluent and influential Parsis have lived in the region in the 12th century, though the modern community dates from the mid 19th century when they served as military contractors and commissariat agents to the British. Further waves of Parsi immigrants from Persia settled in the city in the late 19th century. The population of Parsis in Karachi and throughout South Asia is in continuous decline due to low birth-rates and migration to Western countries.\n\nKarachi has the largest number of Urdu speakers in Pakistan. As per the 1998 census, the linguistic breakdown of Karachi Division is:\n\n!Rank\n!Language\n!1998 census\n!Speakers\n!1981 census\n!Speakers\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 1\n! Urdu\n48.52%\n4,497,747\n54.34%\n2,830,098\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 2\n! Punjabi\n13.94%\n1,292,335\n13.64%\n710,389\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 3\n! Pashto\n11.42%\n1,058,650\n8.71%\n453,628\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 4\n! Sindhi\n7.22%\n669,340\n6.29%\n327,591\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 5\n! Balochi\n4.34%\n402,386\n4.39%\n228,636\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 6\n! Saraiki\n2.11%\n195,681\n0.35%\n18,228\nstyle=\"text-align: left;\" 7\n! Others\n12.44%\n1,153,126\n12.27%\n639,560\n\n! All\n100%\n9,269,265\n100%\n5,208,132\nThe category of \"others\" includes Gujarati, Dawoodi Bohra, Memon, Marwari, Dari, Brahui, Makrani, Hazara, Khowar, Gilgiti, Burushaski, Balti, Arabic, Farsi and Bengali. Since last few decades, every year thousands of Sindhi speaking from the rural areas are moving and settling to the karachi due to which population of the sindhis are increasing drastically.\n\nKarachi is served by a road network estimated to be approximately in length, serving approximately 3.1 million vehicles per day.\n\nKarachi is served by three \"Signal-Free Corridors\" which are designed as urban express roads to permit traffic to transverse large distances without the need to stop at intersections and stop lights. The first opened in 2007 and connects Shah Faisal Town in eastern Karachi to the industrial-estates in SITE Town away. The second corridor connects Surjani Town with Shahrah-e-Faisal over a 19-kilometre span, while the third stretch and connects Karachi's urban centre to the Gulistan-e-Johar suburb. A fourth corridor is currently under construction that will link Karachi's centre to Karachi's Malir Town.\n\nKarachi will be the terminus of the under construction M-9 motorway, which will connect Karachi to Hyderabad. The road is being constructed as part of a much larger motorway network under construction as part of the expansive China Pakistan Economic Corridor. From Hyderabad, motorways have been built, or are being constructed, to provide high-speed road access to the northern Pakistani cities of Peshawar and Mansehra to the north of Karachi.\n\nKarachi is also the terminus of the N-5 National Highway which connects the city to the historic medieval capital of Sindh, Thatta. It offers further connections to northern Pakistan and the Afghan border near Torkham, as well as the N-25 National Highway which connects the port city to the Afghan border near Quetta.\n\nWithin the city of Karachi, the Lyari Expressway is a controlled-access highway along the Lyari River in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Lyari Expressway's north-bound and south-bound sections are both complete and open for traffic. This toll highway is designed to relieve congestion in the city of Karachi. To the north of Karachi lies the Karachi Northern Bypass (M10), which starts near the junction of the M9. It then continues north for a few kilometres before turning west, where it intersects the N25.\n\nKarachi is linked by rail to the rest of the country by Pakistan Railways. The Karachi City Station and Karachi Cantonment Railway Station are the city's two major railway stations. The city has an international rail link, the Thar Express which links Karachi Cantonment Station with Bhagat Ki Kothi station in Jodhpur, India.\n\nThe railway system also handles freight linking Karachi port to destinations up-country in northern Pakistan. The city is the terminus for the Main Line-1 Railway which connects Karachi to Peshawar. Pakistan's rail network, including the Main Line-1 Railway is being upgraded as part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor, allowing trains to depart Karachi and travel on Pakistani railways at an average speed of versus the average speed currently possible on existing track.\n\nKarachi's public transport infrastructure is inadequate and constrained by low levels of investment. Karachi is not currently served by any municipal public transit, and is instead serviced primarily by the private and informal sector.\n\nThe Pakistani Government is developing the Karachi Metrobus project, which is a multi-line bus rapid transit system currently under construction. The Metrobus project was inaugurated by then-Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on 25 February 2016. Sharif stated that the \"project will be more beautiful than Lahore Metro Bus.\" The projects initial launch date was February 2017, but due to the slow pace of work, it is not yet operational. The Metrobus project has also been criticized for not being accessible by wheelchair-bound individuals\n\nKarachi was once served by numerous trams and the Karachi Circular Railway, although both systems are no longer in operation. While the Japanese Government has expressed willingness to help fund the refurbishment of the Karachi Circular Railway, the project has not been finalized.\n\nKarachi's Jinnah International Airport is the busiest airport of Pakistan with a total of 6.2 million passengers in 2015. The current terminal structure was built in 1992, and is divided into international and domestic sections. Karachi's airport serves as a hub for the flag carrier, Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), as well as for Air Indus, Shaheen Air, Serene Air and airblue. The airport offers non-stop flights to destinations throughout East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, the Persian Gulf States, Europe and North America.\n\nThe largest shipping ports in Pakistan are the Port of Karachi and the nearby Port Qasim, the former being the oldest port of Pakistan. Port Qasim is located east of the Port of Karachi on the Indus River estuary. These ports handle 95% of Pakistan's trade cargo to and from foreign ports. These seaports have modern facilities which include bulk handling, containers and oil terminals.\n\nIn response to a cholera epidemic in 1846, the Karachi Conservancy Board was organized by British administrators. The board became the Karachi Municipal Commission in 1852, and the Karachi Municipal Committee the following year. The City of Karachi Municipal Act of 1933 transformed the city administration into the Karachi Municipal Corporation with a mayor, a deputy mayor and 57 councillors. In 1976, the body became the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation.\n\nDuring the 1900s, Karachi saw its major beautification project under the mayoralty of Harchandrai Vishandas. New roads, parks, residential, and recreational areas were developed as part of this project. In 1948, the Federal Capital Territory of Pakistan was created, comprising approximately of Karachi and surrounding areas, but this was merged into the province of West Pakistan in 1961. In 1996, the metropolitan area was divided into five districts, each with its own municipal corporation.\n\nIn 2001, during the era of General Pervez Musharraf, five districts of Karachi were merged to form the city district of Karachi, with a three-tier structure. The two most local tiers are composed of 18 towns, and 178 union councils. Each tier focused on elected councils with some common members to provide \"vertical linkage\" within the federation.\n\nNaimatullah Khan was the first Nazim of Karachi during the Union Council period, while Shafiq-Ur-Rehman Paracha was the first district co-ordination officer of Karachi. Syed Mustafa Kamal was elected City Nazim of Karachi to succeed Naimatullah Khan in 2005 elections, and Nasreen Jalil was elected as the City Naib Nazim.\n\nEach Union Council had thirteen members elected from specified electorates: four men and two women elected directly by the general population; two men and two women elected by peasants and workers; one member for minority communities; two members are elected jointly as the Union Mayor (\"Nazim\") and Deputy Union Mayor (\"Naib Nazim\"). Each council included up to three council secretaries and a number of other civil servants. The Union Council system was dismantled in 2011.\n\nIn 2011, city district government of Karachi was reverted its original constituent units known as District Municipal Corporations (DMC). The five original DMCs are: Karachi East, Karachi West, Karachi Central, Karachi South and Malir. In November 2013, a sixth DMC, \"Korangi\" was carved out from District East.\n\nThe current city administrator is Muhammad Hussain Syed and Municipal Commissioner of Karachi is Matanat Ali Khan. The position of Commissioner of Karachi was created and Shoaib Ahmad Siddiqui was appointed as the Commissioner of Karachi. There are six military cantonments, which are administered by the Pakistani Army, and are some of Karachi's most upscale neighbourhoods.\n76% of Karachi households have access to piped water , with private water tankers supplying much of the water required in informal settlements. 18% of residents in a 2015 survey rated their water supply as \"bad,\" or \"very bad,\" while 44% expressed concern at the stability of water supply. By 2015, an estimated 30,000 people were dying due to water-borne diseases annually.\n\nThe K-IV water project is under development at a cost of $876 million, that will provide 650 million gallons daily of potable water to the city, with the first phase expected to supply 260 million gallons by June 2018.\n\n98% of Karachi's households are connected to the city's underground public sewerage system, largely operated by the Karachi Water and Sewerage Board. Households in Orangi Town self-organized to set-up their own sewerage system under the Orangi Pilot Project, a community service organization founded in 1980. 90% of Orangi streets are now connected to a sewer system built by local residents under the Orangi Pilot Project. Residents of individual streets bear the cost of sewerage pipes, and provide volunteer labour to lay the pipe. Residents also maintain the sewer pipes, while the city municipal administration has built several primary and secondary pipes for the network. As a result of OPP, 96% of Orangi residents have access to a latrine.\n\n72% reported in 2015 that Karachi's drainage system overflows or backs up, – the highest percentage of all major Pakistani cities. Parts of the city's drainage system overflows on average 2–7 times per month, flooding some city streets.\n\nKarachi has the highest percentage of residents in Pakistan who report that their streets are never cleaned – 42% of residents in Karachi report their streets are never cleaned, compared to 10% of residents in Lahore. Only 17% of Karachi residents reporting daily street cleaning, compared to 45%\nin Lahore. 69% of Karachi residents rely on private garbage collection services, with only 15% relying on municipal garbage collection services. 57% of Karachi residents in a 2015 survey reported that the state of their neighbourhood's cleanliness was either \"bad\" or \"very bad\". compared to 35% in Lahore, and 16% in Multan.\n\nKarachi's primary education system is divided into five levels: primary (grades one through five); middle (grades six through eight); high (grades nine and ten, leading to the Secondary School Certificate); intermediate (grades eleven and twelve, leading to a Higher Secondary School Certificate); and university programs leading to graduate and advanced degrees. Karachi has both public and private educational institutions. Most educational institutions are gender-based, from primary to university level alongside the co education institutions.\n\nSeveral of Karachi's schools, such as St Patrick's High School, St Joseph's Convent School and St Paul's English High School, are operated by Christian churches, and among Pakistan's most prestigious schools.\n\nKarachi is home to several major public universities. Karachi's first public university's date from the British colonial era. The Sindh Madressatul Islam founded in 1885, was granted university status in 2012. Establishment of the Sindh Madressatul Islam was followed by the establishment of the D. J. Sindh Government Science College in 1887, and the institution was granted university status in 2014. The Nadirshaw Edulji Dinshaw University of Engineering and Technology (NED), was founded in 1921, and is Pakistan's oldest institution of higher learning. The Dow University of Health Sciences was established in 1945, and is now one of Pakistan's top medical research institutions.\n\nThe University of Karachi, founded in 1951, is Pakistan's largest university with a student population of 24,000. The Institute of Business Administration (IBA), founded in 1955, is the oldest business school outside of North America and Europe, and was set up with technical support from the Wharton School and the University of Southern California. The Dawood University of Engineering and Technology, which opened in 1962, offers degree programmes in petroleum, gas, chemical, and industrial engineering. The Pakistan Navy Engineering College (PNEC), operated by the Pakistan Navy, is associated with the National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST) in Islamabad.\n\nKarachi is also home to numerous private universities. The Aga Khan University, founded in 1983, is Karachi's oldest private educational institution, and is one of Pakistan's most prestigious medical schools. The Indus Valley School of Art and Architecture was founded in 1989, and offers degree programmes in arts and architectural fields. Hamdard University is the largest private university in Pakistan with faculties including Eastern Medicine, Medical, Engineering, Pharmacy, and Law. The National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences (NUCES-FAST), one of Pakistan's top universities in computer education, operates two campuses in Karachi. Bahria University (BU) founded in 2000, is one of the major general institutions of Pakistan with their campuses in Karachi, Islamabad and Lahore offers degree programs in Management Sciences, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Psychology. Sir Syed University of Engineering and Technology (SSUET) offers degree programmes in biomedical, electronics, telecom and computer engineering. Karachi Institute of Economics & Technology (KIET) has two campuses in Karachi. The Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology (SZABIST), founded in 1995 by former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, operates a campus in Karachi.\n\nBULLET::::- Iqra University\nBULLET::::- Habib University\nBULLET::::- Dow University\nBULLET::::- Jinnah Medical and Dental College\nBULLET::::- Jinnah Sindh Medical University\nBULLET::::- Pakistan Air Force – Karachi Institute of Economics and Technology\nBULLET::::- United Medical and Dental College\nBULLET::::- Liaquat National Medical College\nBULLET::::- Institute of Cost & Management Accountants of Pakistan (ICMAP)\nBULLET::::- Institute of Business Management (CBM)\n\nKarachi is a centre of research in biomedicine with at least 30 public hospitals, 80 registered private hospitals and 12 recognized medical colleges, including the Indus Hospital, Lady Dufferin Hospital, Karachi Institute of Heart Diseases, National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Civil Hospital, Combined Military Hospital, PNS Rahat, PNS Shifa, Aga Khan University Hospital, Liaquat National Hospital, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, Holy Family Hospital and Ziauddin Hospital. In 1995, Ziauddin Hospital was the site of Pakistan's first bone marrow transplant.\n\nKarachi municipal authorities in October 2017 launched a new early warning system that alerted city residents to a forecasted heatwave. Previous heatwaves had routinely claimed lives in the city, but implementation of the warning system was credited for no reported heat-related fatalities.\n\nKarachi is home to Pakistan and South Asia's largest shopping Mall, Lucky One Mall which hosts over 200 stores. According to TripAdvisor the city is also home to Pakistan's favorite shopping mall, Dolmen Mall, Clifton which was also featured on CNN and the country's favorite entertainment complex, Port Grand. In 2019 the city is expected to add another mega mall/entertainment complex at Bahria Icon Tower Clifton, Pakistan's tallest skyscraper.\n\nKarachi is home to several of Pakistan's most important museums. The National Museum of Pakistan and Mohatta Palace display artwork, while the city also has several private art galleries. The city is also home to the Pakistan Airforce Museum and Pakistan Maritime Museum are also located in the city. Wazir Mansion, the birthplace of Pakistan's founder Muhammad Ali Jinnah has also been preserved as a museum open to the public.\n\nKarachi is home to some of Pakistan's important cultural institutions. The National Academy of Performing Arts, located in the former Hindu Gymkhana, offers diploma courses in performing arts that includes classical music and contemporary theatre. Karachi is home to groups such as Thespianz Theater, a professional youth-based, non-profit performing arts group, which works on theatre and arts activities in Pakistan.\n\nThough Lahore is considered to be home of Pakistan's film industry, Karachi is home to Kara Film Festival annually showcases independent Pakistani and international films and documentaries.\n\nCinema\nBambino Cinema,\nCapri Cinema,\nCinepax Cinema,\nMega Multiplex Cinema – Millennium Mall,\nNueplex Cinemas,\nAtrium Mall.\n\nThe All Pakistan Music Conference, linked to the 45-year-old similar institution in Lahore, has been holding its annual music festival since its inception in 2004. The National Arts Council (\"Koocha-e-Saqafat\") has musical performances and mushaira.\n\nKarachi is a tourist destination for domestic and international tourists. Tourist attractions near Karachi city include:\n\nMuseums: Museums located in Karachi include the National Museum of Pakistan, Pakistan Air Force Museum, and Pakistan Maritime Museum.\n\nParks: Parks located in Karachi include Bagh Ibne Qasim, Boat Basin Park, Mazar-e-Quaid, Karachi Zoo, Hill Park, Safari Park, Bagh-e-Jinnah, PAF Museum Park and Maritime Museum Park.\n\nSometimes stated to be amongst the world's most dangerous cities, the extent of violent crime in Karachi is not as significant in magnitude as compared to other cities. According to the Numbeo Crime Index 2014, Karachi was the 6th most dangerous city in the world. By the middle of 2016, Karachi's rank had dropped to 31 following the launch of anti-crime operations. By 2018, Karachi's ranking has dropped to 50. In mid 2019, Karachi's ranking fell to 71, ranking it safer than regional cities such as Delhi (65th place) and Dhaka (34th place), but was still higher than Mumbai (172nd place) and Lahore (201st place).\n\nThe city's large population results in high numbers of homicides with a moderate homicide rate. Karachi's homicide rates are lower than many Latin American cities, and in 2015 was 12.5 per 100,000 – lower than the homicide rate of several American cities such as New Orleans and St. Louis. The homicide rates in some Latin American cities such as Caracas, Venezuela and Acapulco, Mexico are in excess of 100 per 100,000 residents, many times greater than Karachi's homicide rate. In 2016, the number of murders in Karachi had dropped to 471, which had dropped further to 381 in 2017.\n\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, Karachi was rocked by political conflict while crime rates drastically increased with the arrival of weaponry from the War in Afghanistan. Several of Karachi's criminal mafias became powerful during a period in the 1990s described as \"the rule of the mafias.\" Major mafias active in the city included land mafia, water tanker mafia, transport mafia and a sand and gravel mafia. Karachi's highest death rates occurred in the mid 1990s when Karachi was much smaller. In 1995, 1,742 killings were recorded, when the city had over 5 million fewer residents.\n\nKarachi had become widely known for its high rates of violent crime, but rates sharply decreased following a controversial crackdown operation against criminals, the MQM party, and Islamist militants initiated in 2013 by the Pakistan Rangers. In 2015, 1,040 Karachiites were killed in either acts of terror or crime – an almost 50% decrease from the 2,023 deaths in 2014, and an almost 70% decrease from the 3,251 deaths recorded in 2013 – the highest ever recorded number in Karachi history. Despite a sharp decrease in violent crime, street crime remains high.\n\nWith 650 homicides in 2015, Karachi's homicide rate decreased by 75% compared to 2013. In 2017, the number of homicides had dropped further to 381. Extortion crimes decreased by 80% between 2013 and 2015, while kidnappings decreased by 90% during the same period. By 2016, the city registered a total of 21 cases of kidnap for ransom. Terrorist incidents dropped by 98% between 2012 and 2017, according to Pakistan's Interior Ministry. As a result of the Karachi's improved security environment, real-estate prices in Karachi rose sharply in 2015, with a rise in business for upmarket restaurants and cafés.\n\nInsufficient affordable housing infrastructure to absorb growth has resulted in the city's diverse migrant populations being largely confined to ethnically homogenous neighbourhoods. The 1970s saw major labour struggles in Karachi's industrial estates. Violence originated in the city's university campuses, and spread into the city. Conflict was especially sharp between MQM party and ethnic Sindhis, Pashtuns, and Punjabis. The party and its vast network of supporters were targeted by Pakistani security forces as part of the controversial Operation Clean-up in 1992, as part of an effort to restore peace in the city that lasted until 1994.\n\nUrban planning and service delivery have not kept pace with Karachi's growth, resulting in the city's low ranking on livability rankings. The city has no cohesive transportation policy, and no official public transit system, though up to 1,000 new cars are added daily to the city's congested streets.\n\nUnable to provide housing to large numbers of refugees shortly after independence, Karachi's authorities first issued \"slips\" to refugees beginning in 1950 –\nwhich allowed refugees to settle on any vacant land. Such informal settlements are known as \"katchi abadis\", and now approximately half the city's residents live in these unplanned communities.\n\nKarachi and the urban areas of Sindh have some of the world's highest records of water scarcity. There can be shortages of drinking water, tap water, and water for sanitary purposes within the city.\n\nKarachi has a collection of buildings and structures of varied architectural styles. The downtown districts of Saddar and Clifton contain early 20th-century architecture, ranging in style from the neo-classical KPT building to the Sindh High Court Building. Karachi acquired its first neo-Gothic or Indo-Gothic buildings when Frere Hall, Empress Market and St. Patrick's Cathedral were completed. The Mock Tudor architectural style was introduced in the Karachi Gymkhana and the Boat Club. Neo-Renaissance architecture was popular in the 19th century and was the architectural style for St. Joseph's Convent (1870) and the Sind Club (1883). The classical style made a comeback in the late 19th century, as seen in Lady Dufferin Hospital (1898) and the Cantt. Railway Station. While Italianate buildings remained popular, an eclectic blend termed Indo-Saracenic or Anglo-Mughal began to emerge in some locations.\nThe local mercantile community began acquiring impressive structures. Zaibunnisa Street in the Saddar area (known as Elphinstone Street in British days) is an example where the mercantile groups adopted the Italianate and Indo-Saracenic style to demonstrate their familiarity with Western culture and their own. The Hindu Gymkhana (1925) and Mohatta Palace are examples of Mughal revival buildings. The Sindh Wildlife Conservation Building, located in Saddar, served as a Freemasonic Lodge until it was taken over by the government. There are talks of it being taken away from this custody and being renovated and the Lodge being preserved with its original woodwork and ornate wooden staircase.\n\nIndus Valley School of Art and Architecture is one of the prime examples of Architectural conservation and restoration where an entire Nusserwanjee building from Kharadar area of Karachi has been relocated to Clifton for adaptive reuse in an art school. The procedure involved the careful removal of each piece of timber and stone, stacked temporarily, loaded on the trucks for transportation to the Clifton site, unloaded and re-arranged according to a given layout, stone by stone, piece by piece, and completed within three months.\n\nArchitecturally distinctive, even eccentric, buildings have sprung up throughout Karachi. Notable example of contemporary architecture include the Pakistan State Oil Headquarters building. The city has examples of modern Islamic architecture, including the Aga Khan University hospital, Masjid e Tooba, Faran Mosque, Bait-ul Mukarram Mosque, Quaid's Mausoleum, and the Textile Institute of Pakistan. One of the unique cultural elements of Karachi is that the residences, which are two- or three-story townhouses, are built with the front yard protected by a high brick wall. I. I. Chundrigar Road features a range of extremely tall buildings. The most prominent examples include the Habib Bank Plaza, PRC Towers and the MCB Tower which is the tallest skyscraper in Pakistan.\n\nWhen it comes to sports Karachi has a distinction, because some sources cite that it was in 1877 at Karachi in (British) India, where the first attempt was made to form a set of rules of badminton and likely place is said to Frere Hall.\n\nCricket's history in Pakistan predates the creation of the country in 1947. The first ever international cricket match in Karachi was held on 22 November 1935 between Sindh and Australian cricket teams. The match was seen by 5,000 Karachiites. Karachi is also the place that innovated tape ball, a safer and more affordable alternative to cricket.\n\nThe inaugural first-class match at the National Stadium was played between Pakistan and India on 26 February 1955 and since then Pakistani national cricket team has won 20 of the 41 Test matches played at the National Stadium. The first One Day International at the National Stadium was against the West Indies on 21 November 1980, with the match going to the last ball.\n\nThe national team has been less successful in such limited-overs matches at the ground, including a five-year stint between 1996 and 2001, when they failed to win any matches. The city has been host to a number of domestic cricket teams including Karachi, Karachi Blues, Karachi Greens, and Karachi Whites. The National Stadium hosted two group matches (Pakistan v. South Africa on 29 February and Pakistan v. England on 3 March), and a quarter-final match (South Africa v. West Indies on 11 March) during the 1996 Cricket World Cup.\n\nThe city has hosted seven editions of the National Games of Pakistan, most recently in 2007.\n\nIn 2005, the city hosted the SAFF Championship at this ground, as well as the Geo Super Football League 2007, which attracted capacity crowds during the games. The popularity of golf is increasing, with clubs in Karachi like Dreamworld Resort, Hotel & Golf Club, Arabian Sea Country Club, DA Country & Golf Club. The city has facilities for field hockey (the Hockey Club of Pakistan, UBL Hockey Ground), boxing (KPT Sports Complex), squash (Jahangir Khan Squash Complex), and polo. There are marinas and boating clubs. National Bank of Pakistan Sports Complex is First-class cricket venue and Multi-purpose sports facility in Karachi,\n\nBULLET::::- Professional Karachi teams\n{class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n! scope=\"col\" Club\n! scope=\"col\" League\n! scope=\"col\" Sport\n! scope=\"col\" Venue\n! scope=\"col\" Established\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" Karachi Kings\nPakistan Super League\nCricket\nDubai International Cricket Stadium\n2015\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" Karachi Dolphins\nNational T20 League/National One-day Championship\nCricket\nNational Stadium\n2004\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" Karachi Zebras\nNational T20 League/National One-day Championship\nCricket\nNational Stadium\n2004\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" HBL FC\nPakistan Premier League\nFootball\nPeoples Football Stadium\n1975\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" K-Electric F.C.\nPakistan Premier League\nFootball\nPeoples Football Stadium\n1913\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" KPT F.C.\nPakistan Premier League\nFootball\nKPT Football Stadium\n1887\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" NBP F.C.\nPakistan Premier League\nFootball\nKPT Football Stadium\nN/A\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"font-weight: normal; text-align: left;\" PIA F.C.\nPakistan Premier League\nFootball\nKPT Football Stadium\n1958\n\nBULLET::::- Cinema in Karachi\nBULLET::::- Cuisine of Karachi\nBULLET::::- Karachi Circular Railway\nBULLET::::- List of Art Galleries of Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of cemeteries in Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of hospitals in Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of magazines in Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of newspapers in Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of parks and gardens in Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of people from Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of streets of Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of tallest buildings in Karachi\nBULLET::::- List of television stations in Karachi\nBULLET::::- Media in Karachi\nBULLET::::- Sister cities of Karachi\nBULLET::::- Transport in Karachi\n\n\nBULLET::::- Karachi at the end of the Raj, film by an unknown British soldier, 1942–1947, Mowgli Productions.\n"}
{"id": "17125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17125", "title": "Kerguelen Islands", "text": "Kerguelen Islands\n\nThe Kerguelen Islands ( or ; in French commonly ' but officially ', ), also known as the Desolation Islands (\"\" in French), are a group of islands in the Antarctic constituting one of the two exposed parts of the Kerguelen Plateau, a large igneous province mostly submerged by the southern Indian Ocean. They are among the most isolated places on Earth, located northwest of the uninhabited Heard Island and McDonald Islands (Australia) and more than from Madagascar, the nearest populated location (excluding the Alfred Faure scientific station in Île de la Possession, about from there, and the non-permanent station located in Île Amsterdam, away). The islands, along with Adélie Land, the Crozet Islands, Amsterdam and Saint Paul Islands, and France's Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean, are part of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands and are administered as a separate district.\n\nThe main island, Grande Terre, is in area and is surrounded by a further 300 smaller islands and islets, forming an archipelago of . The climate is raw and chilly with frequent high winds throughout the year. The surrounding seas are generally rough and they remain ice-free year-round. There are no indigenous inhabitants, but France maintains a permanent presence of 45 to 100 soldiers, scientists, engineers and researchers. There are no airports on the islands, so all travel and transport from the outside world is conducted by ship.\n\nKerguelen Islands appear as the \"Ile de Nachtegal\" on Philippe Buache's map from 1754 before the island was officially discovered in 1772. The Buache map has the title \"Carte des Terres Australes comprises entre le Tropique du Capricorne et le Pôle Antarctique où se voyent les nouvelles découvertes faites en 1739 au Sud du Cap de Bonne Esperance\" ('Map of the Southern Lands contained between the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctic Pole, where the new discoveries made in 1739 to the south of the Cape of Good Hope may be seen'). It is possible this early name was after Abel Tasman's ship \"De Zeeuwsche Nachtegaal\". On the Buache map, \"Ile de Nachtegal\" is located at 43°S, 72°E, about 6 degrees north and 2 degrees east of the accepted location of Grande Terre.\n\nThe islands were officially discovered by the French navigator Yves-Joseph de Kerguelen-Trémarec on 12 February 1772. The next day Charles de Boisguehenneuc landed and claimed the island for the French crown. Yves de Kerguelen organised a second expedition in 1773 and arrived at the \"\"baie de l'Oiseau\"\" by December of the same year. On 6 January 1774 he commanded his lieutenant, Henri Pascal de Rochegude, to leave a message notifying any passers-by of the two passages and of the French claim to the islands. Thereafter, a number of expeditions briefly visited the islands, including that of Captain James Cook in December 1776 during his third voyage, who verified and confirmed the passage of de Kerguelen by discovering and annotating the message left by the French navigator.\nSoon after their discovery, the archipelago was regularly visited by whalers and sealers (mostly British, American and Norwegian) who hunted the resident populations of whales and seals to the point of near extinction, including fur seals in the 18th century and elephant seals in the 19th century. The sealing era lasted from 1781 to 1922 during which time 284 sealing visits are recorded, nine of which ended when the vessel was wrecked. Modern industrial sealing, associated with whaling stations, occurred intermittently between 1908 and 1956. Since the end of the whaling and sealing era, most of the islands' species have been able to increase their population again. Relics of the sealing period include trypots, hut ruins, graves and inscriptions.\n\nIn 1800, spent eight months sealing and whaling around the islands. During this time Captain Robert Rhodes, her master, prepared a chart of the islands. That vessel returned to London in April 1801 with 450 tuns of sea elephant oil.\n\nIn 1825, the British sealer John Nunn and three crew members from \"Favourite\" were shipwrecked on Kerguelen until they were rescued in 1827 by Captain Alexander Distant during his hunting campaign.\nThe islands were not completely surveyed until the Ross expedition of 1840.\n\nThe Australian James Kerguelen Robinson (1859–1914) was the first human born south of the Antarctic Convergence, on board the sealing ship \"Offley\" in Gulf of Morbihan (Royal Sound then), Kerguelen Island on 11 March 1859.\n\nFor the 1874 transit of Venus, George Biddell Airy at the Royal Observatory of the UK organised and equipped five expeditions to different parts of the world. Three of these were sent to the Kerguelen Islands. The Reverend Stephen Joseph Perry led the British expeditions to the Kerguelen Islands. He set up his main observation station at Observatory Bay and two auxiliary stations, one at Thumb Peak led by Sommerville Goodridge, and the second at Supply Bay led by Cyril Corbet. Observatory Bay was also used by the German Antarctic Expedition led by Erich Dagobert von Drygalski in 1902–03. In January 2007, an archaeological excavation of this site was carried out.\n\nIn 1874–1875, British, German and U.S. expeditions visited Kerguelen to observe the transit of Venus.\n\nIn 1877 the French started a coal mining operation; however, this was abandoned soon after.\n\nIn response to German operations in the area, France reasserted its sovereignty on the Kerguelen Islands, along with the islands of Amsterdam and St Paul, and the Crozet archipelago in 1893, and decided to administer these territories from Madagascar in 1924 (in addition to that portion of Antarctica claimed by France and known as Adélie Land; as with all Antarctic territorial claims, France's possession on the continent is held in abeyance until a new international treaty is ratified that defines each claimant's rights and obligations).\n\nThe German auxiliary cruiser called at Kerguelen during December 1940. During their stay the crew performed maintenance and replenished their water supplies. This ship's first fatality of the war occurred when a sailor, Bernhard Herrmann, fell while painting the funnel. He is buried in what is sometimes referred to as \"the most southerly German war grave\" of World War II.\n\nKerguelen has been continually occupied since 1950 by scientific research teams, with a population of 50 to 100 frequently present. There is also a French satellite tracking station.\n\nUntil 1955, the Kerguelen Islands were administratively part of the French Colony of Madagascar and Dependencies. That same year they collectively became known as ' (French Southern and Antarctic Lands) and were administratively part of the French '. In 2004 they were permanently transformed into their own entity (keeping the same name) but having inherited another group of five very remote tropical islands, \"\", which are also owned by France and are dispersed widely throughout the southern Indian Ocean.\n\nThe main island of the archipelago is called \"\". It measures east to west and north to south.\n\nPort-aux-Français, a scientific base, is along the eastern shore of the Gulf of Morbihan on La Grande Terre. Facilities there include scientific-research buildings, a satellite tracking station, dormitories, a hospital, a library, a gymnasium, a pub, and the chapel of Notre-Dame des Vents.\n\nThe highest point is Mont Ross in the Gallieni Massif, which rises along the southern coast of the island and has an elevation of . The Cook Ice Cap (), France's largest glacier with an area of about , lies on the west-central part of the island. Overall, the glaciers of the Kerguelen Islands cover just over . Grande Terre has also numerous bays, inlets, fjords, and coves, as well as several peninsulas and promontories. The most important ones are listed below:\nBULLET::::- Courbet Peninsula\nBULLET::::- Péninsule Rallier du Baty\nBULLET::::- Péninsule Gallieni\nBULLET::::- Péninsule Loranchet\nBULLET::::- Péninsule Jeanne d'Arc\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île Ronarc'h\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île de la Société de Géographie\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île Joffre\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île du Prince de Galles\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île du Gauss\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île Bouquet de la Grye\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île d'Entrecasteaux\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île du Bougainville\nBULLET::::- Presqu'île Hoche\n\nThere are also a number of notable localities, all on La Grande Terre (see also the main map):\nBULLET::::- Anse Betsy (Betsy Cove) is a former geomagnetic station on Baie Accessible (Accessible Bay), on the north coast of the Courbet Peninsula. On this site an astronomical and geomagnetic observatory was erected on 26 October 1874 by a German research expedition led by Georg Gustav Freiherr von Schleinitz. The primary goal of this station was the 1874 observation of the transit of Venus.\nBULLET::::- Armor (Base Armor), established in 1983, is located west of Port-aux-Français at the bottom of Morbihan Gulf, for the acclimatization of salmon to the Kerguelen islands.\nBULLET::::- Baie de l'Observatoire (Observatory Bay) is a former geomagnetic observation station, just west of Port-Aux-Français, on the eastern fringe of the Central Plateau, along the northern shore of the Golfe du Morbihan.\nBULLET::::- Cabane Port-Raymond is a scientific camp at the head of a fjord cutting into the Courbet Peninsula from the south.\nBULLET::::- Cap Ratmanoff is the eastmost point of the Kerguelens, and the site of a geomagnetic station.\nBULLET::::- La Montjoie is a scientific camp on the south shore of Baie Rocheuse, along the northwestern coast of the archipelago.\nBULLET::::- Molloy (Pointe Molloy) is a former observatory west of the present-day Port-Aux-Français, on the northern shore of the Golfe du Morbihan (Kerguelen). An American expedition led by G. P. Ryan erected a station at this site on 7 September 1874. That station was also established to observe the 1874 transit of Venus.\nBULLET::::- Port Bizet is a seismographic station on the northeastern coast of Île Longue. This also serves as the principal sheep farm for the island's resident flock of Bizet sheep.\nBULLET::::- Port Christmas is a former geomagnetic station on Baie de l'Oiseau, in the extreme northwest of the Loranchet Peninsula. It was named by Captain James Cook, who re-discovered the islands and who anchored there on Christmas Day, 1776. This is also the place where Captain Cook coined the name \"Desolation Islands\" in reference to what he saw as a sterile landscape.\nBULLET::::- Port Couvreux, a former whaling station, experimental sheep farm, and geomagnetic station is on Baie du Hillsborough, on the southeast coast of Presqu'île Bouquet de la Grye. Starting in 1912, sheep were raised here to create an economic base for future settlement. However, the attempt failed and the last inhabitants had to be evacuated, and the station abandoned, in 1931. The huts remain, as well as a graveyard with five anonymous graves. These are those of the settlers who were unable to survive in the harsh environment.\nBULLET::::- Port Curieuse, a harbor on the west coast across Île de l'Ouest, was named after the ship \"La Curieuse\", which was used by Raymond Rallier du Baty on his second visit to the islands (1913–14).\nBULLET::::- Port Douzième (Twelfth Port) is a hut and former geomagnetic station on the southern shore of the Golfe du Morbihan.\nBULLET::::- Port Jeanne d'Arc is a former whaling station founded by a Norwegian whaling company in 1908, and a former geomagnetic station, and lies in the northwestern corner of Presqu'île Jeanne d'Arc, looking across the Buenos Aires passage to Île Longue ( northeast). The derelict settlement consists of four residential buildings with wooden walls and tin roofs, and a barn. One of the buildings was restored in 1977, and another in 2007.\n\nFrom 1968 to 1981, a site just east of Port-aux-Français was a launching site for sounding rockets, some for French (Dragon rockets), American (Arcas) or French-Soviet (Eridans) surveys, but at the end mainly for a Soviet program (M-100).\n\nThe following is a list of the most important adjacent islands:\nBULLET::::- Île Foch in the north of the archipelago, at , the second most important offlier in the Kerguelens.\nBULLET::::- Île Saint-Lanne Gramont, is to the west of Île Foch in the Golfe Choiseul. It has an area of . Its highest point reaches .\nBULLET::::- Île du Port, also in the north in the Golfe des Baleiniers is the fourth largest satellite island with an area of . Near its centre it reaches an altitude of .\nBULLET::::- Île de l'Ouest (west coast, about )\nBULLET::::- Île Longue (southeast, about )\nBULLET::::- Îles Nuageuses (northwest, including île de Croÿ, île du Roland, îles Ternay, îles d'Après)\nBULLET::::- Île de Castries\nBULLET::::- Îles Leygues (north, including île de Castries, île Dauphine)\nBULLET::::- Île Violette\nBULLET::::- Île Australia (also known as \"Île aux Rennes\" – \"Reindeer Island\") (western part of the Golfe du Morbihan, area , altitude )\nBULLET::::- Île Haute (western part of the Golfe du Morbihan, altitude )\nBULLET::::- Île Mayès\nBULLET::::- Îles du Prince-de-Monaco (south, in the Audierne bay)\nBULLET::::- Îles de Boynes (four small islands south of Presqu'ile Rallier du Baty on the main island)\nBULLET::::- Île Altazin (a small island in the Swains Bay)\nBULLET::::- Île Gaby (a small island in the Swains Bay)\n\nPrincipal activities on the Kerguelen Islands focus on scientific research – mostly earth sciences and biology.\n\nThe former sounding rocket range to the east of Port-aux-Français is currently the site of a SuperDARN radar.\n\nSince 1992, the French Centre National d'Études Spatiales (CNES) has operated a satellite and rocket tracking station which is located east of Port-aux-Français. CNES needed a tracking station in the Southern Hemisphere, and the French government required that it be located on French territory, rather than in a populated, but foreign, place like Australia or New Zealand.\n\nAgricultural activities were limited until 2007 to raising sheep (about 3,500 Bizet sheep, a breed that is rare in mainland France) on Longue Island for consumption by the occupants of the base, as well as small quantities of vegetables in a greenhouse within the immediate vicinity of the main French base. There are also feral rabbits and sheep that can be hunted, as well as wild birds.\n\nThere are also five fishing boats and vessels, owned by fishermen on Réunion Island (a \"department\" of France about to the north) who are licensed to fish within the archipelago's exclusive economic zone.\n\nThe Kerguelen islands form an emerged part of the submerged Kerguelen Plateau, which has a total area nearing . The plateau was built by volcanic eruptions associated with the Kerguelen hotspot, and now lies on the Antarctic plate.\n\nThe major part of the volcanic formations visible on the islands is characteristic of an effusive volcanism, which caused a trap rock formation to start emerging above the level of the ocean 35 million years ago. The accumulation is of a considerable amount; basalt flows, each with a thickness of three to ten metres, stacked on top of each other, sometimes up to a depth of . This form of volcanism creates a monumental relief shaped as stairs of pyramids.\n\nOther forms of volcanism are present locally, such as the strombolian volcano Mont Ross, and the volcano-plutonic complex on the Rallier du Baty peninsula. Various veins and extrusions of lava such as trachytes, trachyphonolites and phonolites are common all over the islands.\n\nNo eruptive activity has been recorded in historic times, but some fumaroles are still active in the south-west of Grande-Terre island.\n\nA few lignite strata, trapped in basalt flows, reveal fossilised araucarian fragments, dated at about 14 million years of age.\n\nGlaciation caused the depression and tipping phenomena which created the gulfs at the north and east of the archipelago. Erosion caused by the glacial and fluvial activity carved out the valleys and fjords; erosion also created conglomerate detrital complexes, and the plain of the Courbet Peninsula.\n\nThe islands are part of a submerged microcontinent called the Kerguelen sub-continent. The microcontinent emerged substantially above sea level for three periods between 100 million years ago and 20 million years ago. The so-called Kerguelen sub-continent may have had tropical flora and fauna about 50 million years ago. The Kerguelen sub-continent finally sank 20 million years ago and is now below sea level. Kerguelen's sedimentary rocks are similar to ones found in Australia and India, indicating they were all once connected. Scientists hope that studying the Kerguelen sub-continent will help them discover how Australia, India, and Antarctica broke apart.\n\nKerguelen's climate is oceanic, cold and extremely windswept. Under the Köppen climate classification, Kerguelen's climate is considered to be an \"ET\" or tundra climate, which is technically a form of polar climate, as the average temperature in the warmest month is below . Comparable climates include the Aleutian Islands, Campbell Island (New Zealand), Falkland Islands, Iceland, northern Kamchatka Peninsula, Labrador and Wollaston Islands.\n\nAll climate readings come from the Port-aux-Français base, which has one of the more favourable climates in Kerguelen due to its proximity to the coast and its location in a gulf sheltered from the wind.\n\nThe average annual temperature is with an annual range of around . The warmest months of the year include January and February, with average temperatures between . The coldest month of the year is August with an average temperature of . Annual high temperatures rarely surpass , while temperatures in winter have never been recorded below at sea level.\n\nKerguelen receives frequent precipitation, with snow throughout the year as well as rain. Port-aux-Français receives a modest amount of precipitation ( per year) compared to the west coast which receives an estimated three times as much precipitation per year.\n\nThe mountains are frequently covered in snow but can thaw very quickly in rain. Over the course of several decades, many permanent glaciers have shown signs of retreat, with some smaller ones having disappeared completely.\n\nThe west coast receives almost continuous wind at an average speed of , due to the islands' location in between the Roaring Forties and the Furious Fifties. Wind speeds of are common and can even reach .\n\nWaves up to high are common, but there are many sheltered places where ships can dock.\n\nThe islands are part of the Southern Indian Ocean Islands tundra ecoregion that includes several subantarctic islands. Plant life is mainly limited to grasses, mosses and lichens, although the islands are also known for the indigenous, edible Kerguelen cabbage, a good source of vitamin C to mariners. The main indigenous animals are insects along with large populations of ocean-going seabirds, seals and penguins.\n\nThe wildlife is particularly vulnerable to introduced species and one particular problem has been cats. The main island is the home of a well-established feral cat population, descended from ships' cats. They survive on sea birds and the feral rabbits that were introduced to the islands. There are also populations of wild sheep (\"Ovis orientalis orientalis\") and reindeer.\n\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, French geologist Edgar Albert de la Rue began to introduce several species of salmonids. Of the seven species introduced, only brook trout and brown trout survived to establish wild populations.\n\nBULLET::::- Carabidae\nBULLET::::- [introduced]\nBULLET::::- Hydraenidae\nBULLET::::- [endemic]\n\nThe islands appear in a number of fictional works. The title character in Edgar Allan Poe's 1838 novel, \"The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket\", visits the islands. French writer Jules Verne's 1897 novel \"An Antarctic Mystery\" offers a follow up to Poe's book, and revisits the Kerguelen Islands. The 1874 short story \"The Tachypomp\" by Edward Page Mitchell tells of a hole through the center of the Earth with one end in the United States and the other in \"Kerguellen's Land\" (which is roughly antipodal to the United States and Canada). The 1880 collection \"Songs from the Mountains\" by the Australian poet Henry Kendall contains the poem \"Beyond Kerguelen\". In Kipling's poem \"McAndrew's Hymn\" – about a ship's engineer – there are the lines: \"Fra' Cape Town east to Wellington – ye need an engineer.\nFail there – ye've time to weld your shaft – ay, eat it, ere ye're spoke,\nOr make Kerguelen under sail – three jiggers burned wi' smoke!\"\n\nHenry De Vere Stacpoole set his 1919 novel \"The Beach of Dreams\" on the islands. The Kerguelen Islands were the setting for a post-Second World War confrontation between W. E. Johns's recurring hero, Biggles and the crew of a gold bullion-bearing German U-boat, in the 1948 novel \"Biggles' Second Case\". The fifth book in Patrick O'Brian's Aubrey–Maturin series, published in 1978, is entitled \"Desolation Island\".\n\nFrench author Jean-Paul Kauffmann produced a non-fiction account of his 1991 journey to the islands, titled \"The Arch of Kerguelen: Voyage to the Islands of Desolation\".\n\nThe islands appear, and serve as a main location in the 1998 novel \"Kilo Class\" by Patrick Robinson.\n\nIn 2000 British journalist and former Conservative MP Matthew Parris spent four months on Kerguelen, staying with the researchers at Port-aux-Français. A series of articles were published in \"The Times\" in which Parris charted his visit, and a documentary \"To The Ends of Earth: Dreaming on Desolation Island\" was produced for UK television, which aired on Channel 4.\n\nThe islands inspired the 2008 song \"The Loneliest Place on the Map\" by singer Al Stewart.\n\nKerguelen and island-based research facilities are an important part of Craig A. Falconer's 2015 science fiction novel \"Not Alone\" and its sequel \"Not Alone: Second Contact\".\n\nBULLET::::- Administrative divisions of France\nBULLET::::- French overseas departments and territories\nBULLET::::- Islands controlled by France in the Indian and Pacific oceans\nBULLET::::- List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands\n\nBULLET::::- Including a toponymy index.\nBULLET::::- Personal site with many pictures\nBULLET::::- Rocket launches on the Kerguelen Islands\n"}
{"id": "17129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17129", "title": "Kahlúa", "text": "Kahlúa\n\nKahlúa () is a coffee-flavored liqueur from Mexico. The drink contains rum, sugar, vanilla bean, and arabica coffee.\n\nPedro Domecq began producing Kahlúa in 1936. It was named Kahlúa, meaning \"House of the Acolhua people\" in the Veracruz Nahuatl language spoken before the Spanish Conquest. \"Kahlúa\" was Hispanicized as \"Ulúa\", forming the name of the modern San Juan de Ulúa fortress. Jules Berman was the first importer of the liquor to the United States, earning him the nickname \"Mr. Kahlua\".\n\nThe company merged in 1994 with Allied Lyons to become Allied Domecq. In turn, that company was partially acquired in 2005 by Pernod Ricard, the largest spirits distributor in the world since its merger with the Swedish Vin & Sprit in March 2008.\n\nSince 2004, the alcohol content of Kahlúa is 20.0%; earlier versions had 26.5%. In 2002, a more expensive, high-end product called \"Kahlúa Especial\" became available in the United States, Canada and Australia after previously being offered only in duty-free markets. Made with arabica coffee beans grown in Veracruz, Mexico, Kahlúa Especial has an alcohol content of 36%, has a lower viscosity, and is less sweet than the regular version. A 750 ml bottle of Kahlúa Especial bought in Austin Tx in December 2019 indicates this liqueur is 70 proof; the label states alcohol content is 35 percent. \n\nKahlúa is used to make cocktails or drink neat or on ice. Some people use it when baking desserts, and/or as a topping for ice cream, cakes, and cheesecakes.\n\nIt is mixed in several ways, often with different combinations of milk, cream, coffee and cocoa.\n\nBecause Kahlúa is made from coffee beans, it contains caffeine. According to the company, it contains \"approximately 10 mg per 100 mL (4.85 mg in each 1.5 oz) drink\" or about 25% the amount found in the same volume of coffee.\n\nKahlúa is a key ingredient in several notable cocktails:\n\nBULLET::::- Espresso Martini\nBULLET::::- White Russian\nBULLET::::- Black Russian\nBULLET::::- Mind Eraser\nBULLET::::- B-52\nBULLET::::- Baby Guinness\nBULLET::::- Brave Bull\nBULLET::::- Colorado Bulldog\nBULLET::::- Dirty Mother\nBULLET::::- Kahlúa Sour\nBULLET::::- Moose Milk\nBULLET::::- Mudslide\nBULLET::::- Spanish coffee\nKahlúa and Kahlúa Especial have received accolades from international spirit ratings organizations. The San Francisco World Spirits Competition awarded the Kahlúa Especial three silver medals between 2005 and 2007 and a bronze in 2009. The Beverage Testing Institute gave the Especial a score of 85 in 2007.\n\nBULLET::::- List of cocktails\nBULLET::::- List of coffee liqueurs\nBULLET::::- Milk and Alcohol\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\nBULLET::::- On Kahlúa and Caffeine\n"}
{"id": "17130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17130", "title": "Kelsey Grammer", "text": "Kelsey Grammer\n\nAllen Kelsey Grammer (born February 21, 1955) is an American actor, voice actor, comedian, singer, producer, director, writer and activist, best known for his two-decade-long portrayal of psychiatrist Dr. Frasier Crane on the NBC sitcoms \"Cheers\" and \"Frasier\". He also produced the sitcom \"Girlfriends\". He has won five Primetime Emmy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, and one Tony Award, and has also worked as a television producer, director, and writer.\n\nAllen Kelsey Grammer was born February 21, 1955, in Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, the son of Sally (née Cranmer; 1928–2008), a singer and actress, and Frank Allen Grammer, Jr. (d. 1968), a musician and owner of a coffee shop and a bar and grill called Greer's Place. He had one younger sister, Karen.\n\nGrammer's personal life has been beset by sometimes unusual family tragedies. He was raised by his mother and maternal grandparents in New Jersey. The family relocated to Florida, and shortly afterwards, Kelsey's grandfather died of cancer when he was twelve years old. In 1968, his father was murdered in a home invasion. In 1975, his sister was kidnapped, raped, and murdered. In 1980, his two half-brothers died while they were scuba diving off the coast of the Virgin Islands.\n\nGrammer attended Pine Crest School, a private preparatory school in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. It was there that he first began to sing and perform on stage. From the age of 16, with his mother's approval, he began to smoke a pipe. Grammer won a scholarship to the Juilliard School. He was a member of Group 6, 1973–1975. He failed to attend classes and was eventually expelled.\n\nAfter leaving Juilliard, Grammer had a three-year internship with the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego in the late 1970s before a stint in 1980 at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He made his Broadway debut in 1981 as \"Lennox\" in \"Macbeth\", taking the lead role when Philip Anglim withdrew after receiving negative reviews. Grammer then played Michael Cassio in a Broadway revival of \"Othello\", with James Earl Jones and Christopher Plummer. In 1983 he performed in the demo of the Stephen Sondheim–James Lapine production \"Sunday in the Park with George\", starring Mandy Patinkin. In 2000, Grammer again played \"Macbeth\" on Broadway, in a production that closed after only 10 days.\n\nOn April 18, 2010, Grammer made his Broadway musical debut playing the role of Georges in a revival of the Jerry Herman/Harvey Fierstein musical \"La Cage aux Folles\", for which he was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Musical. Grammer originated the roles of Charles Frohman and Captain Hook in the Broadway premiere of the musical \"Finding Neverland\" in March 2015, continuing with the roles through June 28, 2015. He returned to the stage from January 19 to April 3, 2016. Most recently he made an appearance in the West End production of \"Big Fish\".\n\nIn 1984, Grammer appeared as Dr. Frasier Crane in the NBC sitcom \"Cheers\". Grammer's former Juilliard classmate and Broadway co-star Mandy Patinkin suggested Grammer to the New York casting director, and he got what was supposed to be a six-episode job, but ended up as a regular cast member until May 1993, when the show ended.\n\nIn September 1993 the character became the center of the spin-off \"Frasier\", one of the most successful spin-offs in TV history. In addition to starring, he also directed more than 30 episodes, especially during the second half of the series, and sang the closing theme \"Tossed Salads and Scrambled Eggs.\" \"Frasier\" was nominated for and won many awards during its 11-year run, concluding in May 2004.\n\nGrammer received 11 consecutive Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his role in \"Frasier\". He won four times, tied with Carrol O'Connor, Michael J. Fox and Jim Parsons for the most wins for Primetime Emmy Award for Best Actor in a Comedy Series.\n\nIn 2001, he negotiated a US$700,000-per-episode salary for \"Frasier\". His 20-year run playing Dr. Frasier Crane ties a length set by James Arness in playing Marshal Matt Dillon on \"Gunsmoke\" from 1955 to 1975 but was surpassed by Richard Belzer in playing Det. John Munch on \"\" and \"\" since 1993.\n\nFrasier Crane also had a crossover appearance in 1993 \"Wings\" episode \"Planes, Trains, & Visiting Cranes\".\n\nIn 2005, Grammer returned to television. He produced and appeared in an American adaptation of the British show \"The Sketch Show\", which aired on Fox. The main cast consisted of Malcolm Barrett, Kaitlin Olson, Mary Lynn Rajskub and Paul F. Tompkins, as well as Lee Mack from the British version of the show. Grammer appeared in only short opening and closing segments in each episode. Many of the sketches from the British version were re-created, such as the \"California Dreamin'\", \"English Course\", and \"Sign Language\" sketches. Only six episodes of the show were made, and it was cancelled after only four of them had aired.\n\nIn 2007, Grammer starred with Patricia Heaton in the American sitcom \"Back to You\", which Fox cancelled after its first season. His next attempt, ABC's \"Hank\", fared even worse. It was cancelled after only five episodes had aired. Grammer later commented, \"Honestly, it just wasn't very funny.\"\n\nIn 2011 and 2012, Grammer found temporary success in the Starz drama series \"Boss\" as a fictional mayor of Chicago in the mold of Richard J. Daley which premiered in October 2011. It was his first dramatic TV series. At the 2012 Golden Globe Awards Kelsey Grammer won the award for Best Actor in a Television Series Drama for his role on \"Boss\". The show ran for 18 episodes over two seasons.\n\nIn 2010–2012, Grammer guest starred as a comical version of himself in three episodes of the NBC show \"30 Rock\" alongside Jane Krakowski and Jack McBrayer.\n\nIn 2014 Grammer returned to sitcom television in \"Partners\" with comedian Martin Lawrence. The Lionsgate-produced show was written and executive produced by Robert L. Boyett and Robert Horn, known for writing hit shows like \"Family Matters\", \"Living Single\", \"Full House\", \"Designing Women\", and \"Perfect Strangers\". Despite this the show was cancelled after its first season.\n\nGrammer has had parts in films such as \"Down Periscope\" (1996), \"Anastasia\" (1997), \"Toy Story 2\" (1999), \"A Christmas Carol\" (2004), \"\" (2006), \"Swing Vote\" (2008), \"Fame\" (2009), \"The Expendables 3\" (2014), \"\" (2014), \"Best of Enemies\" (2015), the National Geographic TV film \"Killing Jesus\" (2015) (in which he both played a role and narrated), and the Netflix film \"Like Father\" with Kristen Bell (2019).\n\nGrammer has provided the voice of Sideshow Bob on \"The Simpsons\", winning an Emmy Award for his work in the episode \"The Italian Bob\", his fifth Emmy win. He has appeared in eighteen episodes from the show's inception in 1989 through 2015's \"Treehouse of Horror XXVI\". Grammer supplied his voice for many other projects, including Pixar's Golden Globe Award-winning \"Toy Story 2\" (1999), 20th Century Fox's critically acclaimed animated movie \"Anastasia\", as well as \"Barbie of Swan Lake\", \"Bartok the Magnificent\", the title character in the short-lived animated series \"Gary the Rat\", \"Disney's Teacher's Pet\", the Mickey Mouse short \"Runaway Brain\" and the narrator of \"Mickey Mouse – Once Upon a Christmas\".\n\nGrammer's voice has been featured in many commercials. One of the earliest was a 1998 commercial for Honey Nut Cheerios, where he voices the wolf in Little Red Riding Hood. Since 2006, Grammer has provided the voice for television commercials advertising Hyundai. In 2008, Grammer reprised his role of Dr. Frasier Crane in a commercial for Dr Pepper (\"Frasier\" and \"Cheers\" co-star Bebe Neuwirth also reprised her role as Lilith Sternin in the same commercial, albeit in voice only).\n\nIn 2015, the voices of Grammer and John Lithgow were used in the critically acclaimed documentary \"Best of Enemies\" as William F. Buckley and Gore Vidal, respectively.\n\n!Year\n!Title\n!width=100Role\n!Notes\n1992\n\"Galaxies Are Colliding\"\nPeter\n\n1995\n\"Runaway Brain\"\nDr. Frankenollie\nVoiceShort film\n1996\n\"Down Periscope\"\nTom Dodge\n\n1997\n\"Anastasia\"\nVladimir\nVoice\n1998\n\"The Real Howard Spitz\"\nHoward Spitz\n\n\"Standing on Fishes\"\nVerk\n\n\"Bartok the Magnificent\"\nZozi\nrowspan=2 VoiceDirect-to-video\n\"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\"\nNarrator\n\"Toy Story 2\"\nStinky Pete the Prospector\nVoice\n\"15 Minutes\"\nRobert Hawkins\n\n\"Just Visiting\"\nNarrator\nUncredited voice\n\"God Lives Underwater: Fame\"\nRobert Hawkins\nShort film\n\"The Big Empty\"\nAgent Banks\n\n\"Barbie of Swan Lake\"\nRothbart\nVoiceDirect-to-video\n2004\n\"Teacher's Pet\"\nDr. Ivan Krank\nVoice\n2005\n\"The Good Humor Man\"\nMr. Skibness\n\n\"Even Money\"\nDetective Brunner\n\nDr. Henry \"Hank\" McCoy / Beast\n\n\"Swing Vote\"\nPresident Andrew Boone\n\n\"An American Carol\"\nPatton\n\n\"Middle Men\"\nFrank Griffin\n\n\"Fame\"\nMr. Martin Cranston\n\n2010\n\"Crazy on the Outside\"\nFrank\n\n2011\n\"I Don't Know How She Does It\"\nClark Cooper\n\n2013\nTin Man\nVoice\nCameo;<br>Shared role with Nicholas Hoult\n\"Think Like a Man Too\"\nLee Fox\n\n\"The Expendables 3\"\nBonaparte\n\nHarold Attinger\n\"Reach Me\"\nAngelo AldoBrandini\n\n\"Breaking the Bank\"\nCharles Bunbury\n\n\"Entourage\"\nHimself\nCameo\n\"Best of Enemies\" \nWilliam F. Buckley \nShelby's Dad\n\n\"Storks\"\nHunter\nrowspan=2 Voice\n2017\n\"Bunyan and Babe\"\nThe Amazing Blackstone / Norman Blandsford\n\"Guardians of the Tomb\"\nMason\n\n\"Like Father\"\nHarry Hamilton\n2019\n\"Grand Isle\" (2019 film)\nDetective Jones\n\n!Year\n!Title\n!Role\n!Notes\n1979\n\"Ryan's Hope\"\nWaiter\nUncreditedEpisode: \"#1.1051\"\n1982\n\"Another World\"\nHead Paramedic\nEpisode: \"#1.4498\"\n1982\n\"Macbeth\"\nLennox\nTelevision film\n1983\n\"Kennedy\"\nStephen Smith\n5 episodes\n\"Kate & Allie\"\nDavid Hamill\nEpisode: \"Allie's First Date\"\n\"George Washington\"\nLieutenant Stewart\n1 episode\n1984–1993\n\"Cheers\"\nDr. Frasier Crane\n203 episodes\n1986\n\"Crossings\"\nCraig Lawson\n2 episodes\n\"You Are the Jury\"\nStuart Cooper\nEpisode: \"The State of Oregan vs. Stanley Manning\"\n\"J.J. Starbuck\"\nPierce Morgan\nEpisode: \"Murder in E Minor\"\n\"Mickey's 60th Birthday\"\nDr. Frasier Crane\nTelevision special\n\"Dance 'til Dawn\"\nEd Strull\nTelevision film\n\"227\"\nMr. Anderson\nEpisode: \"For Sale\"\n\"Top of the Hill\"\nUnknown\nTelevision movie\n\"The Tracey Ullman Show\"\nMr. Brenna\nEpisode: \"Maria and the Mister\"\n\"Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color\"\nEpisode: \"Disneyland's 35th Anniversary Celebration\"\n\"The Earth Day Special\"\nTelevision special\n1990–present\n\"The Simpsons\"\nSideshow Bob\nVoice23 episodes\n1991\n\"Baby Talk\"\nRussell\nEpisode: \"One Night with Elliot\"\n1991–98\n\"Saturday Night Live!\"\nHimself\n3 episodes<br>Host (2 episodes)<br>Cameo (Episode: \"Kirstie Alley / Tom Petty & The Heartbreakers\"\n\"Wings\"\nDr. Frasier Crane\nEpisode: \"Planes, Trains and Visiting Cranes\"\n\"\"\nCaptain Morgan Bateson\nEpisode: \"\"\n\"Roc\"\nDetective Rush\nEpisode: \"To Love and Die on Emerson Street (Part 2)\"\n\"Beyond Suspicion\"\nRon McNally\nTelevision film\n1993–2004\n\"Frasier\"\nDr. Frasier Crane\n263 episodes\n1994\n\"The Innocent\"\nDetective Frank Barlow\nTelevision film\n1995\n\"Biography\"\nGeorge Washington\nDocumentary<br>Episode: \"Benedict Arnold: Triumph and Treason\"\n1996\n\"London Suite\"\nSydney Nichols\nTelevision film\n1997\n\"Fired Up\"\nTom Whitman\n2 episodes\n\"The Pentagon Wars\"\nGeneral Partridge\nTelevision film\n\"Just Shoot Me!\"\nNarrator\nVoiceEpisode: \"How the Finch Stole Christmas\"\n1999\n\"Animal Farm\"\nSnowball\nVoiceTelevision film\n2000\n\"Stark Raving Mad\"\nProfessor Tuttle\nEpisode: \"The Grade\"\n2001\n\"The Sports Pages\"\nHoward Greene\nTelevision filmSegment \"How Doc Waddems Finally Broke 100\"\n2002\n\"Mr. St. Nick\"\nNick St. Nicholas\nTelevision film\nGeorge Washington\nTelevision film\n\"Becker\"\nRick Cooper\nEpisode: \"But I've Got Friends I Haven't Used Yet\"\n2003\n\"Gary the Rat\"\nGary Andrews\nVoice13 episodes\n\"A Christmas Carol: The Musical\"\nEbenezer Scrooge\nTelevision film\nHimself\n1 episode\n2005\n\"Kelsey Grammer Presents: The Sketch Show\"\nVarious characters\n6 episodes\n2006\n\"Medium\"\nBob Sherman/Angel of Death\nEpisode: \"Death Takes a Policy\"\n2007–2008\n\"Back to You\"\nChuck Darling\n17 episodes\n2009–2010\n\"Hank\"\nHank Pryor\n10 episodes\n2010\n\"The Troop\"\nDr. Cranius\nVoiceEpisode: \"Do Not Talk to Dr. Cranius\"\n2010–2012\n\"30 Rock\"\nHimself\n3 episodes\n2011–2012\n\"Boss\"\nMayor Tom Kane\n18 episodes\n2014\n\"Partners\"\nAllen Braddock\n10 episodes\n2015\n\"Killing Jesus\"\nKing Herod/Narrator\nTelevision film\n2016\n\"Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt\"\nHimself\nVoiceEpisode: \"Kimmy Kidnaps Gretchen!\"\n2016–2017\n\"The Last Tycoon\"\nPat Brady\n9 episodes\n2016–2018\nBlinky\nVoice52 episodes\n\"Modern Family\"\nKeifth\nEpisode: \"Ringmaster Keifth\"\n\"Porters\"\nMendel Dolem\nEpisode: \"#1.1\"\n2018–19\nBlinky\nVoice2 Episodes\n\"Arrow\"\nNarrator\nUncredited voiceEpisode: \"Emerald Archer\"\n\"Proven Innocent\"\nGore Bellows\nMain role\n\n!Year\n!Title\n!Role\n!Notes\n1981\n\"Macbeth\"\nLennox\nVivian Beaumont Theatre\nrowspan=\"2\" 1982\n\"Othello\"\nMichael Cassio\nWinter Garden Theatre\n\"Plenty\"\nCodename Lazar\nThe Public Theater\nrowspan=\"2\" 1983\n\"Quartermaine's Terms\"\nMark Sackling\nPlayhouse 91\n\"Sunday in the Park with George\"\nYoung Man on the Bank and soldier\nPlaywrights Horizons\nrowspan=\"3\" 2000\nrowspan=\"2\" \"Macbeth\"\nrowspan=\"2\" Macbeth\nColonial Theater\nMusic Box Theatre\n\"\"\nSweeney Todd\nAhmanson Theatre\n2007\n\"My Fair Lady\"\nProfessor Henry Higgins\nLincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall\n2010–2011\n\"La Cage aux Folles\"\nGeorges\nLongacre Theatre\n2015–2016\n\"Finding Neverland\"\nCharles Frohman/Captain Hook\nLunt-Fontanne Theatre\n2015–2017\n\"The Color Purple\"\nProducerBernard B. Jacobs Theatre\n2017\n\"Big Fish\"\nEdward Bloom\nThe Other Palace\n2019\n\"Man of La Mancha\"\n\n!Year\n!Title\n!Voice role\n2007\n\"The Simpsons Game\"\nSideshow Bob\n\nDirector\n!Year\n!Title\n!Notes\n1996–2004\n\"Frasier\"\n36 episodes\n2001\n\"Neurotic Tendencies\"\nPilot\n2005\n\"Out of Practice\"\n2 episodes\n2006\n\"My Ex Life\"\nPilot\n2007\n\"Everybody Hates Chris\"\nEpisode: \"Everybody Hates the Last Day\"\n\"Hank\"\n2 episodes\n\"Alligator Point\"\nPilot\n2014\n\"Partners\"\n2 episodes\n\nProducer\n\nHis production company, Grammnet Productions, produces the CW sitcoms \"Girlfriends\" and \"The Game\" (now on BET), the NBC drama \"Medium\", and many other projects.\n\n!Year\n!Title\n!Contribution\n!Notes\n1993–2004\n\"Frasier\"\nrowspan=\"18\" Executive producer\n262 episodes\n1994\n\"The Innocent\"\nTelevision film\n1995\n\"Kelsey Grammer Salutes Jack Benny\"\nTelevision documentary\n1997–1998\n\"Fired Up\"\n28 episodes\n2000–2008\n\"Girlfriends\"\n172 episodes\n2001\n\"Neurotic Tendencies\"\nPilot\n2002–2003\n\"In-Laws\"\n15 episodes\n\"Gary the Rat\"\n\"Alligator Point\"\nPilot\n2004\n\"The Soluna Project\"\nPilot\n\"The Good Humor Man\"\nFeature film\n\"Kelsey Grammer Presents: The Sketch Show\"\n6 episodes\n\"World Cup Comedy\"\n2005–2011\n\"Medium\"\n2006–2009\n\"The Game\"\n2007\n\"Dash 4 Cash\"\nPilot\n2007–2008\n\"Back to You\"\n17 episodes\n2009–2010\n\"Hank\"\n6 episodes\n2010\n\"The Kelsey Grammer Bill Zucker Comedy Hour\"\nProducer\nPilot\n2011–2012\n\"Boss\"\n2014\n\"Partners\"\n10 episodes\n2018\n\"Light as a Feather\"\n\nGrammer won a number of Emmys, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Golden Globes for his work on \"Frasier\". He was the first American actor ever to be nominated for multiple Emmy awards for portraying the same character on three different television shows (\"Cheers\", \"Frasier\", and \"Wings\"). In 2010, Grammer received his first Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Musical for his acclaimed performance in \"La Cage Aux Folles\" opposite Douglas Hodge. In 2016, he received his second Tony Award nomination and win for Best Revival of a Musical as a producer for \"The Color Purple.\" On May 22, 2001, he was presented with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for television. In 1999 he received a nomination from Directors Guild of America award for directing the episode \"Frasier\". At the Golden Globes, he has received nine nominations winning three times.\n\nGrammer has been married four times and has seven children and one grandchild . His first marriage to dance instructor Doreen Alderman lasted from 1982 to 1990, although they were separated for the last six years of that period. They have one daughter, actress Spencer Grammer (born October 9, 1983). Through Spencer, Grammer has one grandson, Spencer's son Emmett Emmanual Hesketh (born October 10, 2011).\n\nAfter his divorce from Alderman, Grammer had a daughter, Kandace Greer Grammer (\"Greer Grammer\"; born February 15, 1992), with hair and makeup stylist Barrie Buckner. Greer was a cast member on MTV's show \"Awkward.\"\n\nHis second marriage, to Leigh-Anne Csuhany in September 1992, lasted one year. Grammer filed for an annulment when Csuhany was three months pregnant and evicted her from their home. The pregnancy ended in a miscarriage. Grammer claimed she was abusive and fired a gun at him.\n\nIn 1994, he met 28-year-old Tammi Baliszewski, also known as Tammi Alexander, at a bar in Manhattan Beach, California. In December 1994, they appeared together on the cover of \"People\" magazine, announcing their engagement and Grammer's substance abuse problems.\n\nIn August 1997, Grammer married his third wife, dancer and model Camille Donatacci. They met on a blind date in 1996. They have a daughter, born October 2001, and a son, born August 2004, both born to a surrogate mother. During their marriage, several of Grammer and Donatacci's homes were featured in magazines, including ones in Malibu, California (February 2001, \"InStyle\"), Maui (May 2004, \"InStyle\"), Long Island, New York (April 2008, \"InStyle\"), Bachelor Gulch, Colorado (\"Architectural Digest)\", and Bel Air, Los Angeles (\"Architectural Digest\"). In New York City, they lived at 15 Central Park West. It was announced on July 1, 2010, that Donatacci had filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Grammer and Donatacci's divorce was finalized on February 10, 2011.\n\nOn August 12, 2010, Grammer announced that he was going to be a father for the fifth time with girlfriend Kayte Walsh, an English flight attendant 25 years his junior, daughter of retired soccer player Alan Walsh. However, in October, Grammer announced that Walsh had miscarried six weeks earlier. The couple announced their engagement in December 2010, and married at The Plaza Hotel in New York City on February 25, 2011, two weeks after the finalization of Grammer's third divorce. Grammer and Walsh have a daughter, born July 2012, and two sons, born July 2014 and November 2016.\n\nOn July 1, 1975, Freddie Glenn, Michael Corbett, and one other man abducted, raped, and murdered Grammer's younger sister, 18-year-old Karen Grammer. Grammer, then 20, identified her body. He and his sister had been close, and he was devastated by her death; his later bouts of alcoholism and drug addiction were fueled in part by guilt and depression. In a 2012 interview with Oprah Winfrey, Grammer said he would be willing to forgive the perpetrators if they would take responsibility for the crime, but that they all continued to say they were innocent. In the same interview, Grammer expressed his loss of faith for a few years after Karen's death. He subsequently forgave Glenn in a 2014 parole hearing after being convinced of Glenn's contrition, but refused to support his release, saying that it would \"be a betrayal of my sister's life\". He named his daughter Spencer Karen Grammer in part for his sister.\n\nGrammer is a supporter of the Republican Party. In 2019, he called Washington politicians a \"bunch of clowns\". He has expressed an interest in some day running for United States Congress, Mayor of New York City, and the presidency. Grammer was a guest at President George W. Bush's first inauguration. Grammer endorsed Rudy Giuliani in the 2008 presidential primary and later campaigned for John McCain in the general election. Grammer promoted RightNetwork, a conservative start-up American television network. He endorsed Michele Bachmann for the Republican nomination for president in 2012. After Mitt Romney won the nomination, Grammer endorsed him.<ref name=\"http://thehill.com/video/campaign/202579-kelsey-grammer-says-mitt-romney-would-probably-do-a-pretty-good-job\"></ref> He supported Ben Carson's candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination in 2016, although he endorsed Donald Trump when the latter was selected.\n\nAlthough Grammer endorses the Tea Party movement on economic issues such as small government and lower taxes, he is supportive of same-sex marriage, stating \"I think marriage is up to two people who love each other\".\n\nWhile a \"New York\" magazine profile published in 2010 described him as pro-choice, Grammer in 2015 posted an Instagram photo of himself with his wife Kayte wearing a T-shirt by the pro-life group Abort73. \"City A.M.\" described Grammer as \"one of Hollywood's best-known Republicans, a rare spark of red in a blue sea of Democrats\".\n\nGrammer has a history of alcoholism. In 1988, Grammer was arrested for drunk driving and cocaine possession and sentenced to 30 days in jail. In August 1990, Grammer was arrested again for cocaine possession and was sentenced to three years' probation, fined $500, and required to perform 300 hours of community service. In January 1991, Grammer was given an additional two years' probation for violating his original probation through additional cocaine use. The cast and producers of both \"Frasier\" and \"Cheers\" held interventions to attempt to help him. Grammer's personal problems affected his work; co-star Bebe Neuwirth and writer Ken Levine cited delays with rehearsals and filming due to his erratic behavior. Writer Dan O'Shannon recalled, however, that\n\nGrammer credits his religion for helping him through with his struggles with alcohol and drug use, as well as his personal tragedies.\n\nOn May 31, 2008, while paddleboarding with his then-wife Camille in Hawaii, Grammer experienced a heart attack. Their personal assistant, Scott MacLean was essential in saving his life. Grammer was discharged on June 4, 2008, and was said to be \"resting comfortably\" at his Hawaiian residence. Seven weeks after the attack, Grammer told \"Entertainment Tonight\" that, although at the time his spokesman described the attack as mild, it was in fact more severe, almost leading to his death, as his heart had stopped. Grammer thought Fox's decision to cancel his TV sitcom \"Back to You\" contributed to his health problems, stating that \"It was a very stressful time for me, and a surprise that it was cancelled. But you know, everything that doesn't kill us—which it almost did—makes us stronger!\"\n\nIn 1995, a 15-year-old babysitter who babysat Grammer's daughter accused the actor of statutory rape. A grand jury chose not to indict Kelsey Grammer \"on sexual assault charges based on a teenager's complaint that he had sex with her at a local hotel in 1993.\" \"The young woman's delay of more than a year in pressing charges against Mr. Grammer made it difficult to support her claim\" according to the County Prosecutor Nicholas L. Bissell Jr.\"\n\nThat same year, Grammer's ex-girlfriend, Cerlette Lamme, sued him for defamation of character and invasion of privacy over content he included in his autobiography \"So Far\". In September 1996, he crashed his Dodge Viper while intoxicated, and subsequently checked into the Betty Ford Center (an alcohol rehabilitation clinic) for 30 days.\nIn 1998, Grammer filed a lawsuit against Internet Entertainment Group (IEG), which Grammer claimed had stolen from his home a videotape of him having sex with a woman. IEG countersued Grammer, denying it was in possession of such a tape, and Grammer's suit was eventually dropped. IEG President Seth Warshavsky later said, \"We have been presented with another Kelsey Grammer tape. But we have no plans to air it. We are still evaluating it at this time.\" Grammer later reflected:\n\nWhether or not you're a celebrity—even if you're just an old slob with a video camera—you don't realize you shouldn't do it. So you throw the tape in the back of a dark closet until your old girlfriend remembers it's there because you're famous now and she's not. But if you're not prepared to do the time, don't do the crime.\n\nIn August 2008, Bradley Blakeman, a former aide to George W. Bush, filed a copyright lawsuit in federal court on Long Island over Grammer's movie \"Swing Vote\", claiming that parts of its plot and marketing had been stolen from him. The lawsuit claimed that Blakeman had given a copyrighted screenplay called \"Go November\" to Grammer in 2006, and that Grammer agreed to develop the project and star as a Republican president but instead ended up playing a similar role in \"Swing Vote\", which was released on August 1, 2008. Grammer's spokesman dismissed the claims as \"frivolous\" and a \"waste of time\". The lawsuit was settled in 2010 for $10.\n\nBULLET::::- Grammer, Kelsey. \"So Far\". New York: Viking Press, 1995. Print. . . His Autobiography.\n\n"}
{"id": "17131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17131", "title": "Kemerovo", "text": "Kemerovo\n\nKemerovo () is an industrial city and the administrative center of Kemerovo Oblast, Russia, located at the confluence of the Iskitim and Tom Rivers, in the major coal mining region of the Kuznetsk Basin. Its population was 532,981 in the 2010 Census; 484,754 in the 2002 Census; 520,263 in the 1989 Census.\n\nIt was previously known as \"Shcheglovsk\" (until March 27, 1932).\n\nKemerovo is an amalgamation of, and successor to, several older Russian settlements. A waypoint named Verkhotomsky \"ostrog\" was established nearby in 1657 on a road from Tomsk to Kuznetsk fortress. In 1701, the settlement of Shcheglovsk was founded on the left bank of the Tom; soon it became a village. By 1859, seven villages existed where modern Kemerovo is now: Shcheglovka (or Ust-Iskitimskoye), Kemerovo (named in 1734), Yevseyevo, Krasny Yar, Kur-Iskitim (Pleshki), Davydovo (Ishanovo), and Borovaya. In 1721, coal was discovered in the area. The first coal mines were established in 1907, later a chemical plant was established in 1916. By 1917, the population of Shcheglovo had grown to around 4,000 people.\n\nThe area's further development was boosted by the construction of a railway between Yurga and Kolchugino (now Leninsk-Kuznetsky) with a connection between Topki and Shcheglovo. Shcheglovo was granted town status on May 9, 1918, which is now considered to be the date of Kemerovo's founding; and was later known as Shcheglovsk. The town became the central location for the Kuzbass Autonomous Industrial Colony which was established there in 1921. 650 workers from 20 different countries settled there and set up what became the Kemerovo Coke Chemical Plant. Some of their descendants visited the modern factory in 2011. On May 27, 1932, Shcheglovsk was renamed Kemerovo and became the administrative center of Kemerovo Oblast in 1943. In March 2018, 60 people were killed when a fire broke out in a shopping mall in the town.\n\nKemerovo is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Kemerovsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as Kemerovo City Under Oblast Jurisdiction—an administrative unit with a status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, Kemerovo City Under Oblast Jurisdiction is incorporated as Kemerovsky Urban Okrug.\n\nThe industrialization of Kemerovo was driven and underpinned by coal mining and by the heavy industry based on the availability of coal. It remains an important industrial city, built up during the Soviet period, with important steel, aluminum and machinery based manufacturing plants along with chemical, fertilizer, and other manufacturing industries. Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the city's industries have experienced a severe decline, creating high levels of unemployment. Major companies based in the city include Siberian Business Union.\n\nKemerovo is linked to western Russia by a branch of the Trans-Siberian Railway and has the Kemerovo Railway station.\n\nThe city is served by Kemerovo International Airport.\n\nLocal public transport is provided by buses, trolleybuses and trams.\nSix higher education institutions are located in Kemerovo: Kemerovo State University, Kuzbass State Technical University, Kemerovo Institute of Food Industry (University), Kemerovo State Medical Academy, Kemerovo State Institute of Culture, Kemerovo Agricultural Institute and Kuzbass Economy and Justice Institute.\n\nThe public interest for bandy is widespread in Russia. 26,000 watched the opening game of the 2011–12 Russian Bandy League when local club Kuzbass played against Dynamo Moscow and Kuzbass is among the very best in the Russian Bandy League. The 2007 Bandy World Championship was held in the city. Female bandy only exists in a few places in Russia. Now Kemerovo is about to start it up. Moscow already had two multi-use indoor arenas where bandy can be played. Kemerovo got the first one in Russia specifically built for bandy (today also Khabarovsk and Ulyanovsk have it). Kuzbass plays the matches in the league at Khimik Stadium because of the big public interest. That arena has a capacity of 32000. As it also is equipped with artificial ice, Kemerovo has the best infrastructure for developing bandy in Russia.\n\nSince 2013 there has been a \"bandy on boots\" tournament for national diasporas living in Kuzbass.\n\nKemerovo's position gives it a humid continental climate (Köppen \"Dfb\") with average temperatures varying from in January to in July and relatively low precipitation of around annually.\n\nBULLET::::- Yuri Arbachakov, boxer\nBULLET::::- Maria Barakova, mezzo-soprano; winner of Glinka and Tchaikovsky classical music competitions\nBULLET::::- Andreas Beck, association football player\nBULLET::::- Diana Borisova, rhythmic gymnast\nBULLET::::- Marina Domashenko, opera singer\nBULLET::::- Vyacheslav Ivanenko, retired race walker\nBULLET::::- Alexei Leonov, cosmonaut; honorable citizen of Kemerovo\nBULLET::::- Alexandra Merkulova, retired rhythmic gymnast\nBULLET::::- Slava Mogutin, artist\nBULLET::::- Andrei Panin, actor, director\nBULLET::::- Wladimir Sukhatsky, TV-producer\nBULLET::::- Aman Tuleyev, governor of Kemerovo Oblast\n\nKemerovo is twinned with:\nBULLET::::- Billings, Montana, United States\nBULLET::::- Salgótarján, Hungary\n\nBULLET::::- Immaculate Heart of Mary Church, Kemerovo\nBULLET::::- Кемеровский областной краеведческий музей\nBULLET::::- Informational website of Kemerovo (in Russian)\n\n\nBULLET::::- Official website of Kemerovo\nBULLET::::- Webcam with the view of the Theater Square in Kemerovo\nBULLET::::- Natural landscapes of the Kemerovo area\n"}
{"id": "17133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17133", "title": "Channels of the Hawaiian Islands", "text": "Channels of the Hawaiian Islands\n\nIn an archipelago like the Hawaiian Islands the water between islands is typically called a \"channel\" or \"passage\". Described here are the channels between the islands of Hawaiʻi, arranged from southeast to northwest.\n\nThe ʻAlenuihāhā separates the island of Hawaiʻi and the island of Maui. The maximum depth of this channel is , and the channel is 30 miles wide. There is a significant wind funnel effect in the channel, which is subject to scientific investigations. ʻAlenuihāhā means \"great billows smashing.\"\n\nThe ʻAlalākeiki Channel separates the islands of Kahoʻolawe and Maui, at a distance of 7 miles. ʻAlalākeiki means \"crying baby.\"\n\nThe Kealaikahiki Channel is the channel between Lānaʻi and Kahoʻolawe. It literally means \"the road to Tahiti\"; if one takes a bearing off of Kealaikahiki Point on Kahoʻolawe while in the channel and heads directly straight, one arrives, more or less, in Tahiti. In practice, however, Polynesian navigators probably did not quite ply a straight route to Tahiti. The channel is 17 miles wide.\n\nThe ʻAuʻau Channel is one of the most protected areas of ocean in the Hawaiian Islands, lying between Lānaʻi and Maui. The channel is also protected by Molokaʻi to the north, and Kahoʻolawe to the south. The depth of the channel reaches , and its width is . ʻAuʻau channel is a whale-watching center in the Hawaiian Islands. Humpback whales migrate approximately 3,500 miles (5600 km) from Alaskan waters each autumn and spend the northern hemisphere winter months in the protected waters of the channel.\n\nʻAuʻau translates to \"to take a bath\" referring to its calm bath-like conditions.\n\nThe middle of the ʻAuʻau channel off Lahaina is known as the Lahaina Roads. Once filled with whalers when Lahaina was a capital for that industry, Lahaina Roads were later adopted as an alternate anchorage for the main U.S. Pacific Fleet based at Pearl Harbor. In the planning for the attack on Pearl Harbor, the Japanese had hoped that the Pacific Fleet still utilized Lahaina as an anchorage as ships sunk in the deep water there would have been unrecoverable. However, Lahaina was not utilized, and the bulk of the fleet remained moored in Pearl Harbor. The Roads are still a common moorage for oceangoing cruise ships and naval vessels of many flags, including the U.S., whose crews enjoy liberty on the island.\n\nThe Pailolo Channel separates the islands of Molokaʻi and Maui. Although the channel is only about at its shortest point, it is one of the windiest and roughest in the Hawaiian Islands.\n\nThe Kalohi Channel is the stretch of water separating Lānaʻi and Molokaʻi. Depth of water in this channel is about and width is . This is one of the less treacherous channels between islands in the archipelago, although strong winds and choppy sea conditions are frequent. Kalolohia beach on the Lānaʻi coast is also known as \"Shipwreck Beach\" because of a wreck on the reef there. Kalohi means \"the slowness.\"\n\nThe Kaiwi Channel (also known as the Molokaʻi Channel) separates the islands of Oʻahu and Molokaʻi, and is wide. Maximum depth is . \"Ka Iwi\" means \"the bone\". There are annual paddleboarding and outrigger canoe paddling contests which traverse this channel. \n\nSwimming the channel is one of the 7 challenges in the Oceans Seven open water swimming series.\n\nThe Kaʻieʻie Waho Channel, also called the Kauai Channel, separates the islands of Kauaʻi and Oʻahu, at a distance of . Kaʻieʻie Waho means \"Outer Kaʻieʻie,\" named after the ʻieʻie vine (\"Freycinetia arborea\"). The maximum depth of the channel is over 11000 feet.\n\nThe Kaulakahi Channel separates the islands of Niʻihau and Kauaʻi. It is wide. Kaulakahi translates to \"the single flame (streak of color).\"\n\nThe Kumukahi Channel separates the islands of Niʻihau and Lehua. Kumukahi means \"first beginning.\"\n\nThe Hoʻomoʻa Channel separates the islands of Lehua and Nihoa. Hoʻomoʻa means \"to cook.\"\n\nThe Hawaiʻiloa Channel to the northwest of the islands of Nihoa. Named after Hawaiʻiloa, hero of an ancient Hawaiian legend about the settling of the Hawaiian Islands.\n\n"}
{"id": "17134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17134", "title": "Kemp Town", "text": "Kemp Town\n\nKemp Town is a 19th-century residential estate in the east of Brighton in East Sussex, England, UK. Conceived and financed by Thomas Read Kemp, it has given its name to the larger Kemptown region of Brighton. The majority of the original estate is now demarcated by the modern Kemp Town Conservation Area as defined by the local authority, Brighton and Hove City Council.\n\nKemp Town Estate was designed by Charles Busby and Amon Henry Wilds and constructed by Thomas Cubitt. Building work started in 1823 on Arundel Terrace, Chichester Terrace, Lewes Crescent and Sussex Square. Chichester Terrace incorporated the earlier Chichester House. In 1837 Thomas Kemp fled the country to escape his creditors. The project continued under Cubitt with the support of the Fifth Earl of Bristol. It was completed in 1855, with Sussex Square larger than London's Grosvenor Square and at the time the biggest housing crescent in Britain. The original estate is a good example of Regency architecture. A history of the residential occupation of the Estate has been collected as part of a local project called \"Who's been living in my house?\".\n\nThe gardens which form Sussex Square and Lewes Crescent, separated by Eastern Road, are known formally as the Kemp Town Enclosures. Work began on the Enclosures in 1823. Early works led by Henry Philips included the landscaping of the gardens and the addition of a tunnel to the esplanade. The Enclosures are owned communally by the freeholders of the 105 houses which make up the Kemp Town Estate.\n\nAt around the same time, Brighton's neighbour Hove was expanding on the western boundary of Brighton, with the development of the Brunswick Estate which featured similar though smaller Regency-style properties, and its own market, police station, riding school and (as in Kemp Town) small mews streets for staff housing. These mews now provide very attractive private accommodation which can fetch similar prices to flats in the grand houses they once served.\n\nBelow and to the east of Kemp Town, at beach level, is now Brighton Marina and a proposed redevelopment at Black Rock, site of a former lido.\n\nBULLET::::- Detailed history of (all of) Kemptown\n"}
{"id": "17135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17135", "title": "Kentucky Derby", "text": "Kentucky Derby\n\nThe Kentucky Derby is a horse race held annually in Louisville, Kentucky, United States, on the first Saturday in May, capping the two-week-long Kentucky Derby Festival. The competition is a Grade I stakes race for three-year-old Thoroughbreds at a distance of at Churchill Downs. Colts and geldings carry and fillies .\n\nIt is dubbed \"The Run for the Roses,\" stemming from the blanket of roses draped over the winner. It is also known in the United States as \"The Most Exciting Two Minutes in Sports\" or \"The Fastest Two Minutes in Sports\" because of its approximate duration. It is the first leg of the American Triple Crown, followed by the Preakness Stakes, and then the Belmont Stakes. Unlike the Preakness and Belmont Stakes, which took hiatuses in 1891–1893 and 1911–1912 respectively, the Kentucky Derby has been held uninterrupted since 1875. Even with the Olympics and major professional sports leagues canceled at those points, the Derby, Preakness, and Belmont took place during the Great Depression and both World Wars.\n\nA horse must win all three races to win the Triple Crown. In the 2015 listing of the International Federation of Horseracing Authorities (IFHA), the Kentucky Derby tied with the Whitney Handicap as the top Grade 1 race in the United States outside the Breeders' Cup races.\n\nThe attendance at the Kentucky Derby ranks first in North America and usually surpasses the attendance numbers of all other stakes races including the Preakness Stakes, Belmont Stakes, and the Breeders' Cup.\n\nIn 1872, Col. Meriwether Lewis Clark, Jr., grandson of William Clark of the Lewis and Clark expedition, traveled to England, visiting Epsom in Surrey where The Derby had been running annually since 1780. From there, Clark went on to Paris, France, where a group of racing enthusiasts had formed the French Jockey Club in 1863. They had organized the Grand Prix de Paris at Longchamp, which at the time was the greatest race in France.\n\nReturning home to Kentucky, Clark organized the Louisville Jockey Club to raise money for building quality racing facilities just outside the city. The track would soon become known as Churchill Downs, named for John and Henry Churchill, who provided the land for the racetrack. The naming went official in 1937.\n\nThe Kentucky Derby was first run at 1 1/2 miles (12 furlongs; 2.4 km) the same distance as the Epsom Derby, before changing lengths in 1896 to its current 1 1/4 miles (10 furlongs; 2 km). On May 17, 1875, in front of an estimated crowd of 10,000 people, a field of 15 three-year-old horses contested the first Derby. Under jockey Oliver Lewis, a colt named Aristides, who was trained by future Hall of Famer Ansel Williamson, won the inaugural Derby. Later that year, Lewis rode Aristides to a second-place finish in the Belmont Stakes.\n\nAlthough the first race meeting proved a success, the track ran into financial difficulties, and in 1894 the New Louisville Jockey Club was incorporated with the new capitalization and improved facilities. Despite this, the business floundered until 1902 when Col. Matt Winn of Louisville put together a syndicate of businessmen to acquire the facility. Under Winn, Churchill Downs prospered, and the Kentucky Derby then became the preeminent stakes race for three-year-old thoroughbred horses in North America.\n\nThoroughbred owners began sending their successful Derby horses to compete in two other races. These two are the Preakness Stakes at the Pimlico Race Course, in Baltimore, Maryland, and the Belmont Stakes in Elmont, New York. The three races offered large purses, and in 1919 Sir Barton became the first horse to win all three races. However, the term Triple Crown didn't come into use for another eleven years. In 1930, when Gallant Fox became the second horse to win all three races, sportswriter Charles Hatton brought the phrase into American usage. Fueled by the media, public interest in the possibility of a \"superhorse\" that could win the Triple Crown began in the weeks leading up to the Derby. Two years after the term went in use, the race (until that time ran in mid-May since inception) changed the date to the first Saturday in May. This change allows for a specific schedule for the Triple Crown races. Since 1931, the order of Triple Crown races has been the Kentucky Derby first, followed by the Preakness Stakes and then the Belmont Stakes. Before 1931, eleven times the Preakness was run before the Derby. On May 12, 1917, and again on May 13, 1922, the Preakness and the Derby took place on the same day. On eleven occasions the Belmont Stakes was run before the Preakness Stakes.\n\nOn May 16, 1925, the first live radio broadcast of the Kentucky Derby aired on WHAS as well as on WGN in Chicago. On May 7, 1949, the first television coverage of the Kentucky Derby took place, produced by WAVE-TV, the NBC affiliate in Louisville. This coverage was aired live in the Louisville market and sent to NBC as a kinescope newsreel recording for national broadcast. On May 3, 1952, the first national television coverage of the Kentucky Derby took place, aired from then-CBS affiliate WHAS-TV. In 1954, the purse exceeded $100,000 for the first time. In 1968, Dancer's Image became the first horse to win the race and then faced disqualification. A urine test revealed traces of phenylbutazone (an anti-inflammatory painkiller drug) inside Dancer's Image. Forward Pass won after a protracted legal battle by the owners of Dancer's Image (which they lost). Forward Pass thus became the eighth winner for Calumet Farm. Unexpectedly, the regulations at Kentucky thoroughbred race tracks were changed some years later, allowing horses to run on phenylbutazone. In 1970, Diane Crump became the first female jockey to ride in the Derby, finishing 15th aboard Fathom.\n\nThe fastest time ever run in the Derby was in 1973 at 1:59.4 minutes, when Secretariat broke the record set by Northern Dancer in 1964 - a record time yet to be topped. Also during that race, he did something unique in Triple Crown races: for each successive quarter ran, his times were faster. Although the races do not record times for non-winners, in 1973 Sham finished second, two and a half lengths behind Secretariat in the same race. Using the thoroughbred racing convention of one length equaling one-fifth of a second to calculate Sham's time, he also finished in under two minutes. Another sub-two-minute finish, only the third, was set in 2001 by Monarchos at 1:59.97.\n\nIn 2005, the purse distribution for the Derby changed, so that horses finishing fifth would henceforth receive a share of the purse; previously only the first four finishers did so.\n\nThe Kentucky Derby will offer $3 million in purse money starting in 2019. Churchill Downs officials have cited the success of historical race wagering terminals at their Derby City Gaming facility in Louisville as a factor behind the purse increase. The Derby first offered a $1 million purse in 1996; then doubled to $2 million in 2005.\n\nMillions of people from around the world bet at various live tracks and online sportsbooks. In 2017, a crowd of 158,070 watched Always Dreaming win the Derby, making it the seventh biggest attendance in the history of the racetrack. The track reported a wagering total of $209.2 million from all the sources on all the races on the Kentucky Derby Day program. It was a 9 percent increase compared to the total of $192.6 million in 2016 and an increase of 8 percent over the previous record set in 2015 of $194.3 million. TwinSpires, a platform for betting online and a partner of the Kentucky Derby and the Breeders' Cup, recorded $32.8 million in handle on the Churchill Down races for the Kentucky Derby Day program. This record was a 22 percent increase over the preceding year. On the Kentucky Derby race alone, the handle of TwinSpires was $20.1 million, which is a 22 percent rise compared to the prior year.\n\nThe race often draws celebrities. HM Queen Elizabeth II, on a visit to the United States, joined the racegoers at Churchill Downs in 2007.\n\nThe 2004 Derby marked the first time that jockeys—as a result of a court order—were allowed to wear corporate advertising logos on their clothing.\n\nNorman Adams has been the designer of the Kentucky Derby Logo since 2002. On February 1, 2006, the Louisville-based fast-food company Yum! Brands, Inc. announced a corporate sponsorship deal to call the race \"The Kentucky Derby presented by Yum! Brands.\" In 2018, Woodford Reserve replaced Yum Brands as the presenting sponsor.\n\nIn addition to the race itself, several traditions play a significant role in the Derby atmosphere. The mint julep—an iced drink consisting of bourbon, mint, and sugar syrup—is the traditional beverage of the race. The historic beverage comes served in an ice-frosted silver julep cup. However, most Churchill Downs patrons sip theirs from souvenir glasses (first offered in 1939 and available in revised form each year since) printed with all previous Derby winners. Also, burgoo, a thick stew of beef, chicken, pork, and vegetables, is a popular Kentucky dish served at the Derby.\nThe infield—a spectator area inside the track—offers general admission prices but little chance of seeing much of the race, particularly before the jumbotron installation in 2014. Instead, revelers show up in the infield to party with abandon. By contrast, \"Millionaire's Row\" refers to the expensive box seats that attract the rich, the famous and the well-connected. Women appear in elegant outfits lavishly accessorized with large, elaborate hats. Following the Call to the Post, as the horses start to parade before the grandstands, the University of Louisville Cardinal Marching Band plays Stephen Foster's \"My Old Kentucky Home.\" This song is a tradition which began in 1921. The event attracts spectators from a large area, flying in hundreds of private aircraft to Louisville International Airport.\n\nThe Derby is frequently referred to as \"\"The Run for the Roses\",\" because a lush blanket of 554 red roses is awarded to the Kentucky Derby winner each year. The tradition originated in 1883 when New York socialite E. Berry Wall presented roses to ladies at a post-Derby party. Churchill Downs founder and president, Col. M. Lewis Clark, attended that event. This gesture is believed to have led Clark to the idea of making the rose the race's official flower. However, it was not until 1896 that any recorded account referred to draping roses on the Derby winner. The Governor of Kentucky awards the garland and the Kentucky Derby Trophy. Pop vocalist Dan Fogelberg composed the song \"Run for the Roses,\" released in time for the 1980 running of the race.\n\n\"Riders Up!\" is the traditional command from the Paddock Judge for jockeys to mount their horses in advance of the upcoming race. Since 2012, a dignitary or celebrity attendee recites this phrase.\n\nIn the weeks preceding the race, numerous activities took place for the Kentucky Derby Festival. Thunder Over Louisville—an airshow and fireworks display—generally begins the festivities in earnest two weeks before the Derby.\n\nSpeed record:\nBULLET::::- Mile and a Quarter: 1:59 – Secretariat (1973)\nBULLET::::- Mile and a Half: 2:34 – Spokane (1889)\n\nMargin of Victory:\nBULLET::::- 8 lengths – Old Rosebud (1914), Johnstown (1939), Whirlaway (1941), Assault (1946)\n\nMost wins by a jockey:\nBULLET::::- 5 – Eddie Arcaro (1938, 1941, 1945, 1948, 1952)\nBULLET::::- 5 – Bill Hartack (1957, 1960, 1962, 1964, 1969)\n\nMost wins by a trainer:\nBULLET::::- 6 – Ben A. Jones (1938, 1941, 1944, 1948, 1949, 1952)\n\nMost wins by an owner:\nBULLET::::- 8 – Calumet Farm (1941, 1944, 1948, 1949, 1952, 1957, 1958, 1968)\n\nLongest shot to win the Derby:\nBULLET::::- 91 to 1 – Donerail (1913)\n\nMiscellaneous:\nBULLET::::- In 2010, Calvin Borel set a new record, being the first jockey to win 3 out of 4 consecutive Kentucky Derbys.\nBULLET::::- In 2018, Justify became the first horse since Apollo in 1882, to win the Derby without having raced as a two year old.\nBULLET::::- In 2019, Country House won the Kentucky Derby after Maximum Security was disqualified.\n\n+ Kentucky Derby winners\n! scope=\"col\"  Year\n! scope=\"col\"  Winner\n! scope=\"col\"  Jockey\n! scope=\"col\"  Trainer\n! scope=\"col\"  Owner \n!Distance (miles)\n!Track Condition\n! scope=\"col\"  Time\n2019\nCountry House\nFlavien Prat\nBill Mott\nMrs. J.V. Shields, Jr., E. J. M. McFadden, Jr. and LNJ Foxwoods \n1 ¼\nSloppy\n2:03.93\n1 ¼\nMeB Racing, Brooklyn Boyz, Teresa Viola, St. Elias, Siena Farm, West Point\n1 ¼\nWet Fast (sealed)\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nMuddy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nMuddy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nSlow\n1 ¼\nSlow\n1 ¼\nMuddy\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nMuddy\n1 ¼\nHeavy\n1 ¼\nSlow\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSloppy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSlow\n1 ¼\nHeavy\n1 ¼\nMuddy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nMuddy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nSlow\n1 ¼\nHeavy\n1 ¼\nHeavy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nHeavy\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nFast\n1 ¼\nGood\n1 ¼\nHeavy\n1 ¼\nDusty\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nHeavy\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nMuddy\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nGood\n1 ½\nGood\n1 ½\nHeavy\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nDusty\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nDusty\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n1 ½\nFast\n\nBULLET::::- Notes:\n designates a Triple Crown Winner.\n\nBULLET::::- Kentucky Oaks\nBULLET::::- Kentucky Derby Festival\nBULLET::::- American thoroughbred racing top attended events\nBULLET::::- Kentucky Derby top four finishers\nBULLET::::- List of graded stakes at Churchill Downs\nBULLET::::- \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved\", a seminal example of New Journalism by Hunter S. Thompson.\nBULLET::::- Triple Crown Productions\nBULLET::::- Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing\nBULLET::::- Grand Slam of Thoroughbred Racing\nBULLET::::- List of attractions and events in the Louisville metropolitan area\nBULLET::::- Derby Pie\nBULLET::::- List of Kentucky Derby broadcasters\n\nBULLET::::- David Domine, \"Insiders' Guide to Louisville.\" Guilford, CT: Globe-Pequot Press, 2010.\nBULLET::::- James C. Nicholson, \"The Kentucky Derby: How the Run for the Roses Became America's Premier Sporting Event.\" Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2012.\n\nBULLET::::- Kentucky Derby (official site)\nBULLET::::- Kentucky Derby Museum\nBULLET::::- The \"Courier-Journal\"s Derby Site\nBULLET::::- ESPN.COM Attending the Kentucky Derby (includes future dates)\n"}
{"id": "17138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17138", "title": "Keyword", "text": "Keyword\n\nKeyword may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Keyword (computer programming), word or identifier that has a particular meaning to the programming language\nBULLET::::- Keyword (cryptography), word used as the key to determine the letter matching of the cipher alphabet to the plain alphabet\nBULLET::::- Keyword (Internet search), a word or phrase typically used by bloggers or online content creator to rank a web page on a particular topic\nBULLET::::- Index term, a term used as a keyword to documents in an information system such as a catalog or a search engine\nBULLET::::- Keyword advertising, a form of online advertising\nBULLET::::- Keyword clustering, a practice search engine optimization\nBULLET::::- Keyword density, how often a keyword appears on web page\n\nBULLET::::- Keyword (linguistics), word which occurs in a text more often than we would expect to occur by chance alone\nBULLET::::- Keyword (rhetoric), a word that academics use to reveal the internal structure of an author's reasoning\nBULLET::::- \"\", 1973 non-fiction book by Raymond Williams\nBULLET::::- \"Keyword\" (Tohoshinki song), a 2008 J-pop song\n"}
{"id": "17139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17139", "title": "FX-87", "text": "FX-87\n\nFX-87 is a polymorphic typed functional language based on a system for static program analysis in which every expression has two static properties: a type and an effect. In a study done by MIT, FX-87 yields similar performance results as functional languages on programs that do not contain side effects (Fibonacci, Factorial). FX-87 did yield a great performance increase when matching DNA sequences.\n\nKFX is the kernel language of FX-87. It was described in 'Polymorphic Effect Systems', J.M. Lucassen et al., \"Proceedings of the 15th Annual ACM Conference POPL\", ACM 1988, pp. 47–57.\n"}
{"id": "17140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17140", "title": "Katal", "text": "Katal\n\nThe katal (symbol: kat) is the unit of catalytic activity in the International System of Units (SI). It is a derived SI unit for quantifying the catalytic activity of enzymes (that is, measuring the enzymatic activity level in enzyme catalysis) and other catalysts. \n\nThe General Conference on Weights and Measures and other international organizations recommend use of the katal. It replaces the non-SI enzyme unit of catalytic activity. Enzyme units are, however, still more commonly used than the katal, especially in biochemistry.\n\nThe katal is not used to express the rate of a reaction; that is expressed in units of concentration per second, as moles per liter per second. Rather, the katal is used to express catalytic activity, which is a property of the catalyst.\n\nThe katal is invariant of the measurement procedure, but the measured numerical value is not; the value depends on the experimental conditions. Therefore, to define the quantity of a catalyst in katals, the rate of conversion of a defined chemical reaction is specified as moles reacted per second. One katal of trypsin, for example, is that amount of trypsin which breaks one mole of peptide bonds in one second under specified conditions.\n\nThe name \"katal\" has been used for decades, and the unit became an official SI unit in 1999. The name comes from the Ancient Greek κατάλυσις (\"katalysis\"), meaning \"dissolution\",; the word \"catalysis\" itself is a Latinized form of the Greek word.\n\nBULLET::::- Unit \"katal\" for catalytic activity (IUPAC Technical Report) \"Pure Appl. Chem.\" Vol. 73, No. 6, pp. 927–931 (2001)\n"}
{"id": "17143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17143", "title": "Koala", "text": "Koala\n\nThe koala (\"Phascolarctos cinereus\", or, inaccurately, koala bear) is an arboreal herbivorous marsupial native to Australia. It is the only extant representative of the family Phascolarctidae and its closest living relatives are the wombats, which comprise the family Vombatidae. The koala is found in coastal areas of the mainland's eastern and southern regions, inhabiting Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. It is easily recognisable by its stout, tailless body and large head with round, fluffy ears and large, spoon-shaped nose. The koala has a body length of and weighs . Fur colour ranges from silver grey to chocolate brown. Koalas from the northern populations are typically smaller and lighter in colour than their counterparts further south. These populations possibly are separate subspecies, but this is disputed.\n\nKoalas typically inhabit open eucalypt woodlands, and the leaves of these trees make up most of their diet. Because this eucalypt diet has limited nutritional and caloric content, koalas are largely sedentary and sleep up to 20 hours a day. They are asocial animals, and bonding exists only between mothers and dependent offspring. Adult males communicate with loud bellows that intimidate rivals and attract mates. Males mark their presence with secretions from scent glands located on their chests. Being marsupials, koalas give birth to underdeveloped young that crawl into their mothers' pouches, where they stay for the first six to seven months of their lives. These young koalas, known as joeys, are fully weaned around a year old. Koalas have few natural predators and parasites, but are threatened by various pathogens, such as Chlamydiaceae bacteria and the koala retrovirus, as well as by bushfires and droughts.\n\nKoalas were hunted by Indigenous Australians and depicted in myths and cave art for millennia. The first recorded encounter between a European and a koala was in 1798, and an image of the animal was published in 1810 by naturalist George Perry. Botanist Robert Brown wrote the first detailed scientific description of the koala in 1814, although his work remained unpublished for 180 years. Popular artist John Gould illustrated and described the koala, introducing the species to the general British public. Further details about the animal's biology were revealed in the 19th century by several English scientists. Because of its distinctive appearance, the koala is recognised worldwide as a symbol of Australia. Koalas are listed as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. The animal was hunted heavily in the early 20th century for its fur, and large-scale cullings in Queensland resulted in a public outcry that initiated a movement to protect the species. Sanctuaries were established, and translocation efforts moved to new regions koalas whose habitat had become fragmented or reduced. The biggest threat to their existence is habitat destruction caused by agriculture and urbanisation.\n\nThe word koala comes from the Dharug \"gula\", meaning \"no water\". It was at one time thought, since the animals were not observed to come down from trees often, that they were able to survive without drinking. The leaves of the eucalyptus tree have a high water content, so the koala does not need to drink often. But the notion that they do not need to drink water at all was shown to be a myth. Although the vowel 'u' was originally written in the English orthography as \"oo\" (in spellings such as \"coola\" or \"koolah\"), it was changed to \"oa\", possibly in error. Because of the koala's supposed resemblance to a bear, it was often miscalled the koala bear, particularly by early settlers. The generic name, \"Phascolarctos\", is derived from the Greek words \"phaskolos\" \"pouch\" and \"arktos\" \"bear\". The specific name, \"cinereus\", is Latin for \"ash coloured\".\n\nThe koala was given its generic name \"Phascolarctos\" in 1816 by French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville, who would not give it a specific name until further review. In 1819, German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss gave it the binomial \"Lipurus cinereus\". Because \"Phascolarctos\" was published first, according to the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, it has priority as the official name of the genus. French naturalist Anselme Gaëtan Desmarest proposed the name \"Phascolartos fuscus\" in 1820, suggesting that the brown-coloured versions were a different species than the grey ones. Other names suggested by European authors included \"Marodactylus cinereus\" by Goldfuss in 1820, \"P. flindersii\" by René Primevère Lesson in 1827, and \"P. koala\" by John Edward Gray in 1827.\n\nThe koala is classified with wombats (family Vombatidae) and several extinct families (including marsupial tapirs, marsupial lions and giant wombats) in the suborder Vombatiformes within the order Diprotodontia. The Vombatiformes are a sister group to a clade that includes macropods (kangaroos and wallabies) and possums. The ancestors of vombatiforms were likely arboreal, and the koala's lineage was possibly the first to branch off around 40 million years ago during the Eocene.\n\nThe modern koala is the only extant member of Phascolarctidae, a family that once included several genera and species. During the Oligocene and Miocene, koalas lived in rainforests and had less specialised diets. Some species, such as the Riversleigh rainforest koala (\"Nimiokoala greystanesi\") and some species of \"Perikoala\", were around the same size as the modern koala, while others, such as species of \"Litokoala\", were one-half to two-thirds its size. Like the modern species, prehistoric koalas had well developed ear structures which suggests that long-distance vocalising and sedentism developed early. During the Miocene, the Australian continent began drying out, leading to the decline of rainforests and the spread of open \"Eucalyptus\" woodlands. The genus \"Phascolarctos\" split from \"Litokoala\" in the late Miocene and had several adaptations that allowed it to live on a specialised eucalyptus diet: a shifting of the palate towards the front of the skull; larger molars and premolars; smaller pterygoid fossa; and a larger gap between the molar and the incisor teeth.\n\nDuring the Pliocene and Pleistocene, when Australia experienced changes in climate and vegetation, koala species grew larger. \"P. cinereus\" may have emerged as a dwarf form of the giant koala (\"P. stirtoni\"). The reduction in the size of large mammals has been seen as a common phenomenon worldwide during the late Pleistocene, and several Australian mammals, such as the agile wallaby, are traditionally believed to have resulted from this dwarfing. A 2008 study questions this hypothesis, noting that \"P. cinereus\" and \"P. stirtoni\" were sympatric during the middle to late Pleistocene, and possibly as early as the Pliocene. The fossil record of the modern koala extends back at least to the middle Pleistocene.\n\nTraditionally, three distinct subspecies have been recognised: the Queensland koala (\"P. c. adustus\", Thomas 1923), the New South Wales koala (\"P. c. cinereus\", Goldfuss 1817), and the Victorian koala (\"P. c. victor\", Troughton 1935). These forms are distinguished by pelage colour and thickness, body size, and skull shape. The Queensland koala is the smallest of the three, with shorter, silver fur and a shorter skull. The Victorian koala is the largest, with shaggier, brown fur and a wider skull. The boundaries of these variations are based on state borders, and their status as subspecies is disputed. A 1999 genetic study suggests that the variations represent differentiated populations with limited gene flow between them, and that the three subspecies comprise a single evolutionarily significant unit. Other studies have found that koala populations have high levels of inbreeding and low genetic variation. Such low genetic diversity may have been a characteristic of koala populations since the late Pleistocene. Rivers and roads have been shown to limit gene flow and contribute to the genetic differentiation of southeast Queensland populations. In April 2013, scientists from the Australian Museum and Queensland University of Technology announced they had fully sequenced the koala genome.\n\nThe koala is a stocky animal with a large head and vestigial or non-existent tail. It has a body length of and a weight of , making it among the largest arboreal marsupials. Koalas from Victoria are twice as heavy as those from Queensland. The species is sexually dimorphic, with males 50% larger than females. Males are further distinguished from females by their more curved noses and the presence of chest glands, which are visible as hairless patches. As in most marsupials, the male koala has a bifurcated penis, and the female has two lateral vaginas and two separate uteri. The male's penile sheath contains naturally occurring bacteria that play an important role in fertilisation. The female's pouch opening is tightened by a sphincter that keeps the young from falling out.\n\nThe pelage of the koala is thicker and longer on the back, and shorter on the belly. The ears have thick fur on both the inside and outside. The back fur colour varies from light grey to chocolate brown. The belly fur is whitish; on the rump it is dappled whitish, and darker at the back. The koala has the most effective insulating back fur of any marsupial and is highly resilient to wind and rain, while the belly fur can reflect solar radiation. The koala's curved, sharp claws are well adapted for climbing trees. The large forepaws have two opposable digits (the first and second, which are opposable to the other three) that allow them to grasp small branches. On the hindpaws, the second and third digits are fused, a typical condition for members of the Diprotodontia, and the attached claws (which are still separate) are used for grooming. As in humans and other primates, koalas have friction ridges on their paws. The animal has a sturdy skeleton and a short, muscular upper body with proportionately long upper limbs that contribute to its climbing and grasping abilities. Additional climbing strength is achieved with thigh muscles that attach to the shinbone lower than other animals. The koala has a cartilaginous pad at the end of the spine that may make it more comfortable when it perches in the fork of a tree.\n\nThe koala has one of the smallest brains in proportion to body weight of any mammal, being 60% smaller than that of a typical diprotodont, weighing only . The brain's surface is fairly smooth, typical for a \"primitive\" animal. It occupies only 61% of the cranial cavity and is pressed against the inside surface by cerebrospinal fluid. The function of this relatively large amount of fluid is not known, although one possibility is that it acts as a shock absorber, cushioning the brain if the animal falls from a tree. The koala's small brain size may be an adaptation to the energy restrictions imposed by its diet, which is insufficient to sustain a larger brain. Because of its small brain, the koala has a limited ability to perform complex, unfamiliar behaviours. For example, when presented with plucked leaves on a flat surface, the animal cannot adapt to the change in its normal feeding routine and will not eat the leaves. The koala's olfactory senses are normal, and it is known to sniff the oils of individual branchlets to assess their edibility. Its nose is fairly large and covered in leathery skin. Its round ears provide it with good hearing, and it has a well-developed middle ear. A koala's vision is not well developed, and its relatively small eyes are unusual among marsupials in that the pupils have vertical slits. Koalas make use of a novel vocal organ to produce low-pitched sounds (see social spacing, below). Unlike typical mammalian vocal cords, which are folds in the larynx, these organs are placed in the velum (soft palate) and are called velar vocal cords.\n\nThe koala has several adaptations for its eucalypt diet, which is of low nutritive value, of high toxicity, and high in dietary fibre. The animal's dentition consists of the incisors and cheek teeth (a single premolar and four molars on each jaw), which are separated by a large gap (a characteristic feature of herbivorous mammals). The incisors are used for grasping leaves, which are then passed to the premolars to be snipped at the petiole before being passed to the highly cusped molars, where they are shredded into small pieces. Koalas may also store food in their cheek pouches before it is ready to be chewed. The partially worn molars of middle-aged koalas are optimal for breaking the leaves into small particles, resulting in more efficient stomach digestion and nutrient absorption in the small intestine, which digests the eucalyptus leaves to provide most of the animal's energy. A koala sometimes regurgitates the food into the mouth to be chewed a second time.\n\nUnlike kangaroos and eucalyptus-eating possums, koalas are hindgut fermenters, and their digestive retention can last for up to 100 hours in the wild, or up to 200 hours in captivity. This is made possible by the extraordinary length of their caecum— long and in diameter—the largest proportionally of any animal. Koalas can select which food particles to retain for longer fermentation and which to pass through. Large particles typically pass through more quickly, as they would take more time to digest. While the hindgut is proportionally larger in the koala than in other herbivores, only 10% of the animal's energy is obtained from fermentation. Since the koala gains a low amount of energy from its diet, its metabolic rate is half that of a typical mammal, although this can vary between seasons and sexes. The koala conserves water by passing relatively dry faecal pellets high in undigested fibre, and by storing water in the caecum.\n\nThe koala's geographic range covers roughly , and 30 ecoregions. It extends throughout eastern and southeastern Australia, encompassing northeastern, central and southeastern Queensland, eastern New South Wales, Victoria, and southeastern South Australia. The koala was introduced near Adelaide and on several islands, including Kangaroo Island and French Island. The population on Magnetic Island represents the northern limit of its range. Fossil evidence shows that the koala's range stretched as far west as southwestern Western Australia during the late Pleistocene. They were likely driven to extinction in these areas by environmental changes and hunting by indigenous Australians.\n\nIn Queensland, koalas are unevenly distributed and uncommon except in the southeast, where they are numerous. In New South Wales, they are abundant only in Pilliga, while in Victoria they are common nearly everywhere. In South Australia, koalas were extirpated by 1920 and subsequently reintroduced. Koalas can be found in habitats ranging from relatively open forests to woodlands, and in climates ranging from tropical to cool temperate. In semi-arid climates, they prefer riparian habitats, where nearby streams and creeks provide refuge during times of drought and extreme heat.\n\nKoalas are herbivorous, and while most of their diet consists of eucalypt leaves, they can be found in trees of other genera, such as \"Acacia\", \"Allocasuarina\", \"Callitris\", \"Leptospermum\", and \"Melaleuca\". They are able to digest the toxins present in eucalyptus leaves due to their production of cytochrome P450, which breaks down these poisons in the liver. Though the foliage of over 600 species of \"Eucalyptus\" is available, the koala shows a strong preference for around 30. They tend to choose species that have a high protein content and low proportions of fibre and lignin. The most favoured species are \"Eucalyptus microcorys\", \"E. tereticornis\", and \"E. camaldulensis\", which, on average, make up more than 20% of their diet. Despite its reputation as a fussy eater, the koala is more generalist than some other marsupial species, such as the greater glider. Since eucalypt leaves have a high water content, the koala does not need to drink often; its daily water turnover rate ranges from 71 to 91 ml/kg of body weight. Although females can meet their water requirements from eating leaves, larger males require additional water found on the ground or in tree hollows. When feeding, a koala holds onto a branch with hindpaws and one forepaw while the other forepaw grasps foliage. Small koalas can move close to the end of a branch, but larger ones stay near the thicker bases. Koalas consume up to of leaves a day, spread over four to six feeding sessions. Despite their adaptations to a low-energy lifestyle, they have meagre fat reserves and need to feed often.\n\nBecause they get so little energy from their diet, koalas must limit their energy use and sleep or rest 20 hours a day; They are predominantly active at night and spend most of their waking hours feeding. They typically eat and sleep in the same tree, possibly for as long as a day. On very hot days, a koala may climb down to the coolest part of the tree which is cooler than the surrounding air. The koala hugs the tree to lose heat without panting. On warm days, a koala may rest with its back against a branch or lie on its stomach or back with its limbs dangling. During cold, wet periods, it curls itself into a tight ball to conserve energy. On windy days, a koala finds a lower, thicker branch on which to rest. While it spends most of the time in the tree, the animal descends to the ground to move to another tree, walking on all fours. The koala usually grooms itself with its hindpaws, but sometimes uses its forepaws or mouth.\n\nKoalas are asocial animals and spend just 15 minutes a day on social behaviours. In Victoria, home ranges are small and have extensive overlap, while in central Queensland they are larger and overlap less. Koala society appears to consist of \"residents\" and \"transients\", the former being mostly adult females and the latter males. Resident males appear to be territorial and dominate others with their larger body size. Alpha males tend to establish their territories close to breeding females, while younger males are subordinate until they mature and reach full size. Adult males occasionally venture outside their home ranges; when they do so, dominant ones retain their status. When a male enters a new tree, he marks it by rubbing his chest gland against the trunk or a branch; males have occasionally been observed to dribble urine on the trunk. This scent-marking behaviour probably serves as communication, and individuals are known to sniff the base of a tree before climbing. Scent marking is common during aggressive encounters. Chest gland secretions are complex chemical mixtures—about 40 compounds were identified in one analysis—that vary in composition and concentration with the season and the age of the individual.\n\nAdult males communicate with loud bellows—low pitched sounds that consist of snore-like inhalations and resonant exhalations that sound like growls. These sounds are thought to be generated by unique vocal organs found in koalas. Because of their low frequency, these bellows can travel far through air and vegetation. Koalas may bellow at any time of the year, particularly during the breeding season, when it serves to attract females and possibly intimidate other males. They also bellow to advertise their presence to their neighbours when they enter a new tree. These sounds signal the male's actual body size, as well as exaggerate it; females pay more attention to bellows that originate from larger males. Female koalas bellow, though more softly, in addition to making snarls, wails, and screams. These calls are produced when in distress and when making defensive threats. Young koalas squeak when in distress. As they get older, the squeak develops into a \"squawk\" produced both when in distress and to show aggression. When another individual climbs over it, a koala makes a low grunt with its mouth closed. Koalas make numerous facial expressions. When snarling, wailing, or squawking, the animal curls the upper lip and points its ears forward. During screams, the lips retract and the ears are drawn back. Females bring their lips forward and raise their ears when agitated.\n\nAgonistic behaviour typically consists of squabbles between individuals climbing over or passing each other. This occasionally involves biting. Males that are strangers may wrestle, chase, and bite each other. In extreme situations, a male may try to displace a smaller rival from a tree. This involves the larger aggressor climbing up and attempting to corner the victim, which tries either to rush past him and climb down or to move to the end of a branch. The aggressor attacks by grasping the target by the shoulders and repeatedly biting him. Once the weaker individual is driven away, the victor bellows and marks the tree. Pregnant and lactating females are particularly aggressive and attack individuals that come too close. In general, however, koalas tend to avoid energy-wasting aggressive behaviour.\n\nKoalas are seasonal breeders, and births take place from the middle of spring through the summer to early autumn, from October to May. Females in oestrus tend to hold their heads further back than usual and commonly display tremors and spasms. However, males do not appear to recognise these signs, and have been observed to mount non-oestrous females. Because of his much larger size, a male can usually force himself on a female, mounting her from behind, and in extreme cases, the male may pull the female out of the tree. A female may scream and vigorously fight off her suitors, but will submit to one that is dominant or is more familiar. The bellows and screams that accompany matings can attract other males to the scene, obliging the incumbent to delay mating and fight off the intruders. These fights may allow the female to assess which is dominant. Older males usually have accumulated scratches, scars, and cuts on the exposed parts of their noses and on their eyelids.\n\nThe koala's gestation period lasts 33–35 days, and a female gives birth to a single joey (although twins occur on occasion). As with all marsupials, the young are born while at the embryonic stage, weighing only . However, they have relatively well-developed lips, forelimbs, and shoulders, as well as functioning respiratory, digestive, and urinary systems. The joey crawls into its mother's pouch to continue the rest of its development. Unlike most other marsupials, the koala does not clean her pouch.\n\nA female koala has two teats; the joey attaches itself to one of them and suckles for the rest of its pouch life. The koala has one of the lowest milk energy production rates in relation to body size of any mammal. The female makes up for this by lactating for as long as 12 months. At seven weeks of age, the joey's head grows longer and becomes proportionally large, pigmentation begins to develop, and its sex can be determined (the scrotum appears in males and the pouch begins to develop in females). At 13 weeks, the joey weighs around and its head has doubled in size. The eyes begin to open and fine fur grows on the forehead, nape, shoulders, and arms. At 26 weeks, the fully furred animal resembles an adult, and begins to poke its head out of the pouch.\n\nAs the young koala approaches six months, the mother begins to prepare it for its eucalyptus diet by predigesting the leaves, producing a faecal pap that the joey eats from her cloaca. The pap is quite different in composition from regular faeces, resembling instead the contents of the caecum, which has a high concentration of bacteria. Eaten for about a month, the pap provides a supplementary source of protein at a transition time from a milk to a leaf diet. The joey fully emerges from the pouch for the first time at six or seven months of age, when it weighs . It explores its new surroundings cautiously, clinging to its mother for support. By nine months, it weighs over and develops its adult fur colour. Having permanently left the pouch, it rides on its mother's back for transportation, learning to climb by grasping branches. Gradually, it spends more time away from its mother, and at 12 months it is fully weaned, weighing around . When the mother becomes pregnant again, her bond with her previous offspring is permanently severed. Newly weaned young are encouraged to disperse by their mothers' aggressive behaviour towards them.\n\nFemales become sexually mature at about three years of age and can then become pregnant; in comparison, males reach sexual maturity when they are about four years old, although they can produce sperm as early as two years. While the chest glands can be functional as early as 18 months of age, males do not begin scent-marking behaviours until they reach sexual maturity. Because the offspring have a long dependent period, female koalas usually breed in alternate years. Favourable environmental factors, such as a plentiful supply of high-quality food trees, allow them to reproduce every year.\n\nKoalas may live from 13 to 18 years in the wild. While female koalas usually live this long, males may die sooner because of their more hazardous lives. Koalas usually survive falls from trees and immediately climb back up, but injuries and deaths from falls do occur, particularly in inexperienced young and fighting males. Around six years of age, the koala's chewing teeth begin to wear down and their chewing efficiency decreases. Eventually, the cusps disappear completely and the animal will die of starvation.\n\nKoalas have few predators; dingos and large pythons may prey on them; birds of prey (such as powerful owls and wedge-tailed eagles) are threats to young. Koalas are generally not subject to external parasites, other than ticks in coastal areas. Koalas may also suffer mange from the mite \"Sarcoptes scabiei\", and skin ulcers from the bacterium \"Mycobacterium ulcerans\", but neither is common. Internal parasites are few and largely harmless. These include the tapeworm \"Bertiella obesa\", commonly found in the intestine, and the nematodes \"Marsupostrongylus longilarvatus\" and \"Durikainema phascolarcti\", which are infrequently found in the lungs. In a three-year study of almost 600 koalas admitted to the Australian Zoo Wildlife Hospital in Queensland, 73.8% of the animals were infected with at least one species of the parasitic protozoal genus \"Trypanosoma\", the most common of which was \"T. irwini\".\n\nKoalas can be subject to pathogens such as Chlamydiaceae bacteria, which can cause keratoconjunctivitis, urinary tract infection, and reproductive tract infection. Such infections are widespread on the mainland, but absent in some island populations. The koala retrovirus (KoRV) may cause koala immune deficiency syndrome (KIDS) which is similar to AIDS in humans. Prevalence of KoRV in koala populations suggests a trend spreading from the north to the south of Australia. Northern populations are completely infected, while some southern populations (including Kangaroo Island) are free.\n\nThe animals are vulnerable to bushfires due to their slow movements and the flammability of eucalypt trees. The koala instinctively seeks refuge in the higher branches, where it is vulnerable to intense heat and flames. Bushfires also fragment the animal's habitat, which restricts their movement and leads to population decline and loss of genetic diversity. Dehydration and overheating can also prove fatal. Consequently, the koala is vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Models of climate change in Australia predict warmer and drier climates, suggesting that the koala's range will shrink in the east and south to more mesic habitats. Droughts also affect the koala's well-being. For example, a severe drought in 1980 caused many \"Eucalyptus\" trees to lose their leaves. Subsequently, 63% of the population in southwestern Queensland died, especially young animals that were excluded from prime feeding sites by older, dominant koalas, and recovery of the population was slow. Later, this population declined from an estimated mean population of 59,000 in 1995 to 11,600 in 2009, a reduction attributed largely to hotter and drier conditions resulting from droughts in most years between 2002 and 2007. Another predicted negative outcome of climate change is the effect of elevations in atmospheric levels on the koala's food supply: increases in cause \"Eucalyptus\" trees to reduce protein and increase tannin concentrations in their leaves, reducing the quality of the food source.\n\nThe first written reference of the koala was recorded by John Price, servant of John Hunter, the Governor of New South Wales. Price encountered the \"cullawine\" on 26 January 1798, during an expedition to the Blue Mountains, although his account was not published until nearly a century later in \"Historical Records of Australia\". In 1802, French-born explorer Francis Louis Barrallier encountered the animal when his two Aboriginal guides, returning from a hunt, brought back two koala feet they were intending to eat. Barrallier preserved the appendages and sent them and his notes to Hunter's successor, Philip Gidley King, who forwarded them to Joseph Banks. Similar to Price, Barrallier's notes were not published until 1897. Reports of the first capture of a live \"koolah\" appeared in \"The Sydney Gazette\" in August 1803. Within a few weeks Flinders' astronomer, James Inman, purchased a specimen pair for live shipment to Joseph Banks in England. They were described as 'somewhat larger than the Waumbut (Wombat)'. These encounters helped provide the impetus for King to commission the artist John Lewin to paint watercolours of the animal. Lewin painted three pictures, one of which was subsequently made into a print that was reproduced in Georges Cuvier's \"The Animal Kingdom\" (first published in 1827) and several European works on natural history.\n\nBotanist Robert Brown was the first to write a detailed scientific description of the koala in 1814, based on a female specimen captured near what is now Mount Kembla in the Illawarra region of New South Wales. Austrian botanical illustrator Ferdinand Bauer drew the animal's skull, throat, feet, and paws. Brown's work remained unpublished and largely unnoticed, however, as his field books and notes remained in his possession until his death, when they were bequeathed to the British Museum (Natural History) in London. They were not identified until 1994, while Bauer's koala watercolours were not published until 1989. British surgeon Everard Home included details of the koala based on eyewitness accounts of William Paterson, who had befriended Brown and Bauer during their stay in New South Wales. Home, who in 1808 published his report in the journal \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\", gave the animal the scientific name \"Didelphis coola\".\n\nThe first published image of the koala appeared in George Perry's (1810) natural history work \"Arcana\". Perry called it the \"New Holland Sloth\" on account of its perceived similarities to the Central and South American tree-living mammals of genus \"Bradypus\". His disdain for the koala, evident in his description of the animal, was typical of the prevailing early 19th-century British attitude about the primitiveness and oddity of Australian fauna: \"... the eye is placed like that of the Sloth, very close to the mouth and nose, which gives it a clumsy awkward appearance, and void of elegance in the combination ... they have little either in their character or appearance to interest the Naturalist or Philosopher. As Nature however provides nothing in vain, we may suppose that even these torpid, senseless creatures are wisely intended to fill up one of the great links of the chain of animated nature ...\".\nNaturalist and popular artist John Gould illustrated and described the koala in his three-volume work \"The Mammals of Australia\" (1845–63) and introduced the species, as well as other members of Australia's little-known faunal community, to the general British public. Comparative anatomist Richard Owen, in a series of publications on the physiology and anatomy of Australian mammals, presented a paper on the anatomy of the koala to the Zoological Society of London. In this widely cited publication, he provided the first careful description of its internal anatomy, and noted its general structural similarity to the wombat. English naturalist George Robert Waterhouse, curator of the Zoological Society of London, was the first to correctly classify the koala as a marsupial in the 1840s. He identified similarities between it and its fossil relatives \"Diprotodon\" and \"Nototherium\", which had been discovered just a few years before. Similarly, Gerard Krefft, curator of the Australian Museum in Sydney, noted evolutionary mechanisms at work when comparing the koala to its ancestral relatives in his 1871 \"The Mammals of Australia\".\n\nThe first living koala in Britain arrived in 1881, purchased by the Zoological Society of London. As related by prosecutor to the society, William Alexander Forbes, the animal suffered an accidental demise when the heavy lid of a washstand fell on it and it was unable to free itself. Forbes used the opportunity to dissect the fresh female specimen, thus was able to provide explicit anatomical details on the female reproductive system, the brain, and the liver—parts not previously described by Owen, who had access only to preserved specimens. Scottish embryologist William Caldwell—well known in scientific circles for determining the reproductive mechanism of the platypus—described the uterine development of the koala in 1884, and used the new information to convincingly place the koala and the monotremes into an evolutionary time frame.\n\nPrince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, visited the Koala Park Sanctuary in Sydney in 1934 and was \"intensely interested in the bears\". His photograph, with Noel Burnet, the founder of the park, and a koala, appeared in \"The Sydney Morning Herald\". After World War II, when tourism to Australia increased and the animals were exported to zoos overseas, the koala's international popularity rose. Several political leaders and members of royal families had their pictures taken with koalas, including Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Harry, Crown Prince Naruhito, Crown Princess Masako, Pope John Paul II, US President Bill Clinton, Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev, South African President Nelson Mandela, Prime Minister Tony Abbott, and Russian President Vladimir Putin.\n\nThe koala is well known worldwide and is a major draw for Australian zoos and wildlife parks. It has been featured in advertisements, games, cartoons, and as soft toys. It benefited the national tourism industry by over an estimated billion Australian dollars in 1998, a figure that has since grown. In 1997, half of visitors to Australia, especially those from Korea, Japan, and Taiwan, sought out zoos and wildlife parks; about 75% of European and Japanese tourists placed the koala at the top of their list of animals to see. According to biologist Stephen Jackson: \"If you were to take a straw poll of the animal most closely associated with Australia, it's a fair bet that the koala would come out marginally in front of the kangaroo\". Factors that contribute to the koala's enduring popularity include its childlike body proportions and teddy bear-like face.\n\nThe koala is featured in the Dreamtime stories and mythology of indigenous Australians. The Tharawal people believed that the animal helped row the boat that brought them to the continent. Another myth tells of how a tribe killed a koala and used its long intestines to create a bridge for people from other parts of the world. This narrative highlights the koala's status as a game animal and the length of its intestines. Several stories tell of how the koala lost its tail. In one, a kangaroo cuts it off to punish the koala for being lazy and greedy. Tribes in both Queensland and Victoria regarded the koala as a wise animal and sought its advice. Bidjara-speaking people credited the koala for turning barren lands into lush forests. The animal is also depicted in rock carvings, though not as much as some other species.\n\nEarly European settlers in Australia considered the koala to be a prowling sloth-like animal with a \"fierce and menacing look\". At the beginning of the 20th century, the koala's reputation took a more positive turn, largely due to its growing popularity and depiction in several widely circulated children's stories. It is featured in Ethel Pedley's 1899 book \"Dot and the Kangaroo\", in which it is portrayed as the \"funny native bear\". Artist Norman Lindsay depicted a more anthropomorphic koala in \"The Bulletin\" cartoons, starting in 1904. This character also appeared as Bunyip Bluegum in Lindsay's 1918 book \"The Magic Pudding\". Perhaps the most famous fictional koala is Blinky Bill. Created by Dorothy Wall in 1933, the character appeared in several books and has been the subject of films, TV series, merchandise, and a 1986 environmental song by John Williamson. The first Australian stamp featuring a koala was issued by the Commonwealth in 1930. A television ad campaign for Australia's national airline Qantas, starting in 1967 and running for several decades, featured a live koala (voiced by Howard Morris), who complained that too many tourists were coming to Australia and concluded \"I hate Qantas\". The series has been ranked among the greatest commercials of all time.\n\nThe song \"Ode to a Koala Bear\" appears on the B-side of the 1983 Paul McCartney/Michael Jackson duet single \"Say Say Say\". A koala is the main character in Hanna-Barbera's \"The Kwicky Koala Show\" and Nippon Animation's \"Noozles\", both of which were animated cartoons of the early 1980s. Food products shaped like the koala include the Caramello Koala chocolate bar and the bite-sized cookie snack Koala's March. Dadswells Bridge in Victoria features a tourist complex shaped like a giant koala, and the Queensland Reds rugby team has a koala as its mascot. The Platinum Koala coin features the animal on the reverse and Elizabeth II on the obverse.\n\nThe drop bear is an imaginary creature in contemporary Australian folklore featuring a predatory, carnivorous version of the koala. This hoax animal is commonly spoken about in tall tales designed to scare tourists. While koalas are typically docile herbivores, drop bears are described as unusually large and vicious marsupials that inhabit treetops and attack unsuspecting people (or other prey) that walk beneath them by dropping onto their heads from above.\n\nWhile the koala was previously classified as Least Concern on the Red List, it was uplisted to Vulnerable in 2016. Australian policy makers declined a 2009 proposal to include the koala in the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. In 2012, the Australian government listed koala populations in Queensland and New South Wales as Vulnerable, because of a 40% population decline in the former and a 33% decline in the latter. A 2017 WWF report found a 53% decline per generation in Queensland, and a 26% decline in New South Wales. Populations in Victoria and South Australia appear to be abundant; however, the Australian Koala Foundation argues that the exclusion of Victorian populations from protective measures is based on a misconception that the total koala population is 200,000, whereas they believe it is probably less than 100,000.\n\nKoalas were hunted for food by Aboriginals. A common technique used to capture the animals was to attach a loop of ropey bark to the end of a long, thin pole, so as to form a noose. This would be used to snare an animal high in a tree, beyond the reach of a climbing hunter; an animal brought down this way would then be killed with a stone hand axe or hunting stick (waddy). According to the customs of some tribes, it was considered taboo to skin the animal, while other tribes thought the animal's head had a special status, and saved them for burial.\n\nThe koala was heavily hunted by European settlers in the early 20th century, largely for its thick, soft fur. More than two million pelts are estimated to have left Australia by 1924. Pelts were in demand for use in rugs, coat linings, muffs, and as trimming on women's garments. Extensive cullings occurred in Queensland in 1915, 1917, and again in 1919, when over one million koalas were killed with guns, poisons, and nooses. The public outcry over these cullings was probably the first wide-scale environmental issue that rallied Australians. Novelist and social critic Vance Palmer, writing in a letter to \"The Courier-Mail\", expressed the popular sentiment: \"The shooting of our harmless and lovable native bear is nothing less than barbarous ... No one has ever accused him of spoiling the farmer's wheat, eating the squatter's grass, or even the spreading of the prickly pear. There is no social vice that can be put down to his account ... He affords no sport to the gun-man ... And he has been almost blotted out already from some areas.\"\n\nDespite the growing movement to protect native species, the poverty brought about by the drought of 1926–28 led to the killing of another 600,000 koalas during a one-month open season in August 1927. In 1934, Frederick Lewis, the Chief Inspector of Game in Victoria, said that the once-abundant animal had been brought to near extinction in that state, suggesting that only 500–1000 remained.\n\nThe first successful efforts at conserving the species were initiated by the establishment of Brisbane's Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary and Sydney's Koala Park Sanctuary in the 1920s and 1930s. The owner of the latter park, Noel Burnet, became the first to successfully breed koalas and earned a reputation as the foremost contemporary authority on the marsupial. In 1934, David Fleay, curator of Australian mammals at the Melbourne Zoo, established the first Australian faunal enclosure at an Australian zoo, and featured the koala. This arrangement allowed him to undertake a detailed study of its diet in captivity. Fleay later continued his conservation efforts at Healesville Sanctuary and the David Fleay Wildlife Park.\n\nSince 1870, koalas have been introduced to several coastal and offshore islands, including Kangaroo Island and French Island. Their numbers have significantly increased, and since the islands are not large enough to sustain such high koala numbers, overbrowsing has become a problem. In the 1920s, Lewis initiated a program of large-scale relocation and rehabilitation programs to transfer koalas whose habitat had become fragmented or reduced to new regions, with the intent of eventually returning them to their former range. For example, in 1930–31, 165 koalas were translocated to Quail Island. After a period of population growth, and subsequent overbrowsing of gum trees on the island, about 1,300 animals were released into mainland areas in 1944. The practice of translocating koalas became commonplace; Victorian State manager Peter Menkorst estimated that from 1923 to 2006, about 25,000 animals were translocated to more than 250 release sites across Victoria. Since the 1990s, government agencies have tried to control their numbers by culling, but public and international outcry has forced the use of translocation and sterilisation, instead.\nOne of the biggest anthropogenic threats to the koala is habitat destruction and fragmentation. In coastal areas, the main cause of this is urbanisation, while in rural areas, habitat is cleared for agriculture. Native forest trees are also taken down to be made into wood products. In 2000, Australia ranked fifth in the world by deforestation rates, having cleared . The distribution of the koala has shrunk by more than 50% since European arrival, largely due to fragmentation of habitat in Queensland. The koala's \"vulnerable\" status in Queensland and New South Wales means that developers in these states must consider the impacts on this species when making building applications. In addition, koalas live in many protected areas.\n\nWhile urbanisation can pose a threat to koala populations, the animals can survive in urban areas provided enough trees are present. Urban populations have distinct vulnerabilities: collisions with vehicles and attacks by domestic dogs kill about 4,000 animals every year. Injured koalas are often taken to wildlife hospitals and rehabilitation centres. In a 30-year retrospective study performed at a New South Wales koala rehabilitation centre, trauma (usually resulting from a motor vehicle accident or dog attack) was found to be the most frequent cause of admission, followed by symptoms of \"Chlamydia\" infection. Wildlife caretakers are issued special permits, but must release the animals back into the wild when they are either well enough or, in the case of joeys, old enough. As with most native animals, the koala cannot legally be kept as a pet in Australia or anywhere else.\n\nBULLET::::- Fauna of Australia\nBULLET::::- List of monotremes and marsupials of Australia\nBULLET::::- Sam (koala), a female koala known for being rescued during the Black Saturday bushfires in 2009\n\n\nBULLET::::- Arkive – images and movies of the koala \"Phascolarctos cinereus\"\nBULLET::::- Animal Diversity Web – \"Phascolarctos cinereus\"\nBULLET::::- Koala Science Community\nBULLET::::- \"Koala Crunch Time\" – an ABC documentary (2012)\nBULLET::::- \"Koalas deserve full protection\"\nBULLET::::- Cracking the Koala Code – a PBS Nature documentary (2012)\n"}
{"id": "17147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17147", "title": "Killer micro", "text": "Killer micro\n\nA killer micro is a microprocessor-based machine that infringes on mini, mainframe, or supercomputer performance turf. It originally referred to the replacement of vector supercomputers built with bipolar technology by Massively Parallel Processors (MPP) assembled from a larger number of lower performing microprocessors. These systems faced initial skepticism, based on the assumption that applications do not have significant parallelism, because of Amdahl's law, but the success of early systems such as nCUBE and the fast progress in microprocessor performance following Moore's law led to a fast replacement.\n\nTaken from the title of Eugene Brooks' (of Lawrence Livermore Lab) talk \"Attack of the Killer Micros\" at Supercomputing 1990. This title was probably chosen after the \"Attack of the Killer Tomatoes\" cult film.\n\nBULLET::::- The Attack of the 'Killer Micros'\n"}
{"id": "17148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17148", "title": "Killer poke", "text": "Killer poke\n\nIn computer jargon, a killer poke is a method of inducing physical hardware damage on a machine or its peripherals by the insertion of invalid values, via, for example, BASIC's POKE command, into a memory-mapped control register. The term is typically used to describe a family of fairly well known tricks that can overload the analog electronics in the CRT monitors of computers lacking hardware sanity checking (notable examples being the IBM Portable and Commodore PET.)\n\nThe PET-specific killer poke is connected to the architecture of that machine's video rasterizer circuits. In early PETs, writing a certain value to the memory address of a certain I/O register (codice_1) made the machine able to display text on the screen much faster. When the PET range was revamped with updated hardware, it was discovered that performing the old trick on the new hardware led to strange behavior by the new video chip, which could possibly damage the PET's integrated CRT monitor.\n\nThe Commodore 64 had an optional external 5-1/4\" floppy drive. The Commodore 1541 contained a 6502 microprocessor which was used to run Commodore DOS and also to manage the drive mechanism. The drives stored data on 40 tracks (#0–39), and the stepper motor could be manually controlled through BASIC by PRINT#-ing \"MEMORY-WRITE\" commands to the drive (which correspond to the POKE command of BASIC, but write to the drive's internal memory and I/O registers, not those of the computer itself). If the drive was at either end of its range (track 0 or track 39) and it was commanded to continue moving, there was no software or firmware method to prevent drive damage. Continued \"knocking\" of the drive head against the stop would throw the mechanism out of alignment. The problem was exacerbated by copy protection techniques that used non-standard disk formats with unusual track counts. The Commodore 1571 had an optical head stop instead of a mechanical one.\n\nThe TRS-80 Model III had the ability to switch between a 32-character-wide display and a 64-character display. Doing so actuated a relay in the video hardware, accomplished by writing to a specific memory-mapped control register. Programs that repeatedly switched between 32- and 64-character modes at high speed (either on purpose or accidentally) could permanently damage the video hardware. While this is not a single \"killer poke\", it demonstrates a software failure mode that could permanently damage the hardware.\n\nThe TRS-80 Color Computer, IBM PC, IBM PCjr, Nascom, MSX, Amstrad CPC, and BBC Micro from Acorn Computers all contained a built-in relay for controlling an external tape recorder. Toggling the motor control relay in a tight loop would reduce the relay's longevity.\n\nThe floppy drive of the Commodore Amiga personal computer could be made to produce noises of various pitches by making the drive heads move back and forth. A program existed which could play El Cóndor Pasa, more or less correctly, on the Amiga's floppy drive. As some sounds relied on the head assembly hitting the stop, this gradually sent the head out of alignment.\n\nCertain models of LG CD-ROM drives with specific firmware used an abnormal command for \"update firmware\": the \"clear buffer\" command usually used on CD-RW drives. Linux uses this command to tell the difference between CD-ROM and CD-RW drives. Most CD-ROM drives dependably return an error for the unsupported CD-RW command, but the faulty drives interpreted it as \"update firmware\", causing them to stop working (or, in casual parlance, to be \"bricked\").\n\nSystemd mounts variables used by Unified Extensible Firmware Interface on Linux system's sysfs as writable by the root user of a system. As a result, it is possible for the root user of a system to completely brick a system with a non-conforming UEFI implementation (specifically some MSi laptops) by using the codice_2 command to delete the codice_3 directory, or recursively delete the root directory.\n\nThe Game Boy's LCD screen can be turned off by game software. Doing so outside of the vertical blanking interval can allegedly damage the hardware.\n\nBULLET::::- HCF (Halt and Catch Fire)\nBULLET::::- Pentium F00F bug\nBULLET::::- Scratch monkey\nBULLET::::- Stuxnet, malware designed to cause physical wear in industrial centrifuges\nBULLET::::- Bricking, the act of misconfiguring a device so as to make it cease functioning\n\nBULLET::::- Commodore PET killer poke discussion\n"}
{"id": "17149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17149", "title": "Kill file", "text": "Kill file\n\nA kill file (also killfile, bozo bin or twit list) is a file used by some Usenet reading programs to discard articles matching some unwanted patterns of subject, author, or other header lines. Adding a person or subject to one's kill file means that person or topic will be ignored by one's newsreader in the future. By extension, the term may be used for a decision to ignore the person or subject in other media.\n\nKill files were first implemented in Larry Wall's rn. Sometimes more than one kill file will be used. Some newsreader programs also allow the user to specify a time period to keep an author in the kill file.\n\nNewer newsreader software like Gnus often provides a more advanced form of filter known as a score file, which can use multiple rules to determine which articles are shown. Web-based forums usually have a similar feature called an \"ignore list\", which hides any posts by a specific user.\n\nJerry Pournelle wrote in 1986 of his wish for improvements to an offline reader for the Byte Information Exchange online service: \"What I really need, though, is a program that will ... sort through the messages, assigning some to a priority file and others to the bit bucket depending on subject matter and origin\".\nIn William Gibson's novel \"Idoru\", the virtual community Hak Nam is built around an \"inverted killfile\" and is modeled on Kowloon Walled City.\n\nBULLET::::- Circular File\nBULLET::::- Email filtering\nBULLET::::- Plonk\nBULLET::::- Stealth banning\nBULLET::::- Usenet Death Penalty\n\nBULLET::::- Kill file entry in the Jargon File\nBULLET::::- Kill file definition entry at NewsDemon.com\n"}
{"id": "17151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17151", "title": "Kilobaud", "text": "Kilobaud\n\nKilobaud may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- One thousand baud\nBULLET::::- P.H.I.R.M., a 1980s computer hacking group originally known as Kilobaud\nBULLET::::- \"Kilobaud Microcomputing\", a homebrew computer magazine from the 1980s\n"}
{"id": "17152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17152", "title": "Kilobit", "text": "Kilobit\n\nThe kilobit is a multiple of the unit bit for digital information or computer storage. The prefix \"kilo-\" (symbol k) is defined in the International System of Units (SI) as a multiplier of 10 (1 thousand), and therefore,\n\nThe kilobit has the unit symbol kbit or kb.\n\nUsing the common byte size of 8 bits, 1 kbit is equal to 125 bytes.\n\nThe kilobit is commonly used in the expression of data rates of digital communication circuits as kilobits per second (kbit/s or kb/s), or abbreviated as \"kbps\", as in, for example, \"a 56 kbps PSTN circuit\", or \"a 512 kbit/s broadband Internet connection\".\n\nThe unit symbol kb (lowercase 'b') is typographically similar to the international standard unit symbol for the kilobyte, i.e. kB (upper case 'B'). The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) recommends the symbol bit instead of b. The prefix \"kilo-\" is often used in fields of computer science and information technology with a meaning of multiplication by 1024 instead of 1000, contrary to international standards, in conjunction with the base unit byte and bit, in which case it is to be written as \"Ki-\", with a capital letter K, e.g., 1 Kibit = 1024 bits. The decimal SI definition, 1 kbit/s = 1000 bit/s, is used uniformly in the context of telecommunication transmission speeds.\n\nThe kilobit is closely related to the much less used kibibit, a unit multiple derived from the binary prefix \"kibi-\" (symbol Ki) of the same order of magnitude, which is equal to = 1024 bits, or approximately 2% larger than the kilobit. Despite the definitions of these new prefixes, meant for binary-based quantities of storage by international standards organizations, memory semiconductor chips are still marketed using the metric prefix names to designate binary multiples.\n\nBULLET::::- Data rate units\nBULLET::::- Orders of magnitude (data)\nBULLET::::- SI prefix\n"}
{"id": "17154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17154", "title": "Kit Carson", "text": "Kit Carson\n\nChristopher Houston Carson (December 24, 1809 – May 23, 1868), better known as Kit Carson, was an American frontiersman. He was a mountain man (fur trapper), wilderness guide, Indian agent, and U.S. Army officer. Carson became a frontier legend in his own lifetime via biographies and news articles. Often exaggerated versions of his exploits were the subject of dime novels. His understated nature belied confirmed reports of his fearlessness, combat skills, tenacity, and profound effect on the westward expansion of the United States.\n\nCarson left home in rural present-day Missouri at age 16 to become a mountain man and trapper in the West. In the 1830s, he accompanied Ewing Young on an expedition to Mexican California and joined fur-trapping expeditions into the Rocky Mountains. He lived among and married into the Arapaho and Cheyenne tribes.\n\nIn the 1840s, Carson was hired as a guide by John C. Frémont. Frémont's expeditions covered much of California, Oregon, and the Great Basin area. Frémont mapped and wrote reports and commentaries on the Oregon Trail to assist and encourage westward-bound American pioneers. Carson achieved national fame through Frémont's accounts of his expeditions. Under Frémont's command, Carson participated in the conquest of Mexican California at the beginning of the Mexican–American War. Later in the war, Carson was a scout and courier, celebrated for his rescue mission after the Battle of San Pasqual and for his coast-to-coast journey from California to Washington, D.C. to deliver news of the conflict in California to the U.S. government. In the 1850s, he was appointed as the Indian agent to the Ute Indians and the Jicarilla Apaches.\n\nDuring the American Civil War, Carson led a regiment of mostly Hispanic volunteers from New Mexico on the side of the Union at the Battle of Valverde in 1862. When the Confederate threat to New Mexico was eliminated, Carson led forces to suppress the Navajo, Mescalero Apache, and the Kiowa and Comanche peoples by destroying their food sources.\n\nCarson was brevetted a Brigadier General and took command of Fort Garland, Colorado. He was there only briefly: poor health forced him to retire from military life. Carson was married three times and had ten children. The Carson home was in Taos, New Mexico. Carson died at Fort Lyon, Colorado, of an aortic aneurysm on May 23, 1868. He is buried in Taos, New Mexico, next to his third wife, Josefa.\n\nChristopher Houston Carson was born on Christmas Eve, 1809 at the Home of Thomas Young in Madison County, Kentucky. His parents were Lindsay Carson and his second wife, Rebecca Robinson. Lindsay had had five children by his first wife Lucy Bradley, and ten more children by Rebecca. The Christmas Eve occasion of Christopher \"Kit\" Houston Carson birth was an interesting experience. Thomas Young and his family had a family tradition to celebrate Christmas by annually having a party at their fashionable home in Houstonville. In addition to their own family, the Youngs would always invite friends and close neighbors. It was to this occasion that Lindsay and Rebecca Carson were invited. \nLindsay's wife, Rebecca was expecting the imminent birth of their 6th child. Early in the evening, the hostess, Mrs. Young noticed that Rebecca Carson seemed to be in some distress and knowing of her expectant child, Mrs. Young took Rebecca to a room in another building where she could be in a more comforting environment and attended by a helpful attendant, a woman who was an African-American slave. It was not long until the sound of a new pair of strong lungs sounded out the alarm, a new child had been born to Lindsay and Rebecca Carson. The new mother and father decided quickly their son should be named Christopher Houston Carson, and because of his small size, to give him the nick-name, \"Kit\".\nLindsay Carson had a Scots-Irish Presbyterian background. He was a farmer, a cabin builder, and a veteran of the American Revolutionary War and the War of 1812. He fought Indians on the American frontier, losing two fingers on his left hand in a battle with the Fox and Sauk Indians.\n\nThe Carson family moved to Boone's Lick, Howard County, Missouri, when Kit was about one year old. The family settled on a tract of land owned by the sons of Daniel Boone, who had purchased the land from the Spanish. The Boone and Carson families became good friends, working and socializing together, and intermarrying. Lindsay's oldest son William married Boone's grand-niece, Millie Boone, in 1810. Their daughter Adaline became Kit's favorite playmate.\n\nMissouri was then the frontier of American expansionism west; cabins were \"forted\" with tall stockade fences to defend against Indian attacks. As men worked in the fields, sentries were posted with weapons, to protect the farmers. These men were ready to kill any Indian who attacked.< Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\": \"For two or three years after our arrival, we had to remain forted and it was necessary to have men stationed at the extremities of the fields for the protection of those that were laboring.\n\nIn 1818 Lindsay Carson died instantly when a tree limb fell on him while he was clearing a field. Kit was about eight years old. Despite being penniless, his mother took care of her children alone for four years. She then married Joseph Martin, a widower with several children. Kit was a young teenager at the time and did not get along with his stepfather. The decision was made to apprentice him to David Workman, a saddler in Franklin, Missouri. Kit wrote in his \"Memoirs\" that Workman was \"a good man, and I often recall the kind treatment I received.\"\n\nFranklin was situated at the eastern end of the Santa Fe Trail, which had opened two years earlier. Many of the customers at the saddle shop were trappers and traders, from whom Carson heard stirring tales of the West. Carson found work in the saddlery not to his taste: he once stated \"the business did not suit me, and I concluded to leave\".\n\nIn August 1826, against his mother's wishes, Kit ran away from his apprenticeship. He went west with a caravan of fur trappers, tending their livestock. They made their trek over the Santa Fe Trail to Santa Fe, the capital of Santa Fe de Nuevo México, reaching their destination in November 1826. Kit settled in Taos.\n\nCarson lived with Mathew Kinkead, a trapper and explorer who had served with Carson's older brothers during the War of 1812. Carson was mentored by Kinkead in learning the skills of a trapper, while learning the necessary languages for trade. Eventually he became fluent in Spanish and several Indian languages.\n\nWorkman put an advertisement in a local newspaper back in Missouri. He wrote that he would give a one cent reward to anyone who brought the boy back to Franklin. No one claimed the reward. It was a bit of a joke, but Carson was free. The advertisement featured the first printed description of Carson: \"Christopher Carson, a boy about 16 years old, small of his age, but thick set; light hair, ran away from the subscriber, living in Franklin, Howard county, Missouri, to whom he had been bound to learn the saddler's trade.\"\n\nBetween 1827 and 1829, Carson worked as cook, translator, and wagon driver in the southwest. He also worked at a copper mine near the Gila River in southwestern New Mexico. In later life, Carson never mentioned any women from his youth. There are only three specific women mentioned in his writing: Josefa Jaramillo, his third and last wife; a comrade's mother in Washington, DC; and Mrs. Ann White, a victim of Indian atrocities.\n\nAt the age of nineteen, Carson began his career as a mountain man. He traveled through many parts of the American West with famous mountain men like Jim Bridger and Old Bill Williams. He spent the winter of 1828–1829 as a cook for Ewing Young in Taos. He joined Young's trapping expedition of 1829. The leadership of Young and the experience of the venture are credited with shaping Carson's early life in the mountains.\n\nDuring August 1829 the party went into Apache country along the Gila River. The expedition was attacked, being Carson's first experience of combat. Young's party continued on into Alta California trapping and trading in California from Sacramento in the north to Los Angeles in the south, returning to Taos, New Mexico in April 1830 after trapping along the Colorado River.\n\nCarson joined a wagon train rescue party after entering Taos, and although the perpetrators had fled the scene of atrocities Young had the opportunity to witness Carson's horsemanship and courage. Carson joined another expedition led by Thomas Fitzpatrick and William Levin in 1831. Fitzpatrick, Levin and his trappers went north to the central Rocky Mountains. Carson would hunt and trap in the West for about ten years. He was known as a reliable man and a good fighter.\n\nLife for Carson as a mountain man was not easy. After collecting beavers from traps, he had to hold onto them for months at a time until the annual Rocky Mountain Rendezvous, held in remote areas of the West like the banks of the Green River in Wyoming. With the money received for the pelts, necessities of an independent life including fish hooks, flour and tobacco were procured. As there was little to no medical access in the varied regions he worked in, Carson had to dress his wounds and nurse himself. Conflict with particular Indians sometimes occurred. Carson's primary clothing at the time was in deer skins that had stiffened after being left outdoors for a time. This suit offered some protection against particular weapons employed by Indians.\n\nGrizzly bears were one of the mountain man's greatest enemies. A particular incident involving the animals happened to Carson in 1834 as he was hunting an elk alone. Two bears crossed paths with him and quickly chased him up a tree. One of the bears tried to make him fall by shaking the tree, but was not successful and eventually went away. Carson returned to his camp as fast as he could. He wrote in his \"Memoirs\" that: \"[The bear] finally concluded to leave, of which I was heartily pleased, never having been so scared in my life.\"\n\nThe last rendezvous was held in 1840. At that time, the fur trade began to drop off. Fashionable men in London, Paris, and New York wanted silk hats instead of beaver hats. In addition, beaver populations across North America were declining rapidly from over-exploitation. Carson knew it was time to find other work. He wrote in his \"Memoirs\" that \"Beaver was getting scarce, it became necessary to try our hand at something else.\"\n\nIn 1841, he was hired at Bent's Fort in Colorado, at the largest building on the Santa Fe Trail. Hundreds of people worked or lived there. Carson hunted buffalo, antelope, deer, and other animals to feed these people. He was paid one dollar a day. He returned to Bent's Fort several times during his life to again provide meat for the fort's residents.\n\nCarson was nineteen when he set off with Ewing Young's expedition to the Rocky Mountains in 1829. In addition to furs and the company of free-spirited, rugged mountain men, Carson sought action and adventure. He found what he was looking for in killing and scalping Indians. Carson probably killed and took the scalp of his first Indian when he was nineteen years old, during Ewing Young's expedition.\n\nCarson's \"Memoirs\" are replete with stories about hostile Indian encounters with the memoirist. In January 1833, for example, warriors of the Crow tribe stole nine horses from Carson's camp. Carson and two other men sprayed the Crow camp with gunfire, killing almost every Crow. Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\": \"During our pursuit for the lost animals, we suffered considerably but, the success of having recovered our horses and sending many a redskin to his long home, our sufferings were soon forgotten.\"\n\nCarson viewed the Blackfoot nation as a hostile tribe, believing they posed the greatest threat to his livelihood, safety, and life. He hated the Blackfeet, and killed them at every opportunity. Historian David Roberts has written: \"It was taken for granted that the Blackfeet were bad Indians; to shoot them whenever he could was a mountain man's instinct and duty.\"\n\nCarson had several encounters with the Blackfeet. His last battle with the Blackfeet took place in spring 1838. He was traveling with about one hundred mountain men led by Jim Bridger. In Montana territory, the group found a teepee with three Indian corpses inside. These three had died of smallpox. Bridger wanted to move on, but Carson and the other young men wanted to kill the Blackfeet.\n\nThey found the Blackfoot village and killed ten Blackfeet warriors. The Blackfeet found some safety in a pile of rocks but were driven away. It is not known how many Blackfeet died in this incident. Historian David Roberts writes: \"[I]f anything like pity filled Carson's breast as, in his twenty-ninth year, he beheld the ravaged camp of the Blackfeet, he did not bother to remember it.\" Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\" that this battle was \"the prettiest fight I ever saw.\"\n\nCarson's notions about Indians softened over the years. He found himself more and more in their company as he grew older and his attitude towards them became more respectful and humane. He urged the government to set aside lands called reservations for their use. As an Indian agent, he saw to it that those under his watch were treated with honesty, fairness, and clothed and fed properly. Historian David Roberts believes his first marriage to an Arapaho woman named Singing Grass \"softened the stern and pragmatic mountaineer's opportunism.\"\n\nIn April 1842, Carson went back to his childhood home in Missouri to put his daughter Adaline in the care of relatives. On the return trip, Carson met John C. Frémont aboard a steamboat on the Missouri River. Frémont was a United States Army officer in the Corps of Topographical Engineers. He was about to lead an expedition into the West. After a brief conversation, Frémont hired Carson as a guide at $100 a month. It was the best-paying job of Carson's life. Frémont wrote, \"I was pleased with him and his manner of address at this first meeting. He was a man of medium height, broad-shouldered, and deep-chested, with a clear steady blue eye and frank speech and address; quiet and unassuming.\"\n\nIn 1842, Carson guided Frémont across the Oregon Trail to South Pass, Wyoming. This was their first expedition into the West together. The purpose of this expedition was to map and describe the Oregon Trail as far as South Pass. A guidebook, maps, and other paraphernalia would be printed for westward-bound migrants and settlers. After the five-month, trouble-free mission was accomplished, Frémont wrote his government reports. These reports made Carson's name known across the United States, and spurred a migration of settlers westward to Oregon via the Oregon Trail.\n\nIn 1843, Carson agreed to join Frémont's second expedition. He guided Frémont across part of the Oregon Trail to the Columbia River in Oregon. The purpose of the expedition was to map and describe the Oregon Trail from South Pass, Wyoming to the Columbia River. They also side-tripped to Great Salt Lake in Utah, using a rubber raft to navigate the waters. On the way to California, the party suffered from bad weather in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, but were saved by Carson's good judgement and his skills as a guide. They found American settlers who fed them. The expedition then headed to California. This was illegal and dangerous because California was Mexican territory. The Mexican government ordered Frémont to leave. Frémont finally went back to Washington, D.C. The government liked his reports, but ignored his illegal trip into Mexico. Frémont was made a captain. The newspapers nicknamed him \"The Pathfinder\".\n\nDuring this expedition, Frémont trekked into the Mojave Desert. His party met a Mexican man and boy. The two told Carson that Native Americans had ambushed their party of travelers. The male travelers were killed; the women travelers were staked to the ground, sexually mutilated, and killed. The murderers then stole the Mexicans' thirty horses. Carson and a mountain man friend named Alexis Godey went after the murderers. They took two days to find them. They rushed into their camp, killing and scalping two of the murderers. The stolen horses were recovered and returned to the Mexican man and boy. This deed brought Carson even greater fame. It confirmed his status as a western hero in the eyes of the American people.\n\nIn 1845, Carson guided Frémont on their third and last expedition. They went to California and Oregon. Frémont made scientific plans, but the expedition appeared to be political in nature. Frémont may have been working under secret government orders. President Polk wanted the province of Alta California for the United States. Once in California, Frémont started to rouse the American settlers into a patriotic fervor. The Mexican government ordered him to leave. Frémont went north to Oregon, though not before instigating the Sacramento River massacre, in which at least 150 Indians were killed in an unprovoked attack. The party moved up along the Sacramento River, continuing to kill Indians as they went, then camped near Klamath Lake. Messages from Washington, DC made it clear that President Polk wanted California.\n\nAt Klamath Lake in southern Oregon, Frémont's party was hit in a revenge attack by 15–20 Indians on the night of May 9, 1846. Two or three men in camp were killed. The attackers fled after a brief struggle. Carson was angry that his friends had been killed. He took an axe and avenged the death of his friends by chopping away at a dead Indian's face. Frémont wrote, \"He knocked his head to pieces.\"\n\nIn retaliation for the attack, a few days later Frémont's party massacred a village of Klamath people along the Williamson River in the Klamath Lake massacre. The entire village was razed and at least 14 men, women and children were killed. There was no evidence that the village in question had anything to do with the previous attack.\n\nIn June 1846, Frémont and Carson both participated in a California uprising against Mexico called the Bear Flag Revolt. Mexico ordered all Americans to leave California. American settlers in California wanted to be free of the Mexican government and declared California an independent republic. The American rebels found courage to oppose Mexico because they had Frémont—who had written an oath of allegiance—and his troops behind them. Frémont and his men were able to give some protection to the Americans. He ordered Carson to execute an old Mexican man named José de los Reyes Berreyesa and his two adult nephews, who had been captured when they stepped ashore at San Francisco Bay, to prevent them from notifying Mexico about the uprising.\n\nFrémont worked hard to win California for the United States, for a time fashioning himself as its military governor, until being replaced by General Kearney, who out-ranked him. Carson took military records to the Secretary of War in Washington, DC. Frémont wrote, \"This was a service of great trust and honor ... and great danger also.\" In 1847 and 1848, Carson made two quick trips to Washington, DC with messages and reports. In 1848, he took news of the California Gold Strike to the nation's capitol.\n\nIn July 1853, Carson was in northern Nevada, with 7,000 sheep from Santa Fe. He was taking them to settlers in northern California, and southern Oregon. Carson had with him six \"Spaniards\" (possibly Basques) to herd the sheep.\n\nCarson's fame spread throughout the United States with government reports, dime novels, newspaper accounts, and word of mouth. The dime novels celebrated Carson's adventures, but were usually colored with exaggeration. A factual biography was attempted by DeWitt C. Peters in 1859, but has been criticized for inaccuracies and exaggerations. Carson became the hero of juvenile fiction not just in the United States, but also published in French, German, Portuguese, Gujarati, Hindi, Singhalese, Arabic and Japanese.\n\nThe first story about Carson's adventures was printed in 1847. It was called \"An Adventure of Kit Carson: A Tale of the Sacramento\". It was printed in \"Holden's Dollar Magazine\". Other stories were also printed, such as \"Kit Carson: The Prince of the Goldhunters\" and \"The Prairie Flower\". Writers thought Carson the perfect mountain man and Indian fighter. His exciting adventures were printed in the story \"Kiowa Charley, The White Mustanger; or, Rocky Mountain Kit's Last Scalp Hunt\". In this story, an older Kit is said to have \"ridden into Sioux camps unattended and alone, had ridden out again, but with the scalps of their greatest warriors at his belt.\"\n\nIn 1849, Carson guided soldiers on the trail of Mrs. Ann White, her baby daughter and \"negro servant,\" who had been captured by Jicarilla Apaches and Utes. The commanding officer, Captain William Grier of the 1st Cavalry Regiment, ignored Carson's advice about an immediate rescue attempt after catching the Jicarillas unaware, but after a shot was fired, the order was given to attack, by which time the Jicarillas had started to flee. As Carson describes it in his autobiography: \"In about 200 yards, pursuing the Indians, the body of Mrs. White was found, perfectly warm, had not been killed more than five minutes - shot through the heart by an arrow... I am certain that if the Indians had been charged immediately on our arrival she would have been saved.\" Her child and servant were taken away by the fleeing Jicarillas and killed shortly after the attack, according to a 1850 report by James S. Calhoun, the Superintendent of Indian Affairs in New Mexico.\n\nA soldier in the rescue party wrote: \"Mrs. White was a frail, delicate, and very beautiful woman, but having undergone such usage as she suffered nothing but a wreck remained; it was literally covered with blows and scratches. Her countenance even after death indicated a hopeless creature. Over her corpse, we swore vengeance upon her persecutors.\"\n\nCarson discovered a book about himself in the Apache camp. This was the first time that he found himself in print. He was the hero of adventure stories. He was sorry for the rest of his life that Mrs. White had been killed. He wrote in his \"Memoirs\": \"In camp was found a book, the first of the kind I had ever seen, in which I was made a great hero, slaying Indians by the hundreds ... I have often thought that Mrs. White read the same ... [and prayed] for my appearance that she might be saved.\"\n\nIn 1856, Carson told his life story to someone who wrote it down. This book is called \"Memoirs\". The manuscript was lost when taken East to find a professional writer who would work it into a book. Washington Irving was asked, but declined. The lost manuscript was found in a trunk in Paris in 1905. It was later printed. The first biography of Carson was written by DeWitt C. Peters in 1859. The book was called \"Kit Carson, the Nestor of the Mountains, from Facts Narrated by Himself\". When the book was read to Carson he said, \"Peters laid it on a leetle too thick.\"\n\nLasting from 1846 to 1848, the Mexican–American War was an armed conflict between the United States and Mexico. At war's end, Mexico was forced to sell the territories of Alta California and New Mexico to the United States under The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.\n\nOne of Carson's best known adventures took place during this war. In December 1846, Carson was ordered by General Stephen W. Kearny to guide him and his troops from Socorro, New Mexico to San Diego, California. Mexican soldiers attacked Kearny and his men near the village of San Pasqual, California.\n\nKearny was outnumbered. He knew he could not win; he ordered his men to take cover on a small hill. On the night of December 8, Carson, a naval lieutenant named Beale, and an Indian scout left Kearny to bring reinforcements from San Diego, away. Carson and the lieutenant removed their shoes because they made too much noise, and walked barefoot through the desert. Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\": \"Finally got through, but had the misfortune to lose our shoes. Had to travel over a country covered with prickly pear and rocks, barefoot.\"\n\nBy December 10, Kearny believed reinforcements would not arrive. He planned to break through the Mexican lines the next morning, but 200 mounted American soldiers arrived in San Pasqual late that night. They swept the area, driving the Mexicans away. Kearny was in San Diego on December 12.\n\nIn April 1861, the American Civil War broke out. Carson left his job as an Indian agent and joined the Union Army as a lieutenant. He led the 1st New Mexico Volunteer Infantry and trained the new men. In October 1861, he was made a colonel. The Volunteers fought the Confederate forces in the Battle of Valverde in New Mexico, in February 1862. The Confederates won this battle but were later defeated in June and retreated to Texas.\n\nOnce the Confederates were driven from New Mexico, Carson's commander Major General James Henry Carleton turned his attention to the Native Americans. Author and historian Edwin Sabin writes that this officer had a \"psychopathic hatred of the Apaches\". Carleton led his forces deep into the Mescalero Apache territory. The Mescaleros were tired of fighting and put themselves under Carson's protection. Carleton put these Apaches on a remote and lonely reservation on the Pecos River.\n\nCarson disliked the Apaches as well. He wrote in a report that the Jicarilla Apaches \"were truly the most degraded and troublesome Indians we have in our department ... [W]e daily witness them in a state of intoxication in our plaza.\" Carson half-heartedly supported Carleton's plans. He was tired and had suffered an injury two years before that gave him great trouble. He resigned from the Army in February 1863. Carleton refused to accept the resignation because he wanted Carson to lead a campaign against the Navajo.\n\nCarleton had chosen a bleak site on the Pecos River for his reservation, which was called Bosque Redondo (Round Grove). He chose this site for the Apaches and Navajos because it was far from white settlements. He also wanted these Apaches and Navajo to act as a buffer for any aggressive acts committed upon the white settlements from Kiowas and Comanches to the east of Bosque Redondo. He thought as well that the remoteness and desolation of the reservation would discourage white settlement.\n\nThe Mescalero Apaches walked to the reservation. By March 1863, four hundred Apaches had settled around nearby Fort Sumner. Others had fled west to join fugitive bands of Apaches. By middle summer, many of these people were planting crops and doing other farm work.\n\nOn July 7, Carson, with little heart for the Navajo roundup, started the campaign against the tribe. His orders were almost the same as those for the Apache roundup: he was to shoot all males on sight and take the women and children captives. No peace treaties were to be made until all the Navajo were on the reservation.\n\nCarson searched far and wide for the Navajo. He found their homes, fields, animals, and orchards, but the Navajo were experts at disappearing quickly and hiding in their vast lands. The roundup proved frustrating for Carson. He was in his 50s, tired, and ill. By autumn 1863, Carson started to burn the Navajo homes and fields and remove their animals from the area. The Navajo would starve if this destruction continued. One hundred eighty-eight Navajo surrendered and were sent to Bosque Redondo. Life at the Bosque had turned grim; murders took place. The Apaches and Navajos fought. The water in the Pecos contained minerals that gave people cramps and stomach aches. Residents had to walk to find firewood.\n\nCarson wanted to take a winter break from the campaign. Major General Carleton refused, ordering him to invade the Canyon de Chelly, where many Navajos had taken refuge. Historian David Roberts writes, \"Carson's sweep through the Canyon de Chelly in the winter of 1863–1864 would prove to be the decisive action in the Campaign.\"\n\nThe Canyon de Chelly was a sacred place for the Navajo. They believed that it would now be their strongest sanctuary. Three hundred Navajo took refuge on the canyon rim at a place called Fortress Rock. They resisted Carson's invasion by building rope ladders and bridges, lowering water pots into a stream, and keeping quiet and out of sight. These three hundred Navajo survived the invasion. In January 1864, Carson swept through the Canyon with his forces. The thousands of peach trees in the canyon were cut down. Few Navajo were killed or captured. Carson's invasion, however, proved to the Navajo that the United States could invade their territory at any time. Many Navajo surrendered at Fort Defiance, Arizona.\n\nBy March 1864, there were 3,000 refugees at Fort Canby. An additional 5,000 arrived in the camp. They were suffering from the intense cold and hunger. Carson asked for supplies to feed and clothe them. The thousands of Navajo were forced to walk to Bosque Redondo. Many died along the way. Stragglers in the rear were shot and killed. In Navajo history, this horrific trek is known as Long Walk of the Navajo. By 1866, reports indicated that Bosque Redondo was a complete failure, and Major General Carleton was fired. Congress started investigations. In 1868, a treaty was signed, and the Navajo were allowed to return to their homeland. Bosque Redondo was closed.\n\nOn November 25, 1864, Carson led his forces against the southwestern tribes at the First Battle of Adobe Walls in the Texas panhandle. Adobe Walls was an abandoned trading post blown up by its inhabitants to prevent a take-over by hostile Indians. Combatants at the First Battle were the United States Army and Indian scouts against Kiowas, Comanches, and Plains Apaches. It was one of the largest engagements fought on the Great Plains.\n\nThe battle was the result of General Carleton's belief that Indians were responsible for the continuing attacks on settlers along the Santa Fe Trail. He wanted to punish them and brought in Carson to do the job. With most of the Army engaged elsewhere during the American Civil War, the protection the settlers sought was almost nonexistent. Carson led 260 cavalry, 75 infantry, and 72 Ute and Jicarilla Apache Army scouts. In addition, he had two mountain howitzers.\n\nOn the morning of November 25, Carson discovered and attacked a Kiowa village of 176 lodges. After destroying this village, he moved forward to Adobe Walls. Carson found other Comanche villages in the area, and realized he would face a very large force of Native Americans. A Captain Pettis estimated that 1,200 to 1,400 Comanche and Kiowa began to assemble. That number would swell, according to some accounts, to an implausible 3,000. Four to five hours of battle ensued. When Carson ran low on ammunition and howitzer shells, he ordered his men to retreat to a nearby Kiowa village. There they burned the village and many fine buffalo robes. His Indian scouts killed and mutilated four elderly and weak Kiowas.\n\nFirst Adobe Walls, located northeast of Stinnett in Hutchinson County, Texas, was Carson’s last military engagement. It ended in victory for the Comanche-Kiowa alliance that allowed them to dominate the Llano Estacado for another eight years. The encounter could have resulted in a massacre worse than Custer's Last Stand in Montana Territory twelve years thereafter. Three of Carson's men died; twenty-one were wounded. More than one hundred warriors lost their lives, and two hundred were wounded.\n\nThe retreat to New Mexico then began with few deaths among Carson's men. General Carleton wrote to Carson: \"This brilliant affair adds another green leaf to the laurel wreath which you have so nobly won in the service of your country.\" \n\nIn 1847, the future General William Tecumseh Sherman met Kit Carson in Monterey, California. Sherman wrote: \"His fame was then at its height, ... and I was very anxious to see a man who had achieved such feats of daring among the wild animals of the Rocky Mountains, and still wilder Indians of the plains ... I cannot express my surprise at beholding such a small, stoop-shouldered man, with reddish hair, freckled face, soft blue eyes, and nothing to indicate extraordinary courage or daring. He spoke but little and answered questions in monosyllables.\"\n\nColonel Edward W. Wynkoop wrote: \"Kit Carson was five feet five and one half-inches tall, weighed about 140 pounds, of nervy, iron temperament, squarely built, slightly bow-legged, and those members apparently too short for his body. But, his head and face made up for all the imperfections of the rest of his person. His head was large and well-shaped with yellow straight hair, worn long, falling on his shoulders. His face was fair and smooth as a woman's with high cheekbones, straight nose, a mouth with a firm, but somewhat sad expression, a keen, deep-set but beautiful, mild blue eye, which could become terrible under some circumstances, and like the warning of the rattlesnake, gave notice of attack. Though quick-sighted, he was slow and soft of speech, and posed great natural modesty.\"\n\nLieutenant George Douglas Brewerton made one coast-to-coast dispatch-carrying trip to Washington, D.C. with Carson. Brewerton wrote: \"The Kit Carson of my \"imagination\" was over six feet high — a sort of modern Hercules in his build — with an enormous beard, and a voice like a roused lion ... The real Kit Carson I found to be a plain, simple ... man; rather below the medium height, with brown, curling hair, little or no beard, and a voice as soft and gentle as a woman's. In fact, the hero of a hundred desperate encounters, whose life had been mostly spent amid wilderness, where the white man is almost unknown, was one of Dame Nature's gentleman ...\"\n\nCarson joined Freemasonry in the Santa Fe Territory of New Mexico, petitioning in Montezuma Lodge No. 101. He was initiated an Entered Apprentice on April 22, 1854, passed to the degree of Fellowcraft June 17, 1854, and raised to the sublime degree of Master Mason December 26, 1854, just two days after his forty-fifth birthday. Kit, together with several other Freemasons in Taos, petitioned to Charter Bent Lodge No. 204 (now Bent Lodge # 42) from the Grand Lodge of Missouri AF&AM, a request which was granted on June 1, 1860, with Kit elected Junior Warden of the lodge.\n\nThe Masonic fraternity continued to serve him and his family, well after his death. In 1908, the Grand Lodge of New Mexico erected a wrought iron fence around his family burial plot. The following year, the Grand Lodge challenged Bent Lodge to purchase and preserve Kit's home. More than a century later, the Kit Carson Home & Museum is still managed by the lodge.\n\nCarson was married three times. His first two wives were Native American. His third wife was Mexican. Carson was the father of ten children. He never wrote about his first two marriages in his \"Memoirs\". He may have thought he would be known as a \"squaw man\". Such men were not welcomed by polite society.\n\nIn 1836, Carson met an Arapaho woman named Waanibe (Singing Grass, or Grass Singing) at a mountain man rendezvous held along the Green River in Wyoming. Singing Grass was a lovely young woman, and many mountain men were in love with her. Carson was forced to fight a duel with a French trapper named Chouinard for Waanibe's hand in marriage. Carson won, but he had a very narrow escape. The French trapper's bullet singed his hair. The duel was one of the best known stories about Carson in the 19th century.\n\nCarson married Singing Grass. She tended to his needs, and went with him on his trapping trips. They had a daughter named Adaline (or Adeline). Singing Grass died after giving birth to Carson's second daughter, circa 1841. His second child did not live long: in 1843, she fell into a kettle of boiling soap in Taos, New Mexico and subsequently died.\n\nCarson's life as a mountain man was too hard for a little girl so he took Adaline to live with his sister Mary Ann Carson Rubey in St. Louis, Missouri. Adaline was taught in a school for girls called a seminary. Carson brought her West when she was a teenager. She married and divorced a George Stilts of St. Louis, Missouri. In 1858, she went to the California goldfields. Adaline died in 1860 or after 1862, probably in Mono County, California.\n\nIn 1841, Carson married a Cheyenne woman named Making-Out-Road. They were together only a short time. Making-Out-Road divorced him in the way of her people by putting Adaline and all of Carson's property outside their tent. Making-Out-Road left Carson to travel with her people through the west.\n\nAbout 1842, Carson met Josefa Jaramillo. She was the daughter of a wealthy and prominent Mexican couple living in Taos. In order to marry her, Carson left the Presbyterian Church for the Catholic Church. He married 14-year-old Josefa on February 6, 1843. They had eight children.\n\nCarson was illiterate. He was embarrassed by this, and tried to hide it. In 1856, he dictated his \"Memoirs\" to another and stated then:\n\"I was a young boy in the school house when the cry came, Injuns! I jumped to my rifle and threw down my spelling book, and thar it lies.\"\n\nCarson enjoyed having other people read to him, and preferred the poetry of George Gordon, Lord Byron. Carson thought Sir Walter Scott's long poem, \"The Lady of the Lake\" was \"the finest expression of outdoor life.\" Carson eventually learned to write \"C. Carson\", but it was very difficult for him. He made his mark on official papers, and this mark was then witnessed by a clerk or other official.\n\nWhen the Civil War ended, and the Indian Wars campaigns were in a lull, Carson was appointed brevet brigadier general (dated March 13, 1865) and appointed commandant of Ft. Garland, Colorado, in the heart of Ute country. Carson had many Ute friends in the area and assisted in government relations.\n\nAfter being mustered out of the Army, Carson took up ranching, settling at Boggsville in Bent County. In 1868, at the urging of Washington and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Carson journeyed to Washington D.C., where he escorted several Ute Chiefs to meet with the President of the United States to plead for assistance to their tribe.\n\nSoon after his return, his wife Josefa died from complications after giving birth to their eighth child. Her death was a crushing blow to Carson. He died a month later at age 58 on May 23, 1868, in the presence of Dr. Tilton and his friend Thomas Boggs in the surgeon's quarters at Fort Lyon, Colorado. His last words were \"Goodbye, friends. \"Adios, compadres\"\". The cause of his death was abdominal aortic aneurysm. His resting place is Taos, New Mexico.\n\nCarson's home in Taos, New Mexico is today a museum called the Kit Carson Home and Museum. A monument was raised in the plaza at Santa Fe by the New Mexico Grand Army. In Denver, a statue of a mounted Kit Carson can be found atop the Mac Monnies Pioneer Monument. Another equestrian statue can be seen in Trinidad, Colorado. Carson National Forest in New Mexico was named for him, as well as a county and a town in Colorado. A river in Nevada is named for Carson as well as the state's capital, Carson City. Fort Carson, Colorado, an army post near Colorado Springs, was named after him during World War II by popular vote of the men training there. Kit Carson Park in Escondido, California is named for him.\n\nCarson has been widely depicted in film and television series. In 1966, the actor Phillip Pine played Carson with Michael Pate as fellow Fremont scout Frenchy Godey in the episode \"Samaritans, Mountain Style\" of the syndicated series, \"Death Valley Days\", hosted by Robert Taylor. In the story line, Carson and Godey stop to help a settler in dire straits.\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Carson came under the scrutiny of contemporary historians, and ideas regarding his historical legacy began to change. Earlier accounts portrayed Carson as an American hero, but in scholarship of this period he became an arch-villain in the military campaigns against the Indians. In 1992, for example, a young professor at Colorado College was successful in demanding that a period photograph of Carson be removed from the ROTC office. In 1992, a tourist told a journalist at the Carson home in Taos, \"I will not go into the home of that racist, genocidal killer.\" In the 1970s, a Navajo at a trading post said, \"No one here will talk about Kit Carson. He was a butcher.\" In 1993, a symposium was organized to air various views on Carson, but the Navajo spokespeople refused to attend.\n\nOver time, historical analysis of Carson shifted again. David Roberts writes, \"Carson's trajectory, over three and a half decades, from thoughtless killer of Apaches and Blackfeet to defender and champion of the Utes, marks him out as one of the few frontiersmen whose change of heart toward the Indians, born not of missionary theory but of first hand experience, can serve as an exemplar for the more enlightened policies that sporadically gained the day in the twentieth century.\"\n\nHarry Carey played Carson in the 1936 film \"Sutter's Gold\".\n\nJon Hall played Carson in the 1940 Western film \"Kit Carson\".\n\nBill Williams played Kit Carson in the TV mini-series 1951-55 The Adventures of Kit Carson\n\nRip Torn played Carson in the 1986 miniseries \"Dream West\".\n\nCarson was the inspiration for a same-named character in the popular Italian comic book series \"Tex Willer\".\n\nCarson is a supporting character in Willa Cather's novel, \"Death Comes for the Archbishop\".\n\nCarson's contributions to western history have been reexamined by historians, journalists and Indian activists since the 1960s. In 1968, Carson biographer Harvey L. Carter stated:\n\nHistorian Hampton Sides said that Carson believed the Native Americans needed reservations as a way of physically separating and shielding them from white hostility and white culture. He is said to have viewed the raids on white settlements as driven by desperation, \"committed from absolute necessity when in a starving condition.\" Indian hunting grounds were disappearing as waves of white settlers filled the region.\n\nIn 2014 there was a petition to rename Kit Carson Park in Taos, NM Red Willow Park. Despite the support of the Taos Pueblo and the residents of Taos Valley the park was not renamed and still bears the Kit Carson moniker.\n\nBULLET::::- Kit Carson Scouts\nBULLET::::- Kit Carson Mesa\nBULLET::::- Cleland, Robert Glass (1950). \"This Reckless Breed of Men: The Trappers and Fur Traders of the Southwest\". New York City: Knopf.\nBULLET::::- Reidhead, S.J. \"Kit Carson: The Legendary Frontiersman Remains an American Hero\" HistoryNet.com June 12, 2006\nBULLET::::- Roberts, S. A., Roberts, C. A., & Chilton, K. (2004). \"A history of New Mexico\". Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Guide to the Kit Carson Papers at The Bancroft Library\nBULLET::::- Kit Carson Papers – Missouri History Museum\nBULLET::::- Narrative of the Exploring Expedition to the Rocky Mountains By John Charles Frémont. Published 1845.\nBULLET::::- The Daring Adventures of Kit Carson and Fremont, Among Buffaloes, Grizzlies. By John Charles Frémont. Published 1888.\nBULLET::::- The First, and a Little-known, 1847 Biography of Kit Carson\nBULLET::::- The Life and Adventures of Kit Carson, the Nestor of the Rocky Mountains, from Facts Narrated by Himself (1858) by De Witt C. Peters, at Project Gutenberg and at Google Books.\nBULLET::::- Kit Carson papers, Vault MSS 513 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University\nBULLET::::- 'A West Won by Blood & Thunder' NPR (2006).\n"}
{"id": "17155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17155", "title": "Kirin", "text": "Kirin\n\nKirin may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Jilin or Kirin, a province in northeastern China\nBULLET::::- Jilin City or Kirin, a city in the province of Jilin, China\nBULLET::::- Kirin, Croatia, a settlement in Vrginmost\n\nBULLET::::- Kirin Company, a Japanese beverages company\nBULLET::::- Brasil Kirin, a Brazilian brewery and beverage company\nBULLET::::- Kyowa Hakko Kirin, a Japanese pharmaceutical company\nBULLET::::- Kirin, a series of SoCs produced by HiSilicon\n\nBULLET::::- Kirin Cup, an association football tournament organised in Japan\nBULLET::::- Kirin Open, a Japanese golf tournament from 1974 to 2001\n\nBULLET::::- Qilin, Girin or Kirin, a mythical creature known in various East Asian cultures\nBULLET::::- \"Kirin\" (manga), a 1987 Japanese manga series\nBULLET::::- Ki-rin (\"Dungeons & Dragons\"), a type of monster in \"D&D\"\nBULLET::::- Kirin (chess) or giraffe, a fairy chess piece\nBULLET::::- Kirin language or Kili, a Tungusic language of Russia and China\nBULLET::::- Kirin, a type of monster in \"\"\nBULLET::::- Kirin, a type of creature in the \"\" Series\n\nBULLET::::- Ivica Kirin (born 1970), former Interior Minister of Croatia\nBULLET::::- Kirin J. Callinan (born 1986), Australian singer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- Kirin Kiki (1943–2018), Japanese TV and film actress\nBULLET::::- Kirin Narayan (born 1959), Indian-born American anthropologist and writer\nBULLET::::- Kirin Kotecha, a character in \"Emmerdale\"\n\nBULLET::::- Girin (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Keirin, a form of motor-paced cycle racing\nBULLET::::- \"Kirin no Tsubasa\", a 2012 Japanese film\nBULLET::::- Kirino (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Kylin (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Qilin (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Xilin (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "17156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17156", "title": "Kipper", "text": "Kipper\n\nA kipper is a whole herring, a small, oily fish, that has been split in a butterfly fashion from tail to head along the dorsal ridge, gutted, salted or pickled, and cold-smoked over smouldering woodchips (typically oak).\n\nIn Britain and Ireland as well as a few North American regions, they are often eaten for breakfast. In Great Britain, kippers, along with other preserved smoked or salted fish such as the bloater and buckling, were also once commonly enjoyed as a high tea or supper treat, most popularly with inland and urban working-class populations before World War II.\n\nThe English philologist and ethnographer Walter William Skeat derives the word from the Old English \"kippian\", to spawn. The word has various possible parallels, such as Icelandic \"kippa\" which means \"to pull, snatch\" and the Germanic word \"kippen\" which means \"to tilt, to incline\". Similarly, the Middle English \"kipe\" denotes a basket used to catch fish. Another theory traces the word kipper to the \"kip\", or small beak, that male salmon develop during the breeding season.\n\nAs a verb, \"kippering\" (\"to kipper\") means to preserve by rubbing with salt or other spices before drying in the open air or in smoke. \nOriginally applied to the preservation of surplus fish (particularly those known as \"kips,\" harvested during spawning runs), \"kippering\" has come to mean the preservation of any fish, poultry, beef or other meat in like manner. The process is usually enhanced by cleaning, filleting, butterflying or slicing the food to expose maximum surface area to the drying and preservative agents.\n\nAlthough the exact origin of the kipper is unknown, this processes of slitting, gutting, and smoke-curing fish is well documented. According to Mark Kurlansky, \"Smoked foods almost always carry with them legends about their having been created by accident—usually the peasant hung the food too close to the fire, and then, imagine his surprise the next morning when …\". For instance Thomas Nashe wrote in 1599 about a fisherman from Lothingland in the Great Yarmouth area who discovered smoking herring by accident. Another story of the accidental invention of kipper is set in 1843, with John Woodger of Seahouses in Northumberland, when fish for processing was left overnight in a room with a smoking stove. These stories and others are known to be untrue because the word \"kipper\" long predates this. Smoking and salting of fish—in particular of spawning salmon and herring—which are caught in large numbers in a short time and can be made suitable for edible storage by this practice predates 19th-century Britain and indeed written history, probably going back as long as humans have been using salt to preserve food.\n\nA kipper is also sometimes referred to as a \"red herring\", although particularly strong curing is required to produce a truly red kipper.\nThe term appears in a mid-13th century poem by the Anglo-Norman poet Walter of Bibbesworth, \"He eteþ no ffyssh But heryng red.\" Samuel Pepys used it in his diary entry of 28 February 1660 \"Up in the morning, and had some red herrings to our breakfast, while my boot-heel was a-mending, by the same token the boy left the hole as big as it was before.\"\n\nThe dyeing of kippers was introduced as an economy measure in the First World War by avoiding the need for the long smoking processes. This allowed the kippers to be sold quickly, easily and for a substantially greater profit. Kippers were originally dyed using a coal tar dye called brown FK (the FK is an abbreviation of \"for kippers\"), kipper brown or kipper dye. Today, kippers are usually brine dyed using a natural annatto dye, giving the fish a deeper orange/yellow colour. European Community legislation limits the acceptable daily intake (ADI) of Brown FK to 0.15 mg/kg. Not all fish caught are suitable for the dyeing process, with mature fish more readily sought, because the density of their flesh improves the absorption of the dye. An \"orange kipper\" is a kipper that has been dyed orange.\n\nKippers from the Isle of Man and some Scottish producers are not dyed: The smoking time is extended in the traditional manner.\n\"Cold-smoked\" fish that have not been salted for preservation must be cooked before being eaten safely (they can be boiled, fried, grilled, jugged or roasted, for instance). \"Kipper snacks\" (see below) are precooked and may be eaten without further preparation. In general, oily fish are preferred for smoking as the heat is evenly dispersed by the oil, and the flesh resists flaking apart like drier species.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, kippers are often served for breakfast, and much less often at lunch or dinner. In the United States, where kippers are much less commonly eaten than in the UK, they are almost always sold as either canned \"kipper snacks\" or in jars found in the refrigerated foods section.\n\nKippers produced in the Isle of Man are exported around the world. Thousands are produced annually in the town of Peel, where two kipper houses, Moore's Kipper Yard (founded 1882) and Devereau and Son (founded 1884), smoke and export herring.\n\nMallaig, once the busiest herring port in Europe, is famous for its traditionally smoked kippers, as well as Stornoway kippers and Loch Fyne kippers. The harbour village of Craster in Northumberland is famed for Craster kippers, which are prepared in a local smokehouse, sold in the village shop and exported around the world.\n\nConnors Brothers Limited, of Black's Harbour, New Brunswick, Canada, is one of the world's largest producers of sardines and herring. Their \"kippered snacks\", are smoked and salted, undyed.\n\nThe Manx word for kipper is , literally \"red herring\"; the Irish term is \"scadán dearg\" with the same meaning.\n\n\"Kipper time\" is the season in which fishing for salmon is forbidden in Great Britain, originally the period 3 May to 6 January, in the River Thames by an Act of Parliament. \"Kipper season\" refers (particularly among fairground workers, market workers, taxi drivers and the like) to any lean period in trade, particularly the first three or four months of the year.\n\nThe sailors of the Royal Canadian Navy use the term \"kippers\" as a slang for members of the Royal Navy.\n\nThe term \"kippering\" is used in slang to mean being immersed in a room filled with cigarette or other tobacco smoke.\n\nIn recent years \"Kipper\" has become a nickname for a member of the British political party UKIP.\n\nIn the children's books \"The Railway Series\", and in the television show \"Thomas the Tank Engine and Friends\", The Flying Kipper is a nickname for a fast fish train usually pulled by Henry the Green Engine.\n\nBULLET::::- Bloater, whole-smoked herring\nBULLET::::- Buckling, hot-smoked decapitated herring\nBULLET::::- Craster kipper\nBULLET::::- Fish preservation\nBULLET::::- Kipper tie\nBULLET::::- List of dried foods\nBULLET::::- List of smoked foods\nBULLET::::- Red herring, an irrelevant distraction\nBULLET::::- Sausage (Kippered beef snacks)\nBULLET::::- Smoked fish\nBULLET::::- Solomon Gundy\nBULLET::::- Herring as food\nBULLET::::- Bannerman, A. McK. (2001) Kippers \"Torry Advisory Note No. 48\", FAO, Rome.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The lure of red herring\", history of smoked fish varieties.\nBULLET::::- Isle of Man Kipper Museum\nBULLET::::- National Library of Scotland: SCOTTISH SCREEN ARCHIVE (archive films relating to the production of kippers)\nBULLET::::- E154 Brown FK\nBULLET::::- Nicky Duffy, Guardian Unlimited\nBULLET::::- Kippers, the breakfast dish that fell out of favour, are back on British menus \"The Guardian\", 7 April 2012.\n"}
{"id": "17157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17157", "title": "Kipsigis people", "text": "Kipsigis people\n\nThe Kipsigis (Lumbwa) are a Nilotic people living predominantly in Bomet, Kericho, Narok, Nakuru and Laikipia counties of Kenya. Some also live in Angata-Baragoi and Northern Tanzania. Alongside other Southeastern Nilotes, the Kipsigis make up a group colloquially and academically referred to as \"Kalenjin\" which can be translated to mean \"I tell you\". In mid 19th century AD, the Kipsigis were known to have been called Lumbwa which they shared with Lloikop people (Maasai), Yaaku people, Okiek, Doko and Agumaba people (Iraqw) but by 20th century, it clearly was the term used to identify the Kipsigis but with also a connotation to identify the Wakuavi Maasai of Tanzania.\n\nOther names include: Kipsikis, Ilparakuyo, Baraguyu, Kwavi, Lumbwa or Iloikop.\n\nTheir first language is Kipsigis, which belongs to the Nilo-Saharan language family; their second language is mostly Swahili and English. Like many other Nilotes, Kipsigis have challenges with spoken and written languages and thus in the Kenyan pop culture, they are often attributed to an annoying or funny accent when speaking the second languages.\nThe Kipsigis are monotheistic which made it easier for them to convert to Christianity. The traditional occupation of the Kipsigis is herding. In pre-colonial Kipsigis society, there was a warrior element. Living on the Western Highlands at an altitude of 1500 to 2000m, the Kipsigis now also grow maize, wheat, pyrethrum and tea.\nThe name Kipsigis seems to be owned by the Kipsigis people in a legend where they describe a dispute among the immediate families who they say immigrated them into Kenyan Rift Valley highlands. In this legend, the disputes led to dispersion where Keiyo may have delegated themselves a duty to milk cattle, Tugen to shelter away, Nandi at that time referred to as Chepngal which can mean 'those who say a lot' and Kipsigis implying they put more importance in fertility and repopulation.\nThe name 'Kipsigis' can be translated as 'prolific' or 'the ones who bear many children' where 'Kip' is the masculine name prefix and 'sigis' implying the process of giving birth.\n\nAccording to the Swahili traders and alien visitors, the Kipsigis would have seemed as part of the Nandi as were all the other Kalenjin tribes and in this accord, Kalenjin was referred to as Nandi-Speaking communities. Apparently, the Kipsigis were recorded to be called Lumbwa by legends from Meru community and by the British.\n\nThe origin of the Kipsigis is compact with the origin of other Southeastern Nilotes. From archeological and linguistic studies, their origin is in Eastern Sudan with scientific evidence dating to 6000BCE.\nThe earliest area in the Great Lakes region that is recognized as inhabited by the Southern Nilotic speakers lies in the present day Jie and Dodoth country in Uganda. In oral culture among the Kalenjin, they identify their origin to be Mount Elgon and so do the Kipsigis.\n\nThe Kipsigis was initially a single group and identity with the Nandi until 1800 when the Nandi community was separated by a wedge of Uasin Ngishu Maasai in Kipchorian River (River Nyando); the resulting community in Nyando became Kipsgis.\n\nThe Kipsigis valued songs more than story telling as it was an easy medium to communicate and preserve history. There are two interesting and confusing songs:\nBULLET::::- Kichome echek tulwenyon, tulwet-aap Araran/Ararat: We love our mountain, mount Ararat/Araran.\nBULLET::::- Ndamo riret ab Musa; to maki-sobje: Were it not for Musa's (Moses') cry, we wouldn't have been saved.\n\nThese two offer a glimpse of an early origin of the Kalenjin in general but it has not been understood as to what timeline the activities in the songs took place. It has been understood colloquially to the events of Noah's flooding and Moses' passage through the Red sea. It also unclear how these songs got passed to the Kipsigis or if it had meaning to Kalenjin as a whole.\n\nThe arrival of the Southern Nilotes on the East African archaeological scene is correlated with the appearance of the prehistoric lithic industry and pottery tradition referred to as the Elmenteitan culture. The bearers of the Elmenteitan culture developed a distinct pattern of land use, hunting and pastoralism on the western plains of Kenya during the East African Pastoral Neolithic. Its earliest recorded appearance dates to the ninth century BC (i.e. 900 to 801 BC).\nIt is thought that around the fifth and sixth centuries BC, the speakers of the Southern Nilotic languages split into two major divisions - the proto-Kalenjin and the proto-Datooga. The former took shape among those residing to the north of the Mau range while the latter took shape among sections that moved into the Mara and Loita plains south of the western highlands.\nWhile few large-scale excavations have been done on sites outside the Central Rift, regional surveys indicate that the population was far denser in the southern highlands during this time.\nThe Datooga were specialized pastoralists on considerable scale, spreading their settlements westward after 400BC across the Mara plains and as far as southeastern Lake Nyanza. Their presence on the Mara and Loita plains would continue through to the seventeenth century AD when they were driven south by the Maasai during the Il-Tatua wars. Archaeological and linguistic evidence point to significant differences in ways of life between the Elmenteitan culture and the Savanna Pastoral Neolithic cultures that had preceded them in Kenya.\n\nIt is imperative to note that the Kipsigis understand that circumcision was introduced to them and it was not part of their culture before this timeline. It is understood by the Kipsigis that the first ever circumcision ceremony was performed in a hill very sacred to the Kipsigis to this very date:- \"Tulwab Kipsigis\" meaning Mount Kipsigis which is located in Londiani Junction in Kericho. The hill has had other names in the past including: Tulwab Monyis meaning the mountain of the penis and Tulwab Lagok or Tulawab Ngetik meaning \"The Mount of Children\" or \"The Mount of Uncircumcised Boys\", respectively.\n\nWhilst academia and archaeology find the Sirikwa as a pastoral neolithic period of the Kalenjin, among the Kipsigis, they mention living with a group of people they refer as Sirikwa. The Sirkwa are said to have dug up circular parameters where they kept their cattle and made huts on top of the parameters. It is also said that the Sirikwa had a thing about red ants, their appearance made them migrate as it was a bad omen for them. It is also told that the Sirikwa migrated Southward toward Tanzania. The Iraqw of Tanzania actually do confirm to be the Sirikwa who interacted with the Kalenjin before migrating to Tanzania. The Sirgoik clan of the Kipsigis are thought to be adopted group of Iraqw families.\n\nArchaeological and linguistic research indicate that the Kipsigis may have occupied a region extending from Nandi hills eastwards toward Mount Kenya and a southern projection to much of Maasai land. This is founded in a legend by the Meru community of Kenya where they claim their ancestors interacted with a group of people they referred to as Lumbwa. The reduction of the area occupied by the Kipsigis can be attributed to the rise of the Maasai community which cut them off from mount Kenya all the way to Laikipia.\n\nThe Kipsigis are a very religious group of people. They were monotheistic before the advent of conversion to Christianity. Theism was accompanied with no need for proof. Their God is known as \"Asis\" which can be derived from the word- \"Asista\" meaning the sun. Previous translations state that \"Asis\" means the 'darlzing one' but 'to darzle' is coined by the term lili.\n\"Asis\" has nine attributes/names including:\n\nBULLET::::- 1. Asis - \"Sunny\"\n\nThis is the common name for the Kalenjin's deity.\n\nBULLET::::- 2. Cheptalel - \"She who can be white\"\n\nThought of God with human nature. This attribute is coined by a legend which includes the sacrificing of girl which resulted in answer of rain after a severe drought. Cheptalel is the protagonist in the legend.\n\nBULLET::::- 3. Chepopkooiyo - \"She from halo\"\n\n\"Kooiyo\" is derived from halo usually around the sun on a humid day. A halo around the sun was an important omen among the Kalenjin during war. By observing appearance of a halo before going to war, the Kalenjin would decided whether to go or not go to war. Chepopkooiyo thus implies the God of war.\n\nBULLET::::- 4. Chepomirchiio - \"she who leads war\"\n\nIt literally means the one who leads wars, or the god of hosts. He/she protects and leads armies.\n\nBULLET::::- 5. Chepkeelyen Sogool - \"she with nine legs\"\n\nNine is devine to the Kalenjin, it symbolizes infinity. It also has a meaning of nine rays of the sun as it rises which relates to a Maasai attribute of god called 'Isyet' with the same meaning.\n\nBULLET::::- 6. Chemalus - \"She who never looses/she who is wise\"\n\nIt can literally mean she who has a high intelligent quotient, never loses a riddle, always correct, never defeated. He/she is invoked in legal proceeds.\n\nBULLET::::- 7. Chebokimabai - \"She who dries millet\"\n\nThis attribute invokes a prayer for warm and sunny climate to dry harvest of millet.\n\nBULLET::::- 8. Weerit Neoo - \"The eldest son\"\nBULLET::::- 9. Cheboo - \"She who is big/large\"\nBULLET::::- 10.Chepkochor - \"She who rises (especially to do with the sun rising)\"\nBULLET::::- 11. Tororot - \"The lifted, the promoted.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Kaapkoros - Shrine\nThis was the common places of worship among the Kipsigis. The currently known and remembered shrines include: Kapkoros in Bomet, Kapkoros in Chepkechei, Tulwab Kipsgis (Mau Summit) and Tulwab Bureti.\nBULLET::::- Mabwaita - family alter\nThis was a household family alter positioned to the east of the house as one exited through the main door (the Nandi and Keiyo call it Korosyoot). It was continuously maintained and replenished by the initiated members of the household in a process called \"Kisoop mabwaiita\"- \"to heal/ give life to the alter\". It is an erected structure composing of branches and vines of trees of sacred importance and purpose to the Kipsigis.\nBULLET::::- \"Sach-Ooran\"- Crossroads\n\nThey were men from specific clans who did not partake of war. They prayed for the community and lead the processions of the harvest ceremonies.\n\nWomen were seen as acceptable beings to god as they bore no or less sins compared to men and thus, they believed a prayer by a woman would be granted effectively compared to a prayer by a man. This was the reason why women were the ones who prayed for their families in their homestead alter. The Kipsigis women were also rain-makers and rain chasers. they would practice a communal prayer in a river while naked and this would paranormally bring or avert rain.\n\nThe Kipsigis have a circular view of life. They were a superstitious as well as spiritual community. They considered all life as sacred. They believed that the natural world is all connected and that a good deed never goes unnoticed. Similarly bad deeds lead to consequences in various forms. This view ensures that all members of the community act in a morally upright manner.\n\n1. (One):Agenge: It has no significance\n\n2. (Two): \"Aeng\"': It is a good number. It symbolizes marriage and is a reciprocal/multiple to the masculine number (four).\n\n3. (Three):Somok: It is a feminine number and a feminine symbol. It was also the maximum number of acquittal for offences, the fourth resulted in death by execution.\n\n4. (Four): Ang'wan: Four is a masculine and military number.\n\n5. (Five): Muut: It is associated with biology and physiology i.e., five fingers on hands and feet.\n\n6. (Six): Lo: It is a neutral number\n\n7. (Seven): Tisaap: It is associated with the seven age sets.\n\n8. (Eight): Sisit: It has no significance\n\n9. (Nine): \"Sogool:\" It is a divine number. It is also a complete number(it is the largest ones value)\n\n10. (Ten): Taman: It is not significant as it is a round off figure i.e. 9+1\n\nKiptaman ak Sogol literally means \"ten and nine\" but it means \"a thousand and one times (___ * 1001)\"; Although Bogol means and equals a hundred, Bogolai means or implies \"Thanks a million.\"\n\nThe Kipsigis would tell their location in respect to the rising place of the sun (east) and plotting the four cardinal points descriptively by their position in relation to the east. The Kipsigis are also said to have been able the navigate at night by plotting the appearance of various constellations of the stars.\n\nBULLET::::1. Kong'asiis ak Cherongo (East and West)\nBULLET::::2. Murot' Tai ak Murot' Katam (South and North)\n\nThe Kipsigis made provisions for habitation in regard and respect of the availability of grazing land, the size of cattle, the size and type of family. Houses were primary grass-thatched huts usually clustered together. There would also be a \"bomet\" in which the cattle slept.\n\nA male was given four set of names. First two after birth: the first based on time, place or weather of the time of birth, usually proceeded by a 'Kip' prefix; and a second being an attribute of a reincarnated ancestor. A third name was a borrowed name from a local hero. A fourth name was given to males after initiation which is based on the first name of the father where if the father was Kiprotich, the son would be called Arap Rotich. Naming of the females followed a similar process.\n\nThe Kipsigis had a relaxed attitude to dress codes for children and thus tribal nudism among the uncircumcised youth was common. An initiated Kipsigis, especially a woman had very strict code of dressing that where right from neck down to the knee had to be clothed(usually with a hide garment). Men however were supposed to wear a garment that would conceal their groin and butts. Both men and women would adorn themselves earrings, necklaces, bangles and bells. Shukas for men started becoming a common item of attire for men replacing the hides when the missionaries arrived in Kipsigis land\n\nAge groups were patriarchal groupings of men according to the groups and time of initiation. A group of male individuals initiated together in the same seclusion home (a makeshift home for young male adults called \"Menjo\") would call themselves \"Baghuleh\" and became closer and bonded than blood brothers. The groups males iniated the same year or a year bofore or after the other called themselves \"Botuum\". Women inherited the age group of their husbands. Girls and boys did not have an age set.\n\nKipsigis have cyclical age setting, each usually offsetting not less than 15 years. It can be viewed as a mechanism of tracking the age expectancy of the community. In order, a new age set can never be called in while an old person of the same age set is still alive; not even one! The sets viz:\n\nBULLET::::1. Nyongi\nBULLET::::2. Maina\nBULLET::::3. Sawe\nBULLET::::4. Chumo\nBULLET::::5. Kerongoro\nBULLET::::6. Kaplelach\nBULLET::::7. Kipnyi'gee\n\nBULLET::::- Marriage by Betrothal: This was the marriage by means of betrothal by grooms family and upon acceptance of the brides family, marriage would precede.\nBULLET::::- Marriage by Elopement (\"Choret\" -stealing): Elopment occurred if the groom or bride suspected that either parental sides would not allow for their marriage or if the groom did not have enough funds and status in the society.\nBULLET::::- Lesbian Marriage (\"Kitunji Toloch\"): This was a marriage between a middle aged barren woman and a young woman (just completed initiation). The young woman would be respected and identified as any other wive and would get children from random men.\nBULLET::::- Promisal Marriage (\"Kabwatereret\"): This was a marriage organized by parents so that when the young boy and they young girl were initiated, then followed the custom of marriage (ratet)\nBULLET::::- Marriage by proxy (\"Museet\"): This is where a mother of the groom (who may have traveled or was in war) would actually marry a bride (as proxy).\n\nThere was an honorary ceremony called Katunisyeet-aap Tororyeet (which translates to marriage for might) held for a couple and their children when they had lived together peacefully and harmoniously for a long time. It involved in-law members of both sides and it was held in the home of the wife if the wife's parents were still alive or at one of the husband's age group men.\n\nDivorce was practiced primarily if any party was suspected or caught practicing black magic (\"banisyeet\"). A wive could also be divorced if they were known to have committed adultery (A man would not be accused of adultury, extramarital sex for men was common and were not seen as an offense unless they had had sex with a married woman which was a big No!-No! for the Kipsigis).\n\nAmong the Kipsigis, there is a mixed explanation of what death and funeral entailed. An important event before or after death was 'Kerar-geet' event which involved the delivery of an oral will by the dying individual and the proceeding interpretation of it by the kin of the dead person after his/her death.All Kipsigis agree that funerals were not a rite of passage (tuum), but rather just that- death (\"me-et\" or \"meet\"). Proceeding the death of a person however, there are two explanation: \nBULLET::::- Laying- where the dead were cleaned,adorned and taken with their belongings by a single next of kin to a bush or forest and laid to rest in a very specific manner; after which the body would be left to decay and fed on by hyenas\nBULLET::::- Burying- this explanation details a very specific and intricate manner of burial where a dead person would be buried at the dung heap, west of their household and laid in their graves head on to the western side so that they \"would rise to see the rising sun\".\nIt is argued by some Kipsigis that Laying was done to individuals who died before marrying or having children or who had a low status in the society while burials were done for rich or well defined and prestigious people.\nPoore: This was a ritual among the Kipsigis where if there had been lack of births over a period of time, the elderly in the affected commune would pray for death as it was believed this would invoke birth of new members of the society.\n\nInitially, the Kipsigis clans were only about seven but due to entire adoption of families from the Abagusii, Luo, Maasai and Nandi, there have been an increase to about a hundred clans.This is because the Kipsigis, unlike the Nandi, always held restraint to killing people especially if they wanted to make peace after a defeat. In its early times, these clans would have been divided into: Kipsigis and Ogiek where a portion of Kipsigis clans were herders of cattle while some others were hunters and gathers. This therefore implies that the pastoral Kipsigis may have adopted Ogiek clans before adopting the other communities.\n\nThe totems seem are based on animals including: Lion, Buffalo, Snake, Hyena, Baboon, Crested Cranes, Hare, Dik-Dik and the Dog (coyote/kayote).\n\nBULLET::::- Kipsamaek-Ng'etundo (Lion): In Tebesonik Bureti, Kitale, Ng'ororga, Kabitungu, Kipkelion, Bomet, Kericho\n\nBULLET::::- Talaek- \"Ng'etundo (Lion):\" They were introduced to Kipsigis after cessation of arap Turgat by the Nandi who wanted Koitalel to lead them (Koitalel was the son from Turgat fourth wive while customs would have dictated that the first borne son from the first wive lead.)Hence three sons from respective first three wives were sent to Kipsigis. Other Talai clansmen may have immigrated earlier or later than this timeline.\n\nBULLET::::- kabarsumek- \"Moseet (Baboon):\" They derive origin from two Maasai siblings (a boy- Sienan and a girl-Tabrugut) who were abducted during a cattle rustle by men from Komosi clan and later adopted to a barren old woman. The Kabarsumek clan came to being because of homicides committed by the boy and after a deliberation by the elders of Komosi clan, they came to a resolution to grant the young man and his newly established family a clan. This clan was is part of the Kebeni battalion\n\nBULLET::::- Boguserek:Bomet, Nakuru, Kericho, Abosi-Kapchumbe, Kaboson, sigor, chebunyon, sotik, lelechonik-Dikir and Angata Barikoi. \"The origin of this clan can be traced to the Laikipia maasai, where a woman and her two children, Koisomoi and Bonge, left their land during a severe drought. The woman was later nicknamed Chesamich because she was found in a forest. They were found by a man called Tiror of Okiek descent who took them to his home. The two children were later abducted by a Gusii man of the Abagusero clan and taken to Gusiiland. After many years, the descendants had increased in number and now they founded The Boguserek clan a name which they adopted from Gusii land. The totem of this clan is Lion(Simba).They are cousins with Kipindoek clan.\"\n\nIraqw (Sirikwa)-Origin Clans \nBULLET::::- Kabioria\nBULLET::::- Kapkitoleek-Abosi, Ndanai, Nakuru ---\nBULLET::::- Kapnabe\nBULLET::::- Kaptirit\nBULLET::::- Kipomuek-Cheptirkichet (in Sigor Koitakalyet, Bomet, Sotik, Kaplong, Kericho)\nBULLET::::- Kimeiteek\nBULLET::::- Kibasisek\nBULLET::::- Kibetu (in Belgut, Sosiot, Kapsoit)\nBULLET::::- Kibokwoek\nBULLET::::- Kapsengerek\nBULLET::::- Kipkogosek\nBULLET::::- Kapcheroigik\nBULLET::::- Kapmelgut\nBULLET::::- Kapsyoriri\nBULLET::::- Kapkiprotichek( related to Kapchebororek and Kapkerichek clans)\nBULLET::::- Kapcheboin\nBULLET::::- Kaptumoto\nBULLET::::- Kaptuiyek\nBULLET::::- Kaparsingil\nBULLET::::- Kibororek\nBULLET::::- Kapbecherek\nBULLET::::- Kipbororek\nBULLET::::- Kapkolwolek\nBULLET::::- Kipkendeek\nBULLET::::- kapkerichek(very related with chebororek clan)\nBULLET::::- Kapbomoek\nBULLET::::- Bobuserek(Ngusero Sambu) -Lion\nBULLET::::- Kabarangweek - belyot\nBULLET::::- Kobasisek\nBULLET::::- Kapkomosek\nBULLET::::- Kapchamogondek\nBULLET::::- Kiplegenek-totem-cheplanget. Sub clans: Kamerengo, Kapkoloibai, Kapsirere (in Kabianga, Kiptere, Bomet-Ndaraweta, Taabet, Chesoen, Kapletundo, Keongo, Kebeneti, Sachangwan, Bureti.\nBULLET::::- Kapsoenik\nBULLET::::- Kapmochoek\nBULLET::::- Kaptotonek\nBULLET::::- Kipintoek-soet(buffalo)\nBULLET::::- Chepkesek\nBULLET::::- Kipbaek\nBULLET::::- Kipcheromek\nBULLET::::- Kipkeles\nBULLET::::- Kapkechwoek\nBULLET::::- Matoboriik\nBULLET::::- Kapsoikoek\nBULLET::::- Narachek\nBULLET::::- Babasik\nBULLET::::- Kipang'wanek\nBULLET::::- Kapmagu\nBULLET::::- Kapchebures\nBULLET::::- Kipsirgoiik\nBULLET::::- Kapmalumaasiaan\nBULLET::::- Kapkenyogore\nBULLET::::- Kaptolil\nBULLET::::- Kapborowek\nBULLET::::- Kapcheurek\nBULLET::::- Kapsegit (The \"Segit\" or totem is \"Ng'okto\" (the dog))\nBULLET::::- Kapcherongong - Kongonyot\nBULLET::::- Kapkaon\nBULLET::::- Kapkarugo(Kaptebeswet in Belgut/Ainamoi, Fort-Ternan)\nBULLET::::- Kapsiteek\nBULLET::::- Segechek (a smaller clan).\nBULLET::::- Kapmunga\nBULLET::::- Kapsigilaek\nBULLET::::- Kapchebororek\nBULLET::::- Baguserek\nBULLET::::- Kapboit\nBULLET::::- chepbororek\nBULLET::::- Kapmanereriek\nBULLET::::- Kapchepalungu/Kimaunyiyet (in Bomet County: Motigo, Cheptagum, Kipkeigei, Kapsabul, Tarakwa, Singorwet, Kapkoros, Chemaner, Tegat, Sotik, Silibwet Olbutyo, Chebunyo, Nyambugo, Kipreres and others in Kericho, Nandi, Narok, and Nakuru Counties and even in Tanzania and some in South Sudan)\nBULLET::::- Kapmaek Clan (totem is \"Kimaketiet\", concentrated in Belgut Kericho, originated from Nandi).\nBULLET::::- Kamogoreek/Umoek. Totem = Ong'ongonyot (Crested Crane) (in Bomet, Nakuru, Narok and Kericho Counties: Chemaner, Tegat, Singorwet, Gelegele, Chebole, Kapkimolwa, Sigor, Kipreres, Chelemei, Sogoo, Koiwa, Kirenget, Olengurone, Mauche, Njoro, Dikirr and Loliondo in Tanzania)\nBULLET::::- Kaboboek - Moset (Kericho, Kipkelion, Londiani, Bureti, Bomet)\nBULLET::::- Kapkolwoleek\nBULLET::::- Kapbinduk-totem- Ng'etundo.(found in Roret, kapkatet, kapkelek, Kabartegan, chemist, chemoiwa, sondu and nandi chepkumnyat)\nBULLET::::- kaptemoet-totem- lion found in chepkechei fort ternan and tinderet, ainamoi,\nBULLET::::- kapkomutket-totem buffalo have close relation with kimatagee, chebunyek, kimologek and kapmochoek.(found in kericho, bureti, bomet and rongai)\nBULLET::::- kibwamwek\nBULLET::::- kapmoek\nBULLET::::- kabarangwek\nBULLET::::- Kapchebereek - Also related to Kapkesuundeek and Kapsaosaanik. Totem is Kong'onyoot. Migration route from Kericho from 1920s: Kapsaos; Saosa; Woochii/Kipcheboor; Lelsa-Changoi; Seretut; Nyabangi-Kiptule; Kabianga; Tulwaab-Bureeti; Kiptome; Kabusienduuk; Cheborgei-Chaakoroor; Keseengiit-Kaborus;Tiriitaab Eito; Kipwaastuiyo; Kapsinendeet; Cheplangeet; Tiriitab Moita; Kaamungei; Kaitiit; Simooti; Koiwa; Sootiit; Kaabosoon; Tereet; Chepluumiat. Societal role: They were the Priests of the Kipsigiis people during times of conducting raids. They prayed to the God of protection, Chebopkooiyo, to provide signs of affirmation failure to which the warriors (oondo in Kipsigis) would not proceed for a raiding mission. If Chebopkooiyo answer the prayers, the priest of Chebere people would lead the raiders accompanying them (referred to in Kipsigis as Kosibon) throughout the mission and interceding on their behalf until the mission is accomplished. Upon a successful raid and on returning to a point where it is obvious the enemy will no longer overcome the raiders, the people of Chebere are called to blow their trumpets and declare victory by singing a song of victory that goes this way: \"Kuut ndurereet Kosibon; kaakoloong Kooiyeet; indoowuneen lagookab Kosibon\".\n\nBULLET::::- herding cattle:\n\nBoys and girls would look after sheep and goats. Men would herd cattle and would always carry paraphernalia of war as the Maasai, Abagusii and Luo would have attacked.\n\nBULLET::::- defense and security: \"Oondo\" (army/legion)\n\nThis was the responsibility and role of initiated men. There were various posts delegated to this men by custom including:those who should protect women and children at home, spies (\"Yotiik\", \"Seegeik\" and \"Sogooldaiik\"), the generals (Kiptayat/Kiptaiinik)and the procession ranks (\"Ng'anymetyeet\", \"Pirtiich\", \"Oldimdo/Lumweet\" and \"Kipeelbany\"). Each soldier in their various posts had a division among four including \"Ngetunyo, Kebeni/Kebeny\" and some other two. There were yearly mock up practice for warring called \"Kaambageet\".\n\nBULLET::::- scientists of sorts (\"ng'amotik\"):\n\n\"Ng'amotiik\" denotes the wise or the knowledgeable. These included: Neuro-surgeons, healers, readers of omens, magic practitioners and rain-makers.\n\nBULLET::::- Hunting and gathering:\n\nHunting and gathering (Logeet) seems to also be a prominent culture among the Kipsigis although there is an indication that it was the culture of Ogiek Kipsigis. It included hunting various animals and birds and collection of mushrooms(Bobeek), wild honey (Kulumbenik) and honey (Kuumiik). These were the activities of men (especially the hunting part), women and children (especially the gathering part).\n\nBULLET::::- Masters of culture, Priests and priesthood:\n\nThe Kipsigis had designated positions and roles for the priests called: \"Motirenik, Tisiik and Maotik\".\n\nBULLET::::- Leaders, judges and committees:\n\nKapkiiruok, kook, kandoik\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mogorek & Lagok ab Aror:\" The Rich and the rich kids\n\nThe Kipsigis valued wealth in terms of cattle. they also secondarily observed that vast wealth was accompanied by wealth in the form of many family members in a family.\nBULLET::::- T\"emiik & Temisiet:\" Agriculturalists and Agriculture\n\nKipsigis people practiced farming. They used to farm and grow finger millet and sorghum. Black nite shade and spider plant made up diet of the Kipsigis implying that it was also farmed. Farming was an all gender and age activity; everyone participated in clearing, tilling and land preparation, men were the experts of planting, weeding was more of female work and harvest was all inclusive, festive and religious event.\n\nIn oral culture, the Kipsigis occupied between Nandi hills, Binyiny in Kericho, Kiptere in Belgut and Bureti; but their expanse just at independence could be attributed to heroes and paranormal leaders called Orgoik. By 1900, the Kipsigis occupied an expanse between Nandi hills, Laikipia, Mau forest, Narok, Trans-Mara, Keroka and Sondu.\n\nThis event represents a darkest past of the Kipsigis which is recounted to date in fearsome tales. It is an event in 1880 when the then youthful men of the age-set of Kaplelach organized a massive legion of warriors who ventured to Migori to rustle cattle against the advice of elders, leaders, Orgoik and wizards who had seen a lot of bad omens. The result was that in a mount cleft in Migori, almost all if the warriors were killed by the Abagusii warriors. Only a dozen returned. This led to a subsequent suffering among the Kipsigis and a shift in culture where their women had to let uncircumcised boys and men from other communities to become fathers. This change also can be equivocated to the attitude relaxation of the patriarchy and a rise or acceptance of the matriarchy among the Kipsigis.\n\nMenya was a member of the Kapkaon clan. He is the great-grandfather to Johanna Ngeno.He is a legend among the Kipsigis people. He mitigated a treaty with the Maasai that resulted in peaceful migration of Maasai from Kaplong in Sotik all through to Trans-Mara and Narok.\n\nThe Kipsigis had wizards who would heal and treat or read omens or fore see or bless. Such individuals included \"chepsogeiyot\"- a seer and healer; and \"Motirenik\"- Masters of culture and ceremonies and \"Tisiik\"- Priests. Orgoik seems to be alien to Kipsigis and with an origin in Nandi. In Kipsigis an Orgoiyot is any member of the Talai clan while in Nandi, it has a meaning of collective or paramount leader with paranormal powers.The orgoik have an origin among the Maasai and are known to them as Laibon. They came to the Nandi and established themselves in Nandi but a predominant family of the Talai in Nandi, the Turgat family had three sons sent to Kipsigis: Arap Koilege, Arap Boisyo and Arap Buiygut. These three are the brothers to Koitalel arap Samoei. Initially, their benefactor was Arap Kiroisi- the father to Mugenik.\nHe lived in Cheriri in Kiptere before he was imprisoned by the British and sent to Rusinga island of Kisumu. He was instrumental for dispersing Luo people from Kiptere to Sondu.\n\nHe lived in Mombwo, near Cheplanget. He was responsible for dispersing Abagusii from Kabianga to Ikonge, Keroka and Trans-Mara.\n\nHe was responsible for displacing Agikuyu from Binyiny near Kericho town all through to Laikipia.\n\nHe was the cousin to Koitalel arap Samoei and lived in village called Sotik to where Sotik town is currently situated.\nHe gave prophecies that the Kipsigis still hold in great anticipation and record. These prophecies were even recorded by Kipjamba and is usually played by Kass fm on occasion.\nThe prophecies include:\nBULLET::::- Sotik Police officers and Station - where he referred that they were Kipsigis children who held what appeared to be cooking sticks but their appearance stroke fear among commons.\nBULLET::::- Sotik KCC and two bridges under color bar -\nBULLET::::- Migration of Kosobek- He mentioned that the Abagusii would come to Kipsigis land and live among them like vines of squash but would leave dramatically but peacefully and the Kipsigis would scramble markers on 'very beautiful huts.'\nBULLET::::- Profound Migrations - Kipsigis people would acquire large portions of land and emigrate in two formations and direction; one toward Laikipia, and another, towards Tanzania.\nBULLET::::- Decimation of the Kipsigis people - That the vast Kipsigis populations of the Kipsigis will be decimated and then only limited to a very few remnants only in Bureti. He said that this would be a cause of an uncircumcised boy.\n\nThe Kipsigis especially of Cheptenye in Sosiot and Tenwek in Bomet had been coerced by the British through the Africa Inland Mission to give up Orgoik in exchange for scholarships and a peace treaty with British. This was easily arrived at with the leadership of Tenkwek AIM clergy, who led a propaganda against the Orgoik. The propaganda led the Kipsigis to associate the orgoik with the failures and disasters that had faced the Kipsigis including the failed battle of Mogori. \nThe surge of negative attitude towards the orgoik led to the preparations for Lumbwa Treaty. With request from the Kipsigis, the orgoik and their families were arrested and put in Kericho cells. The Kipsigis then met at Kipkelion town, then called Lumbwa, and deliberated a treaty in the form and make of Kipsigis traditions under a custom called Muuma or Mummiat. It is detailed that the British promised together with the Kipsigis to collaborate and not harm each other then they went on to savour a dog in two parts and each party buried their half.\nThe British are said to have asked the Kipsigis as to what they would do with the Orgoik in Kericho and the Kipsigis asked that they be exiled and excommunicated. That day, the whole Orgoik families were exiled to Russinga Island in Kisumu. It is then said that the Orgoik cursed the Kipsigis and the Nandi (Mee Kipsigis ne-ki mee tereet, ko me Nandi ne-ki mee Sotet: May the Kipsigiss die the manner of broken pot and may the Nandi die the manner of a broken calabash)\n\nHe was a paramount Kipsigis chief appointed by the British. This way, the Kipsigis were ruled indirectly by the British.\n\nThe Kipsigis were oblivious to think about independence; they thought there was no might that would de-legitimize imperial rule for they (British) had killed Koitalel arap Samoei. Independence therefore was a magical and surprising outcome for the Kipsigis.\n\nIn 1963 however, the Kipsigis obtained loans which facilitated them to buy the white settlement schemes. 1000 Kenya Shillings was equivalent to 40 acres of land.\n\nIn 1964, Kipsigis were living to the reaches of Nyasiongo and Keroka but Jomo Kenyatta, Daniel Arap Moi, Taita Towett\"(His protagonistic role in this agreement has been argued by some Kipsigis that it was because his origin is among tha Abagusii people- his clan is Zoigoek meaning they were adopted from Abagusii)\", Prof. Lawrence Sagini and the then Rift Valley province Provincial Commissioner, Simeon Nyachae agreed to move the Nyanza border to the currently known fomer Nyanza-Rift-valley border. The terms of this agreement seem to have been on consensus, although however, some Kipsigis of Sotik to date still have tittle deeds of their land in Keroka and Nyasiongo. It will be noted that the then Chepalungu (currently Sotik and Chepalungu constituencies)MP, Barmalel campaigned against this move (probably because he was a member of Talaai clan and the shift of boundary would alter his clans legacy)\n\nAfter the Lumbwa treaty, the Kipsigis exercised a shift into Christianity and almost abandoned their culture. This took place in association with the Catholic Church which had its grounds in Kericho Town and Kaplong; Africa Inland Church which had its ground in Litein and Africa Gospel Church which had its grounds in Cheptenye, Sosiot - currently Cheptenye Boys' High School and Cheptenye AGC church and also in Tenwek, Bomet.\n\nThe Kipsigis have ceased naming their children by ancestral reincarnation because missionaries led them to believe it was an evil practice. Birth time naming still continue and as such, boys and girls are still named by the \"\"Kip-\"\" and \"\"Chep-\"\" names which usually makes up their second name. Girls and young women have ceased to be initated or circumcised which subsequently, has led to the loss of \"\"Tab-\"\" naming. Boys and young men still circumcice and intiate and thus the \"\"Arap-\"\" naming system has been retained albeit the fact that the Kenyan Registra bodies all only for 25 characters of which the \"Arap\" tittle would lead to an excess, hence they only use cerfix to \"Arap\" naming system. The later version of Arap naming makes up the surname for initiated men and boys. The first names for the Kipsigis are the secular and gospel names traded from western cultures though the missionaries and pop-culture.\n\nCurrently among its youth, the Kipsigis are exercising a shift to pop culture. This is evident in the shift to initiation ceremonies held in conjunction with the various churches called banda en tililindo against the traditional Kipgaa. It is also evident in the robust gospel and secular music scene unlike any in Kalenjin.\n\nOf the many customs that Kipsigis kept and performed, the current most prominent are the circumcision and intiation of boys and marriage by elopment and thus the current Kipsigis are nothing like their ancestors. To make it worse, the Kipsigis have a high-level of secresy and departmentalization of information and knowledge on their customs thus leading to constant misinterpretation and attrition of their culture.\n\nNotable Kipsigis athletes (deceased, alive, retired and active) include:\n\nBULLET::::- Wilson Kiprugut arap Chumo\n\nHe was the first ever Kenyan athlete/olympian in 1964 participating in Olympics of 1964 barefooted and went on to win a gold medal.\n\nBULLET::::- Paul Kipsiele Koech\nBULLET::::- Peter Kirui\nBULLET::::- Mercy Cherono\n\nBULLET::::- Barmalel\nBULLET::::- Johanna Arap Ngeno\nBULLET::::- Taaita Towett\nBULLET::::- Sotet\nBULLET::::- Franklin Bett\nBULLET::::- Lorna Laboso\nBULLET::::- Isaack Ruto\nBULLET::::- Joyce Laboso\nBULLET::::- Charles Keter\nBULLET::::- Paul Chepkwony\n\nToday, the Kipsigis political arena is divided into four groupings: Belgut (North, West and Central portions of Kericho county), Bureti (South portions of Kericho county, Sotik constituency and Dikiir Constituency), Bomet (Chepalungu, Bomet Central and Bomet East) and Konoin fronts. The Belgut front is a conservative and populist front, the Bureti front is a centre and right front, Bomet is a democrat, centre and left front while Konoin is a liquid front.\n\nKipsigis people of Kenya use Safaricom, Airtel, Telkom and Faiba connection to access GSM, WCDMA , LTE and fibre-optic service provision. About 8 in 10 adults among the Kipsigis own a phone of some sort. Radio is still quite popular with radio stations dedicated to the Kipsigis including Chamgei fm, Kitwek fm and . About 1 in 20 Kipsigis households have a sattelitte TV from startimes, Zuku, DSTV, Bamba TV and GoTV. They also have access to postal services by posta kenya.The entertainment scene in Kipsigis is a robust and colorful one. There are several gospel music artists including :\n\nBULLET::::- Joel Kimeto\nBULLET::::- Lillian Rotich\n\nSecular music art has been the most developed right from independence. Some notable artists include:\n\nBULLET::::- Rafael Kipchambai arap Tabaitui\nBULLET::::- Morris\nBULLET::::- Charles Chepkwony\nBULLET::::- Tumbalal arap Sang\nBULLET::::- Chebaibai\nBULLET::::- Junior Kotestes\nBULLET::::- Chelele\nBULLET::::- Ben Bii\nBULLET::::- Aron Mike (Sweetstar)\nBULLET::::- Naswa\nBULLET::::- 2nd Junior\nBULLET::::- Cyrus\nBULLET::::- Brownny Star\nBULLET::::- Faith Therui\nBULLET::::- Olessos\nBULLET::::- Kenenni\nBULLET::::- Rhino Superstar\n\n10. Kosibon, Elijah Kipngetich (2018). An Oral Narrative about Kapchebereek Clan Among the Kipsigis People of Kenya to His Son Dr. Festus Kipkorir Ngetich.Unpublished.\n\n"}
{"id": "17160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17160", "title": "Knife", "text": "Knife\n\nA knife (plural knives; possibly from Old Norse \" knifr\" (\"blade\")) is a tool with a cutting edge or blade attached to a handle. The earliest tool used by mankind, knives appeared at least two-and-a-half million years ago, as evidenced by the Oldowan tools. Originally made of rock, bone, flint, and obsidian, over the centuries, in step with improvements in metallurgy or manufacture, knife blades have been made from bronze, copper, iron, steel, ceramics, and titanium. Most modern knives have either fixed or folding blades; blade patterns and styles vary by maker and country of origin.\n\nKnives can serve various purposes. Hunters use a hunting knife, soldiers use the combat knife, scouts, campers, and hikers carry a pocket knife; there are kitchen knives for preparing foods (the chef's knife, the paring knife, bread knife, cleaver), table knives (butter knives and steak knives), weapons (daggers or switchblades), knives for throwing or juggling, and knives for religious ceremony or display (the kirpan).\n\nA modern knife consists of:\nBULLET::::1. the \"blade\"\nBULLET::::2. the \"handle\"\nBULLET::::3. the \"point\" – the end of the knife used for piercing\nBULLET::::4. the \"edge\" – the cutting surface of the knife extending from the point to the heel\nBULLET::::5. the \"grind\" – the cross section shape of the blade\nBULLET::::6. the \"spine\" – the thickest section of the blade; on a single-edged knife, the side opposite the edge; on a two-edged knife, more toward the middle\nBULLET::::7. the \"fuller\" – a groove added to make the blade lighter\nBULLET::::8. the \"ricasso\" – the flat section of the blade located at the junction of the blade and the knife's bolster or guard\nBULLET::::9. the \"guard\" – the barrier between the blade and the handle which prevents the hand from slipping forward onto the blade and protects the hand from the external forces that are usually applied to the blade during use\nBULLET::::10. the \"hilt\" or \"butt\" – the end of the handle utilized for blunt force\nBULLET::::11. the \"lanyard\" – a strap used to secure the knife to the wrist\n\nThe blade edge can be plain or serrated, or a combination of both. Single-edged knives may have a \"reverse edge\" or \"false edge\" occupying a section of the spine. These edges are usually serrated and are used to further enhance function.\n\nThe handle, used to grip and manipulate the blade safely, may include a \"tang\", a portion of the blade that extends into the handle. Knives are made with partial tangs (extending part way into the handle, known as \"stick tangs\") or full tangs (extending the full length of the handle, often visible on top and bottom). The handle may include a bolster, a piece of heavy material (usually metal) situated at the front or rear of the handle. The bolster, as its name suggests, is used to mechanically strengthen the knife.\n\nKnife blades can be manufactured from a variety of materials, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Carbon steel, an alloy of iron and carbon, can be very sharp. It holds its edge well, and remains easy to sharpen, but is vulnerable to rust and stains. Stainless steel is an alloy of iron, chromium, possibly nickel, and molybdenum, with only a small amount of carbon. It is not able to take quite as sharp an edge as carbon steel, but is highly resistant to corrosion. High carbon stainless steel is stainless steel with a higher amount of carbon, intended to incorporate the better attributes of carbon steel and stainless steel. High carbon stainless steel blades do not discolor or stain, and maintain a sharp edge. Laminated blades use multiple metals to create a layered sandwich, combining the attributes of both. For example, a harder, more brittle steel may be sandwiched between an outer layer of softer, tougher, stainless steel to reduce vulnerability to corrosion. In this case, however, the part most affected by corrosion, the edge, is still vulnerable. Damascus steel is a form of pattern welding with similarities to laminate construction. Layers of different steel types are welded together, but then the stock is manipulated to create patterns in the steel.\n\nTitanium is a metal that has a better strength-to-weight ratio, is more wear resistant, and more flexible than steel. Although less hard and unable to take as sharp an edge, carbides in the titanium alloy allow them to be heat-treated to a sufficient hardness. Ceramic blades are hard, brittle, and lightweight: they may maintain a sharp edge for years with no maintenance at all, but are as fragile as glass and will break if dropped on a hard surface. They are immune to common corrosion, and can only be sharpened on silicon carbide sandpaper and some grinding wheels. Plastic blades are not especially sharp and typically serrated. They are often disposable.\nSteel blades are commonly shaped by forging or stock removal. Forged blades are made by heating a single piece of steel, then shaping the metal while hot using a hammer or press. Stock removal blades are shaped by grinding and removing metal. With both methods, after shaping, the steel must be heat treated. This involves heating the steel above its critical point, then quenching the blade to harden it. After hardening, the blade is tempered to remove stresses and make the blade tougher. Mass manufactured kitchen cutlery uses both the forging and stock removal processes. Forging tends to be reserved for manufacturers' more expensive product lines, and can often be distinguished from stock removal product lines by the presence of an integral bolster, though integral bolsters can be crafted through either shaping method.\n\nKnives are sharpened in various ways. Flat ground blades have a profile that tapers from the thick spine to the sharp edge in a straight or convex line. Seen in cross section, the blade would form a long, thin triangle, or where the taper does not extend to the back of the blade, a long thin rectangle with one peaked side. Hollow ground blades have concave, beveled edges. The resulting blade has a thinner edge, so it may have better cutting ability for shallow cuts, but it is lighter and less durable than flat ground blades and will tend to bind in deep cuts. Serrated blade knives have a wavy, scalloped or saw-like blade. Serrated blades are more well suited for tasks that require aggressive 'sawing' motions, whereas plain edge blades are better suited for tasks that require push-through cuts (e.g., shaving, chopping, slicing).\n\nMany knives have holes in the blade for various uses. Holes are commonly drilled in blades to reduce friction while cutting, increase single-handed usability of pocket knives, and, for butchers' knives, allow hanging out of the way when not in use.\n\nA fixed blade knife, sometimes called a sheath knife, does not fold or slide, and is typically stronger due to the tang, the extension of the blade into the handle, and lack of moving parts.\n\nA folding knife connects the blade to the handle through a pivot, allowing the blade to fold into the handle. To prevent injury to the knife user through the blade accidentally closing on the user's hand, folding knives typically have a locking mechanism. Different locking mechanisms are favored by various individuals for reasons such as perceived strength (lock safety), legality, and ease of use.\nPopular locking mechanisms include:\nBULLET::::- \"Slip joint\" – Found most commonly on traditional pocket knives, the opened blade does not lock, but is held in place by a spring device that allows the blade to fold if a certain amount of pressure is applied.\nBULLET::::- \"Lockback\" – Also known as the \"spine lock\", the lockback includes a pivoted latch affixed to a spring, and can be disengaged only by pressing the latch down to release the blade.\nBULLET::::- \"Linerlock\" – Invented by Michael Walker, a Linerlock is a folding knife with a side-spring lock that can be opened and closed with one hand without repositioning the knife in the hand. The lock is self-adjusting for wear.\nBULLET::::- \"Compression Lock\" – A variant of the Liner Lock, it uses a small piece of metal at the tip of the lock to lock into a small corresponding impression in the blade. This creates a lock that doesn't disengage when the blade is torqued, instead becoming more tightly locked. It is released by pressing the tab of metal to the side, to allow the blade to be placed into its groove set into the handle.\nBULLET::::- \"Frame Lock\" – Also known as the \"integral lock\" or \"monolock\", this locking mechanism was invented by custom knifemaker Chris Reeve for the Sebenza as an update to the liner lock. The frame lock works in a manner similar to the liner lock but uses a partial cutout of the actual knife handle, rather than a separate liner inside the handle to hold the blade in place.\nBULLET::::- \"Collar lock\" – found on Opinel knives.\nBULLET::::- \"Button Lock\" – Found mainly on automatic knives, this type of lock uses a small push-button to open and release the knife.\nBULLET::::- \"Axis Lock\" – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to the Benchmade Knife Company. A cylindrical bearing is tensioned such that it will jump between the knife blade and some feature of the handle to lock the blade open.\nBULLET::::- \"Arc Lock\" – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to SOG Specialty Knives. It differs from an axis lock in that the cylindrical bearing is tensioned by a rotary spring rather than an axial spring.\nBULLET::::- \"Ball Bearing Lock\" – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to Spyderco. This lock is conceptually similar to the axis and arc locks but the bearing is instead a ball bearing.\nBULLET::::- \"Tri-Ad Lock\" – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to Cold Steel. It is a form of lockback which incorporates a thick steel stop pin between the front of the latch and the back of the tang to transfer force from the blade into the handle.\nBULLET::::- \"PickLock\" – A round post on the back base of the blade locks into a hole in a spring tab in the handle. To close, manually lift (pick) the spring tab (lock) off the blade post with your fingers, or in \"Italian Style Stilettos\" swivel the bolster (hand guard) clockwise to lift the spring tab off the blade post.\n\nAnother prominent feature on many folding knives is the opening mechanism. Traditional pocket knives and Swiss Army knives commonly employ the nail nick, while modern folding knives more often use a stud, hole, disk, or \"flipper\" located on the blade, all which have the benefit of allowing the user to open the knife with one hand.\n\nThe \"wave\" feature is another prominent design, which uses a part of the blade that protrudes outward to catch on one's pocket as it is drawn, thus opening the blade; this was patented by Ernest Emerson and is not only used on many of the Emerson knives, but also on knives produced by several other manufacturers, notably Spyderco and Cold Steel.\n\n\"Automatic\" or \"switchblade\" knives open using the stored energy from a spring that is released when the user presses a button or lever or other actuator built into the handle of the knife. Automatic knives are severely restricted by law in the UK and most American states.\n\nIncreasingly common are \"assisted opening\" knives which use springs to propel the blade once the user has moved it past a certain angle. These differ from automatic or switchblade knives in that the blade is not released by means of a button or catch on the handle; rather, the blade itself is the actuator. Most assisted openers use flippers as their opening mechanism. Assisted opening knives can be as fast or faster than automatic knives to deploy.\n\nIn the lock back, as in many folding knives, a stop pin acting on the top (or behind) the blade prevents it from rotating clockwise. A hook on the tang of the blade engages with a hook on the rocker bar which prevents the blade rotating counter-clockwise. The rocker bar is held in position by a torsion bar. To release the knife the rocker bar is pushed downwards as indicated and pivots around the rocker pin, lifting the hook and freeing the blade.\n\nWhen negative pressure (pushing down on the spine) is applied to the blade all the stress is transferred from the hook on the blade's tang to the hook on rocker bar and thence to the small rocker pin. Excessive stress can shear one or both of these hooks rendering the knife effectively useless. Knife company Cold Steel uses a variant of the lock back called the Tri-Ad Lock which introduces a pin in front of the rocker bar to relieve stress on the rocker pin, has an elongated hole around the rocker pin to allow the mechanism to wear over time without losing strength and angles the hooks so that the faces no longer meet vertically.\n\nThe bolt in the bolt lock is a rectangle of metal that is constrained to slide only back and forward. When the knife is open a spring biases the bolt to the forward position where it rests above the tang of the blade preventing the blade from closing. Small knobs extend through the handle of the knife on both sides allowing the user to slide the bolt backwards freeing the knife to close. The Axis Lock used by knife maker Benchmade is functionally identical to the bolt lock except that it uses a cylinder rather than a rectangle to trap the blade. The Arc Lock by knife maker SOG is similar to the Axis Lock except the cylinder follows a curved path rather than a straight path.\n\nIn the liner lock, an \"L\"-shaped split in the liner allows part of the liner to move sideways from its resting position against the handle to the centre of the knife where it rests against the flat end of the tang. To disengage, this leaf spring is pushed so it again rests flush against the handle allowing the knife to rotate. A frame lock is functionally identical but instead of using a thin liner inside the handle material uses a thicker piece of metal as the handle and the same split in it allows a section of the frame to press against the tang.\n\nA sliding knife is a knife that can be opened by sliding the knife blade out the front of the handle. One method of opening is where the blade exits out the front of the handle point-first and then is locked into place (an example of this is the gravity knife). Another form is an OTF (out-the-front) switchblade, which only requires the push of a button or spring to cause the blade to slide out of the handle and lock into place. To retract the blade back into the handle, a release lever or button, usually the same control as to open, is pressed. A very common form of sliding knife is the sliding utility knife (commonly known as a stanley knife or boxcutter).\n\nThe handles of knives can be made from a number of different materials, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Handles are produced in a wide variety of shapes and styles. Handles are often textured to enhance grip.\nBULLET::::- Wood handles provide good grip and are warm in the hand, but are more difficult to care for. They do not resist water well, and will crack or warp with prolonged exposure to water. Modern stabilized and laminated woods have largely overcome these problems. Many beautiful and exotic hardwoods are employed in the manufacture of custom and some production knives. In some countries it is now forbidden for commercial butchers' knives to have wood handles, for sanitary reasons.\nBULLET::::- Plastic handles are more easily cared for than wooden handles, but can be slippery and become brittle over time.\nBULLET::::- Injection molded handles made from higher grade plastics are composed of polyphthalamide, and when marketed under trademarked names such as \"Zytel\" or \"Grivory\", are reinforced with \"Kevlar\" or fiberglass. These are often used by major knife manufacturers.\nBULLET::::- Rubber handles such as Kraton or Resiprene-C are generally preferred over plastic due to their durable and cushioning nature.\nBULLET::::- Micarta is a popular handle material on \"user\" knives due to its toughness and stability. Micarta is nearly impervious to water, is \"grippy\" when wet, and is an excellent insulator. Micarta has come to refer to any fibrous material cast in resin. There are many varieties of micarta available. One very popular version is a fiberglass impregnated resin called G-10.\nBULLET::::- Leather handles are seen on some hunting and military knives, notably the KA-BAR. Leather handles are typically produced by stacking leather washers, or less commonly, as a sleeve surrounding another handle material. Russian manufacturers often use birchbark in the same manner.\nBULLET::::- Skeleton handles refers to the practice of using the tang itself as the handle, usually with sections of material removed to reduce weight. Skeleton handled knives are often wrapped with parachute cord or other wrapping materials to enhance grip.\nBULLET::::- Stainless steel and aluminum handles are durable and sanitary, but can be slippery. To counter this, premium knife makers make handles with ridges, bumps, or indentations to provide extra grip. Another problem with knives that have metal handles is that, since metal is an excellent heat-conductor, these knives can be very uncomfortable, and even painful or dangerous, when handled without gloves or other protective handwear in (very) cold climates.\n\nMore exotic materials usually only seen on art or ceremonial knives include: Stone, bone, mammoth tooth, mammoth ivory, oosik (walrus penis bone), walrus tusk, antler (often called stag in a knife context), sheep horn, buffalo horn, teeth, and mop (mother of pearl or \"pearl\"). Many materials have been employed in knife handles.\n\nHandles may be adapted to accommodate the needs of people with disabilities. For example, knife handles may be made thicker or with more cushioning for people with arthritis in their hands. A non-slip handle accommodates people with palmar hyperhidrosis.\n\nAs a weapon, the knife is universally adopted as an essential tool. It is the essential element of a knife fight. For example:\nBULLET::::- Ballistic knife: A specialized combat knife with a detachable gas- or spring-propelled blade that can be fired to a distance of several feet or meters by pressing a trigger or switch on the handle.\nBULLET::::- Bayonet: A knife-shaped close-quarters fighting weapon designed to attach to the muzzle of a rifle or similar weapon.\nBULLET::::- Butterfly knife: A folding pocket knife also known as a \"balisong\" or \"batangas\" with two counter-rotating handles where the blade is concealed within grooves in the handles.\nBULLET::::- Combat knife: Any knife intended to be used by soldiers in the field, as a general-use tool, but also for fighting.\nBULLET::::- Dagger: A double-edged combat knife with a central spine and edges sharpened their full length, used primarily for stabbing. Variations include the Stiletto and Push dagger. See List of daggers for a more detailed list.\nBULLET::::- Fighting knife: A knife with a blade designed to inflict a lethal injury in a physical confrontation between two or more individuals at very short range (grappling distance). Well known examples include the Bowie knife and the Fairbairn-Sykes Fighting Knife.\nBULLET::::- Genoese knife: produced from the 12th century with a guardless handle\nBULLET::::- Karambit: A knife with a curved blade resembling a tiger's claw, and a handle with one or two safety holes.\nBULLET::::- Rampuri: An Indian gravity knife having a single-edged blade roughly long.\nBULLET::::- Shiv: A crudely made homemade knife out of everyday materials, especially prevalent in prisons among inmates. An alternate name in some prisons is \"shank\".\nBULLET::::- Throwing knife: A knife designed and weighted for throwing.\nBULLET::::- Trench knife: Purpose-made or improvised knives, intended for close-quarter fighting, particularly in trench warfare; some have a d-shaped integral hand guard.\n\nBULLET::::- Throwing knife: A knife designed and weighted for throwing.\n\nA primary aspect of the knife as a tool includes dining, used either in food preparation or as cutlery. Examples of this include:\nBULLET::::- Bread knife: A knife with a serrated blade for cutting bread\nBULLET::::- Boning knife: A knife used for removing the bones of poultry, meat, and fish.\nBULLET::::- Butcher's Knife: A knife designed and used primarily for the butchering and/or dressing of animals.\nBULLET::::- Carving knife: A knife for carving large cooked meats such as poultry, roasts, hams\nBULLET::::- Chef's knife: Also known as a French knife, a cutting tool used in preparing food\nBULLET::::- Cleaver: A large knife that varies in its shape but usually resembles a rectangular-bladed hatchet. It is used mostly for hacking through bones as a kitchen knife or butcher knife, and can also be used for crushing via its broad side, typically garlic.\nBULLET::::- Electric knife: An electrical device consisting of two serrated blades that are clipped together, providing a sawing action when powered on\nBULLET::::- Kitchen knife: Any knife, including the chef's knife, that is intended to be used in food preparation\nBULLET::::- Oyster knife: Has a short, thick blade for prying open oyster shells\nBULLET::::- Mezzaluna: A two-handled arc-shaped knife used in a rocking motion as a herb chopper or for cutting other foods\nBULLET::::- Paring or Coring Knife: A knife with a small but sharp blade used for cutting out the cores from fruit.\nBULLET::::- Rocker knife is a knife that cuts with a rocking motion, which is primarily used by people whose disabilities prevent them from using a fork and knife simultaneously.\nBULLET::::- Table knife or Case knife: A piece of cutlery, either a butter knife, steak knife, or both, that is part of a table setting, accompanying the fork and spoon\n\nAs a utility tool the knife can take many forms, including:\nBULLET::::- Balisong: A folding knife also known as a \"butterfly knife\" or \"\"batangas\"\", with two handles counter-rotating around the tang such that, when closed, the blade is hidden within the handles.\nBULLET::::- Bowie knife: Commonly, any large sheath knife, or a specific style of large knife popularized by Jim Bowie.\n\nBULLET::::- Bushcraft knife: A sturdy, normally fixed blade knife used while camping in the wilderness.\nBULLET::::- Camping Knife: A camping knife is used for camping and survival purposes in a wilderness environment.\nBULLET::::- Karambit: A knife with a curved blade resembling a tigers claw, used as an agricultural tool then as a weapon.\nBULLET::::- Cobbler's knife or shoemaker's knife: A knife with a semicircular blade used by cobblers since antiquity to cut leather.\nBULLET::::- Crooked knife: Sometimes referred to as a \"curved knife\", \"carving knife\" or in the Algonquian language the \"mocotaugan\" is a utilitarian knife used for carving.\nBULLET::::- Diver's knife: A knife adapted for use in diving and water sports and a necessary part of standard diving dress.\nBULLET::::- Electrician's knife: A short-bladed knife used to cut electrical insulation.\nBULLET::::- Folding Knife: A folding knife is a knife with one or more blades that fit inside the handle that can still fit in a pocket. It is also known as a jackknife or jack-knife.\nBULLET::::- Hunting knife: A knife used to dress large game.\nBULLET::::- Kiridashi: A small Japanese knife having a chisel grind and a sharp point, used as a general-purpose utility knife.\nBULLET::::- Linoleum knife: is a small knife that has a short, stiff blade with a curved point and a handle and is used to cut linoleum or other sheet materials.\nBULLET::::- Machete: A large heavy knife used to cut through thick vegetation such as sugar cane or jungle undergrowth; it may be used as an offensive weapon.\nBULLET::::- Palette knife: A knife, or frosting spatula, lacking a cutting edge, used by artists for tasks such as mixing and applying paint and in cooking for spreading icing.\nBULLET::::- Paper knife: Or a \"letter opener\" it is a knife made of metal or plastic, used for opening mail.\nBULLET::::- Pocket knife: a folding knife designed to be carried in a pants pocket. Subtypes include:\nBULLET::::- Lockback knife: a folding knife with a mechanism that locks the blade into the open position, preventing accidental closure while in use\nBULLET::::- Multi-tool and Swiss Army knife, which combine a folding knife blade with other tools and implements, such as pliers, scissors, or screwdrivers\nBULLET::::- Produce knife: A knife with a rectangular profile and a blunt front edge used by grocers to cut produce.\nBULLET::::- Rigging knife: A knife used to cut rigging in sailing vessels.\nBULLET::::- Scalpel: A medical knife, used to perform surgery.\nBULLET::::- Straight razor: A reusable knife blade used for shaving hair.\nBULLET::::- Survival knife: A sturdy knife, sometimes with a hollow handle filled with survival equipment.\nBULLET::::- Switchblade: A knife with a folding blade that springs out of the grip when a button or lever on the grip is pressed.\nBULLET::::- Utility knife: A short knife with a replaceable triangular blade, used for cutting sheet materials including card stock, paperboard, and corrugated fiberboard\nBULLET::::- Wood carving knife and whittling knives: Knives used to shape wood in the arts of wood carving and whittling, often with short, thin replaceable blades for better control.\nBULLET::::- X-Acto knife: A scalpel-like knife with a long handle and a replaceable pointed blade, used for precise, clean cutting in arts and crafts\n\nBULLET::::- Athame: A typically black-handled and double-edged ritual knife used in Wicca and other derivative forms of Neopagan witchcraft. (see also Boline).\nBULLET::::- Katar: An Indian push dagger sometimes used ceremonially.\nBULLET::::- Kilaya: A dagger used in Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Kirpan: A ceremonial knife that all baptised Sikhs must wear as one of the five visible symbols of the Sikh faith (Kakars)\nBULLET::::- Kris: A dagger used in Indo-Malay cultures, often by royalty and sometimes in religious rituals\nBULLET::::- Kukri: A Nepalese knife used as both tool and weapon\nBULLET::::- Puukko: A traditional Finnish or Scandinavian style woodcraft belt-knife used as a tool rather than a weapon\nBULLET::::- Seax: A Germanic single-edged knife, used primarily as a tool, but was also used as a weapon\nBULLET::::- Sgian Dubh: A small dagger traditionally worn with highland dress (kilt)\nBULLET::::- Ulu: An Inuit woman's all-purpose knife.\nBULLET::::- Yakutian knife: A traditional Yakuts knife used as a tool for wood carving and meat or fish cutting. Can be used as a part of yakutian ethnic costume.\n\nThe knife plays a significant role in some cultures through ritual and superstition, as the knife was an essential tool for survival since early man. Knife symbols can be found in various cultures to symbolize all stages of life; for example, a knife placed under the bed while giving birth is said to ease the pain, or, stuck into the headboard of a cradle, to protect the baby; knives were included in some Anglo-Saxon burial rites, so the dead would not be defenseless in the next world. The knife plays an important role in some initiation rites, and many cultures perform rituals with a variety of knives, including the ceremonial sacrifices of animals. Samurai warriors, as part of bushido, could perform ritual suicide, or seppuku, with a tantō, a common Japanese knife. An athame, a ceremonial knife, is used in Wicca and derived forms of neopagan witchcraft.\n\nIn Greece, a black-handled knife placed under the pillow is used to keep away nightmares. As early as 1646 reference is made to a superstition of laying a knife across another piece of cutlery being a sign of witchcraft. A common belief is that if a knife is given as a gift, the relationship of the giver and recipient will be severed. Something such as a small coin, dove or a valuable item is exchanged for the gift, rendering \"payment.\"\n\nKnives are typically restricted by law, although restrictions vary greatly by country or state and type of knife. For example, some laws prohibit carrying knives in public while other laws prohibit private ownership of certain knives, such as switchblades.\n\nBULLET::::- Arbelos, a geometric figure named after a shoemaker's knife\nBULLET::::- Dirk\nBULLET::::- Knife fight\nBULLET::::- List of culinary knife cuts\nBULLET::::- List of blade materials\nBULLET::::- Sword\nBULLET::::- Zombie knife\n\nBULLET::::- \"Everybody's Knife Bible\" by Don Paul,\n\nBULLET::::- American Knife & Tool Institute\nBULLET::::- Interactive knife steel database and comparison graph builder\n"}
{"id": "17163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17163", "title": "Knockout", "text": "Knockout\n\nA knockout (abbreviated to KO or K.O.) is a fight-ending, winning criterion in several full-contact combat sports, such as boxing, kickboxing, muay thai, mixed martial arts, karate, some forms of taekwondo and other sports involving striking, as well as fighting-based video games. A full knockout is considered any legal strike or combination thereof that renders an opponent unable to continue fighting.\n\nThe term is often associated with a sudden traumatic loss of consciousness caused by a physical blow. Single powerful blows to the head (particularly the jawline and temple) can produce a cerebral concussion or a carotid sinus reflex with syncope and cause a sudden, dramatic KO. Body blows, particularly the liver punch, can cause progressive, debilitating pain that can also result in a KO.\n\nIn boxing and kickboxing, a knockout is usually awarded when one participant falls to the canvas and is unable to rise to their feet within a specified period of time, typically because of exhaustion, pain, disorientation, or unconsciousness. For example, if a boxer is knocked down and is unable to continue the fight within a ten-second count, they are counted as having been knocked out and their opponent is awarded the KO victory.\n\nIn mixed martial arts (MMA) competitions, no time count is given after a knockdown, as the sport allows submission grappling as well as ground and pound. If a fighter loses consciousness (\"goes limp\") as a result of legal strikes it is declared a KO. Even if the fighter loses consciousness for a brief moment and wakes up again to continue to fight, the fight is stopped and declared a KO. As many MMA fights can take place on the mat rather than standing, it is possible to score a KO via ground and pound, a common victory for grapplers. \n\nIn fighting-based video games, such as \"Street Fighter\" and \"Tekken\", a player scores a knockout by fully depleting the opponent's health bar, which awards the round to the winning player. The player who wins the most rounds (by scoring the most knockouts or by having more vitality remaining when time expires during each round) wins the match. This is different from real-life combat sports, where a knockout would end the match immediately.\n\nA technical knockout (TKO or T.K.O.), or stoppage, is declared when the referee decides during a round that a fighter cannot safely continue the match for any reason. Certain sanctioning bodies also allow the official attending physician at ringside to stop the fight as well. In many regions, a TKO is declared when a fighter is knocked down three times in one round. \n\nIn MMA bouts, the referee may declare a TKO if a fighter cannot intelligently defend him/herself while being repeatedly struck.\n\nA double knockout, in both real-life combat sports and fighting-based video games, is when both fighters trade blows and knock each other out simultaneously, and are both unable to continue fighting. In such cases, the match is declared a draw. In fighting games such as \"Street Fighter\" and \"Tekken\", a draw is counted as a loss for both players.\n\nLittle is known about what exactly causes one to be knocked unconscious, but many agree it is related to trauma to the brain stem. This usually happens when the head rotates sharply, often as a result of a strike. There are three general manifestations of such trauma:\nBULLET::::- a typical knockout, which results in a sustained (three seconds or more) loss of consciousness (comparable to general anesthesia, when the recipient emerges and has lost memory of the event).\nBULLET::::- a \"flash\" knockout, when a very transient (less than three seconds) loss of consciousness occurs (in the context of a knock-down), and the recipient often maintains awareness and memory of the combat.\nBULLET::::- a \"stunning,\" a \"dazing\" or a fighter being \"KO'ed on his feet\", is when basic consciousness is maintained (and the fighter never leaves his feet) despite a general loss of awareness and extreme distortions in proprioception, balance, visual fields, and auditory processing. Referees are taught specifically to watch for this state, as it cannot be improved by sheer willpower and usually means the fighter is already concussed and unable to safely defend themselves.\n\nA basic principle of boxing and other combat sports is to defend against this vulnerability by keeping both hands raised about the face and the chin tucked in. That could still be ineffective if the opponent punches effectively to the solar plexus.\n\nA fighter who becomes unconscious from a strike with sufficient knockout power is referred to as having been \"knocked out\" or \"KO'd\" (\"kay-ohd\"). Losing balance without losing consciousness is referred to as being \"knocked down\" (\"down but not out\"). Repeated blows to the head, regardless whether they cause loss of consciousness, are known to gradually cause permanent brain damage. In severe cases this may cause strokes or paralysis. This loss of consciousness is commonly known as becoming \"punch drunk\" or \"shot\". Because of this, many physicians advise against sports involving knockouts.\n\nA knockdown occurs when a fighter touches the floor of the ring with any part of the body other than the feet following a hit, but is able to rise back up and continue fighting. The term is also used if the fighter is hanging on to the ropes, caught between the ropes, or is hanging over the ropes and is unable to fall to the floor and cannot protect himself. A knockdown triggers a count by the referee (normally to 10); if the fighter fails the count, then the fight is ended as a KO.\n\nA flash knockdown is a knockdown where the fighter hits the canvas but recovers quickly enough that a count is not started.\n\nBULLET::::1. Billy Bird (138)\nBULLET::::2. Archie Moore (132)\nBULLET::::3. Young Stribling (129)\nBULLET::::4. Sam Langford (128)\nBULLET::::5. Buck Smith (120)\nBULLET::::6. Kid Azteca (114)\nBULLET::::7. George Odwell (111)\nBULLET::::8. Sugar Ray Robinson, Alabama Kid (108)\nBULLET::::9. Peter Maher (107)\nBULLET::::10. Sandy Saddler (103)\n\nInactive National Boxing Association, World Colored Boxing Championship as well as list on List of current world boxing champions and European Boxing Union.\n\nBULLET::::1. Edwin Valero, Artur Beterbiev (100%)\nBULLET::::2. Deontay Wilder (97%)\nBULLET::::3. Gervonta Davis, Ángel Acosta (95%)\nBULLET::::4. Jonathan Guzmán, Anthony Joshua (boxer) Daniel Dubois (92%)\nBULLET::::5. Carlos Zarate, Dmitry Kudryashov, Yunier Dorticos, LaMar Clark (90%)\nBULLET::::6. Rocky Marciano, Wilfredo Gomez, Aaron Pryor, Laila Ali, Gary Mason (88%)\nBULLET::::7. Vitali Klitschko, Gennady Golovkin, Errol Spence Jr., Naoya Inoue, Jaime Munguia (87%)\nBULLET::::8. Khaosai Galaxy (86%)\nBULLET::::9. Eduard Troyanovsky, Oleksandr Gvozdyk, Gerald McClellan, Miguel Berchelt, In-Chul Baek, David Benavidez (85%)\nBULLET::::10. Naseem Hamed, Alfonso Zamora, Frank Bruno, David Haye, George Foreman, Alberto Machado (84%)\n\nBULLET::::1. Travis Fulton (115)\nBULLET::::2. Igor Vovchanchyn (89)\nBULLET::::3. Muslim Salikhov (86)\nBULLET::::4. Melvin Manhoef (27)\nBULLET::::5. Mirko Filipović (30)\nBULLET::::6. Gilbert Yvel (32)\nBULLET::::7. Chuck Liddell (13)\nBULLET::::8. Alistair Overeem (30)\nBULLET::::9. Alexander Shlemenko (29)\nBULLET::::10. Wanderlei Silva, Joe Riggs, Gary Goodridge (27)\nBULLET::::11. Paul Daley (31)\nBULLET::::12. Mark Hunt, Maiquel Falcao (23)\nBULLET::::13. Travis Wiuff, Anderson Silva (22)\nBULLET::::14. Melvin Guillard (21)\nBULLET::::15. Robbie Lawler, Ben Rothwell, Paul Buentello, Tim Sylvia, Mauricio Rua, Alexander Emelianenko (20)\n\nFighters from inactive Pride Fighting Championships and active UFC/Bellator plus champions and former champions from other organizations.\n\nBULLET::::1. Ricco Rodriguez (100.00%)\nBULLET::::2. Melvin Manhoef (93.33%)\nBULLET::::3. Derrick Lewis (88.89%)\nBULLET::::4. Jimi Manuwa (88.23%)\nBULLET::::5. Mark Hunt (87.50%)\nBULLET::::6. Conor McGregor (81%)\nBULLET::::7. Cristiane Justino (76.43%)\nBULLET::::8. Cain Velasquez (73.33%)\nBULLET::::9. Vitor Belfort (72%)\nBULLET::::10. Thiago Santos, Junior Dos Santos (71%)\n\nBULLET::::- Boxing: LaMar Clark (44)\nBULLET::::- MMA: Travis Fulton (10)\n\nBULLET::::- Boxing: Peter Maher (50)\nBULLET::::- Consecutive/Boxing: Ali Raymi (21)\nBULLET::::- MMA: Travis Fulton (68)\nBULLET::::- Consecutive/MMA: Igor Vovchanchyn, Travis Fulton (7)\n\nBULLET::::1. Changpuek Kiatsongrit (178)\nBULLET::::2. Badr Hari (92)\nBULLET::::3. Andy Souwer (87)\nBULLET::::4. Mike Zambidis (86)\nBULLET::::5. Branko Cikatic (82)\nBULLET::::6. Manson Gibson (80)\nBULLET::::7. Peter Aerts (78)\nBULLET::::8. Rob Kaman (77)\nBULLET::::9. Jerome Le Banner (64)\nBULLET::::10. Ernesto Hoost (62)\n\nBULLET::::- Boxing styles and technique\nBULLET::::- Chin (combat sports)\nBULLET::::- Full contact karate\nBULLET::::- Punch (combat)\nBULLET::::- Punching power\nBULLET::::- Taekwondo\n\nBULLET::::- KO statistics of Mike Tyson, Wladimir Klitschko, Earnie Shavers, George Foreman and other heavyweight boxers\nBULLET::::- All famous MMA knockouts\nBULLET::::- The differences between knockouts and concussions; a simple discussion for beginning boxers\nBULLET::::- https://archive.today/20130505222319/http://www.cyberboxingzone.com/cbzforum/showthread.php?1450-Most-Knockouts-Career\n"}
{"id": "17165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17165", "title": "Kalahari Desert", "text": "Kalahari Desert\n\nThe Kalahari Desert is a large semi-arid sandy savanna in Southern Africa extending for , covering much of Botswana, parts of Namibia and regions of South Africa.\n\nIt is not to be confused with the Angolan, Namibian and South African Namib coastal desert, whose name is of Khoekhoegowab origin and means \"vast place\".\n\n\"Kalahari\" is derived from the Tswana word \"Kgala\", meaning \"the great thirst\", or \"Kgalagadi\", meaning \"a waterless place\"; the Kalahari has vast areas covered by red sand without any permanent surface water.\n\nDrainage of the desert is by dry valleys, seasonally inundated pans and the large salt pans of the Makgadikgadi Pan in Botswana and Etosha Pan in Namibia. The only permanent river, the Okavango, flows into a delta in the northwest, forming marshes that are rich in wildlife. Ancient dry riverbeds—called omuramba—traverse the central northern reaches of the Kalahari and provide standing pools of water during the rainy season.\n\nA semi-desert, with huge tracts of excellent grazing after good rains, the Kalahari supports more animals and plants than a true desert, such as the Namib Desert to the west. There are small amounts of rainfall and the summer temperature is very high. The driest areas usually receive of rain per year, and the wettest just a little over . The surrounding Kalahari Basin covers over extending further into Botswana, Namibia and South Africa, and encroaching into parts of Angola, Zambia and Zimbabwe.\n\nNumerous pans exist within the Kalahari, including the Groot-vloer Pan and Verneukpan where evidence of a wetter climate exists in the form of former contouring for capturing of water. This and other pans, as well as river bottoms, were written about extensively at Sciforums by an article by Walter Wagner regarding the extensive formerly wet areas of the Kalahari. The Kalahari is extensive and extends further north where abandoned extensive roadways also exist.\n\nNorth and east, approximately where the dry forests, savannahs and salt lakes prevail, the climate is sub-humid rather than semi-arid. South and west, where the vegetation is predominantly xeric savanna or even a semi-desert, the climate is \"Kalaharian\" semi-arid. The Kalaharian climate is subtropical (average annual temperature greater than or equal to 18 °C, at peaks reaching 40 °C and above, with mean monthly temperature of the coldest month strictly below 18 °C), and is semi-arid with the dry season during the \"cold\" season, the coldest six months of the year. It is the southern tropical equivalent of the Sahelian climate with the wet season during summer. The altitude has been adduced as the explanation why the Kalaharian climate is not tropical; its altitude ranges from 600 to 1600 meters (and generally from 800 to 1200 meters), resulting in a cooler climate than that of the Sahel or Sahara. For example, winter frost is common from June to August, something rarely seen in the warmer Sahelian regions. For the same reason, summer temperatures certainly can be very hot, but not in comparison to regions of low altitude in the Sahel or Sahara, where some stations record average temperatures of the warmest month around 38 °C, whereas the average temperature of the warmest month in any region in the Kalahari never exceeds 29 °C, though daily temperatures occasionally reach up to close to (44.8 °C at Twee Rivieren Rest Camp in 2012).\nThe dry season lasts eight months or more, and the wet season typically from less than one month to four months, depending on location. The southwestern Kalahari is the driest area, in particular a small region located towards the west-southwest of Tsaraxaibis (Southeast of Namibia). The average annual rainfall ranging from around 110 mm (close to aridity) to more than 500 mm in some areas of the north and east. During summer time in all regions rainfall may go with heavy thunderstorms. In the driest and sunniest parts of the Kalahari, over 4,000 hours of sunshine are recorded annually on average.\n\nIn the Kalahari, there are two main mechanisms of atmospheric circulation, dominated by the Kalahari High anticyclone:\n\nBULLET::::- The North and North-west of the Kalahari is subject to the alternation \"Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)/\"Continental Trade winds\". The ITCZ is the meeting area of the boreal trade winds with their austral counterparts what meteorologists call \"Meteorological equator\" and the sailors \"Doldrum\" or \"Pot-au-noir\" : the ITCZ generates rains in the wet season, whereas the continental trade winds cause the dry season;\nBULLET::::- The rest of the Kalahari is subject to the maritime trade winds, that largely shed their moisture as they cross up and over the Southern African Great Escarpment before arriving over the Kalahari.\n\nThere are huge subterranean water reserves beneath parts of the Kalahari; the Dragon's Breath Cave, for example, is the largest documented non-subglacial underground lake on the planet. Such reserves may be in part the residues of ancient lakes; the Kalahari Desert was once a much wetter place. The ancient Lake Makgadikgadi dominated the area, covering the Makgadikgadi Pan and surrounding areas, but it drained or dried out some 10,000 years ago. It may have once covered as much as . In ancient times, there was sufficient moisture for farming, with dikes and dams collecting the water. These are now filled with sediment, breached, or no longer in use, though they can be readily seen via Google Earth.\n\nThe Kalahari has had a complex climatic history over the past million or so years, in line with major global changes. Changes in the last 250,000 years have been reconstructed from various data sources, and provide evidence of both former extensive lakes and periods drier than now. During the latter the area of the Kalahari has expanded to include parts of western Zimbabwe, Zambia and Angola.\n\nDue to its low aridity, the Kalahari supports a variety of flora. The native flora includes acacia trees and many other herbs and grasses. The kiwano fruit, also known as the horned melon, melano, African horned cucumber, jelly melon, or hedged gourd, is endemic to a region in the Kalahari Desert (specific region unknown).\n\nEven where the Kalahari \"desert\" is dry enough to qualify as a desert in the sense of having low precipitation, it is not strictly speaking a desert because it has too dense a ground cover. The main region that lacks ground cover is in the southwest Kalahari (southeast of Namibia, northwest of South Africa and southwest of Botswana) in the south of the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park. For instance in the ZF Mgcawu District Municipality of South Africa, total vegetation cover may be as low as 30.72% on non-protected (from cattle grazing) farmlands south of Twee Rivieren Rest Camp and 37.74% in the protected (from cattle grazing) South African side of the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park: these southernmost Kalahari xeric savanna areas are truly semi-deserts. However, in all the remaining Kalahari, except on salt pans during the dry season, the vegetation cover can be clearly denser, up to almost 100% in some limited areas.\n\nIn an area of about 600,000 km in the south and west of the Kalahari, the vegetation is mainly xeric savanna. This area is the ecoregion identified by World Wide Fund for Nature as Kalahari xeric savanna AT1309. Typical savanna grasses include \"Schmidtia\", \"Stipagrostis\", \"Aristida\", and \"Eragrostis\"; these are interspersed with trees such as camelthorn (\"Acacia erioloba\"), grey camelthorn (\"Acacia haematoxylon\"), shepherd’s tree (\"Boscia albitrunca\"), blackthorn (\"Acacia mellifera\"), and silver cluster-leaf (\"Terminalia sericea\").\n\nIn certain areas where the climate is drier, it becomes a true semi-desert with ground not entirely covered by vegetation: \"open\" as opposed to \"closed\" vegetation. Examples include the north of the ZF Mgcawu District Municipality, itself in the north of South Africa, and the Keetmanshoop Rural in the southeast of Namibia. In the north and east, there are dry forests covering an area of over 300,000 km in which Rhodesian teak and several species of acacia are prominent. These regions are termed Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands AT0709.\n\nOutside the Kalahari \"desert\", but in the Kalahari basin, a halophytic vegetation to the north is adapted to pans, lakes that are completely dry during the dry season, and maybe for years during droughts, such as in Etosha (Etosha Pan halophytics AT0902) and Makgadikgadi (Zambezian halophytics AT0908).\n\nA totally different vegetation is adapted to the perennial fresh water of the Okavango Delta, an ecoregion termed Zambezian flooded grasslands AT0907.\n\nThe Kalahari is home to many migratory birds and animals. Previously havens for wild animals from elephants to giraffes, and for predators such as lions and cheetahs, the riverbeds are now mostly grazing spots, though leopards and cheetahs can still be found. The area is now heavily grazed and cattle fences restrict the movement of wildlife. Among deserts of the Southern Hemisphere, the Kalahari most closely resembles some Australian deserts in its latitude and its mode of formation. The Kalahari Desert came into existence approximately sixty million years ago along with the formation of the African continent.\n\nAlthough there are few endemic species, a wide variety of species are found in the region, including large predators such as the lion (\"Panthera leo\"), cheetah (\"Acinonyx jubatus\"), leopard (\"Panthera pardus\"), spotted hyena (\"Crocuta crocuta\"), brown hyena (\"Hyaena brunnea\"), and Cape wild dog (\"Lycaon pictus pictus\"). Birds of prey include the secretary bird (\"Sagittarius serpentarius\"), martial eagle (\"Polemaetus bellicosus\") and other eagles, the giant eagle owl (\"Bubo lacteus\") and other owls, falcons, goshawks, kestrels, and kites. Other animals include wildebeest, springbok and other antelopes, porcupines (\"Hystrix africaeaustralis\") and ostriches (\"Struthio camelus\").\n\nSome of the areas within the Kalahari are seasonal wetlands, such as the Makgadikgadi Pans of Botswana. This area, for example, supports numerous halophilic species, and in the rainy season, tens of thousands of flamingos visit these pans.\n\nThe biggest threat to wildlife are the fences erected to manage herds of grazing cattle, a practice which also removes the plant cover of the savanna itself. Cattle ranchers will also poison or hunt down predators from the rangeland, particularly targeting jackals and wild dogs.\n\nThe following protected areas were established in the Kalahari:\nBULLET::::- Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park\nBULLET::::- Central Kalahari Game Reserve\nBULLET::::- Khutse Game Reserve\nBULLET::::- Tswalu Kalahari\n\nThe San people have lived in the Kalahari for 20,000 years as hunter-gatherers. They hunt wild game with bows and poison arrows and gather edible plants, such as berries, melons and nuts, as well as insects. The San get most of their water requirements from plant roots and desert melons found on or under the desert floor. They often store water in the blown-out shells of ostrich eggs. The San live in huts built from local materials—the frame is made of branches, and the roof is thatched with long grass. Most of their hunting and gathering techniques replicate our pre-historic tribes. Their mythology includes legends of a god Chikara, protecting them from starvation and death by sacrificing his own life by being hunted in the form of a deer and other wild game they hunt for food. Bux is the enemy of Chikara and is in the form of snakes which are found in considerable numbers in the Kalahari desert region. Bantu-speaking Tswana, Kgalagadi, and Herero and a small number of European settlers also live in the Kalahari desert. The city of Windhoek is situated in the Kalahari Basin.\n\nIn 1996, De Beers evaluated the potential of diamond mining at Gope. In 1997, the eviction of the San and Bakgalagadi tribes in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve from their land began.\nIn 2006, a Botswana High Court ruled in favor of the San and Bakgalagadi tribes in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve, claiming their eviction from the reserve was unlawful. The Government of Botswana granted a permit to De Beers' Gem Diamonds/Gope Exploration Company (Pty) Ltd. to conduct mining activities within the reserve.\n\nBotswana\nBULLET::::- Ghanzi\nBULLET::::- Tshane\nBULLET::::- Tshabong\nBULLET::::- Orapa\nBULLET::::- Gaborone\nNamibia\nBULLET::::- Gobabis\nBULLET::::- Mariental\n\nSouth Africa\nBULLET::::- Rietfontein\nBULLET::::- Noenieput\n\nBULLET::::- Kgalagadi (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Karoo\n\nBULLET::::- \"Cry of the Kalahari\"\nBULLET::::- Kalahari desert's forgotten influence on carbon levels\n"}
{"id": "17166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17166", "title": "Katanga Province", "text": "Katanga Province\n\nKatanga was one of the eleven provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 1966 and 2015, when it was split into the Tanganyika, Haut-Lomami, Lualaba and Haut-Katanga provinces. Between 1971 and 1997 (during the rule of Mobutu Sese Seko when Congo was known as Zaïre), its official name was Shaba Province.\n\nKatanga's area encompassed . Farming and ranching are carried out on the Katanga Plateau. The eastern part of the province is considered to be a rich mining region, which supplies cobalt, copper, tin, radium, uranium, and diamonds. The region's former capital, Lubumbashi, is the second-largest city in the Congo.\n\nCopper mining in Katanga dates back over 1,000 years, and mines in the region were producing standard-sized ingots of copper for international transport by the end of the 10th century CE.\n\nIn the 1890s, the province was beleaguered from the south by Cecil Rhodes' Northern Rhodesia, and from the north by the Belgian Congo, the personal possession of King Leopold II of Belgium. Msiri, the King of Katanga, held out against both, but eventually Katanga was subsumed by the Belgian Congo.\n\nAfter 1900, the Societe Generale de Belgique practically controlled all of the mining in the province through Union Minière du Haut Katanga (UMHK). This included uranium, radium, copper, cobalt, zinc, cadmium, germanium, manganese, silver, gold, and tin.\n\nIn 1915, a deposit of pitchblende and other uranium minerals of a higher grade than had ever been found before anywhere in the world and higher than any found since were discovered at Shinkolobwe. The discovery was kept secret by UMHK. After World War I, ended a factory was built at Olen; the secrecy was lifted at the end of 1922 with the announcement of the production of the first gram of radium from the pitchblende. By the start of World War II, the mining companies \"constituted a state within the Belgian Congo\". The Shinkolobwe mine near Jadotville (now Likasi) was at the centre of the Manhattan Project.\n\nIn 1960, after the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then called Republic of the Congo) gained independence from Belgium, the UMHK, Moise Tshombe and Godefroid Munongo supported the secession of Katanga province from the Congo. This was supported by Belgium but opposed by the Congolese Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba. This led to the assassination of Lumumba and the Katanga Crisis (or \"Congo Crisis\"), which lasted from 1960 to 1965. The breakaway State of Katanga existed from 1960 to 1963.\n\nIn 2005, the new constitution specified that Katanga was to be split up into separately administered provinces.\n\nMilitias such as Mai Mai Kata Katanga led by Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga fought for Katanga to secede, and his group briefly took over the provincial capital Lubumbashi in 2013.\n\nIn 2015, Katanga Province was split into the constitutional provinces of Tanganyika, Haut-Lomami, Lualaba, and Haut-Katanga.\n\nCopper mining is an important part of the economy of Katanga province. Cobalt mining by individual contractors is also prevalent. A number of reasons have been advanced for the failure of the vast mineral wealth of the province to increase the overall standard of living. The local provincial budget was US$440 million in 2011.\n\nLubumbashi, the mining capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, is a hub for many of the country's biggest mining companies. The Democratic Republic of Congo produces \"more than 3 percent of the world’s copper and half its cobalt, most of which comes from Katanga\".\n\nMajor mining concessions include Tilwezembe and Kalukundi.\n\nBULLET::::- Gécamines, (\"La Générale des Carrières et des Mines\", the former UMHK), the state-owned copper-cobalt mining company, had monopoly concessions in the province.\nBULLET::::- Katanga Mining Ltd \"TSX:KAT\" operates a major mining complex in Katanga province, producing refined copper and cobalt with the \"potential of becoming Africa’s largest copper producer and the world’s largest cobalt producer\". Katanga Mining Ltd is majority-owned by Swiss commodity trader Glencore DCC. A joint venture of Katanga Mining (75%) and Gécamines (25%) began mining Tilwezembe, an open-pit copper and cobalt mine, in 2007.\n\nThe province formed the Congolese border with Angola and Zambia. The province also bordered Tanzania – although Katanga province and Tanzania did not share a land border – but the border was within Lake Tanganyika. Katanga has a wet and dry season. Rainfall is about .\n\nThe University of Lubumbashi, located in the northern part of Lubumbashi city, is the largest university in the province and one of the largest in the country. A number of other university-level institutions exist in Lubumbashi, some public, some private: Institut Supérieur de Statistique, Institut Supérieur Pédagogique, Institut Supérieur des Études Sociales, Institut Supérieur de Commerce, Institut Supérieur des Techniques Médicales (all state-run), Université Protestante de Lubumbashi (Korean Presbyterian), Institut Supérieur Maria Malkia (Catholic), Institut Supérieur de Développement Mgr Mulolwa (Catholique), Theologicum St François de Sales (Salesian seminary), Institut Supérieur de Théologie Évangélique de Lubumbashi (Pentecostal/Anglican/Brethren), etc. Université Méthodiste au Katanga, the oldest private university-level institution in the province, is located at Mulungwishi (between Likasi and Kolwezi) but organizes its Masters in Leadership courses in Lubumbashi. The University of Kamina, the University of Kolwezi and the University of Likasi are former branches of the University of Lubumbashi, which continues to have branches in some locations such as Kalemie.\n\nTESOL, the English Language School of Lubumbashi, is a secondary school that serves the expatriate community. It was founded in 1987 on the grounds of the French School, Lycée Français Blaise Pascal, which suspended operations in 1991 with a new French School starting in 2009.\n\nIn Lubumbashi, French, Belgian, and Greek schools are sponsored by the respective embassies.\n\nThe Jason Sendwe Hospital is the largest hospital in the province, located in Lubumbashi. The Afia (Don Bosco) and Vie & Santé hospitals are among the best-equipped and staffed. The University of Lubumbashi maintains a small teaching hospital in the center of Lubumbashi.\n\nKatanga province has the highest rate of infant mortality in the world, with 184 of 1000 babies born expected to die before the age of five.\nThe Congo Railway provides Katanga Province with limited railway service centered on Lubumbashi. Reliability is limited. Lubumbashi International Airport is located northeast of Lubumbashi. In April 2014, a train derailment killed 63 people.\n\nKatanga province is served by television broadcasts. Radio-Télévision nationale Congolaise (RTNC) has a transmitter in Lubumbashi that re-transmits the signal from Kinshasa. In 2005, new television broadcasts by Radio Mwangaza began in Lubumbashi.\n\nBULLET::::- Laurent-Désiré Kabila, former president of the Democratic Republic of the Congo\nBULLET::::- Moise Tshombe, former president of the breakaway State of Katanga\nBULLET::::- Barbara Kanam, popular singer\nBULLET::::- Frédéric Kibassa Maliba, former opposition leader and president of UDPS\nBULLET::::- Odilon Kafitwe wa pa Bowa, former national minister of Zaire and leader of UFERI\nBULLET::::- Lunda Bululu, former prime minister of Zaire\nBULLET::::- Godefroid Munongo, politician\n\nBULLET::::- Central African Copperbelt\nBULLET::::- State of Katanga\nBULLET::::- Congo Free State\nBULLET::::- Congo Pedicle\nBULLET::::- Msiri\nBULLET::::- Stairs Expedition to Katanga\nBULLET::::- Lubumbashi history and timeline\n\nBULLET::::- The United Nations and the Congo\nBULLET::::- WorldStatesmen- Congo (Kinshasa)\nBULLET::::- The Bank Notes of Katanga\nBULLET::::- Rush and Ruin: The Devastating Mineral Trade in Southern Katanga\n"}
{"id": "17168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17168", "title": "Kathmandu", "text": "Kathmandu\n\nKathmandu (; , \"Yei\", Nepali pronunciation: ) is the capital and largest city of Nepal, with a population of around 2.5 million. Kathmandu is also the largest metropolis in terms of area in the country.\n\nKathmandu Valley is growing at 4 percent per year according to World Bank in 2010, one of the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in South Asia, and the first region in Nepal to face the unprecedented challenges of rapid urbanization and modernization at a metropolitan scale. Also Kathmandu is also 6th most friendliest city in Asia beating likes of Hongkong, Seoul, Dubai, Mumbai and many more. \n\nKathmandu, also known as the city of temples, with one of the oldest Pagodas known as Pashupatinath Temple, stands at an elevation of approximately above sea level in the bowl-shaped Kathmandu Valley in central Nepal. The valley is historically termed as \"Nepal Mandala\" and has been the home of Newar people, a cosmopolitan urban civilization in the Himalayas foothills. The city was the royal capital of the Kingdom of Nepal and hosts palaces, mansions and gardens of the Nepalese aristocracy. It has been home to the headquarters of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) since 1985. Today, it is the seat of government of the Nepalese republic established in 2008 and is part of Province No. 3.\n\nKathmandu is and has been for many years the centre of Nepal's history, art, culture, and economy. It has a multi-ethnic population within a Hindu and Buddhist majority. It is also the home of the Newars. Religious and cultural festivities form a major part of the lives of people residing in Kathmandu.\n\nTourism is an important part of the economy. In 2013, Kathmandu was ranked third among the top ten upcoming travel destinations in the world by TripAdvisor, and ranked first in Asia. The city is the gateway to the Nepalese Himalayas and home to several world heritage sites: Durbar Square, Swayambhunath, Boudhanath and Pashupatinath. \n\nHistoric areas of Kathmandu were severely damaged by a 7.8 magnitude earthquake on 25 April 2015. Some of the buildings have been restored and some are in the process of reconstruction until now.\n\nIndigenous Newari term for Kathmandu valley is \"Yei\". The Nepali name \"Kathmandu\" comes from Kasthamandap, which stood in Durbar Square. In Sanskrit, \"Kastha\" () means \"Wood\" and \"Maṇḍapa\" () means \"Pavilion\". This public pavilion, also known as \"Maru Satta\" in Newar language, was rebuilt in 1596 by Biseth in the period of King Laxmi Narsingh Malla. The three-story structure was made entirely of wood and used no iron nails nor supports. According to legend, all the timber used to build the pagoda was obtained from a single tree. The structure collapsed during a major earthquake on 25 April 2015.\n\nThe colophons of ancient manuscripts, dated as late as the 20th century, refer to Kathmandu as \"Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap Mahānagar\" in Nepal Mandala. Mahānagar means \"great city\". The city is called \"Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap\" in a vow that Buddhist priests still recite to this day. Thus, Kathmandu is also known as Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap. During medieval times, the city was sometimes called Kāntipur (कान्तिपुर). This name is derived from two Sanskrit words – \"Kānti\" and \"pur\". \"Kānti\" is a word that stands for \"beauty\" and is mostly associated with light and \"pur\" means place, thus giving it the meaning, \"City of light\".\n\nAmong the indigenous Newar people, Kathmandu is known as \"Yeṃ Deśa\" (येँ देश), and Patan and Bhaktapur are known as \"Yala Deśa\" (यल देश) and \"Khwopa Deśa\" (ख्वप देश). \"Yen\" is the shorter form of \"Yambu\" (यम्बु), which originally referred to the northern half of Kathmandu. The older northern settlements were referred to as Yambi while the southern settlement was known as Yangala.\n\nThe spelling \"Katmandu\" was often used in older English-language text. More recently, however, the spelling \"Kathmandu\" has become more common in English.\n\nArchaeological excavations in parts of Kathmandu have found evidence of ancient civilizations. The oldest of these findings is a statue, found in Maligaon, that was dated at 185 AD. The excavation of Dhando Chaitya uncovered a brick with an inscription in Brahmi script. Archaeologists believe it is two thousand years old. Stone inscriptions are a ubiquitous element at heritage sites and are key sources for the history of Nepal.\n\nThe earliest Western reference to Kathmandu appears in an account of Jesuit Fathers Johann Grueber and Albert d'Orville. In 1661, they passed through Nepal on their way from Tibet to India, and reported that they reached \"Cadmendu\", the capital of Nepal kingdom.\n\nThe ancient history of Kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends. According to Swayambhu Purana, present-day Kathmandu was once a huge and deep lake named \"Nagdaha\", as it was full of snakes. The lake was cut drained by Bodhisatwa Manjusri with his sword, and the water was evacuated out from there. He then established a city called Manjupattan, and made Dharmakar the ruler of the valley land. After some time, a demon named Banasur closed the outlet, and the valley again turned into a lake. Then lord Krishna came to Nepal, killed Banasur, and again drained out the water. He brought some Gopals along with him and made Bhuktaman the king of Nepal.\n\nKotirudra Samhita of Shiva Purana, Chapter 11, shloka 18 refers to the place as Nayapala city, which was famous for its Pashupati Shivalinga. The name Nepal probably originates from this city Nayapala.\n\nVery few historical record exists of the period before medieval Licchavis rulers. According to Gopalraj Vansawali, a genealogy of Nepali monarchy, the rulers of Kathmandu Valley before the Licchavis were Gopalas, Mahispalas, Aabhirs, Kirants, and Somavanshi. The Kirata dynasty was established by Yalamber. During the Kirata era, a settlement called Yambu existed in the northern half of old Kathmandu. In some of the Sino-Tibetan languages, Kathmandu is still called Yambu. Another smaller settlement called Yengal was present in the southern half of old Kathmandu, near Manjupattan. During the reign of the seventh Kirata ruler, Jitedasti, Buddhist monks entered Kathmandu valley and established a forest monastery at Sankhu.\n\nThe Licchavis from the Indo-Gangetic plain migrated north and defeated the Kiratas, establishing the Licchavi dynasty, circa 400 AD. During this era, following the genocide of Shakyas in Lumbini by Virudhaka, the survivors migrated north and entered the forest monastery lora masquerading as Koliyas. From Sankhu, they migrated to Yambu and Yengal (Lanjagwal and Manjupattan) and established the first permanent Buddhist monasteries of Kathmandu. This created the basis of Newar Buddhism, which is the only surviving Sanskrit-based Buddhist tradition in the world. With their migration, Yambu was called Koligram and Yengal was called Dakshin Koligram during most of the Licchavi era.\n\nEventually, the Licchavi ruler Gunakamadeva merged Koligram and Dakshin Koligram, founding the city of Kathmandu. The city was designed in the shape of \"Chandrahrasa\", the sword of Manjushri. The city was surrounded by eight barracks guarded by Ajimas. One of these barracks is still in use at Bhadrakali (in front of Singha Durbar). The city served as an important transit point in the trade between India and Tibet, leading to tremendous growth in architecture. Descriptions of buildings such as Managriha, Kailaskut Bhawan, and Bhadradiwas Bhawan have been found in the surviving journals of travellers and monks who lived during this era. For example, the famous 7th-century Chinese traveller Xuanzang described Kailaskut Bhawan, the palace of the Licchavi king Amshuverma. The trade route also led to cultural exchange as well. The artistry of the Newar people—the indigenous inhabitants of the Kathmandu Valley—became highly sought after during this era, both within the Valley and throughout the greater Himalayas. Newar artists travelled extensively throughout Asia, creating religious art for their neighbours. For example, Araniko led a group of his compatriot artists through Tibet and China. Bhrikuti, the princess of Nepal who married Tibetan monarch Songtsän Gampo, was instrumental in introducing Buddhism to Tibet.\n\nThe Licchavi era was followed by the Malla era. Rulers from Tirhut, upon being attacked by Muslims, fled north to the Kathmandu valley. They intermarried with Nepali royalty, and this led to the Malla era. The early years of the Malla era were turbulent, with raids and attacks from Khas and Turk Muslims. There was also a devastating earthquake which claimed the lives of a third of Kathmandu's population, including the king Abhaya Malla. These disasters led to the destruction of most of the architecture of the Licchavi era (such as Mangriha and Kailashkut Bhawan), and the loss of literature collected in various monasteries within the city. Despite the initial hardships, Kathmandu rose to prominence again and, during most of the Malla era, dominated the trade between India and Tibet. Nepali currency became the standard currency in trans-Himalayan trade.\n\nDuring the later part of the Malla era, Kathmandu Valley comprised four fortified cities: Kantipur, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, and Kirtipur. These served as the capitals of the Malla confederation of Nepal. These states competed with each other in the arts, architecture, esthetics, and trade, resulting in tremendous development. The kings of this period directly influenced or involved themselves in the construction of public buildings, squares, and temples, as well as the development of waterspouts, the institutionalisation of trusts (called guthis), the codification of laws, the writing of dramas, and the performance of plays in city squares. Evidence of an influx of ideas from India, Tibet, China, Persia, and Europe among other places can be found in a stone inscription from the time of king Pratap Malla. Books have been found from this era that describe their tantric tradition (e.g. Tantrakhyan), medicine (e.g. Haramekhala), religion (e.g. Mooldevshashidev), law, morals, and history. Amarkosh, a Sanskrit-Nepal Bhasa dictionary from 1381 AD, was also found. Architecturally notable buildings from this era include Kathmandu Durbar Square, Patan Durbar Square, Bhaktapur Durbar Square, the former durbar of Kirtipur, Nyatapola, Kumbheshwar, the Krishna temple, and others.\n\nThe Gorkha Kingdom ended the Malla confederation after the Battle of Kathmandu in 1768. This marked the beginning of the modern era in Kathmandu. The Battle of Kirtipur was the start of the Gorkha conquest of the Kathmandu Valley. Kathmandu was adopted as the capital of the Gorkha empire, and the empire itself was dubbed Nepal. During the early part of this era, Kathmandu maintained its distinctive culture. Buildings with characteristic Nepali architecture, such as the nine-story tower of Basantapur, were built during this era. However, trade declined because of continual war with neighbouring nations. Bhimsen Thapa supported France against Great Britain; this led to the development of modern military structures, such as modern barracks in Kathmandu. The nine-storey tower Dharahara was originally built during this era.\n\nRana rule over Nepal started with the Kot Massacre, which occurred near Hanuman Dhoka Durbar. During this massacre, most of Nepal's high-ranking officials were massacred by Jang Bahadur Rana and his supporters. Another massacre, the Bhandarkhal Massacre, was also conducted by Kunwar and his supporters in Kathmandu. During the Rana regime, Kathmandu's alliance shifted from anti-British to pro-British; this led to the construction of the first buildings in the style of Western European architecture. The most well-known of these buildings include Singha Durbar, Garden of Dreams, Shital Niwas, and the old Narayanhiti palace. The first modern commercial road in the Kathmandu Valley, the New Road, was also built during this era. Trichandra College (the first college of Nepal), Durbar School (the first modern school of Nepal), and Bir Hospital (the first hospital of Nepal) were built in Kathmandu during this era. Rana rule was marked by despotism, economic exploitation and religious persecution.\n\nKathmandu is in the northwestern part of the Kathmandu Valley to the north of the Bagmati River and covers an area of . The average elevation is above sea level. The city is bounded by several other municipalities of the Kathmandu valley: south of the Bagmati by Lalitpur Metropolitan City (Patan), with which it forms one urban area surrounded by a ring road, to the southwest by Kirtipur Municipality and to the east by Madyapur Thimi Municipality. To the north the urban area extends into several Village Development Committees. However, the urban agglomeration extends well beyond the neighbouring municipalities, e.g. to Bhaktapur, and nearly covers the entire Kathmandu Valley.\n\nKathmandu is dissected by eight rivers, the main river of the valley, the Bagmati and its tributaries, of which the Bishnumati, Dhobi Khola, Manohara Khola, Hanumante Khola, and Tukucha Khola are predominant. The mountains from where these rivers originate are in the elevation range of , and have passes which provide access to and from Kathmandu and its valley. An ancient canal once flowed from Nagarjuna hill through Balaju to Kathmandu; this canal is now extinct.\n\nKathmandu and its valley are in the \"Deciduous Monsoon Forest Zone\" (altitude range of ), one of five vegetation zones defined for Nepal. The dominant tree species in this zone are oak, elm, beech, maple and others, with coniferous trees at higher altitude.\n\nKathmandu and adjacent cities are composed of neighbourhoods, which are utilized quite extensively and more familiar among locals. However, administratively the city is divided into 32 wards, numbered from 1 to 32. Earlier, there were 35 wards which made it the metropolitan city with the largest number of the wards.\n\nThere is no officially defined agglomeration of Kathmandu. The urban area of the Kathmandu valley is split among three different districts (collections of local government units within a zone), which extend very little beyond the valley fringe, except towards the southern ranges, which have comparatively small population. They have the three highest population densities in the country. Within these 3 districts lie VDCs (villages), 20 municipalities and 2 metropolitan municipality (maha-nagarpalika: Kathmandu and lalitpur). The following data table describes these districts which likely would be considered an agglomeration:\n\n! Administrative district (Nepali: जिल्ला; \"jillā\")\n! Area (km²)\n! Population (2001 Census)\n! Population (2011 Census)\n! Population density (/km²)\n\nFive major climatic regions are found in Nepal. Of these, Kathmandu Valley is in the \"Warm Temperate Zone\" (elevation ranging from ), where the climate is fairly temperate, atypical for the region. This zone is followed by the \"Cool Temperate Zone\" with elevation varying between . Under Köppen's climate classification, portions of the city with lower elevations have a humid subtropical climate (Cwa), while portions of the city with higher elevations generally have a subtropical highland climate (Cwb). In the Kathmandu Valley, which is representative of its valley's climate, the average summer temperature varies from . The average winter temperature is .\n\nThe city generally has a climate with warm days followed by cool nights and mornings. Unpredictable weather is expected, given that temperatures can drop to or less during the winter. During a 2013 cold front, the winter temperatures of Kathmandu dropped to , and the lowest temperature was recorded on 10 January 2013, at . Rainfall is mostly monsoon-based (about 65% of the total concentrated during the monsoon months of June to August), and decreases substantially () from eastern Nepal to western Nepal. Rainfall has been recorded at about for the Kathmandu valley, and averages for the city of Kathmandu. On average humidity is 75%.\nThe chart below is based on data from the Nepal Bureau of Standards & Meteorology, \"Weather Meteorology\" for 2005. The chart provides minimum and maximum temperatures during each month. The annual amount of precipitation was for 2005, as per monthly data included in the table above.\nThe decade of 2000–2010 saw highly variable and unprecedented precipitation anomalies in Kathmandu. This was mostly due to the annual variation of the southwest monsoon. For example, 2003 was the wettest year ever in Kathmandu, totalling over of precipitation due to an exceptionally strong monsoon season. In contrast, 2001 recorded only of precipitation due to an extraordinarily weak monsoon season.\nAir pollution is a major issue in Kathmandu. According to the 2016 World Health Organization's Ambient Air Pollution Database, the annual average PM2.5 concentration in 2013 was 49 μg/m, which is 4.9 times higher than recommended by the World Health Organization. for annual average PM2.5. Starting in early 2017, the Nepali Government and US Embassy have monitored and publicly share real-time air quality data.\n\nThe location and terrain of Kathmandu have played a significant role in the development of a stable economy which spans millennia. The city is in an ancient lake basin, with fertile soil and flat terrain. This geography helped form a society based on agriculture. This, combined with its location between India and China, helped establish Kathmandu as an important trading centre over the centuries. Kathmandu's trade is an ancient profession that flourished along an offshoot of the Silk Road which linked India and Tibet. From centuries past, Lhasa Newar merchants of Kathmandu have conducted trade across the Himalaya and contributed to spreading art styles and Buddhism across Central Asia. Other traditional occupations are farming, metal casting, woodcarving, painting, weaving, and pottery.\n\nKathmandu is the most important industrial and commercial centre in Nepal. The Nepal Stock Exchange, the head office of the national bank, the chamber of commerce, as well as head offices of national and international banks, telecommunication companies, the electricity authority, and various other national and international organizations are in Kathmandu. The major economic hubs are the New Road, Durbar Marg, Ason and Putalisadak.\n\nThe economic output of the metropolitan area alone is worth more than one third of national GDP around $6.5billion in terms of nominal GDP NR.s 550 billion approximately per year $2200 per capita income approx three times national average. Kathmandu exports handicrafts, artworks, garments, carpets, pashmina, paper; trade accounts for 21% of its finances. Manufacturing is also important and accounts for 19% of the revenue that Kathmandu generates. Garments and woolen carpets are the most notable manufactured products. Other economic sectors in Kathmandu include agriculture (9%), education (6%), transport (6%), and hotels and restaurants (5%). Kathmandu is famous for lokta paper and pashmina shawls.\n\nTourism is considered another important industry in Nepal. This industry started around 1950, as the country's political makeup changed and ended the country's isolation from the rest of the world. In 1956, air transportation was established and the Tribhuvan Highway, between Kathmandu and Raxaul (at India's border), was started. Separate organizations were created in Kathmandu to promote this activity; some of these include the Tourism Development Board, the Department of Tourism and the Civil Aviation Department. Furthermore, Nepal became a member of several international tourist associations. Establishing diplomatic relations with other nations further accentuated this activity. The hotel industry, travel agencies, training of tourist guides, and targeted publicity campaigns are the chief reasons for the remarkable growth of this industry in Nepal, and in Kathmandu in particular.\n\nSince then, tourism in Nepal has thrived. It is the country's most important industry. Tourism is a major source of income for most of the people in the city, with several hundred thousand visitors annually. Hindu and Buddhist pilgrims from all over the world visit Kathmandu's religious sites such as Pashupatinath, Swayambhunath, Boudhanath, Changunarayan and Budhanilkantha. From a mere 6,179 tourists in 1961/62, the number increased to 491,504 in 1999/2000. Following the end of the Maoist insurgency, there was a significant rise of 509,956 tourist arrivals in 2009. Since then, tourism has improved as the country turned into the Democratic Republic. In economic terms, the foreign exchange registered 3.8% of the GDP in 1995/96 but then started declining. The high level of tourism is attributed to the natural grandeur of the Himalayas and the rich cultural heritage of the country.\n\nThe neighbourhood of Thamel is Kathmandu's primary \"traveller's ghetto\", packed with guest houses, restaurants, shops, and bookstores, catering to tourists. Another neighbourhood of growing popularity is Jhamel, a name for Jhamsikhel that was coined to rhyme with Thamel. Jhochhen Tol, also known as \"Freak Street\", is Kathmandu's original traveller's haunt, made popular by the hippies of the 1960s and 1970s; it remains a popular alternative to Thamel. Asan is a bazaar and ceremonial square on the old trade route to Tibet, and provides a fine example of a traditional neighbourhood.\n\nWith the opening of the tourist industry after the change in the political scenario of Nepal in 1950, the hotel industry drastically improved. Now Kathmandu boasts several luxuries such as the Hyatt Regency, Dwarika's, theYak & Yeti, The Everest Hotel, Hotel Radisson, Hotel De L'Annapurna, The Malla Hotel, Shangri-La Hotel (which is not operated by the Shangri-La Hotel Group) and The Shanker Hotel. There are several four-star hotels such as Hotel Vaishali, Hotel Narayani, The Blue Star and Grand Hotel. The Garden Hotel, Hotel Ambassador, and Aloha Inn are among the three-star hotels in Kathmandu. Hotels like Hyatt Regency, De L'Annapurna, and Hotel Yak & Yeti are among the five-star hotels providing casinos as well.\n\nKathmandu Municipal Corporation (KMC) is the chief nodal agency for the administration of Kathmandu. The Municipality of Kathmandu was upgraded to incorporated in 1994.\n\nMetropolitan Kathmandu is divided into five sectors: the Central Sector, the East Sector, the North Sector, the City Core and the West Sector. For civic administration, the city is further divided into 35 administrative wards. The Council administers the Metropolitan area of Kathmandu city through its 177 elected representatives and 20 nominated members. It holds biannual meetings to review, process and approve the annual budget and make major policy decisions. The ward's profile documents for the 35 wards prepared by the Kathmandu Metropolitan Council is detailed and provides information for each ward on population, the structure and condition of houses, the type of roads, educational, health and financial institutions, entertainment facilities, parking space, security provisions, etc. It also includes lists of development projects completed, on-going and planned, along with informative data about the cultural heritage, festivals, historical sites and the local inhabitants. Ward 16 is the largest, with an area of 437.4 ha; ward 26 is the smallest, with an area of 4 ha.\n\nKathmandu is the headquarters of the surrounding Kathmandu District. The city of Kathmandu forms this district with Kirtipur Municipality and some 57 Village Development Committees. According to the 2001 census, there are 235,387 households in the metropolitan city.\n\nThe Metropolitan Police is the main law enforcement agency in the city. It is headed by a commissioner of police. The Metropolitan Police is a division of the Nepal Police, and the administrative control lies with the National Home Ministry.\n\nThe fire service, known as the \"Barun Yantra Karyalaya\", opened its first station in Kathmandu in 1937 with a single vehicle. An iron tower was erected to monitor the city and watch for fire. As a precautionary measure, firemen were sent to the areas which were designated as accident-prone areas. In 1944, the fire service was extended to the neighbouring cities of Lalitpur and Bhaktapur. In 1966, a fire service was established in Kathmandu airport. In 1975, a West German government donation added seven fire engines to Kathmandu's fire service. The fire service in the city is also overlooked by an international non-governmental organization, the Firefighters Volunteer Association of Nepal (FAN), which was established in 2000 with the purpose of raising public awareness about fire and improving safety.\n\nElectricity in Kathmandu is regulated and distributed by the NEA Nepal Electricity Authority. Water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the Kathmandu Upatyaka Khanepani Limited (KUKL).\nThere is a severe shortage of water for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, cooking and washing and irrigation. People have been using bottled mineral water, water from tank trucks and from the ancient dhungedharas for all the purposes related to water. The city water shortage should be solved by the completion of the much plagued Melamchi Water Supply Project by the end of 2019.\n\nWaste management may be through composting in municipal waste management units, and at houses with home composting units. Both systems are common and established in India and neighbouring countries.\n\nKathmandu's urban cosmopolitan character has made it the most populous city in Nepal, recording a population of 671,846 residents living in 235,387 households in the metropolitan area, according to the 2001 census. According to the National Population Census of 2011, the total population of Kathmandu city was 975,543 with an annual growth rate of 6.12% with respect to the population figure of 2001. 70% of the total population residing in Kathmandu are aged between 15 and 59.\n\nOver the years the city has been home to people of various ethnicities, resulting in a range of different traditions and cultural practices. In one decade, the population increased from 427,045 in 1991 to 671,805 in 2001. The population was projected to reach 915,071 in 2011 and 1,319,597 by 2021. To keep up this population growth, the KMC-controlled area of has expanded to in 2001. With this new area, the population density which was 85 in 1991 is still 85 in 2001; it is likely to jump to 111 in 2011 and 161 in 2021.\n\nThe largest ethnic groups residing in Kathmandu Metropolitan City consists of primarily Newar (24%), Khas Brahmins (25%), Chhetris (18%), Tamangs (11%) while the rest 12% are occupied by Hill Janajatis including Kirat, Gurung, Magar, Sherpa etc., Terai Janajatis like Tharus along with various ethicities within the Madhesi of 15% community. More recently, other hill ethnic groups and Caste groups from Terai have come to represent a substantial proportion of the city's population. The major languages are Nepali and Nepal Bhasa, while English is understood by many, particularly in the service industry. According to data from 2011, the major religions in Kathmandu city are Hinduism 81.3%, Buddhism 9%, Muslim 4.4% and other 5.2%.\n\nThe linguistic profile of Kathmandu underwent drastic changes during the Shah dynasty's rule because of its strong bias towards the Hindu culture. Sanskrit language therefore was preferred and people were encouraged to learn it even by attending Sanskrit learning centres in Terai. Sanskrit schools were specially set up in Kathmandu and in the Terai region to inculcate traditional Hindu culture and practices originated from Nepal.\n\nThe ancient trade route between India and Tibet that passed through Kathmandu enabled a fusion of artistic and architectural traditions from other cultures to be amalgamated with local art and architecture. The monuments of Kathmandu City have been influenced over the centuries by Hindu and Buddhist religious practices. The architectural treasure of the Kathmandu valley has been categorized under the well-known seven groups of heritage monuments and buildings. In 2006 UNESCO declared these seven groups of monuments as a World Heritage Site (WHS). The seven monuments zones cover an area of , with the buffer zone extending to . The Seven Monument Zones (Mzs) inscribed originally in 1979 and with a minor modification in 2006 are Durbar squares of Hanuman Dhoka, Patan and Bhaktapur, Hindu temples of Pashupatinath and Changunarayan, the Buddhist stupas of Swayambhu and Boudhanath.\n\nThe literal meaning of Durbar Square is a \"place of palaces.\" There are three preserved Durbar Squares in Kathmandu valley and one unpreserved in Kirtipur. The Durbar Square of Kathmandu is in the old city and has heritage buildings representing four kingdoms (Kantipur, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, Kirtipur); the earliest is the Licchavi dynasty. The complex has 50 temples and is distributed in two quadrangles of the Durbar Square. The outer quadrangle has the Kasthamandap, Kumari Ghar, and Shiva-Parvati Temple; the inner quadrangle has the Hanuman Dhoka palace. The squares were severely damaged in the April 2015 Nepal earthquake.\n\nHanuman Dhoka is a complex of structures with the Royal Palace of the Malla kings and of the Shah dynasty. It is spread over five acres. The eastern wing, with ten courtyards, is the oldest part, dating to the mid-16th century. It was expanded by King Pratap Malla in the 17th century with many temples. The royal family lived in this palace until 1886 when they moved to Narayanhiti Palace. The stone inscription outside is in fifteen languages.\n\nKumari Ghar is a palace in the centre of the Kathmandu city, next to the Durbar square where a Royal Kumari selected from several Kumaris resides. Kumari, or Kumari Devi, is the tradition of worshipping young pre-pubescent girls as manifestations of the divine female energy or \"devi\" in South Asian countries. In Nepal the selection process is very rigorous. Previously, during the time of monarchy, the queen and the priests used to appoint the proposed Kumari with delicate process of astrological examination and physical examination of 32 'gunas'.The 'china', an ancient Hindu astrological report, of the Kumari and the reigning king was ought to be similar. Kumari is believed to be the bodily incarnation of the goddess Taleju (the Nepali name for Durga) until she menstruates, after which it is believed that the goddess vacates her body. Serious illness or a major loss of blood from an injury are also causes for her to revert to common status. The current Kumari, Trishna Shakya, age three at the time of appointment, was installed in September 2017 succeeding Matina Shakya who was the first Kumari of Kathmandu after the end of monarchy.\n\nKasthamandap is a three-storeyed temple enshrining an image of Gorakhnath. It was built in the 16th century in pagoda style. The name of Kathmandu is a derivative of the word \"Kasthamandap\". It was built under the reign of King Laxmi Narsingha Malla. Kasthamandap stands at the intersection of two ancient trade routes linking India and Tibet at Maru square. It was originally built as a rest house for travellers.\n\nThe Pashupatinath Temple is a famous 5th century Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva (Pashupati). On the banks of the Bagmati River, Pashupatinath Temple is the oldest Hindu temple in Kathmandu. It served as the seat of national deity, Lord Pashupatinath, until Nepal was secularized. However, a significant part of the temple was destroyed by Mughal invaders in the 14th century and little or nothing remains of the original 5th-century temple exterior. The temple as it stands today was built in the 19th century, although the image of the bull and the black four-headed image of Pashupati are at least 300 years old. The temple is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Shivaratri, or the night of Lord Shiva, is the most important festival that takes place here, attracting thousands of devotees and sadhus.\n\nBelievers in Pashupatinath (mainly Hindus) are allowed to enter the temple premises, but non-Hindu visitors are allowed to view the temple only from the across the Bagmati River. The priests who perform the services at this temple have been Brahmins from Karnataka, South India since the time of Malla king Yaksha Malla. This tradition is believed to have been started at the request of Adi Shankaracharya who sought to unify the states of Bharatam a region of the south Asia believed to be ruled by a mythological king Bharat, by encouraging cultural exchange. This procedure is followed in other temples around India, which were sanctified by Adi Shankaracharya.\n\nThe temple is built in the pagoda style of architecture, with cubic constructions and carved wooden rafters (tundal) on which they rest, and two-level roofs made of copper and gold.\n\nThe Boudhanath (also written as \"Bouddhanath\", \"Bodhnath\", \"Baudhanath\" or the \"Khāsa\" Chaitya), is one of the holiest Buddhist sites in Nepal, along with the Swayambhu. It is a very popular tourist site. Boudhanath is known as Khāsti by Newars and as Bauddha or Bodhnāth by speakers of Nepali. About from the centre and northeastern outskirts of Kathmandu, the stupa's massive mandala makes it one of the largest spherical stupas in Nepal. Boudhanath became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979.\n\nThe base of the stupa has 108 small depictions of the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha. It is surrounded with a brick wall with 147 niches, each with four or five prayer wheels engraved with the mantra, \"om mani padme hum\". At the northern entrance where visitors must pass is a shrine dedicated to Ajima, the goddess of smallpox. Every year the stupa attracts many Tibetan Buddhist pilgrims who perform full body prostrations in the inner lower enclosure, walk around the stupa with prayer wheels, chant, and pray. Thousands of prayer flags are hoisted up from the top of the stupa downwards and dot the perimeter of the complex. The influx of many Tibetan refugees from China has seen the construction of over 50 Tibetan gompas (monasteries) around Boudhanath.\n\nSwayambhu is a Buddhist stupa atop a hillock at the northwestern part of the city. This is among the oldest religious sites in Nepal. Although the site is considered Buddhist, it is revered by both Buddhists and Hindus. The stupa consists of a dome at the base; above the dome, there is a cubic structure with the eyes of Buddha looking in all four directions. There are pentagonal \"toran\" above each of the four sides, with statues engraved on them. Behind and above the torana there are thirteen tiers. Above all the tiers, there is a small space above which lies a gajur.\n\nRanipokhari which is translated as \"Queen's Pond\" is a historic artificial pond that nestled in the heart of Kathmandu. It was built by King Pratap Mall in 1670 AD for his beloved queen after she lost her son and couldn't recover from her loss. A large stone statue of an elephant in the south signifies the image of Pratap Malla and his two sons. Balgopaleshwor Temple stands still inside the temple above the pond. Rani Pokhari is opened once a year during the final day of Tihar i.e. Bhai Tika and Chhath festival. The world's largest Chhath takes place every year in Ranipokhari. The pond is one of Kathmandu's most famous landmarks and is known for its religious and aesthetic significance.\n\nKathmandu valley is described as \"an enormous treasure house of art and sculptures\", which are made of wood, stone, metal, and terracotta, and found in profusion in temples, shrines, stupas, gompas, chaityasm and palaces. The art objects are also seen in street corners, lanes, private courtyards and in open ground. Most art is in the form of icons of gods and goddesses. Kathmandu valley has had this art treasure for a very long time, but received worldwide recognition only after the country opened to the outside world in 1950.\n\nThe religious art of Nepal and Kathmandu in particular consists of an iconic symbolism of the Mother Goddesses such as: Bhavani, Durga, Gaja-Lakshmi, Hariti-Sitala, Mahsishamardini, Saptamatrika (seven mother goddesses), and Sri-Lakshmi(wealth-goddess). From the 3rd century BCE, apart from the Hindu gods and goddesses, Buddhist monuments from the Ashokan period (it is said that Ashoka visited Nepal in 250 BC) have embellished Nepal in general and the valley in particular. These art and architectural edifices encompass three major periods of evolution: the Licchavi or classical period (500 to 900 AD), the post-classical period (1000 to 1400 AD), with strong influence of the Palla art form; the Malla period (1400 onwards) that exhibited explicitly tantric influences coupled with the art of Tibetan Demonology.\n\nA broad typology has been ascribed to the decorative designs and carvings created by the people of Nepal. These artists have maintained a blend of Hinduism and Buddhism. The typology, based on the type of material used are: stone art, metal art, wood art, terracotta art, and painting.\n\nKathmandu is home to a number of museums and art galleries, including the National Museum of Nepal and the Natural History Museum of Nepal. Nepal's art and architecture is an amalgamation of two ancient religions, Hinduism and Buddhhism. These are amply reflected in the many temples, shrines, stupas, monasteries, and palaces in the seven well-defined Monument Zones of the Kathmandu valley are part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This amalgamation is also reflected in the planning and exhibitions in museums and art galleries throughout Kathmandu and its sister cities of Patan and Bhaktapur. The museums display unique artefacts and paintings from the 5th century CE to the present day, including archeological exportation.\n\nKathmandu museums and art galleries include:\nBULLET::::- The National Museum\nBULLET::::- The Natural History Museum\nBULLET::::- Hanumandhoka Palace Complex\nBULLET::::- The Kaiser Library\nBULLET::::- The National Art Gallery\nBULLET::::- The NEF-ART (Nepal Fine Art) Gallery\nBULLET::::- The Nepal Art Council Gallery\nBULLET::::- Narayanhity Palace Museum\nBULLET::::- The Taragaon Museum\n\nThe National Museum is in the western part of Kathmandu, near the Swayambhunath stupa in an historical building. This building was constructed in the early 19th century by General Bhimsen Thapa. It is the most important museum in the country, housing an extensive collection of weapons, art and antiquities of historic and cultural importance. The museum was established in 1928 as a collection house of war trophies and weapons, and the initial name of this museum was \"Chhauni Silkhana\", meaning \"the stone house of arms and ammunition\". Given its focus, the museum contains many weapons, including locally made firearms used in wars, leather cannons from the 18th–19th century, and medieval and modern works in wood, bronze, stone and paintings.\n\nThe Natural History Museum is in the southern foothills of Swayambhunath hill and has a sizeable collection of different species of animals, butterflies, and plants. The museum is noted for its display of species, from prehistoric shells to stuffed animals.\n\nThe Tribhuvan Museum contains artifacts related to the King Tribhuvan (1906–1955). It has a variety of pieces including his personal belongings, letters, and papers, memorabilia related to events he was involved in and a rare collection of photos and paintings of Royal family members. The Mahendra Museum is dedicated to the king Mahendra of Nepal (1920–1972). Like the Tribhuvan Museum, it includes his personal belongings such as decorations, stamps, coins and personal notes and manuscripts, but it also has structural reconstructions of his cabinet room and office chamber. The Hanumandhoka Palace, a lavish medieval palace complex in the Durbar, contains three separate museums of historic importance. These museums include the Birendra museum, which contains items related to the second-last monarch, Birendra of Nepal.\n\nThe enclosed compound of the Narayanhity Palace Museum is in the north-central part of Kathmandu. \"Narayanhity\" comes from \"Narayana\", a form of the Hindu god Lord Vishnu, and \"Hiti\", meaning \"water spout\" (Vishnu's temple is opposite the palace, and the water spout is east of the main entrance to the precinct). Narayanhity was a new palace, in front of the old palace built in 1915, and was built in 1970 in the form of a contemporary Pagoda. It was built on the occasion of the marriage of King Birenda Bir Bikram Shah, then heir apparent to the throne. The southern gate of the palace is at the crossing of Prithvipath and Darbar Marg roads. The palace area covers () and is fully secured with gates on all sides. This palace was the scene of the Nepali royal massacre. After the fall of the monarchy, it was converted to a museum.\n\nThe Taragaon Museum presents the modern history of the Kathmandu Valley.\nIt seeks to document 50 years of research and cultural heritage conservation of the Kathmandu Valley, documenting what artists, photographers, architects, and anthropologists from abroad had contributed in the second half of the 20th century. The actual structure of the museum showcases restoration and rehabilitation efforts to preserve the built heritage of Kathmandu. It was designed by Carl Pruscha (master-planner of the Kathmandu Valley) in 1970 and constructed in 1971. Restoration works began in 2010 to rehabilitate the Taragaon hostel into the Taragaon Museum. The design uses local brick along with modern architectural design elements, as well as the use of circle, triangles and squares. The museum is within a short walk from the Boudhnath stupa, which itself can be seen from the museum tower.\n\nKathmandu is a centre for art in Nepal, displaying the work of contemporary artists in the country and also collections of historical artists. Patan in particular is an ancient city noted for its fine arts and crafts. Art in Kathmandu is vibrant, demonstrating a fusion of traditionalism and modern art, derived from a great number of national, Asian, and global influences. Nepali art is commonly divided into two areas: the idealistic traditional painting known as Paubhas in Nepal and perhaps more commonly known as Thangkas in Tibet, closely linked to the country's religious history and on the other hand the contemporary western-style painting, including nature-based compositions or abstract artwork based on Tantric elements and social themes of which painters in Nepal are well noted for. Internationally, the British-based charity, the Kathmandu Contemporary Art Centre is involved with promoting arts in Kathmandu.\n\nKathmandu contains many notable art galleries. The NAFA Gallery, operated by the Arts and crafts Department of the Nepal Academy is housed in Sita Bhavan, a neo-classical old Rana palace.\n\nThe Srijana Contemporary Art Gallery, inside the Bhrikutimandap Exhibition grounds, hosts the work of contemporary painters and sculptors, and regularly organizes exhibitions. It also runs morning and evening classes in the schools of art. Also of note is the Moti Azima Gallery, in a three-storied building in Bhimsenthan which contains an impressive collection of traditional utensils and handmade dolls and items typical of a medieval Newar house, giving an important insight into Nepali history. The J Art Gallery is also in Kathmandu, near the Royal Palace in Durbarmarg, Kathmandu and displays the artwork of eminent, established Nepali painters. The Nepal Art Council Gallery, in the Babar Mahal, on the way to Tribhuvan International Airport contains artwork of both national and international artists and extensive halls regularly used for art exhibitions.\n\nThe National Library of Nepal is in Patan. It is the largest library in the country with more than 70,000 books. English, Nepali, Sanskrit, Hindi, and Nepal Bhasa books are found here. The library is in possession of rare scholarly books in Sanskrit and English dating from the 17th century AD. Kathmandu also contains the Keshar Library, in the Keshar Mahal on the ground floor of the Ministry of Education building. This collection of around 45,000 books is derived from a personal collection of Keshar Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana. It covers a wide range of subjects including history, law, art, religion, and philosophy, as well as a Sanskrit manual of Tantra, which is believed to be over 1,000 years old. The 2015 earthquake caused severe damage to the Ministry of Education building, and the contents of the Kaiser Library have been temporarily relocated.\n\nThe Asa Archives are also noteworthy. They specialize in medieval history and religious traditions of the Kathmandu Valley. The archives, in Kulambhulu, have a collection of some 6,000 loose-leaf handwritten books and 1,000 palm-leaf manuscripts (mostly in Sanskrit or Nepal Bhasa) and a manuscript dated to 1464.\n\nKathmandu is home to Nepali cinema and theatres. The city contains several theatres, including the National Dance Theatre in Kanti Path, the Ganga Theatre, the Himalayan Theatre and the Aarohan Theater Group founded in 1982. The M. Art Theater is based in the city. The Gurukul School of Theatre organizes the Kathmandu International Theater Festival, attracting artists from all over the world. A mini theatre is also at the Hanumandhoka Durbar Square, established by the Durbar Conservation and Promotion Committee.\n\nKathmandu has a number of cinemas (old single screen establishments and some new multiplexes) showing Nepali, Bollywood, and Hollywood films. Some old establishments include Vishwajyoti Cinema Hall, Jai Nepal Hall, Kumari Cinema Hall, Gopi Krishna Cinema Hall, and Guna Cinema Hall. Kathmandu also houses some international standard cinema theatres and multiplexes, such as QFX Cinemas, Cine De Chef, Fcube Cinemas, Q's Cinemas Big Movies, BSR Movies, etc.\n\nKathmandu is the center of music and dance in Nepal, and these art forms are integral to understanding the city. Musical performances are organized in cultural venues. Music is a part of the traditional aspect of Kathmandu. Gunla is the traditional music festival according to Nepal Sambat. Newar music originated in Kathmandu. Furthermore, music from all over Nepal can be found in Kathmandu.\n\nA number of hippies visited Kathmandu during the 1970s and introduced rock and roll, rock, and jazz to the city. Kathmandu is noted internationally for its jazz festival, popularly known as Jazzmandu. It is the only jazz festival in the Himalayan region and was established in March 2002. The festival attracts musicians from countries worldwide, such as Australia, Denmark, United States, Benin, and India.\n\nThe city has been referenced in numerous songs, including works by Cat Stevens ('Katmandu', \"Mona Bone Jakon\" (1970)), Bob Seger ('Katmandu', \"Beautiful Loser\" (1975)), Rush ('A Passage to Bangkok', \"Pulling into Kathmandu\"; \"2112\", 1976), Krematorij ('Kathmandu', \"Three Springs\" (2000)), Fito Páez (\"Tráfico por Katmandú\" – \"Traffic through Kathmandu\") and Cavalcade ('Kathmandu Kid') 2019.\n\nThe staple food of most people in Kathmandu is dal bhat. This consists of rice and lentil soup, generally served with vegetable curries, achar and sometimes Chutney. Momo, a type of Nepali version of Tibetan dumpling, has become prominent in Nepal with many street vendors and restaurants selling it. It is one of the most popular fast foods in Kathmandu. Various Nepali variants of momo including buff (i.e. buffalo) momo, chicken momo, and vegetarian momo are famous in Kathmandu. \n\nMost of the cuisines found in Kathmandu are non-vegetarian. However, the practice of vegetarianism is not uncommon, and vegetarian cuisines can be found throughout the city. Consumption of beef is very uncommon and considered taboo in many places. \"Buff\" (meat of water buffalo) is very common. There is a strong tradition of \"buff\" consumption in Kathmandu, especially among Newars, which is not found in other parts of Nepal. Consumption of pork was considered taboo until a few decades ago. Due to the intermixing with Kirat cuisine from eastern Nepal, pork has found a place in Kathmandu dishes. A fringe population of devout Hindus and Muslims considers it taboo. The Muslims forbid eating \"buff\" as from Quran while Hindus eat all varieties except Cow's meat as they consider Cow to be a goddess and symbol of purity. The chief lunch/snack for locals and visitors is mostly \"Momo\" or \"Chowmein\".\n\nKathmandu had only one western-style restaurant in 1955. A large number of restaurants in Kathmandu have since opened, catering Nepali cuisine, Tibetan cuisine, Chinese cuisine and Indian cuisine in particular. Many other restaurants have opened to accommodate locals, expatriates, and tourists. The growth of tourism in Kathmandu has led to culinary creativity and the development of hybrid foods to accommodate for tourists such as American chop suey, which is a sweet-and-sour sauce with crispy noodles with a fried egg commonly added on top and other westernized adaptations of traditional cuisine. Continental cuisine can be found in selected places. International chain restaurants are rare, but some outlets of Pizza Hut and KFC have recently opened there. It also has several outlets of the international ice-cream chain Baskin-Robbins\n\nKathmandu has a larger proportion of tea drinkers than coffee drinkers. Tea is widely served but is extremely weak by western standards. It is richer and contains tea leaves boiled with milk, sugar, and spices. Alcohol is widely drunk, and there are numerous local variants of alcoholic beverages. Drinking and driving is illegal, and authorities have a zero-tolerance policy. Ailaa and thwon (alcohol made from rice) are the alcoholic beverages of Kathmandu, found in all the local bhattis (alcohol serving eateries). Chhyaang, tongba (fermented millet or barley) and rakshi are alcoholic beverages from other parts of Nepal which are found in Kathmandu. However, shops and bars in Kathmandu widely sell western and Nepali beers.\n\nMost of the fairs and festivals in Kathmandu originated in the Malla period or earlier. Traditionally, these festivals were celebrated by Newars. In recent years, these festivals have found wider participation from other Kathmanduites as well. As the capital of the Republic of Nepal, various national festivals are celebrated in Kathmandu. With mass migration to the city, the cultures of Khas from the west, Kirats from the east, Bon/Tibetan from the north, and Mithila from the south meet in the capital and mingle harmoniously. The festivities such as the Ghode (horse) Jatra, Indra Jatra, Dashain Durga Puja festivals, Shivratri and many more are observed by all Hindu and Buddhist communities of Kathmandu with devotional fervor and enthusiasm. Social regulation in the codes enacted incorporates Hindu traditions and ethics. These were followed by the Shah kings and previous kings, as devout Hindus and protectors of the Buddhist religion.\n\nCultural continuity has been maintained for centuries in the exclusive worship of goddesses and deities in Kathmandu and the rest of the country. These deities include the Ajima, Taleju (or Tulja Bhavani), Digu taleju, and Kumari (the living goddess). The artistic edifices have now become places of worship in the everyday life of the people, therefore a roster is maintained to observe annual festivals. There are 133 festivals held in the year.\n\nSome of the traditional festivals observed in Kathmandu, apart from those previously mentioned, are Bada Dashain, Tihar, Chhath, Maghe Sankranti, Naga Panchami, Janai Poornima, Pancha Dan, Teej/Rishi Panchami, Pahan Charhe, Jana Baha Dyah Jatra (White Machchhendranath Jatra), and Matatirtha Aunsi.\n\nAssumedly, together with the kingdom of Licchhavi (c. 400 to 750), Hinduism and the endogam social stratification of the Caste was established in Kathmandu Valley. The Pashupatinath Temple, Changu Narayan temple (the oldest), and the Kasthamandap are of particular importance to Hindus. Other notable Hindu temples in Kathmandu and the surrounding valley include Bajrayogini Temple, Dakshinkali Temple, Guhyeshwari Temple, and the Sobha Bhagwati shrine.\n\nThe Bagmati River which flows through Kathmandu is considered a holy river both by Hindus and Buddhists, and many Hindu temples are on the banks of this river. The importance of the Bagmati also lies in the fact that Hindus are cremated on its banks, and Kirants are buried in the hills by its side. According to the Nepali Hindu tradition, the dead body must be dipped three times into the Bagmati before cremation. The chief mourner (usually the first son) who lights the funeral pyre must take a holy riverwater bath immediately after cremation. Many relatives who join the funeral procession also take bath in the Bagmati River or sprinkle the holy water on their bodies at the end of cremation as the Bagmati is believed to purify people spiritually.\n\nBuddhism started in Kathmandu with the arrival of Buddhist monks during the time of Buddha (c. 563 – 483 BCE). They started a forest monastery in Sankhu. This monastery was renovated by Shakyas after they fled genocide from Virudhaka (rule: 491–461 BCE).\n\nDuring the Hindu Lichchavi era (c. 400 to 750), various monasteries and orders were created which successively led to the formation of Newar Buddhism, which is still practiced in the primary liturgical language of Hinduism, Sanskrit.\n\nLegendary Princess Bhrikuti (7th-century) and artist Araniko (1245–1306 CE) from that tradition of Kathmandu valley played a significant role in spreading Buddhism in Tibet and China. There are over 108 traditional monasteries (Bahals and Bahis) in Kathmandu based on Newar Buddhism. Since the 1960s, the permanent Tibetan Buddhist population of Kathmandu has risen significantly so that there are now over fifty Tibetan Buddhist monasteries in the area. Also, with the modernization of Newar Buddhism, various Theravada Bihars have been established.\n\nKirant Mundhum is one of the indigenous animistic practices of Nepal. It is practiced by Kirat people. Some animistic aspects of Kirant beliefs, such as ancestor worship (worship of Ajima) are also found in Newars of Kirant origin. Ancient religious sites believed to be worshipped by ancient Kirats, such as Pashupatinath, Wanga Akash Bhairabh (Yalambar) and Ajima are now worshipped by people of all Dharmic religions in Kathmandu. Kirats who have migrated from other parts of Nepal to Kathmandu practice Mundhum in the city.<ref name=\"Broadening the Nepali mind http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2017-02-02/broadening-the-nepali-mind.html\"></ref>\n\nSikhism is practiced primarily in Gurudwara at Kupundole. An earlier temple of Sikhism is also present in Kathmandu which is now defunct. Jainism is practiced by a small community. A Jain temple is present in Gyaneshwar, where Jains practice their faith. According to the records of the Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Nepal, there are approximately 300 Baha'is in Kathmandu valley. They have a National Office in Shantinagar, Baneshwor. The Baha'is also have classes for children at the National Centre and other localities in Kathmandu. Islam is practiced in Kathmandu but Muslims are a minority, accounting for about 4.2% of the population of Nepal. It is said that in Kathmandu alone there are 170 Christian churches. Christian missionary hospitals, welfare organizations, and schools are also operating. Nepali citizens who served as soldiers in Indian and British armies, who had converted to Christianity while in service, on return to Nepal continue to practice their religion. They have contributed to the spread of Christianity and the building of churches in Nepal and in Kathmandu, in particular.\n\nThe oldest modern school in Nepal is Durbar High School, and the oldest college, Tri Chandra College, are both in Kathmandu city. The largest (according to number of students and colleges), the oldest and most distinguished university in Nepal is in Kirtipur and is called Tribhuvan University. The second largest university, Kathmandu University (KU), is in Dhulikhel, Kavre on the outskirts of Kathmandu. It is the second oldest university in Nepal, established in November 1991. Not surprisingly the best schools and colleges of Nepal are located in Kathmandu and its adjoining cities. Every year thousands of students from all over Nepal arrive at Kathmandu to get admission in the various schools and colleges.\nOne of the key concerns of educationists and concerned citizens is the massive outflux of students from Nepal to outside Nepal for studies. Every year thousands of students apply for No objection certificates for studying abroad. Consultancy firms specializing in preparing students to go abroad can be found in all prominent locations. The reason for such an outflux range from perceived low quality of education, political instability, fewer opportunities in the job market, opportunities for earning while learning abroad and better job prospects with an international degree.\n\nInstitute of Medicine, the central college of Tribhuwan University is the first medical college of Nepal and is in Maharajgunj, Kathmandu. It was established in 1972 and started to impart medical education from 1978. Other major institutions include Patan Academy of Health Sciences, Kathmandu Medical College, Nepal Medical College, KIST Medical College, Nepal Army Institute of Health Sciences, National Academy of Medical Sciences (NAMS) and Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences (KUSMS), are also in or around Kathmandu.\n\nFootball and Cricket are the most popular sports among the younger generation in Nepal and there are several stadiums in the city. The sport is governed by the National Sports Council from its headquarters in Kathmandu. The only international football stadium in the city is the Dasarath Rangasala Stadium, a multi-purpose stadium used mostly for football matches and cultural events, in the neighbourhood of Tripureshwor. It is the largest stadium in Nepal with a capacity of 25,000 spectators, built-in 1956. Martyr's Memorial League is also held in this ground every year. The stadium was renovated with Chinese help before the 8th South Asian Games were held in Kathmandu and had floodlights installed. Kathmandu is home to the oldest football clubs of Nepal such as RCT, Sankata and NRT. Other prominent clubs include MMC, Machhindra FC, Tribhuvan Army Club (TAC) and MPC.\n\nKathmandu is also home of some of the oldest cricket clubs in Nepal, such as Yengal Sports Club. Kathmandu has the only recognized international cricket ground in the country, TU Cricket Ground at the Tribhuvan University in Kirtipur. The Mulpani Cricket Stadium is the under-construction cricket stadium in Mulpani, Kathmandu which will be the largest cricket stadium in the country with a capacity of 30,000. Kathmandu Kings XI represents Kathmandu in Everest Premier League.\n\nAn international stadium for swimming events is in Satdobato, Lalitpur, near Kathmandu. The ANFA Technical Football Center is just adjacent to this stadium.\n\nThe total length of roads in Nepal is recorded to be (), as of 2003–04. This fairly large network has helped the economic development of the country, particularly in the fields of agriculture, horticulture, vegetable farming, industry and also tourism. In view of the hilly terrain, transportation takes place in Kathmandu are mainly by road and air. Kathmandu is connected by the Tribhuvan Highway to the south, Prithvi Highway to the west and Araniko Highway to the north. The BP Highway, connecting Kathmandu to the eastern part of Nepal is under construction.\n\nThe main international airport serving Kathmandu and thus Nepal is the Tribhuvan International Airport, about from the city centre. Operated by the Civil Aviation Authority of Nepal it has two terminals, one domestic and one international. At present, about 26 international airlines connect Nepal to other destinations in Europe, Asia and the Middle East, to cities such as Istanbul, Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore, Kolkata, Singapore, Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Dhaka, Paro, Lhasa, Chengdu, and Guangzhou. Since 2013, Turkish Airlines connects Istanbul to Kathmandu. Oman Air also connects Muscat to Kathmandu since 2010. Regionally, several Nepali airlines operate from the city, including Buddha Air, Nepal Airlines and Yeti Airlines, to other major towns across Nepal.\n\nSajha Yatayat provides regular bus services throughout Kathmandu and the surrounding valley. Other bus companies including micro-bus companies operate several unscheduled routes.\n\nTrolleybusses used to operate on the route between Tripureshwor and Surya Binak on a 13-kilometer route.\n\nRopeways are another important transportation means in hilly terrain. A ropeway operated between Kathmandu and Hetauda over a length of which carried 25 tonnes of goods per hour. It has since been discontinued due to poor carrying capacity and maintenance issues. During the Rana period, a ropeway was constructed between Kathmandu (then Mathathirtha) to Dhorsing (Makawanpur) of over in length, which carried a cargo of 8 tonnes per hour. Now there is a cable car operated in Kathmandu in Chandragiri Hills.\n\nHealthcare in Kathmandu is the most developed in Nepal, and the city and surrounding valley is home to some of the best hospitals and clinics in the country. Bir Hospital is the oldest, established in July 1889 by Bir Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana. Notable hospitals include Bir Hospital, Nepal Medical College and Teaching Hospital (Jorpati), Tribhuwan University Institute of Medicine (Teaching Hospital), Patan Hospital, Kathmandu Model Hospital, Scheer Memorial Hospital, Om Hospital, Norvic Hospital, Grande International Hospital, Nobel Hospital and many more.\n\nThe city is supported by specialist hospitals/clinics such as Shahid Shukra Tropical Hospital, Shahid Gangalal Foundation, Kathmandu Veterinary Hospital, Nepal Eye Hospital, Kanti Children's Hospital, Nepal International Clinic (Travel and Mountain medicine center), Neuro Center, Spinal Rehabilitation center and Bhaktapur Cancer Hospital. Most of the general hospitals are in the city center, although several clinics are elsewhere in Kathmandu district.\n\nTilganga Institute of Ophthalmology is an Ophthalmological hospital in Kathmandu. It pioneered the production of low cost intraocular lenses (IOLs), which are used in cataract surgery. The team of Dr. Sanduk Ruit in the same hospital pioneered sutureless small-incision cataract surgery (SICS), a technique which has been used to treat 4 million of the world's 20 million people with cataract blindness.\n\nKathmandu is the television hub of Nepal. Nepal Television, established in 1985, is the oldest and most-watched television channel in Nepal, as is government-owned NTV 2 Metro, Channel Nepal, Image Channel, Kantipur Television, Sagarmatha TV, Himalayan Television and other channels.\n\nThe headquarters of many of the country's news outlets are also in the city including Kathmandu Tribune, the government-owned Gorkhapatra, the oldest national daily newspaper in Nepal, The Kathmandu Post, Nepali Times, Kantipur Publications and its paper Kantipur, Naya Patrika the largest selling Nepali language paper, The Himalayan Times, the largest selling English broadsheet in Nepal, Karobar Economic Daily and Aarthik Abhiyan National Daily are the only economic daily in Nepal and Jana Aastha National Weekly.\n\nNepal Republic Media, the publisher of MyRepublica, joined a publishing alliance with the International Herald Tribune (IHT), to publish the Asia Pacific Edition of IHT from Kathmandu from 20 July 2011. There is a state-run National News Agency (RSS).\n\nRadio Nepal is a state-run organization that operates national and regional radio stations. These stations are: Hits FM (Nepal), HBC 94 FM, Radio Sagarmatha, Kantipur FM and Image FM. The BBC also has an FM broadcasting station in Kathmandu. Among them a small part of FM radio come from Community radio Station, that are Radio Pratibodh F.M. – 102.4 MHz, Radio Upatyaka – 87.6 MHz etc.\n\nKathmandu Metropolitan City (KMC), in order to promote international relations has established an International Relations Secretariat (IRC). KMC's first international relationship was established in 1975 with the city of Eugene, Oregon, United States. This activity has been further enhanced by establishing formal relationships with 8 other cities: Matsumoto City (Nagano Prefecture, Japan), Rochester (New York (state), U.S.), Yangon (formerly Rangoon, Myanmar), Xi'an (Shaanxi, China), Minsk (Belarus), and Pyongyang (North Korea). KMC's constant endeavour is to enhance its interaction with SAARC countries, other International agencies and many other major cities of the world to achieve better urban management and developmental programs for Kathmandu.\n\nKathmandu is home to several international and regional organizations, including the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).\n\nInternational Buddhist Meditation Center operates in Kathmandu.\n\nKathmandu is twinned with:\nBULLET::::- Eugene, United States\nBULLET::::- Rochester, United States\nBULLET::::- Matsumoto, Japan\nBULLET::::- Xi'an, China\nBULLET::::- Minsk, Belarus\nBULLET::::- Yangoon, Myanmar\nBULLET::::- Pyongyang, DPR Korea\nBULLET::::- Lhasa, China\nBULLET::::- Shenzhen, China\nBULLET::::- Varanasi, India\nBULLET::::- Lanzhou, China\nBULLET::::- Seoul, South Korea\nBULLET::::- Chengdu, China\nBULLET::::- Fredericksburg, United States\nBULLET::::- Edinburgh, Scotland\nBULLET::::- Pyongyang, DPRK\nBULLET::::- Boulder, United States (proposed)\nBULLET::::- Bangkok, Thailand (proposed)\n\nBULLET::::- Prithvi Narayan Shah\nBULLET::::- Bhimsen Thapa\nBULLET::::- Amar Singh Thapa\nBULLET::::- Balbhadra Kunwar\nBULLET::::- Bhakti Thapa\nBULLET::::- Jung Bahadur Rana\nBULLET::::- Gehendra Sumsher\nBULLET::::- Tribhuvwan\nBULLET::::- Mahendra\nBULLET::::- Birendra\nBULLET::::- Dharma Bhakta Mathema\nBULLET::::- Dashrath Chand\nBULLET::::- Shukraraj Shastri\nBULLET::::- Gangalal Shrestha\nBULLET::::- Anuradha Koirala\nBULLET::::- Mahabir Pun\nBULLET::::- Amrita Acharia, an actress\nBULLET::::- Hari Bansha Acharya, an actor and comedian\nBULLET::::- Laxmi Prasad Devkota, a writer\nBULLET::::- Paras Khadka, a cricketer\nBULLET::::- Manisha Koirala, an actress\nBULLET::::- Baikuntha Manandhar, a marathon runner\nBULLET::::- Madan Krishna Shrestha, an actor and comedian\nBULLET::::- Narendra Man Singh, a footballer\n\nBULLET::::- Kathmandu District\nBULLET::::- Kathmandu Valley\n\nBULLET::::- Beal, Samuel (1884). \"Si-Yu-Ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, by Hiuen Tsiang\". 2 vols. Translated by Samuel Beal. London. 1884. Reprint: Delhi. Oriental Books Reprint Corporation. 1969.\nBULLET::::- Nanjio, Bunyiu (1883). \"A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist Pantheon\". Oxford at the Clarendon Press.\nBULLET::::- Shaha, Rishikesh (1992). \"Ancient and Medieval Nepal\". Manohar Publications, New Delhi. .\nBULLET::::- Snellgrove, David (1987). \"Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists & Their Tibetan Successors\". Two Volumes. Shambhala Publications, Boston. (v. 1); (v. 2).\nBULLET::::- Tamot, Kashinath, and Ian Alsop. (2001). \"A Kushan-period Sculpture from the reign of Jaya Varma, CE 184/185, Kathmandu, Nepal.\" (2001). Asianart.com\nBULLET::::- Tamot, Kashinath, and Ian Alsop. (date unknown. Update of previous article). \"A Kushan-period Sculpture from the reign of Jaya Varman, CE 185, Kathmandu, Nepal.\" Asianart.com\nBULLET::::- Watters, Thomas. (1904–05). \"On Yuan Chwang's Travels in India. (629–645 CE).\" Royal Asiatic Society. Second Indian Edition. Munshhiram Manoharlal Publishers, New Delhi. (1973).\n"}
{"id": "17169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17169", "title": "Kington Magna", "text": "Kington Magna\n\nKington Magna is a village and civil parish in the Blackmore Vale in the English county of Dorset, situated about south-west of the town of Gillingham, in the North Dorset administrative district.\n\nThe name Kington Magna means 'great King's Town'; it derives from \"cyne-\" (later \"cyning\") and \"tūn\", Old English for 'royal estate or manor'. The affix \"magna\", Latin for great, was added to distinguish it from Little Kington, a smaller settlement nearby. In 1086 in the Domesday Book these were recorded together in three entries as \"Chintone\", which had 27 households and a total taxable value of 13 geld units, and was in the hundred of Gillingham. In 1243 it was recorded as Magna Kington. Most of the current buildings in the village are no older than the seventeenth century. In 1851 a Primitive Methodist chapel was built in the village; it was on Chapel Hill, which runs parallel to Church Hill. In 1860 a pottery was established at Bye Farm, north of the main village; it manufactured tiles, drainpipes, bricks, and chimney and flower pots. The parish church of All Saints was restored and enlarged in 1862; most of the building, except for the late 15th-century west tower, was rebuilt. Near the church is a pond which was a medieval fishpond.\n\nThe parish covers about and, as well as the main village, includes the small settlement of Nyland in the west. The main village is sited on the slopes of a Corallian limestone hill, overlooking the flat Oxford Clay valley of the small River Cale, which drains into the Stour. In 1906 Sir Frederick Treves wrote in his \"Highways & Byways in Dorset\" that the village \"straggles down hill like a small mountain stream.\"\n\nIn the 2011 census the parish had 180 dwellings, 169 households and a population of 389.\n\nThe nearest railway station is in Gillingham. Trains run on the Exeter to Waterloo line.\n"}
{"id": "17171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17171", "title": "Kiosk", "text": "Kiosk\n\nHistorically, a kiosk () was a small garden pavilion open on some or all sides common in Persia, the Indian subcontinent, and in the Ottoman Empire from the 13th century onward. Today, several examples of this type of kiosk still exist in and around the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul, and they can be seen in Balkan countries.\n\nThe word is used in English-speaking countries for small booths offering goods and services. In Australia they usually offer food service. Freestanding computer terminals dispensing information are called interactive kiosks.\n\nEtymological data points to the Middle Persian word \"kōšk\" 'palace, portico' as the origin, via Turkish \"köşk\" 'pavilion' and French \"kiosque\" or Italian \"chiosco\".\n\nA kiosk is an open summer-house or pavilion usually having its roof supported by pillars with screened or totally open walls. As a building type, it was first introduced by the Seljuks as a small building attached to the main mosque, which consisted of a domed hall with open arched sides. This architectural concept gradually evolved into a small yet grand residence used by Ottoman sultans, the most famous examples of which are quite possibly the Tiled Kiosk (\"Çinili Köşk\" in Turkish) and Baghdad Kiosk (\"Bağdat Köşkü\" in Turkish). The former was built in 1473 by Mehmed II (\"the Conqueror\") at the Topkapı Palace, Istanbul, and consists of a two storey building topped with a dome and having open sides overlooking the gardens of the palace. The Baghdad Koshk was also built at the Topkapı Palace in 1638–39, by Sultan Murad IV. The building is again domed, offering direct views onto the gardens and park of the Palace as well as the architecture of the city of Istanbul.\nSultan Ahmed III (1703–1730) also built a glass room of the Sofa Kiosk at the Topkapı Palace incorporating some Western elements, such as the gilded brazier designed by Duplessis père, which was given to the Ottoman ambassador by King Louis XV of France.\n\nThe first English contact with Turkish Kiosk came through Lady Wortley Montagu (1689–1762), the wife of the English ambassador to Istanbul, who in a letter written on 1 April 1717 to Anne Thistlethwayte, mentions a \"chiosk\" describing it as \"\"raised by 9 or 10 steps and enclosed with gilded lattices\"\".\nEuropean monarchs adopted the building type. Stanisław Leszczyński, king of Poland and father-in-law of Louis XV, built kiosks for himself based on his memories of his captivity in Turkey. These kiosks were used as garden pavilions serving coffee and beverages but later were converted into band stands and tourist information stands decorating most European gardens, parks and high streets.\n\nConservatories were in the form of corridors connecting the Pavilion to the stables and consisting of a passage of flowers covered with glass and linked with orangery, a greenhouse, an aviary, a pheasantry and hothouses. The influence of Muslim and Islamo-Indian forms appears clearly in these buildings and particularly in the pheasantry where its higher part is an adaptation of the kiosks found on the roof of Allahabad Palace, as illustrated by Thomas Daniell. Today's conservatories incorporate many elements of Islamic architecture, although modern art forms have shifted from the classical art forms that were used in earlier times.\n\nIn the Western hemisphere and in English-speaking countries, a \"kiosk\" is also a booth with an open window on one side. Some vendors operate from kiosks (see mall kiosk), selling small, inexpensive consumables such as newspapers, magazines, lighters, street maps, cigarettes, live and frozen fishing bait and confections.\n\nIn Australia, the word is commonly used for small buildings that are used to dispense mainly take-away food and drinks, on beaches, in shopping arcades or in parks. Since the 21st century, many of these have been upgraded and serve fancier food and barista-made coffee.\n\nAn information kiosk (or information booth) dispenses free information in the form of maps, pamphlets, and other literature, and/or advice offered by an attendant.\n\nAn electronic kiosk (or computer kiosk or interactive kiosk) houses a computer terminal that often employs custom kiosk software designed to function while preventing users from accessing system functions. Indeed, \"kiosk mode\" describes such a mode of software operation. Computerized kiosks may store data locally, or retrieve it from a computer network. Some computer kiosks provide a free, informational public service, while others serve a commercial purpose (see mall kiosk). Touchscreens, trackballs, computer keyboards, and pushbuttons are all typical input devices for interactive computer kiosk. Touchscreen kiosks are commercially used as industrial appliances, reducing lines, eliminating paper, improving efficiency and service. Their uses are unlimited from refrigerators to airports, health clubs, movie theaters and libraries.\n\nBULLET::::- Automated Retail\nBULLET::::- Automated teller machine\nBULLET::::- Bandstand\nBULLET::::- Belvedere (structure)\nBULLET::::- Dubai Smart Police Stations\nBULLET::::- Fotomat\nBULLET::::- Gazebo\nBULLET::::- Pavilions\nBULLET::::- Self-service kiosk\nBULLET::::- Telephone booth\nBULLET::::- Vending machine\n\n"}
{"id": "17174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17174", "title": "Knowbot Information Service", "text": "Knowbot Information Service\n\nThe Knowbot Information Service (KIS), also known as netaddress, is an Internet user search engine that debuted in December 1989. Although it searched users, not content, it could be argued to be the first search engine on the Internet as it queried more than a single network for information. It provided a uniform user interface to a variety of remote directory services such as whois, finger, X.500, and MCI Mail. By submitting a single query to KIS, a user can search a set of remote white pages services and see the results of the search in a uniform format. There are several interfaces to the KIS service including e-mail and telnet. Another KIS interface imitates the Berkeley whois command.\n\nKIS consists of two distinct types of modules which interact with each other (typically across a network) to provide the service. One module is a user agent module that runs on the KIS mail host machine. The second module is a remote server module (possibly on a different machine) that interrogates various database services across the network and provides the results to the user agent module in a uniform fashion. Interactions between the two modules can be via messages between knowbots or by actual movement of knowbots.\n\nBULLET::::- http://www.ou.edu/research/electron/internet/knowbot.htm\nBULLET::::- http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/home/koe/index.html\n"}
{"id": "17175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17175", "title": "KISS (system)", "text": "KISS (system)\n\nKISS is an early low-level programming language on the IBM 650 business computer. It was listed in the \"Communications of the ACM\" 2(5):16 (May 1959).\n"}
{"id": "17176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17176", "title": "KISS principle", "text": "KISS principle\n\nKISS, an acronym for \"keep it simple, stupid\" or \"keep it stupid simple\", is a design principle noted by the U.S. Navy in 1960. The KISS principle states that most systems work best if they are kept simple rather than made complicated; therefore, simplicity should be a key goal in design, and unnecessary complexity should be avoided. The phrase has been associated with aircraft engineer Kelly Johnson. The term \"KISS principle\" was in popular use by 1970. Variations on the phrase include: \"Keep it simple, silly\", \"keep it short and simple\", \"keep it simple and straightforward\", \"keep it small and simple\", or \"keep it stupid simple\".\n\nThe acronym was reportedly coined by Kelly Johnson, lead engineer at the Lockheed Skunk Works (creators of the Lockheed U-2 and SR-71 Blackbird spy planes, among many others).\n\nWhile popular usage has transcribed it for decades as \"Keep it simple, stupid\", Johnson transcribed it as \"Keep it simple stupid\" (no comma), and this reading is still used by many authors.\n\nThe principle is best exemplified by the story of Johnson handing a team of design engineers a handful of tools, with the challenge that the jet aircraft they were designing must be repairable by an average mechanic in the field under combat conditions with only these tools. Hence, the \"stupid\" refers to the relationship between the way things break and the sophistication available to repair them.\n\nThe acronym has been used by many in the U.S. military, especially the U.S. Navy and United States Air Force, and in the field of software development.\n\nThe principle most likely finds its origins in similar minimalist concepts, such as Occam's razor, Leonardo da Vinci's \"Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication\", Shakespeare's \"Brevity is the soul of wit\", Mies Van Der Rohe's \"Less is more\", Bjarne Stroustrup's \"Make Simple Tasks Simple!\", or Antoine de Saint Exupéry's \"It seems that perfection is reached not when there is nothing left to add, but when there is nothing left to take away\". Colin Chapman, the founder of Lotus Cars, urged his designers to \"Simplify, then add lightness\". Heath Robinson machines and Rube Goldberg's machines, intentionally overly-complex solutions to simple tasks or problems, are humorous examples of \"non-KISS\" solutions.\n\nA variant \"Make everything as simple as possible, but not simpler\" is attributed to Albert Einstein, although this may be an editor's paraphrase of a lecture he gave.\n\nMaster animator Richard Williams explains the KISS principle in his book \"The Animator's Survival Kit\", and Disney's Nine Old Men write about it in \"\", a considerable work of the genre. The problem faced is that inexperienced animators may \"over-animate\" in their works, that is, a character may move too much and do too much. Williams urges animators to \"KISS\".\n\nBULLET::::- Don't repeat yourself (DRY)\nBULLET::::- Minimalism (computing)\nBULLET::::- Unix philosophy\nBULLET::::- Arch Linux\nBULLET::::- Chartjunk\nBULLET::::- List of software development philosophies\nBULLET::::- Reduced instruction set computing\nBULLET::::- Rule of least power\nBULLET::::- There's more than one way to do it\nBULLET::::- Worse is better (Less is more)\nBULLET::::- You aren't gonna need it (YAGNI)\n\nBULLET::::- Concision\nBULLET::::- Occam's razor\nBULLET::::- Less is more\nBULLET::::- Simplicity\nBULLET::::- Elegance\nBULLET::::- Muntzing\nBULLET::::- Simple living\nBULLET::::- It's the economy, stupid\nBULLET::::- Perfect is the enemy of good\nBULLET::::- The Fox and the Cat (fable)\nBULLET::::- Mini survival kit – a minimal \"bug-out bag\" or survival kit\nBULLET::::- Ultralight backpacking\n\nBULLET::::- Kiss Principle\nBULLET::::- The KISS Principles for ORM Products\n"}
{"id": "17177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17177", "title": "Kit", "text": "Kit\n\nKit may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Kitt, Indiana, United States, formerly spelled Kit, an unincorporated community\nBULLET::::- Kit, Iran, a village in Mazandaran Province\nBULLET::::- Kit Hill, Cornwall, England\n\nBULLET::::- Kit (given name), a list of people and fictional characters\nBULLET::::- Barys Kit (1910–2018), Russian-born American rocket scientist\n\nBULLET::::- Young animals:\nBULLET::::- A short form of kitten, a young cat\nBULLET::::- A young beaver\nBULLET::::- A young ferret\nBULLET::::- A young fox\nBULLET::::- A young mink\nBULLET::::- A young rabbit\nBULLET::::- A young raccoon\nBULLET::::- A young skunk\nBULLET::::- A young squirrel\nBULLET::::- A young wolverine\nBULLET::::- Old collective noun for a group of pigeons flying together (list of collective nouns#P)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kit\", original Bulgarian title of the 1970 film \"Whale\"\n\nBULLET::::- Standard equipment in sports:\nBULLET::::- Kit (association football), the standard equipment and attire worn by players in association football\nBULLET::::- Kit (rugby football), the standard equipment and attire worn by players in rugby football\nBULLET::::- Kit (of components), a set of components such as\nBULLET::::- Electronic kit, a package of electrical components used to build an electronic device\nBULLET::::- Kit car (\"component car\"), an automobile that the buyer assembles into a functioning car\n\nBULLET::::- Kit lens, a low-end SLR camera lens\nBULLET::::- Kit violin or kit, a small stringed musical instrument\nBULLET::::- Tropical Storm Kit (disambiguation)\n\nBULLET::::- KIT (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Kits (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- KITT, two fictional characters from the adventure TV series \"Knight Rider\"\nBULLET::::- St. Kitts, an island in the Caribbean Sea\n"}
{"id": "17178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17178", "title": "KL0", "text": "KL0\n\nKernel Language 0 (KL0) is a sequential logic programming language based on Prolog, used in the ICOT Fifth generation computer project.\n"}
{"id": "17179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17179", "title": "KL1", "text": "KL1\n\nKL1, or Kernel Language 1 is an experimental AND-parallel version of KL0 developed for the ICOT Fifth Generation Computer project. KL1 is an implementation of Flat GHC (a subset of the Guarded Horn Clauses language by Kazunori Ueda), making it a parallelised Prolog variant.\n\nBULLET::::- The KLIC Association, home of the KLIC KL1 to C compiler - last update circa 1999. (The klic.org domain expired and was replaced by a gift company some time between 2010 and 2012; the above link has been adjusted to point to the most recent copy at the Internet Archive.)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Design of the Kernel Language for the Parallel Inference Machine\", U. Kazunori et al., Computer J (December 1990).\n"}
{"id": "17180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17180", "title": "Klamath people", "text": "Klamath people\n\nThe Klamath people are a Native American tribe of the Plateau culture area in Southern Oregon and Northern California. Today Klamath people are enrolled in the federally recognized tribes:\n\nBULLET::::- Klamath Tribes (Klamath, Modoc, and Yahooskin (Yahuskin) Band of Northern Paiute Indians), Oregon\nBULLET::::- Quartz Valley Indian Community (Klamath, Karuk (Karok), and Shasta (Chasta) people), California.\n\nThe Klamath people lived in the area around the Upper Klamath Lake and the Klamath, Williamson, and Sprague rivers. They subsisted primarily on fish and gathered roots and seeds. While there was knowledge of their immediate neighbors, apparently the Klamath were unaware of the existence of the Pacific Ocean. Gatschet has described this position as leaving the Klamath living in a \"protracted isolation\" from outside cultures.\n\nThe Klamath were known to raid neighboring tribes, such as the Achomawi on the Pit River, and occasionally to take prisoners as slaves. They traded with the Wasco-Wishram at The Dalles. However, scholars such as Alfred L. Kroeber and Leslie Spier consider these slaving raids by the Klamath to begin only with the acquisition of the horse.\n\nThese natives made southern Oregon their home for long enough to witness the eruption of Mount Mazama. It was a legendary volcanic mountain who is the creator of Crater Lake, now considered to be a beautiful natural formation.\n\nIn 1826, Peter Skene Ogden, an explorer for the Hudson's Bay Company, first encountered the Klamath people, and he was trading with them by 1829. The United States frontiersman Kit Carson admired their arrows, which were reported to be able to shoot through a house.\n\nThe Klamaths, Modocs, and the Yahooskin (Yahuskin) Band of Northern Paiute (in Paiute known as: Goyatöka - \"Crayfish eaters\"), which was erroneously called \"Upper Sprague River Snakes\" believed to be a Band of \"Snake Indians\", the collective name given to the Northern Paiute, Bannock, and Shoshone Native American tribes, signed a treaty with the United States in 1864, establishing the Klamath Reservation to the northeast of Upper Klamath Lake. This area was largely part of the traditional territory controlled by the ă′ukuckni Klamath band. The treaty required the tribes to cede the land in the Klamath Basin, bounded on the north by the 44th parallel, to the United States. In return, the United States was to make a lump sum payment of $35,000, and annual payments totalling $80,000 over 15 years, as well as providing infrastructure and staff for the reservation. The treaty provided that, if the Indians drank or stored intoxicating liquor on the reservation, the payments could be withheld; the United States could also locate additional tribes on the reservation in the future. The tribes requested Lindsay Applegate as the agent to represent the United States to them. The Indian agent estimated the total population of the three tribes at about 2,000 when the treaty was signed.\n\nSince termination of recognition of their tribal sovereignty in 1954 (with federal payments not disbursed until 1961), the Klamath and neighboring tribes have reorganized their government and revived tribal identity. The Klamath, along with the Modoc and Yahooskin, have formed the federally recognized Klamath Tribes confederation. Their tribal government is based in Chiloquin, Oregon.\n\nSome Klamath live on the Quartz Valley Indian Community in Siskiyou County, California.\n\nTraditionally there were several cultural subdivisions among the Klamath, based on the location of their residency within the Klamath Basin. Despite this, the five recognized \"tribelets\" mutually considered each other the same ethnic group, about 1,200 people in total. Like many Indigenous cultures of the Pacific Northwest, the Klamath lived a semi-sedentary life. Winter settlements were in permanent locations that were reoccupied annually. Construction of the earth-lodges would begin in Autumn, with materials salvaged from abandoned, dilapidated buildings made in previous years. Leslie Spier has detailed some of the winter settlement patterns for Klamath as follows:\n\nThe towns are not isolated, compact groups of houses, but stretch along the banks for half a mile or more. In fact, the settlements on Williamson river below the Sprague river junction form a practically continuous string of houses for five or six miles, the house pits being, in many spots, crowded close together. Informants insisted that many of these were occupied at the same time. When we consider that these earth-lodges may have housed several families, there is strong suggestion of a considerable population.\n\nMarriage was a unique practice for the Klamath, compared to neighboring cultures found in the borderlands of modern Oregon, California, Nevada and Idaho. For example, unlike the Hupa, Karok, and Yurok, the Klamath didn't hold formal talks between families for a bride price. Especially notable was the cultural norm that allowed wives to leave husbands, as they were \"in no sense chattel ... and certainly cannot be disposed of as a possession.\"\n\nThe Klamath use Apocynum cannabinum as a fiber and eat the roots of Lomatium canbyi. They use the rootstocks of Sagittaria cuneata as food.\n\nDentalium shells were common among the Klamath prior to colonization. Compared to other native cultures dentalium didn't hold as much financial use among the Klamath. However, longer shells were generally held to be more valuable. Nonetheless these shells were esteemed primarily for as jewelry and personal adornment. Septum piercings were commonly given to younger members of Klamath families to allow inserting dentalium. Some individuals wouldn't however use any shells in their septum. Spier gives the following account for their usage: \n\nThe septum of the nose is pierced and the ear lobes, the latter twice or even more frequently. Both sexes insert dentalium shells horizontally through the septum ... Ear pendants are a group of four dentalia hung in a bunch by their tips.\n\nThe use of dentalium in septum piercings, in addition to other means of ornamentation, was common among the Wasco-Wishram as well.\n\nThe Klamath people are grouped with the Plateau Indians—the peoples who originally lived on the Columbia River Plateau. They were most closely linked with the Modoc people.\n\nThe Klamath spoke one dialect of the Klamath–Modoc language - the northern or \"fi-ukshikni\" dialect, the other - the \"southern\" dialect being spoken by the Modoc people, who lived south of the Klamath. Once thought to be a language isolate, Klamath–Modoc is now considered a member of the Plateau Penutian language family.\n\nBoth the Klamath and the Modoc called themselves \"maqlaqs\", \"maqlags\" or \"Maklaks\" meaning \"people\". When they wanted to distinguish between themselves they added \"knii\" (\"people from/of\"), the Klamath were called \"?ewksiknii\", \"people of the [Klamath] Lake\", and the Modoc were called \"moowatdal'knii\", \"people of the south\".\n\nBULLET::::- Natalie Ball (b. 1980), interdisciplinary artist\n\nBULLET::::- Indian Reorganization Act\n\n\nBULLET::::- \"Annual report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to the Secretary of the Interior for the year 1865: Reports of Agents in Oregon\" Washington: United States Office of Indian Affairs, 1865.\nBULLET::::- Hale, Horation. \"The Klamath Nation: the country and the people\". \"Science\". vol. 19, no. 465, 1892.\nBULLET::::- Hodge, Frederick Webb. \"Handbook of American Indians north of Mexico\". Washington: Government Printing Office, 1907.\nBULLET::::- Mithun, Marianne. (1999). \"The languages of Native North America\". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (hbk); .\nBULLET::::- Waldman, Carl. \"Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes\". New York: Checkmark, 1999.\n\nBULLET::::- Klamath Reservation General Council\nBULLET::::- Southern Oregon Digital Archives\n"}
{"id": "17186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17186", "title": "Klerer–May System", "text": "Klerer–May System\n\nThe Klerer–May System is a programming language developed in the mid-1960s, oriented to numerical scientific programming, whose most notable feature is its two-dimensional syntax based on traditional mathematical notation.\n\nFor input and output, the Klerer–May system used a Friden Flexowriter modified to allow half-line motions for subscripts and superscripts. The character set included digits, upper-case letters, subsets of 14 lower-case Latin letters and 18 Greek letters, arithmetic operators (codice_1 codice_2 codice_3 codice_4 codice_5) and punctuation (codice_6 codice_7 codice_8 codice_9), and eight special line-drawing characters (resembling codice_10 codice_11 codice_12 codice_13 codice_14 codice_15 codice_16 codice_17) used to construct multi-line brackets and symbols for summation, products, roots, and for multi-line division or fractions.\nThe system was intended to be forgiving of input mistakes, and easy to learn; its reference manual was only two pages.\n\nThe system was developed by Melvin Klerer and Jack May at Columbia University's Hudson Laboratories in Dobbs Ferry, New York, for the Office of Naval Research, and ran on GE-200 series computers.\n\n"}
{"id": "17188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17188", "title": "KL-ONE", "text": "KL-ONE\n\nKL-ONE (pronounced \"kay ell won\") is a well known knowledge representation system in the tradition of semantic networks and frames; that is, it is a frame language. The system is an attempt to overcome semantic indistinctness in semantic network representations and to explicitly represent conceptual information as a structured inheritance network.\n\nThere is a whole family of KL-ONE-like systems. One of the innovations that KL-ONE initiated was the use of a deductive classifier, an automated reasoning engine that can validate a frame ontology and deduce new information about the ontology based on the initial information provided by a domain expert. \n\nFrames in KL-ONE are called concepts. These form hierarchies using subsume-relations; in the KL-ONE terminology a super class is said to subsume its subclasses. \nMultiple inheritance is allowed. Actually a concept is said to be well-formed only if it inherits from more than one other concept. All concepts, except the top concept (usually THING), must have at least one super class. \n\nIn KL-ONE descriptions are separated into two basic classes of concepts: primitive and defined. Primitives are domain concepts that are not fully defined. This means that given all the properties of a concept, this is not sufficient to classify it. They may also be viewed as incomplete definitions. Using the same view, defined concepts are complete definitions. Given the properties of a concept, these are necessary and sufficient conditions to classify the concept.\n\nThe slot-concept is called roles and the values of the roles are role-fillers. There are several different types of roles to be used in different situations. The most common and important role type is the generic RoleSet that captures the fact that the role may be filled with more than one filler.\n\nBULLET::::- Ontology language\n"}
{"id": "17190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17190", "title": "Kipchoge Keino", "text": "Kipchoge Keino\n\nKipchoge Hezekiah Keino (born 17 January 1940) is a retired Kenyan track and field athlete. He was the chairman of the Kenyan Olympic Committee (KOC) until 29th September 2017. A two-time Olympic gold medalist, Keino was among the first in a long line of successful middle and long distance runners to come from the country and has helped and inspired many of his fellow countrymen and women to become the athletics force that they are today. In 2012, he was one of 24 athletes inducted as inaugural members of the International Association of Athletics Federations Hall Of Fame.\n\nKeino was born in Kipsamo, Nandi District, Kenya. His name, \"Kipchoge\", is a Nandi language expression for \"born near the grain storage shed\". His parents died when he was a youngster and he was raised by an aunt. After finishing school, he joined the Kenya Police. Before taking up athletics, he played rugby.\n\nHe began his international career at the 1962 Commonwealth Games in Perth, Australia where he came eleventh in the three miles. At the 1964 Summer Olympics he finished fifth in 5000 m and just missed qualification for the 1500 m final.\n\nOn 27 August 1965, Keino lowered the 3000 m world record by over 6 seconds to 7:39.6 in his first attempt at the distance. He won two gold medals (1500 and 5000 metres) at the inaugural All-Africa Games. Later in that year, he broke the 5000 m world record held by Ron Clarke, clocking 13:24.2. At the 1966 Commonwealth Games in Kingston, Jamaica, he won both the mile run and three mile run. In the next Commonwealth Games, Keino won the 1500 metres and was third in the 5000 metres.\n\nAt the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City, he won the 1500 metres gold medal (defeating American favourite and world record holder Jim Ryun by 20 metres, the largest winning margin in the history of the event) and 5000 m silver medal. Four years later, he won the 3000 metres steeplechase gold and 1500 metres silver at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Germany. He retired in 1973. He is on the cover of the October 1968 issue of \"Track and Field News\", the first issue following the Olympics. He shared the cover of the September 1969 issue with Naftali Bon.\n\nWith his wife, Phyllis Keino, he has dedicated significant efforts to humanitarian work in Eldoret, Kenya. They have established the Lewa Children's Home for orphans, the KipKeino Primary School in 1999, and the Kip Keino Secondary School in 2009.\n\nFor his work with orphans, he shared \"Sports Illustrated\" magazine's \"Sportsmen and Sportswomen of the Year\" award in 1987 with seven others, characterized as \"Athletes Who Care\". In 1996, Kipchoge Keino Stadium in Eldoret is named after him.\n\nIn 2007, he was made an honorary Doctor of Law by the University of Bristol. Earlier, Egerton University in Nakuru had awarded him an honorary degree. In July 2012, he received further recognition from the City of Bristol after the Kenyan Olympic Committee, under his presidency, made Bristol the training base for its athletes in preparation for the London 2012 Olympics. In 2012, Kipchoge Keino was among the inductees in the IAAF Hall of fame . The Bristol City Council awarded him freedom of the city, making him the first to receive this honour from Bristol since Sir Winston Churchill\n\nOn 5 August 2016, at the Olympic opening ceremony in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Keino was awarded the first Olympic Laurel, for outstanding service to the Olympic movement.\n\nKeino resides on a farm in Western Kenya where he controls and runs a charitable organization for orphans. He is married to Phyllis Keino. Their son Martin was a two-time NCAA champion and highly successful pace-setter.\n\nBULLET::::- Kipchoge Keino Foundation\nBULLET::::- Beijing 2008 dazzles, as we 'flashback' to the 1968 Mexico City Olympics and a triumphant Kipchoge Keino, Posted On: 2008-08-08.\n"}
{"id": "17193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17193", "title": "Knud Rasmussen", "text": "Knud Rasmussen\n\nKnud Johan Victor Rasmussen (; 7 June 1879 – 21 December 1933) was a Greenlandic–Danish polar explorer and anthropologist. He has been called the \"father of Eskimology\" and was the first European to cross the Northwest Passage via dog sled. He remains well known in Greenland, Denmark and among Canadian Inuit.\n\nRasmussen was born in Jakobshavn, Greenland, the son of a Danish missionary, the vicar Christian Rasmussen, and an Inuit–Danish mother, Lovise Rasmussen (née Fleischer). He had two siblings.\n\nRasmussen spent his early years in Greenland among the Kalaallit where he learned to speak Kalaallisut, hunt, drive dog sleds and live in harsh Arctic conditions. \"My playmates were native Greenlanders; from the earliest boyhood I played and worked with the hunters, so even the hardships of the most strenuous sledge-trips became pleasant routine for me.\"\n\nHe was later educated in Lynge, North Zealand, Denmark. Between 1898 and 1900 he pursued an unsuccessful career as an actor and opera singer.\n\nHe went on his first expedition in 1902–1904, known as The Danish Literary Expedition, with Jørgen Brønlund, Harald Moltke and Ludvig Mylius-Erichsen, to examine Inuit culture. After returning home he went on a lecture circuit and wrote \"The People of the Polar North\" (1908), a combination travel journal and scholarly account of Inuit folklore. In 1908, he married Dagmar Andersen.\n\nIn 1910, Rasmussen and friend Peter Freuchen established the Thule Trading Station at Cape York (\"Qaanaaq\"), Greenland, as a trading base. The name Thule was chosen because it was the most northerly trading post in the world, literally the \"Ultima Thule\". Thule Trading Station became the home base for a series of seven expeditions, known as the \"Thule Expeditions\", between 1912 and 1933.\nThe First Thule Expedition (1912, Rasmussen and Freuchen) aimed to test Robert Peary's claim that a channel divided Peary Land from Greenland. They proved this was not the case in a remarkable journey across the inland ice that almost killed them. Clements Markham, president of the Royal Geographical Society, called the journey the \"finest ever performed by dogs.\" Freuchen wrote personal accounts of this journey (and others) in \"Vagrant Viking\" (1953) and \"I Sailed with Rasmussen\" (1958).\n\nThe Second Thule Expedition (1916–1918) was larger with a team of seven men, which set out to map a little-known area of Greenland's north coast. This journey was documented in Rasmussen's account \"Greenland by the Polar Sea\" (1921). The trip was beset with two fatalities, the only in Rasmussen's career, namely Thorild Wulff and Hendrik Olsen. The Third Thule Expedition (1919) was depot-laying for Roald Amundsen's polar drift in \"Maud\". The Fourth Thule Expedition (1919–1920) was in east Greenland where Rasmussen spent several months collecting ethnographic data near Angmagssalik.\n\nRasmussen's \"greatest achievement\" was the massive Fifth Thule Expedition (1921–1924) which was designed to \"attack the great primary problem of the origin of the Eskimo race.\" A ten volume account (\"The Fifth Thule Expedition 1921–1924\" (1946)) of ethnographic, archaeological and biological data was collected, and many artifacts are still on display in museums in Denmark. The team of seven first went to eastern Arctic Canada where they began collecting specimens, taking interviews (including the shaman Aua, who told him of Uvavnuk), and excavating sites.\n\nRasmussen left the team and traveled for 16 months with two Inuit hunters by dog sled across North America to Nome, Alaska – he tried to continue to Russia but his visa was refused. He was the first European to cross the Northwest Passage via dog sled. His journey is recounted in \"Across Arctic America\" (1927), considered today a classic of polar expedition literature. This trip has also been called the \"\"Great Sled Journey\"\" and was dramatized in the Canadian film \"The Journals of Knud Rasmussen\" (2006).\n\nFor the next seven years Rasmussen traveled between Greenland and Denmark giving lectures and writing. In 1931, he went on the Sixth Thule Expedition, designed to consolidate Denmark's claim on a portion of eastern Greenland that was contested by Norway.\n\nThe Seventh Thule Expedition (1933) was meant to continue the work of the sixth, but Rasmussen contracted pneumonia after an episode of food poisoning attributed to eating kiviaq, dying a few weeks later in Copenhagen at the age of 54.\n\nIn addition to several capes and glaciers, Knud Rasmussen Range in Greenland is named after him.\n\nHe was awarded an Honorary Fellowship from the American Geographical Society in 1912, and its Daly Medal in 1924. The Royal Geographical Society awarded him their Founder's Gold Medal in 1923 and the Royal Danish Geographical Society their Hans Egede Medal in 1924. He was made honorary doctor at the University of Copenhagen in 1924.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The People of the Polar North\" (1908)\nBULLET::::- \"Greenland by the Polar Sea: The Story of the Thule Expedition from Melville Bay to Cape Morris Jesup\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"Eskimo Folk Tales\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"Across Arctic America: Narrative of the Fifth Thule Expedition\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"The Fifth Thule Expedition\" (1946–52) 10 volumes\n\nBULLET::::- Bown, Stephen R. \"White Eskimo: Knud Rasmussen's Fearless Journey into the Heart of the Arctic\" (Da Capo, 2015). xxvi, 341 pp.\nBULLET::::- Cruwys, Elizabeth (2003). \"Rasmussen, Knud (1879–1933)\", in \"Literature of Travel and Exploration: An Encyclopedia\", volume 3.\nBULLET::::- Malaurie, Jean (1982). \"The Last Kings of Thule: With the Polar Eskimos, as They Face Their Destiny\", trans. Adrienne Folk.\nBULLET::::- Markham, Clements R. (1921). \"The Lands of Silence: A History of Arctic and Antarctic Exploration\". Cambridge University Press.\n\n"}
{"id": "17195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17195", "title": "Knute Rockne", "text": "Knute Rockne\n\nKnute Kenneth Rockne ( ; March 4, 1888 – March 31, 1931) was a Norwegian-American football player and coach at the University of Notre Dame.\n\nRockne is regarded as one of the greatest coaches in college football history. His biography at the College Football Hall of Fame identifies him as \"without question, American football's most-renowned coach\". Rockne helped to popularize the forward pass and made the Notre Dame Fighting Irish a major factor in college football.\n\nKnute Rockne was born Knut Larsen Rokne, in Voss, Norway, to smith and wagonmaker Lars Knutson Rokne (1858–1912) and his wife, Martha Pedersdatter Gjermo (1859–1944). He immigrated to Chicago with his parents when he was five years old. He grew up in the Logan Square area of Chicago, on the northwest side of the city. Rockne learned to play football in his neighborhood and later played end in a local group called the Logan Square Tigers. He attended Lorenz Brentano elementary school, and North West Division High School in Chicago where he played football and ran track.\n\nAfter Rockne graduated from high school, he took a job as a mail dispatcher with the post office in Chicago for four years. When he was 22, he had saved enough money to continue his education. He headed to Notre Dame in Indiana to finish his schooling. Rockne excelled as a football end there, winning All-American honors in 1913. Rockne worked as a lifeguard at Cedar Point in the summer of 1913.\n\nRockne helped to transform the college game in a single contest. On November 1, 1913, the Notre Dame squad stunned the highly regarded Army team 35–13 in a game played at West Point. Led by quarterback Charlie \"Gus\" Dorais and Rockne, the Notre Dame team attacked the Cadets with an offense that featured both the expected powerful running game but also long and accurate downfield forward passes from Dorais to Rockne. This game was not the \"invention\" of the forward pass, but it was the first major contest in which a team used the forward pass regularly throughout the game.\n\nAt Notre Dame, Rockne was educated as a chemist and he graduated in 1914 with a degree in pharmacy. After graduating, he was the laboratory assistant to noted polymer chemist Julius Arthur Nieuwland at Notre Dame and helped out with the football team, but rejected further work in chemistry after receiving an offer to coach football. In 1914, he was recruited by Peggy Parratt to play for the Akron Indians. There Parratt had Rockne playing both end and halfback and teamed with him on several successful forward pass plays during their title drive. Knute wound up in Massillon, Ohio, in 1915 along with former Notre Dame teammate Dorais to play with the professional Massillon Tigers. Rockne and Dorais brought the forward pass to professional football from 1915 to 1917 when they led the Tigers to the championship in 1915. \"Pro Football in the Days of Rockne\" by Emil Klosinski maintains the worst loss ever suffered by Rockne was in 1917. He coached the \"South Bend Jolly Fellows Club\" when they lost 40–0 to the Toledo Maroons.\n\nDuring 13 years as head coach, Rockne led Notre Dame to 105 victories, 12 losses, five ties and three national championships, which included five undefeated and untied seasons. Rockne posted the highest all-time winning percentage (.881) for a major college football coach. His schemes utilized the eponymous Notre Dame Box offense and the 7–2–2 defense. Rockne's box included a shift. The backfield lined up in a T-formation, then quickly shifted into a box to the left or right just as the ball was snapped.\n\nRockne was also shrewd enough to recognize that intercollegiate sports had a show-business aspect. Thus he worked hard promoting Notre Dame football to make it financially successful. He used his considerable charm to court favor from the media, which then consisted of newspapers, wire services and radio stations and networks, to obtain free advertising for Notre Dame football. He was very successful as an advertising pitchman for South Bend-based Studebaker and other products. He eventually received an annual income of $75,000 from Notre Dame.\n\nDuring the war-torn season of 1918, Rockne took over from his predecessor Jesse Harper and posted a 3–1–2 record, losing only to the Michigan Aggies. He made his coaching debut on September 28, 1918, against Case Tech in Cleveland, earning a 26–6 victory. In the backfield were Leonard Bahan, George Gipp, and Curly Lambeau. In Gipp, Rockne had an ideal handler of the forward pass.\n\nRockne handled the line and Gus Dorais handled the backfield of the 1919 team. The team went undefeated and was a national champion, though the championship is not recognized by Notre Dame.\n\nGipp died on December 14, 1920, just two weeks after being elected Notre Dame's first All-American by Walter Camp. He likely contracted strep throat and pneumonia while giving punting lessons after his final game, on November 20 against Northwestern University. Since antibiotics were not available in the 1920s, treatment options for such infections were limited and they could be fatal even to the young and healthy. It was while on his hospital bed and speaking to Rockne that he is purported to have delivered the line \"win just one for the Gipper\".\nJohn Mohardt led the 1921 Notre Dame team to a 10-1 record with 781 rushing yards, 995 passing yards, 12 rushing touchdowns, and nine passing touchdowns. Grantland Rice wrote, \"Mohardt could throw the ball to within a foot or two of any given space\" and noted that the 1921 Notre Dame team \"was the first team we know of to build its attack around a forward passing game, rather than use a forward passing game as a mere aid to the running game\". Mohardt had both Eddie Anderson and Roger Kiley at end to receive his passes.\n\nThe national champion 1924 team included the \"Four Horsemen\" backfield of Harry Stuhldreher, Don Miller, Jim Crowley, and Elmer Layden. The line was known as the \"Seven Mules\". The Irish capped an undefeated 10–0 season with a victory over Stanford in the Rose Bowl.\n\nFor all his success, Rockne also made what an Associated Press writer called \"one of the greatest coaching blunders in history\". Instead of coaching his 1926 team against Carnegie Tech, Rockne traveled to Chicago for the Army–Navy Game to \"write newspaper articles about it, as well as select an All-America football team\". Carnegie Tech used the coach's absence as motivation for a 19–0 win; the upset likely cost the Irish a chance for a national title.\n\nThe 1928 team lost to national champion Georgia Tech. \"I sat at Grant Field and saw a magnificent Notre Dame team suddenly recoil before the furious pounding of one man–Peter Pund\", said Rockne. \"Nobody could stop him. I counted 20 scoring plays that this man ruined.\" Rockne wrote of an attack on his coaching in the \"Atlanta Journal\", \"I am surprised that a paper of such fine, high standing [as yours] would allow a zipper to write in his particular vein ... the article by Fuzzy Woodruff was not called for.\"\n\nOn November 10, 1928, the Fighting Irish were tied with Army 0–0 at the end of the half. Rockne entered the locker room and told the team the words he heard on Gipp's deathbed in 1920: \"I've got to go, Rock. It's all right. I'm not afraid. Some time, Rock, when the team is up against it, when things are going wrong and the breaks are beating the boys, tell them to go in there with all they've got and win just one for the Gipper. I don't know where I'll be then, Rock. But I'll know about it, and I'll be happy.\" This inspired the team, who then won the game 12–6. The phrase \"Win one for the Gipper\" was later used as a political slogan by Ronald Reagan, who in 1940 portrayed Gipp in \"Knute Rockne, All American.\"\n\nBoth the 1929 and the 1930 teams went undefeated and were national champions. According to interviews, Rockne considered his 1929 team his strongest overall. Rockne also said he considered his 1930 team to have been his best offensively before the departure of Jumping Joe Savoldi. Rockne was struck with illness in 1929, and the \"de facto\" head coach was assistant Tom Lieb. Rockne's all-time All-America backfield was Jim Thorpe, Red Grange, George Gipp, and George Pfann.\n\nRockne met Bonnie Gwendoline Skiles (1891 – 1956) of Kenton, Ohio, an avid gardener, while the two were employed at Cedar Point. Bonnie was the daughter of George Skiles and Huldah Dry. The two married at Sts. Peter and Paul Catholic Church in Sandusky, Ohio, on July 14, 1914, with Father William F. Murphy officiating and Gus Dorais as best man. They had four children: Knute Lars Jr., William Dorias, Mary Jeane and John Vincent. Rockne converted from the Lutheran to the Roman Catholic faith on November 20, 1925. The Rev. Vincent Mooney, C.S.C., baptized Rockne in the Log Chapel on Notre Dame's campus.\n\nRockne died in the crash of a Transcontinental & Western Air airliner in Kansas on March 31, 1931, while \"en route\" to participate in the production of the film \"The Spirit of Notre Dame\" (released October 13, 1931). He had stopped in Kansas City to visit his two sons, Bill and Knute Jr., who were in boarding school there at the Pembroke-Country Day School. A little over an hour after taking off from Kansas City, one of the Fokker Trimotor's wings broke up in flight. The cause of the breakup was determined to be that the plane's plywood outer skin was bonded to the ribs and spars with water-based aliphatic resin glue, and flight in rain had caused the bond to deteriorate to the point that sections of the plywood suddenly separated in flight. The plane crashed into a wheat field near Bazaar, Kansas, killing Rockne and seven others.\n\nCoincidentally, Jess Harper was a friend of Rockne and was also the coach that Rockne had replaced at Notre Dame. Harper lived about 100 miles from the spot of the crash, and he was called to make positive identification of Rockne's body. A memorial dedicated to the victims stands on the spot where the plane crashed. The memorial is surrounded by a wire fence with wooden posts and was maintained for many years by James Heathman, who, at the age of 13 in 1931, was one of the first people to arrive at the site of the crash.\n\nRockne's unexpected death startled the nation and triggered a national outpouring of grief, comparable to the deaths of presidents. President Herbert Hoover called Rockne's death \"a national loss\". King Haakon VII of Norway, Rockne's birthplace, posthumously knighted Rockne, and sent a personal envoy to Rockne's massive funeral. More than 100,000 people lined the route of his funeral procession, and the funeral was broadcast live on network radio across the United States and in Europe as well as to parts of South America and Asia.\n\nRockne was buried in Highland Cemetery in South Bend, the city adjacent to the Notre Dame campus.\n\nDriven by the public feeling for Rockne, the crash story played out at length in nearly all the nation's newspapers, and public demand for an inquiry into the crash's causes and circumstances ensued.\n\nThe national outcry over the disaster that killed Rockne and seven others triggered sweeping changes to airliner design, manufacturing, operation, inspection, maintenance, regulation and crash investigation, igniting a safety revolution that ultimately transformed airline travel worldwide from the most dangerous forms of travel to one of the safest.\n\nRockne was not the first coach to use the forward pass, but he helped popularize it nationally. Most football historians agree that a few schools, notably St. Louis University (under coach Eddie Cochems), Michigan, Carlisle and Minnesota, had passing attacks in place before Rockne arrived at Notre Dame. The great majority of passing attacks, however, consisted solely of short pitches and shovel passes to stationary receivers. Additionally, few of the major Eastern teams that constituted the power center of college football at the time used the pass. In the summer of 1913, while he was a lifeguard on the beach at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio, Rockne and his college teammate and roommate Gus Dorais worked on passing techniques. These were employed in games by the 1913 Notre Dame squad and subsequent Harper- and Rockne-coached teams and included many features common in modern passing, including having the passer throw the ball overhand and having the receiver run under a football and catch the ball in stride. That fall, Notre Dame upset heavily favored Army 35-13 at West Point thanks to a barrage of Dorais-to-Rockne long downfield passes. The game played an important role in displaying the potency of the forward pass and \"open offense\" and convinced many coaches to add pass plays to their play books. The game is dramatized in the movies \"Knute Rockne, All American\" and \"The Long Gray Line\". In May 1949, Knute Rockne appeared in the Master Man story on Kid Eternity comics, Vol 1, number 15.\n\nRockne's coaching tree includes:\n\nBULLET::::1. Eddie Anderson: played for Notre Dame (1919–1921), head coach for Iowa (1939–1949)\nBULLET::::2. Hunk Anderson: played for Notre Dame (1918–1921), head coach for Notre Dame (1931–1933), NC State (1934–1936)\nBULLET::::3. Joe Bach: played for Notre Dame (1923–1924), head coach for Duquesne (1934), Pittsburgh Pirates/Steelers (1935–1936; 1952–1953)\nBULLET::::4. Charlie Bachman: played for Notre Dame (1914–1916), head coach for Kansas State (1920–1927), Florida (1928–1932), Michigan State (1933–1946)\nBULLET::::5. Dutch Bergman: played for Notre Dame (1915–1916; 1919), head coach for Catholic (1930–1940), Washington Redskins (1943)\nBULLET::::6. Frank Carideo: played for Notre Dame (1928–1930), head coach for Missouri (1932–1934)\nBULLET::::7. Stan Cofall: played for Notre Dame (1914–1916), head coach for Wake Forest (1928).\nBULLET::::8. Chuck Collins: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for North Carolina (1926–1933).\nBULLET::::9. Jim Crowley: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for Michigan State (1928–1932), Fordham (1933–1941).\nBULLET::::10. Gus Dorais: played for Notre Dame (1910–1913), assistant for Notre Dame (1919), head coach for Gonzaga (1920–1924).\nBULLET::::11. Rex Enright: played for Notre Dame (1923–1925), head coach for South Carolina (1938–1942; 1946–1955).\nBULLET::::12. Noble Kizer: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for Purdue (1930–1936)\nBULLET::::13. Elmer Layden: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for Duquesne (1927–1933), Notre Dame (1934–1940)\nBULLET::::14. Frank Leahy: played for Notre Dame (1928–1930), head coach for Boston College (1939–1940), Notre Dame (1941–1943; 1946–1953).\nBULLET::::15. Tom Lieb: played for Notre Dame (1919–1922), head coach for Loyola Los Angeles (1930–1938), Florida (1940–1945).\nBULLET::::16. Slip Madigan: played for Notre Dame (1916–1917; 1919), head coach for Saint Mary's (1921–1939) Iowa (1943–1944)\nBULLET::::17. Harry Mehre: played for Notre Dame (1919–1921), head coach for Georgia (1928–1937), Ole Miss (1938–1945).\nBULLET::::18. Don Miller: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), assistant for Georgia Tech (1925–1928), Ohio State (1929–1932).\nBULLET::::19. Edgar Miller: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for Navy (1931–1933)\nBULLET::::20. Chuck Riley: played for Notre Dame (1927), head coach for New Mexico (1931–1933)\nBULLET::::21. Marchmont Schwartz: played for Notre Dame (1929–1931), head coach for Creighton (1935–1939), Stanford (1942–1950).\nBULLET::::22. Buck Shaw: played for Notre Dame (1919–1921), head coach for NC State (1924), Nevada (1925–1928), San Francisco 49ers ( 1946-1954 ), Philadelphia Eagles ( 1958- 1960 ).\nBULLET::::23. Maurice J. \"Clipper\" Smith: played for Notre Dame (1917–1920), head coach for Gonzaga (1925–1928), Villanova (1936–1942)\nBULLET::::24. Harry Stuhldreher: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for Villanova (1925–1935), Wisconsin (1936–1948).\nBULLET::::25. Frank Thomas: played for Notre Dame (1920–1922), head coach for Alabama (1931–1946)\nBULLET::::26. Adam Walsh: played for Notre Dame (1922–1924), head coach for Santa Clara (1925–1928), Bowdoin (1935–1942; 1947–1958)\nBULLET::::27. Earl Walsh: played for Notre Dame (1919–1921), head coach for Fordham (1942).\nBULLET::::28. John Weibel: played for Notre Dame (1923–1924), assistant for Vanderbilt (1925–1926), Duquesne (1927).\nBULLET::::29. Chet A. Wynne: played for Notre Dame (1919–1921), head coach for Creighton (1923–1929), Auburn (1930–1933), Kentucky (1934–1937).\n\nBULLET::::- Notre Dame memorializes him in the Knute Rockne Memorial Building, an athletics facility built in 1937, as well as the main football stadium.\nBULLET::::- His name appears on streets in South Bend and in Stevensville, Michigan, (where Rockne had a summer home), and a travel plaza on the Indiana Toll Road.\nBULLET::::- The Rockne Memorial near Bazaar, Kansas at the site of the airliner crash memorializes Rockne and the seven others who died with him. It was erected by the late Easter Heathman, who as a boy was a crash eyewitness and was among the first to respond at the scene. Every five years since the crash, a memorial ceremony is held there and at a nearby schoolhouse, drawing relatives of the victims and Rockne and Notre Dame fans from around the world. Now part of the Heathman family estate, it is accessible only by arrangement or during memorial commemorations.\nBULLET::::- The Matfield Green rest stop travel plaza (center foyer) on the Kansas Turnpike near Bazaar and the airliner crash site where Rockne was killed used to have a large, glassed-in exhibit commemorating Rockne (chiefly), the other crash victims, and the crash itself. The memorial was taken down during renovations of the travel plaza.\nBULLET::::- Allentown Central Catholic High School in Allentown, Pennsylvania dedicated its gymnasium, Rockne Hall, to Knute Rockne.\nBULLET::::- Taylorville, Illinois dedicated the street next to the football field as \"Knute Rockne Road\".\nBULLET::::- The town of Rockne, Texas was named to honor him. In 1931, the children of Sacred Heart School were given the opportunity to name their town. A vote was taken, with the children electing to name the town after Rockne, who had died in a plane crash earlier that year. On March 10, 1988, Rockne opened its post office for one day during which a Knute Rockne 22-cent commemorative stamp was issued. A life-size bust of Rockne was unveiled on March 4, 2006.\nBULLET::::- The Studebaker automobile company of South Bend marketed the Rockne automobile from 1931 to 1933. It was a separate product line of Studebaker and priced in the low-cost market.\nBULLET::::- Symphonic composer Ferde Grofe composed a musical suite in Rockne's honor shortly after the coach's death.\nBULLET::::- In 1940, actor Pat O'Brien portrayed Rockne in the Warner Brothers film \"Knute Rockne, All American\", in which Rockne used the phrase \"win one for the Gipper\" in reference to the death bed request of George Gipp, played by Ronald Reagan.\nBULLET::::- The short film \"I Am an American\" (1944) featured Rockne as a foreign-born citizen\nBULLET::::- Rockne was enshrined in the College Football Hall of Fame in 1951 as a charter member and in the Indiana Football Hall of Fame.\nBULLET::::- In 1988, the United States Postal Service honored Rockne with a 22-cent commemorative postage stamp. President Ronald Reagan, who played George Gipp in the movie \"Knute Rockne, All American\", gave an address at the Athletic & Convocation Center at the University of Notre Dame on March 9, 1988, and officially unveiled the Rockne stamp.\nBULLET::::- In 1988, Rockne was inducted posthumously into the Scandinavian-American Hall of Fame held during Norsk Høstfest.\nBULLET::::- A biographical musical of Rockne's life premiered at the Theatre at the Center in Munster, Indiana on April 3, 2008. The musical is based on a play and mini-series by Buddy Farmer.\nBULLET::::- The U.S. Navy named a ship in the Liberty ship class after Knute Rockne in 1943. The SS Knute Rockne was scrapped in 1972.\nBULLET::::- A statue of Rockne, as well as Ara Parseghian, both by the sculptor Armando Hinojosa of Laredo, Texas, are located on the Notre Dame campus.\nBULLET::::- He was inducted into the Rose Bowl Hall of Fame as a member of the Class of 2014.\n\nBULLET::::- Brondfield, Jerry. \"Rockne: The Coach, the Man, the Legend\" (1976, reissued 2009)\nBULLET::::- Carter, Bob, Sports Century Biography:\"Knute Rockne was Notre Dame's master motivator,\", Special to ESPN.com\nBULLET::::- Cavanaugh, Jack. \"The Gipper: George Gipp, Knute Rockne, and the Dramatic Rise of Notre Dame Football\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- Harmon, Daniel E. \"Notre Dame Football\" (The Rosen Publishing Group, 2013).\nBULLET::::- Lindquist, Sherry C. M. \"Memorializing Knute Rockne at the University of Notre Dame: Collegiate Gothic Architecture and Institutional Identity\", \"Winterthur Portfolio\" (Spring 2012), 46#1 pp 1–24. DOI: 10.1086/665045 In JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Lovelace, Delos Wheeler. \"Rockne of Notre Dame\" (1931)\nBULLET::::- \"Norsk Biografisk leksikon\" (NBL)\nBULLET::::- Robinson, Ray. \"Rockne of Notre Dame: The Making of a Football Legend\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- Rockne, Knute K. \" \" Coaching \" \". (Devin-Adair, 1925 ).\nBULLET::::- Sperber, Murray, \"Shake Down the Thunder: The Creation of Notre Dame Football\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- Stewart, Mark. \"The Notre Dame Fighting Irish\" (Norwood House Press, 2011)\n\nBULLET::::- List of teachers portrayed in films\n\nBULLET::::- Knute Rockne letters to Eugene Roberts, MSS 7691 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Brigham Young University\n"}
{"id": "17198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17198", "title": "Kariba Dam", "text": "Kariba Dam\n\nThe Kariba Dam is a double curvature concrete arch dam in the Kariba Gorge of the Zambezi river basin between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The dam stands tall and long. The dam forms Lake Kariba, which extends for and holds of water.\n\nThe double curvature concrete arch dam was designed by Coyne et Bellier and constructed between 1955 and 1959 by Impresit of Italy at a cost of $135,000,000 for the first stage with only the Kariba South power cavern. Final construction and the addition of the Kariba North Power cavern by Mitchell Construction was not completed until 1977 due to largely political problems for a total cost of $480,000,000. During construction, 86 men lost their lives.\n\nThe Kariba Dam supplies of electricity to parts of both Zambia (the Copperbelt) and Zimbabwe and generates per annum. Each country has its own power station on the north and south bank of the dam respectively. The south station belonging to Zimbabwe has been in operation since 1960 and had six generators of capacity each for a total of .\n\nOn November 11, 2013 it was announced by Zimbabwe's Finance Minister, Patrick Chinamasa that capacity at the Zimbabwean (South) Kariba hydropower station would be increased by 300 megawatts. The cost of upgrading the facility has been supported by a $319m loan from China. The deal is a clear example of Zimbabwe's \"Look East\" policy, which was adopted after falling out with Western powers. Construction on the Kariba South expansion began in mid-2014 and was initially expected to be complete in 2019.\n\nIn March 2018, president Emmerson Mnangagwa commissioned the completed expansion of \"Kariba South Hydroelectric Power Station\". The addition of two new turbines, brings to at capacity at this station to . The expansion work was done by Sinohydro, at a cost of US$533 million. Work started in 2014, and was completed in March 2018.\n\nThe north station belonging to Zambia has been in operation since 1976, and has four generators of each for a total of ; work to expand this capacity by an additional to was completed in December 2013. Two additional 180 MW generators were added.\n\nThe Kariba Dam project was planned by the government of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, or Central African Federation (CAF). The CAF was a semi-independent state within the Commonwealth in southern Africa that existed from 1953 to the end of 1963, comprising the former self-governing British colonies of Northern Rhodesia and Southern Rhodesia and the former British protectorate of Nyasaland. Northern Rhodesia had decided earlier in 1953 (before the Federation was founded) to build a dam within its territory, on the Kafue River, a major tributary of the Zambezi. It would have been closer to Zambia's Copperbelt, which was in need of more power. This would have been a cheaper and less grandiose project, with a smaller environmental impact. Southern Rhodesia, the richest of the three, objected to a Kafue dam and insisted that the dam be sited instead at Kariba. Also, the capacity of the Kafue dam was much lower than that at Kariba. Initially the dam was managed and maintained by the Central African Power Corporation. The Kariba Dam is now owned and operated by the Zambezi River Authority, which is jointly and equally owned by Zimbabwe and Zambia.\n\nSince Zambia's independence, two dams have been built on the Kafue River: the Kafue Gorge Dam and the Itezhi-Tezhi Dam.\n\nThe creation of the reservoir forced resettlement of about 57,000 Tonga people living along the Zambezi in both Northern Rhodesia and Southern Rhodesia. \nFrom \"The Shadow of The Dam\", a first-hand account written by David Howarth in the 1960s, referring to the situation in Northern Rhodesia:- \"Everything that a government can do on a meagre budget is being done. Demonstration gardens have been planted, to try to teach the Tonga more sensible methods of agriculture, and to try to find cash crops that they can grow. The hilly land has been plowed in ridge contours to guard against erosion. In Sinazongwe, an irrigated garden has grown a prodigious crop of pawpaws, bananas, oranges, lemons, and vegetables, and shown that the remains of the valley could be made prolific if only money could be found for irrigation. Cooperative markets have been organized, and Tonga are being taught to run them. Enterprising Tonga have been given loans to set themselves up as farmers. More schools have been built than the Tonga ever had before, and most of the Tonga are now within reach of dispensaries and hospitals.\"\n\nThere are many different perspectives on how much resettlement aid was given to the displaced tribe. According to anthropologist Thayer Scudder, who has studied these communities since the late 1950s, \"Today, most are still 'development refugees.' Many live in less-productive, problem-prone areas, some of which have been so seriously degraded within the last generation that they resemble lands on the edge of the Sahara Desert.\"\n\nA 2005 book, \"Deep Water\" by Jacques Leslie focused on the plight of the people resettled by the dam, and found the situation little changed. Kariba remains the worst dam-resettlement disaster in African history.\n\nIn a quest to restore their lives and find justice, the Tonga formed their own advocacy group in 2000, the Basilwizi Trust.\n\nThe Kariba Dam controls 90% of the total runoff of the Zambezi River, thus changing the downstream ecology dramatically.\n\nFrom 1958 to 1961, 'Operation Noah' captured and removed around 6,000 large animals and numerous small ones threatened by the lake's rising waters.\n\nOn 6 February 2008, the BBC reported that heavy rain might lead to a release of water from the dam, which would force 50,000 people downstream to evacuate.\nRising levels led to the opening of the floodgates in March 2010, requiring the evacuation of 130,000 people who lived in the floodplain, and causing concerns that flooding may spread to nearby areas.\n\nIn March 2014, at a conference organized by the Zambezi River Authority, engineers warned that the foundations of the dam had weakened and there was a possibility of dam failure unless repairs were made.\n\nOn 3 October 2014 the BBC reported that “The Kariba Dam is in a dangerous state. Opened in 1959, it was built on a seemingly solid bed of basalt. But, in the past 50 years, the torrents from the spillway have eroded that bedrock, carving a vast crater that has undercut the dam's foundations. … engineers are now warning that without urgent repairs, the whole dam will collapse. If that happened, a tsunami-like wall of water would rip through the Zambezi valley, reaching the Mozambique border within eight hours. The torrent would overwhelm Mozambique's Cahora Bassa Dam and knock out 40% of southern Africa's hydroelectric capacity. Along with the devastation of wildlife in the valley, the Zambezi River Authority estimates that the lives of 3.5 million people are at risk.”\n\nIn June 2015 The Institute of Risk Management South Africa completed a Risk Research Report entitled \"Impact of the failure of the Kariba Dam\". It concluded: \"Whilst we can debate whether the Kariba\nDam will fail, why it might occur and when, there is no doubt that the impact across the region would be devastating.\"\n\nIn January 2016 it was reported that water levels at the dam had dropped to 12% of capacity. Levels fell by , which is just above the minimum operating level for hydropower. Low rainfalls and overuse of the water by the power plants have left the reservoir near empty, raising the prospect that both Zimbabwe and Zambia will face water shortages.\n\nIn July and September 2018 the Lusaka Times reported that work had started relating to the plunge pool and a cracks in the dam wall.\n\nOn 22 February 2019 Bloomberg reported \"Zambia has reduced hydropower production at the Kariba Dam because of rapidly declining water levels\" but \"Zambia doesn’t anticipate power cuts as a result of shortages\". On 5 August that year, the same publication reported that the reservoir was near empty, and that it may have to stop hydropower production.\n\nBULLET::::- Cahora Bassa Dam\nBULLET::::- Nyami Nyami\nBULLET::::- List of largest power stations in the world\nBULLET::::- List of crossings of the Zambezi River\n"}
{"id": "17199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17199", "title": "Keilhauite", "text": "Keilhauite\n\nKeilhauite (also known as \"yttrotitanite\") is a variety of the mineral titanite of a brownish black color, related to titanite in form. It consists chiefly of silicon dioxide, titanium dioxide, calcium oxide, and yttrium oxide. The variety was described in 1841 and named for Baltazar Mathias Keilhau (1797-1858) a Norwegian geologist.\n\nKeilhauite has a chemical formula of (CaTi,Al,Fe,Y)SiO. It differs from titanite only in that calcium is substituted by up to 10 percent (Y,Ce)O.\n"}
{"id": "17202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17202", "title": "Kingsley Amis", "text": "Kingsley Amis\n\nSir Kingsley William Amis, (16 April 1922 – 22 October 1995) was an English novelist, poet, critic, and teacher. He wrote more than 20 novels, six volumes of poetry, a memoir, various short stories, radio and television scripts, along with works of social and literary criticism. According to his biographer, Zachary Leader, Amis was \"the finest English comic novelist of the second half of the twentieth century.\" He is the father of British novelist Martin Amis. In 2008, \"The Times\" ranked him ninth on a list of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945.\n\nKingsley Amis was born on 16 April 1922 in Clapham, south London, the only child of William Robert Amis (1889–1963), a clerk for mustard manufacturer Colman's in the City of London and his wife, Rosa Annie (née Lucas). The Amis grandparents were wealthy, William Amis's father, glass merchant Joseph James Amis, owning a mansion called Barchester at Purley, then part of Surrey. Amis considered J. J. Amis – always called \"Pater\" or \"Dadda\" – \"a jokey, excitable, silly little man,\" whom he \"disliked and was repelled by\". His wife Julia \"was a large, dreadful, hairy-faced creature... whom [Amis] loathed and feared. His mother's parents (her father an enthusiastic collector of books employed at a gentleman's outfitters, being \"the only grandparent [Amis] cared for\") lived at Camberwell. Amis hoped to inherit a decent part of his grandfather's library, but at his death was only permitted by his grandmother to take five volumes, on condition he wrote \"from his grandfather's collection\" on the flyleaf of each.\n\nAmis was raised at Norbury – in his later estimation \"not really a place, it's an expression on a map [–] really I should say I came from Norbury station.\" In 1940, the Amis family moved to Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. He was educated at the City of London School (as his father had been) on a scholarship, after his first year, and in April 1941 was admitted to St John's College, Oxford, also on a scholarship, where he read English. It was there he met Philip Larkin, with whom he formed the most important friendship of his life. While at Oxford in June 1941, Amis joined the Communist Party of Great Britain although he broke with communism in 1956, in view of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's denunciation of Joseph Stalin in his speech \"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences.\"). In July 1942, he was called up for national service and served in the Royal Corps of Signals. He then returned to Oxford in October 1945 to complete his degree. Although he worked hard and earned a first in English in 1947, he had decided by then to give much of his time to writing.\n\nIn 1946 he met Hilary Bardwell. They married in 1948 after she became pregnant with their first child, Philip. Amis initially arranged for her to have a back-street abortion, but changed his mind, fearing for her safety. He became a lecturer in English at the University College of Swansea (1949–1961). Two other children followed: Martin in August 1949 and Sally in January 1954.\n\nDays after Sally's birth, Amis's first novel \"Lucky Jim\" was published to great acclaim; critics felt it had caught the flavour of Britain in the 1950s and ushered in a new style of fiction. By 1972, its impressive sales in Britain had been matched by 1.25 million paperback copies sold in the United States. It was latterly translated into twenty languages, including Polish, Hebrew, Korean, and Serbo-Croat. The novel won the Somerset Maugham Award for fiction and Amis became listed among the writers labelled the Angry Young Men. \"Lucky Jim\" was one of the first British campus novels, setting a precedent for later generations of writers such as Malcolm Bradbury, David Lodge, Tom Sharpe and Howard Jacobson. As a poet, Amis was associated with The Movement.\n\nIn 1958–1959 Amis made the first of two visits to the United States, as Visiting Fellow in Creative Writing at Princeton University and a visiting lecturer in other north-eastern universities. On returning to Britain, he fell into a rut, and he began looking for another post. After 13 years at Swansea, Amis became a fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge in 1961, but regretted the move within a year, finding Cambridge an academic and social disappointment, and resigned in 1963, intent on moving to Majorca, although he actually moved no further than London.\n\nIn 1963, Hilary discovered that Amis was having a love affair with the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard. Hilary and Amis separated in August and he went to live with Howard, divorcing Hilary in 1965 and marrying Howard the same year. In 1968 he moved with Howard to Lemmons, a house in Barnet, north London. She and Amis divorced in 1983.\n\nIn his last years, Amis shared a house with his first wife Hilary and her third husband, Alastair Boyd, 7th Baron Kilmarnock. Martin wrote the memoir \"Experience\" about the life, charm, and decline of his father.\n\nAmis was knighted in 1990. In August 1995 he fell, suffering a suspected stroke. After apparently recovering, he worsened, was re-admitted to hospital, and died on 22 October 1995 at St Pancras Hospital, London. He was cremated; his ashes rest at Golders Green Crematorium.\n\nAmis is widely known as a comic novelist of life in mid to late 20th-century Britain, but his literary work included many genres – poetry, essays and criticism, short stories, food and drink writing, anthologies, and a number of novels in genres such as science fiction and mystery. His career initially developed in a pattern which was the inverse of that of his close friend Philip Larkin. Before becoming known as a poet, Larkin had published two novels; Amis, on the other hand, originally wished to be a poet and turned to writing novels only after publishing several volumes of verse. He continued throughout his career to write poetry, which is known for its typically straightforward and accessible style, yet often masks a nuance of thought, for example, in \"Bookshop Idyll\" or \"Against Romanticism\", just as it does in his novels.\n\nAmis's famous first novel \"Lucky Jim\" (1954) satirises the high-brow academic set of an unnamed university, through the eyes of its protagonist, Jim Dixon, a struggling young lecturer of history. It was widely perceived as part of the Angry Young Men movement of the 1950s, which reacted against the stultification of conventional British life, although Amis never encouraged this interpretation. Amis's other novels of the 1950s and early 1960s likewise depict situations from contemporary British life, often drawn from his own experience. \"That Uncertain Feeling\" (1955) features a young provincial librarian (perhaps with an eye to Larkin working as a librarian in Hull) and his temptation to adultery. \"I Like It Here\" (1958) presents a contemptuous view of \"abroad\", following from the author's own travels on the Continent with a young family. \"Take a Girl Like You\" (1960) steps away from the immediately autobiographical, but remains grounded in the concerns of sex and love in ordinary modern life, tracing the courtship and ultimate seduction of the heroine Jenny Bunn by a young schoolmaster, Patrick Standish.\n\nWith \"The Anti-Death League\" (1966), Amis begins to show some of the experimentation – in content, if not with style – which would mark much of his work in the 1960s and 1970s. His departure from the strict realism of his early comedic novels is not so abrupt as might first appear. He had been avidly reading science fiction since a boy and developed that interest in the Christian Gauss Lectures of 1958, while visiting Princeton University. These were published in that year as \"New Maps of Hell: A Survey of Science Fiction\". They give a serious, yet light-handed treatment of what the genre had to say about man and society. Amis was especially keen on the dystopian works of Frederik Pohl and C. M. Kornbluth, and in \"New Maps of Hell\" coined the term \"comic inferno\" to describe a type of humorous dystopia, particularly as exemplified in the works of Robert Sheckley. Amis further displayed his devotion to the genre in editing, with the Sovietologist Robert Conquest, the science-fiction anthology series \"Spectrum\" I–V, which drew heavily upon 1950s numbers of the magazine \"Astounding Science Fiction\".\n\nThough not explicitly science fiction, \"The Anti-Death League\" takes liberties with reality not found in Amis's earlier novels, and introduces a speculative bent that would continue to develop in others of his genre novels, such as \"The Green Man\" (1969) (mystery/horror) and \"The Alteration\" (1976) (alternative history). Much of this speculation concerned the improbability of the existence of any benevolent deity involved in human affairs. In \"The Anti-Death League\", \"The Green Man\", \"The Alteration\" and elsewhere, including poems such as \"The Huge Artifice: an interim assessment\" and \"New Approach Needed\", Amis showed frustration with a God who could lace the world with cruelty and injustice, and championed the preservation of ordinary human happiness – in family, in friendships, in physical pleasure – against the demands of any cosmological scheme. The matter of Amis's religious views is perhaps summed up in a response, reported in his \"Memoirs\", to the Russian poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko's question, in his broken English: \"You atheist?\" Amis replied, \"It's more that I hate Him.\"\n\nDuring this time, Amis had not turned completely away from the comedic realism of \"Lucky Jim\" and \"Take a Girl Like You\". \"I Want It Now\" (1968) and \"Girl, 20\" (1971) both depict the \"swinging\" atmosphere of London in the late 1960s, in which Amis certainly participated, though neither book is strictly autobiographical. \"Girl, 20\", for instance, is framed in the world of classical (and pop) music, of which Amis was not a part — the book's relatively impressive command of musical terminology and opinion shows both Amis's amateur devotion to music and the almost journalistic capacity of his intelligence to take hold of a subject which interested him. That intelligence is similarly on display in, for instance, the presentation of ecclesiastical matters in \"The Alteration\", when Amis was neither a Roman Catholic nor for that matter a devotee of any church.\n\nThroughout the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, Amis regularly produced essays and criticism, principally for periodical publication. Some were collected in 1968 into \"What Became of Jane Austen? and Other Essays\", in which Amis's wit and literary and social opinions were displayed over books such as Colin Wilson's \"The Outsider\" (panned), Iris Murdoch's début novel \"Under the Net\" (praised), and William Empson's \"Milton's God\" (inclined to agreement). Amis's opinions on books and people tended to appear, and often were conservative, and yet, as the title essay of the collection shows, he was not merely reverent of \"the classics\" and of traditional morals, but more disposed to exercise his own rather independent judgement in all things.\n\nAmis became associated with Ian Fleming's James Bond novels, which he admired, in the late 1960s, when he began composing critical works connected with the fictional spy, either under a pseudonym or uncredited. In 1965, he wrote the popular \"James Bond Dossier\" under his own name. That same year, he wrote \"The Book of Bond, or, Every Man His Own 007\", a tongue-in-cheek how-to manual about being a sophisticated spy, under the pseudonym \"Lt Col. William ('Bill') Tanner\", Tanner being M's Chief of Staff in many of Fleming's Bond novels. In 1968 Amis wrote \"Colonel Sun\", which was published under the pseudonym \"Robert Markham\".\n\nAmis's literary style and tone changed significantly after 1970, with the possible exception of \"The Old Devils\", a Booker Prize winner. Several critics accused him of being old fashioned and misogynistic. His \"Stanley and the Women\", an exploration of social sanity, could be said to instance these traits. Others said that his output lacked the humanity, wit and compassion of earlier work.\n\nThis period also saw Amis as an anthologist displaying a wide knowledge of all kinds of English poetry. \"The New Oxford Book of Light Verse\" (1978), which he edited, was a revision of an original volume done by W. H. Auden. Amis took it in a markedly new direction: Auden had interpreted light verse to include \"low\" verse of working-class or lower-class origin, regardless of subject matter, while Amis defined light verse as essentially light in tone, though not necessarily simple in composition. \"The Amis Anthology\" (1988), a personal selection of his favourite poems, grew out of his work for a London newspaper, in which he selected a poem a day and gave it a brief introduction.\n\nAmis was shortlisted for the Booker Prize three times – for \"Ending Up\" (1974) and \"Jake's Thing\" (1978), and finally, winning the prize, for \"The Old Devils\" in 1986.\n\nIn 2008, \"The Times\" ranked Kingsley Amis 13th on its list of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945.\n\nAs a young man at Oxford, Amis joined the Communist Party. He left in 1956. He later described this stage of his political life as \"the callow Marxist phase that seemed almost compulsory in Oxford\". Amis remained nominally on the Left for some time after the war, declaring in the 1950s that he would always vote for the Labour Party.\n\nBut he eventually moved further right, a development he discussed in the essay \"Why Lucky Jim Turned Right\" (1967); his conservatism and anti-communism can be seen in such later works of his as the dystopian novel \"Russian Hide and Seek\" (1980). In 1967, Amis, Robert Conquest, John Braine and several other authors signed a letter to \"The Times\" entitled \"Backing for U.S. Policies in Vietnam\", supporting the US government in the Vietnam War. He spoke at the Adam Smith Institute, arguing against government subsidy to the arts.\n\nAmis was by his own admission and as revealed by his biographers a serial adulterer for much of his life. This was one of the main contributory factors in the breakdown of his first marriage. A famous photograph of a sleeping Amis on a Yugoslav beach shows the slogan (written by wife Hilly) on his back \"1 Fat Englishman – I fuck anything\".\n\nIn one of his memoirs, Amis wrote: \"Now and then I become conscious of having the reputation of being one of the great drinkers, if not one of the great drunks, of our time\". He suggests that this is the result of a naïve tendency on the part of his readers to apply the behaviour of his characters to himself. This was disingenuous; the fact was that he enjoyed drink, and spent a good deal of his time in pubs. Hilary Rubinstein, who accepted \"Lucky Jim\" for publication at Victor Gollancz, commented: \"I doubted whether Jim Dixon would have gone to the pub and drunk ten pints of beer... I didn't know Kingsley very well, you see.\" Clive James comments: \"All on his own, he had the weekly drinks bill of a whole table at the Garrick Club even before he was elected. After he was, he would get so tight there that he could barely make it to the taxi.\" Amis was, however, adamant in his belief that inspiration did not come from a bottle: \"Whatever part drink may play in the writer's life, it must play none in his or her work.\" That this was certainly the case is attested to by Amis's highly disciplined approach to writing. For \"many years\" Amis imposed a rigorous daily schedule upon himself in which writing and drinking were strictly segregated. Mornings were devoted to writing with a minimum daily output of 500 words. The drinking would only begin around lunchtime, when this output had been achieved. Amis's prodigious quantity of work would have been impossible without such self-discipline.\n\nYet according to Clive James, Amis reached a turning point when his drinking ceased to be social, and became a way of dulling his remorse and regret at his behaviour toward Hilly. \"Amis had turned against himself deliberately... it seems fair to guess that the troubled grandee came to disapprove of his own conduct.\" His friend Christopher Hitchens said: \"The booze got to him in the end, and robbed him of his wit and charm as well as of his health.\"\n\nAmis had a complex relationship with anti-Semitism, which he sometimes expressed but also disliked and opposed.\n\nHe occasionally speculated on the historically received, and commonly accepted stereotypes attributed to Jewish character. Anti-Semitism was sometimes present in his conversations and letters to friends and associates: \"The great Jewish vice is glibness, fluency... also possibly just bullshit, as in Marx, Freud, Marcuse.\" Or, \"Chaplin is a horse's arse. He's a Jeeeew you see, like the Marx Brothers, like Danny Kaye.\" (Chaplin was not, in fact, Jewish.) It is a minor theme in his novel about a paranoid schizophrenic, \"Stanley and the Women\". As for the cultural complexion of America, Amis had this to say: \"I've finally worked out why I don't like Americans... Because everyone there is either a Jew or a hick.\" Amis himself described his anti-Semitism as being \"very mild\".\n\nAmis's first marriage, of fifteen years, was to Hilary Bardwell, daughter of a civil servant, by whom he had two sons and one daughter: Philip Amis, a graphics designer; Martin Amis, a novelist; and Sally Amis, who died in 2000.\n\nAmis was married a second time, to the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard from 1965 to 1983, with whom he had no children.\n\nAt the end of his second marriage, he went to live with his ex-wife Hilary and her third husband, in a deal brokered by their two sons Philip and Martin, so that he could be cared for until his death.\n\nBULLET::::- 1947 \"Bright November\"\nBULLET::::- 1953 \"A Frame of Mind\"\nBULLET::::- 1954 \"Poems: Fantasy Portraits\"\nBULLET::::- 1956 \"A Case of Samples: Poems 1946–1956\"\nBULLET::::- 1962 \"The Evans County\"\nBULLET::::- 1968 \"A Look Round the Estate: Poems, 1957–1967\"\nBULLET::::- 1979 \"Collected Poems 1944–78\"\n\nBULLET::::- Novels\nBULLET::::- c. 1948 \"The Legacy\" (unpublished)\nBULLET::::- 1954 \"Lucky Jim\"\nBULLET::::- 1955 \"That Uncertain Feeling\"\nBULLET::::- 1958 \"I Like It Here\"\nBULLET::::- 1960 \"Take a Girl Like You\"\nBULLET::::- 1963 \"One Fat Englishman\"\nBULLET::::- 1965 \"The Egyptologists\" (with Robert Conquest)\nBULLET::::- 1966 \"The Anti-Death League\"\nBULLET::::- 1968 \"Colonel Sun: a James Bond Adventure\" (pseud. Robert Markham)\nBULLET::::- 1968 \"I Want It Now\"\nBULLET::::- 1969 \"The Green Man\"\nBULLET::::- 1971 \"Girl, 20\"\nBULLET::::- 1973 \"The Riverside Villas Murder\"\nBULLET::::- 1974 \"Ending Up\"\nBULLET::::- 1975 \"The Crime of the Century\"\nBULLET::::- 1976 \"The Alteration\"\nBULLET::::- 1978 \"Jake's Thing\"\nBULLET::::- 1980 \"Russian Hide-and-Seek\"\nBULLET::::- 1984 \"Stanley and the Women\"\nBULLET::::- 1986 \"The Old Devils\"\nBULLET::::- 1988 \"Difficulties with Girls\"\nBULLET::::- 1990 \"The Folks That Live on the Hill\"\nBULLET::::- 1991 \"We Are All Guilty\"\nBULLET::::- 1992 \"The Russian Girl\"\nBULLET::::- 1994 \"You Can't Do Both\"\nBULLET::::- 1995 \"The Biographer's Moustache\"\nBULLET::::- c. 1995 \"Black and White\" (unfinished)\nBULLET::::- Short fiction collections\nBULLET::::- 1962 \"My Enemy's Enemy\"\nBULLET::::- 1980 \"Collected Short Stories\"\nBULLET::::- 1991 \"Mr Barrett's Secret and Other Stories\"\nBULLET::::- Other short fiction\nBULLET::::- 1960 \"Hemingway in Space\" (short story), \"Punch\" December 1960\n\nBULLET::::- 1957 \"Socialism and the Intellectuals\", a Fabian Society pamphlet\nBULLET::::- 1960 \"New Maps of Hell: A Survey of Science Fiction\"\nBULLET::::- 1965 \"The James Bond Dossier\"\nBULLET::::- 1965 \"The Book of Bond, or Every Man His Own 007\" (pseud. Lt.-Col William ('Bill') Tanner)\nBULLET::::- 1970 \"What Became of Jane Austen?, and Other Questions\"\nBULLET::::- 1972 \"On Drink\"\nBULLET::::- 1974 \"Rudyard Kipling and His World\"\nBULLET::::- 1983 \"Everyday Drinking\"\nBULLET::::- 1984 \"How's Your Glass?\"\nBULLET::::- 1990 \"The Amis Collection\"\nBULLET::::- 1991 \"Memoirs\"\nBULLET::::- 1997 \"The King's English: A Guide to Modern Usage\" (name in part a pun as he was sometimes called \"Kingers\" or \"The King\" by friends and family, as told by his son Martin in his memoir \"Experience\")\nBULLET::::- 2001 \"The Letters of Kingsley Amis\", Edited by Zachary Leader\nBULLET::::- 2008 \"Everyday Drinking: The Distilled Kingsley Amis\", Introduction by Christopher Hitchens (an omnibus edition of \"On Drink\", \"Everyday Drinking\" and \"How's Your Glass?\")\n\nBULLET::::- 1967 \"Spectrum V : a fifth science fiction anthology\" (ed. with Robert Conquest)\nBULLET::::- 1978 \"The New Oxford Book of Light Verse\" (ed.)\nRichard Aldington – Kenneth Allott – Matthew Arnold – Kenneth Ashley – W. H. Auden – William Barnes – Oliver Bayley – Hilaire Belloc – John Betjeman – Laurence Binyon – William Blake – Edmund Blunden – Rupert Brooke – Robert Browning – Robert Burns – Thomas Campbell – Thomas Campion – G. K. Chesterton – Hartley Coleridge – Robert Conquest – W. J. Cory – John Davidson – Donald Davie – C. Day Lewis – Walter de la Mare – Ernest Dowson – Michael Drayton – Lawrence Durrell – Jean Elliot – George Farewell – James Elroy Flecker – Thomas Ford – Roy Fuller – Robert Graves – Thomas Gray – Fulke Greville – Heath – Reginald Heber – Felicia Dorothea Hemans – W. E. Henley – George Herbert – Ralph Hodgson – Thomas Hood – Teresa Hooley – Gerard Manley Hopkins – A. E. Housman – Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey – T. E. Hulme – Leigh Hunt – Elizabeth Jennings – Samuel Johnson – John Keats – Henry King – Charles Kingsley – Rudyard Kipling – Philip Larkin – Henry Wadsworth Longfellow – John Lydgate – H. F. Lyte – Louis MacNeice – Andrew Marvell – John Masefield – Alice Meynell – Harold Monro – William Morris – Edwin Muir – Henry Newbolt – Alfred Noyes – Wilfred Owen – Thomas Love Peacock – George Peele – Alexander Pope – Frederic Prokosch – Walter Ralegh – John Crowe Ransom – Christina Rossetti – Siegfried Sassoon – John Skelton – Robert Southey – Edmund Spenser – Sir John Squire – Robert Louis Stevenson – John Suckling – Algernon Charles Swinburne – George Szirtes – Alfred, Lord Tennyson – Dylan Thomas – Edward Thomas – R. S. Thomas – Francis Thompson – Anthony Thwaite – Chidiock Tichborne – Aurelian Townsend – W. J. Turner – Oscar Wilde – John Wilmot, Lord Rochester – Roger Woddis – Charles Wolfe – William Wordsworth – William Butler Yeats – Andrew Young\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kingsley Amis's Troublesome Fun\", Michael Dirda. The Chronicle of Higher Education 22 June 2007. B9-B11.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Kingsley Amis in the Great Tradition and in Our Time,\" by Robert H. Bell, Williams College. Introduction to \"Critical Essays on Kingsley Amis\", ed. Robert H. Bell, New York: G.K. Hall, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Guardian Books \"Author Page\", with profile and links to further articles.\nBULLET::::- \"The Serious Comedian\", by Tom Chatfield, Prospect Magazine, a review of Zachary Leader's biography.\nBULLET::::- \"The old devil\" – article on Amis by Mark Steyn in The New Criterion\nBULLET::::- The Amis Inheritance—Profile on Martin and Kingsley Amis by Charles McGrath from New York Times Magazine (22 April 2007).\nBULLET::::- Kingsley Amis Collection at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin.\nBULLET::::- Kingsley Amis Literary Estate\n"}
{"id": "17204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17204", "title": "Kana", "text": "Kana\n\nKatakana, with a few additions, are also used to write Ainu. \n\nTaiwanese kana were used in Taiwanese Hokkien as glosses (\"furigana\") for Chinese characters in Taiwan under Japanese rule.\n\nEach kana character (syllabogram) corresponds to one sound in the Japanese language. Apart from the five vowels, this is always CV (consonant onset with vowel nucleus), such as \"ka\", \"ki\", etc., or V (vowel), such as \"a\", \"i\", etc., with the sole exception of the C grapheme for nasal codas usually romanised as \"n\". This structure has led some scholars to label the system \"moraic\" instead of \"syllabic\", because it requires the combination of two syllabograms to represent a CVC syllable with coda (i.e. CV\"n\", CV\"m\", CV\"ng\"), a CVV syllable with complex nucleus (i.e. multiple or expressively long vowels), or a CCV syllable with complex onset (i.e. including a glide, C\"y\"V, C\"w\"V).\n\nDue to the limited number of phonemes in Japanese, as well as the relatively rigid syllable structure, the kana system is a very accurate representation of spoken Japanese.\n\nThe following table reads, in gojūon order, as \"a\", \"i\", \"u\", \"e\", \"o\" (down first column), then \"ka\", \"ki\", \"ku\", \"ke\", \"ko\" (down second column), and so on. \"n\" appears on its own at the end. Asterisks mark unused combinations.\n+Japanese kana: hiragana (left) and katakana (right)\n!\n!title=\"single vowels\" –\n!\"k\"\n!\"s\"\n!\"t\"\n!\"n\"\n!\"h\"\n!\"m\"\n!\"y\"\n!\"r\"\n!\"w\"\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"a\"\n\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"i\"\n\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"u\"\n\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"e\"\n\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"o\"\n\nBULLET::::- There are presently no kana for \"ye\", \"yi\" or \"wu\", as corresponding syllables do not occur natively in modern Japanese.\nBULLET::::- The (\"ye\") sound is believed to have existed in pre-Classical Japanese, mostly before the advent of kana, and can be represented by the man'yōgana kanji 江. There was an archaic Hiragana () derived from the man'yōgana \"ye\" kanji 江, which is encoded into Unicode at code point U+1B001 (𛀁), but it is not widely supported. It is believed that \"e\" and \"ye\" become both pronounced mostly as \"ye\", and that the pronunciation \"e\" surpassed \"ye\" during the Edo period. A hiragana \"we\", ゑ, which also came to be pronounced as (\"ye\"), as demonstrated by 17th century-era European sources, still exists but is considered archaic, and it was eliminated from official orthography in 1946. In modern orthography, if necessary, [je] (\"ye\") may be written as いぇ (イェ); however, this usage is limited and nonstandard.\nBULLET::::- The modern Katakana \"e\", エ, derives from the man'yōgana 江, originally pronounced \"ye\"; a \"Katakana letter Archaic E\" () derived from the man'yōgana 衣 (\"e\") is encoded into Unicode at code point U+1B000 (𛀀), due to being used for that purpose in scholarly works on classical Japanese.\nBULLET::::- Some gojūon tables published during the 19th century list additional Katakana in the \"ye\" (), \"wu\" () and \"yi\" () positions. These are not presently used, and the latter two sounds never existed in Japanese. They do not presently exist in Unicode. These sources also list (Unicode U+1B006, 𛀆) in the Hiragana \"yi\" position, and in the \"ye\" position.\nBULLET::::- While no longer part of standard Japanese orthography, \"wi\" and \"we\" are sometimes used stylistically, as in ウヰスキー for \"whisky\" and ヱビス or ゑびす for Japanese kami Ebisu, and Yebisu, a brand of beer named after Ebisu. Hiragana \"wi\" and \"we\" are still used in certain Okinawan scripts, while katakana \"wi\" and \"we\" are still used in Ainu.\nBULLET::::- \"wo\" is preserved only in a single use, as a grammatical particle, normally written in hiragana.\nBULLET::::- \"si\", \"ti\", \"tu\", \"hu\", \"wi\", \"we\" and \"wo\" are often romanized respectively as \"shi\", \"chi\", \"tsu\", \"fu\", \"i\", \"e\" and \"o\" instead, according to contemporary pronunciation.\n\nSyllables beginning with the voiced consonants [g], [z], [d] and [b] are spelled with kana from the corresponding unvoiced columns (\"k\", \"s\", \"t\" and \"h\") and the voicing mark, \"dakuten\". Syllables beginning with [p] are spelled with kana from the \"h\" column and the half-voicing mark, \"handakuten\".\n\n+Dakuten diacritic marks, hiragana (left) and katakana (right)\n!\"g\"\n!\"z\"\n!\"d\"\n!\"b\"\n!\"p\"\n!\"ng\"\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"a\"\nが ガ\nざ ザ\nだ ダ\nば バ\nぱ パ\nか゚ カ゚\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"i\"\nぎ ギ\nじ ジ\nぢ ヂ\nび ビ\nぴ ピ\nき゚ キ゚\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"u\"\nぐ グ\nず ズ\nづ ヅ\nぶ ブ\nぷ プ\nく゚ ク゚\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"e\"\nげ ゲ\nぜ ゼ\nで デ\nべ ベ\nぺ ペ\nけ゚ ケ゚\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"o\"\nご ゴ\nぞ ゾ\nど ド\nぼ ボ\nぽ ポ\nこ゚ コ゚\nBULLET::::- Note that the か゚, カ゚ and remaining entries in the rightmost column, though they exist, are not used in standard Japanese orthography.\nBULLET::::- \"zi\", \"di\", and \"du\" are often transcribed into English as \"ji\", \"ji\", and \"zu\" instead, respectively, according to contemporary pronunciation.\nBULLET::::- Usually, [va], [vi], [vu], [ve], [vo] are represented respectively by バ[ba], ビ[bi], ブ[bu], ベ[be], and ボ[bo], for example, in loanwords such as バイオリン (\"baiorin\" \"violin\"), but (less usually) the distinction can be preserved by using ヴァ, ヴィ, ヴ, ヴェ, and ヴォ. Note that ヴ did not have a JIS-encoded Hiragana form (ゔ) until JIS X 0213, meaning that many Shift JIS flavours (including the Windows and HTML5 version) can only represent it as a katakana, although Unicode supports both.\n\nSyllables beginning with palatalized consonants are spelled with one of the seven consonantal kana from the \"i\" row followed by small \"ya\", \"yu\" or \"yo\". These digraphs are called yōon.\n\n+Yōon digraphs, hiragana\n!\"k\"\n!\"s\"\n!\"t\"\n!\"n\"\n!\"h\"\n!\"m\"\n!\"r\"\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"ya\"\nきゃ\nしゃ\nちゃ\nにゃ\nひゃ\nみゃ\nりゃ\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"yu\"\nきゅ\nしゅ\nちゅ\nにゅ\nひゅ\nみゅ\nりゅ\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"yo\"\nきょ\nしょ\nちょ\nにょ\nひょ\nみょ\nりょ\nBULLET::::- There are no digraphs for the semivowel \"y\" and \"w\" columns.\nBULLET::::- The digraphs are usually transcribed with three letters, leaving out the \"i\": C\"y\"V. For example, きゃ is transcribed as \"kya\".\nBULLET::::- \"si\"+\"y\"* and \"ti\"+\"y\"* are often transcribed \"sh*\" and \"ch*\" instead of \"sy*\" and \"ty*\". For example, しゃ is transcribed as \"sha\".\nBULLET::::- In earlier Japanese, digraphs could also be formed with \"w\"-kana. Although obsolete in modern Japanese, the digraphs くゎ (/kʷa/) and くゐ/くうぃ(/kʷi/), are still used in certain Okinawan orthographies. In addition, the kana え can be used in Okinawan to form the digraph くぇ, which represents the /kʷe/ sound.\n\n+Yōon digraphs, hiragana\n!\"g\"\n!\"j\"\n!\"b\"\n!\"p\"\n!\"ng\"\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"ya\"\nぎゃ\nじゃ\nびゃ\nぴゃ\nき゚ゃ\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"yu\"\nぎゅ\nじゅ\nびゅ\nぴゅ\nき゚ゅ\n!style=\"font-size:0.5em\"\"yo\"\nぎょ\nじょ\nびょ\nぴょ\nき゚ょ\nBULLET::::- Note that the き゚ゃ, き゚ゅ and remaining entries in the rightmost column, though they exist, are not used in standard Japanese orthography.\nBULLET::::- \"jya\", \"jyu\", and \"jyo\" are often transcribed into English as \"ja\", \"ju\", and \"jo\" instead, respectively, according to contemporary pronunciation.\n\nThe difference in usage between hiragana and katakana is stylistic. Usually, hiragana is the default syllabary, and katakana is used in certain special cases.\n\nHiragana is used to write native Japanese words with no kanji representation (or whose kanji is thought obscure or difficult), as well as grammatical elements such as particles and inflections (okurigana).\n\nToday katakana is most commonly used to write words of foreign origin that do not have kanji representations, as well as foreign personal and place names. Katakana is also used to represent onomatopoeia and interjections, emphasis, technical and scientific terms, transcriptions of the Sino-Japanese readings of kanji, and some corporate branding.\n\nKana can be written in small form above or next to lesser-known kanji in order to show pronunciation; this is called furigana. Furigana is used most widely in children's or learners' books. Literature for young children who do not yet know kanji may dispense with it altogether and instead use hiragana combined with spaces.\n\nThe first kana was a system called \"man'yōgana,\" a set of kanji used solely for their phonetic values, much as Chinese uses characters for their phonetic values in foreign loanwords (especially proper nouns) today. \"Man'yōshū\", a poetry anthology assembled in 759, is written in this early script. Hiragana developed as a distinct script from cursive \"man'yōgana\", whereas katakana developed from abbreviated parts of regular script \"man'yōgana\" as a glossing system to add readings or explanations to Buddhist sutras.\n\nKana is traditionally said to have been invented by the Buddhist priest Kūkai in the ninth century. Kūkai certainly brought the Siddhaṃ script of India home on his return from China in 806; his interest in the sacred aspects of speech and writing led him to the conclusion that Japanese would be better represented by a phonetic alphabet than by the kanji which had been used up to that point. The modern arrangement of kana reflects that of Siddhaṃ, but the traditional \"iroha\" arrangement follows a poem which uses each kana once.\n\nThe present set of kana was codified in 1900, and rules for their usage in 1946.\n\n+ Identical man’yōgana roots of katakana and hiragana glyphs\n! \n! a !! i !! u !! e !! o !! =:≠\n! - \n! k \n! s \n! t \n! n \n! h \n! m \n! y \n! r \n! w \n! n\n\n6:45:46:47:29:133:15\n\nKana are the basis for collation in Japanese. They are taken in the order given by the \"gojūon\" (あ い う え お ... わ を ん), though iroha (い ろ は に ほ へ と ... せ す (ん)) ordering is used for enumeration in some circumstances. Dictionaries differ in the sequence order for long/short vowel distinction, small \"tsu\" and diacritics. As Japanese does not use word spaces (except as a tool for children), there can be no word-by-word collation; all collation is kana-by-kana.\n\nThe hiragana range in Unicode is U+3040 ... U+309F, and the katakana range is U+30A0 ... U+30FF. The obsolete and rare characters (\"wi\" and \"we\") also have their proper code points.\n\nCharacters U+3095 and U+3096 are hiragana small \"ka\" and small \"ke\", respectively. U+30F5 and U+30F6 are their katakana equivalents. Characters U+3099 and U+309A are combining dakuten and handakuten, which correspond to the spacing characters U+309B and U+309C. U+309D is the hiragana iteration mark, used to repeat a previous hiragana. U+309E is the voiced hiragana iteration mark, which stands in for the previous hiragana but with the consonant voiced (\"k\" becomes \"g\", \"h\" becomes \"b\", etc.). U+30FD and U+30FE are the katakana iteration marks. U+309F is a ligature of \"yori\" (より) sometimes used in vertical writing. U+30FF is a ligature of \"koto\" (コト), also found in vertical writing.\n\nAdditionally, there are halfwidth equivalents to the standard fullwidth katakana. These are encoded within the Halfwidth and Fullwidth Forms block (U+FF00–U+FFEF), starting at U+FF65 and ending at U+FF9F (characters U+FF61–U+FF64 are halfwidth punctuation marks):\nThere is also a small \"Katakana Phonetic Extensions\" range (U+31F0 ... U+31FF), which includes some additional small kana characters for writing the Ainu language. Further small kana characters are present in the \"Small Kana Extension\" block.\n\nUnicode also includes \"Katakana letter archaic E\" (U+1B000), as well as 255 archaic Hiragana, in the Kana Supplement block. It also includes a further 31 archaic Hiragana in the Kana Extended-A block.\n\nBULLET::::- Gojūon\nBULLET::::- Hentaigana\nBULLET::::- Historical kana orthography\nBULLET::::- Man'yōgana\nBULLET::::- Romanization of Japanese\nBULLET::::- Transliteration and Transcription (linguistics)\n\nBULLET::::- Hiragana & katakana chart and writing practice sheet\nBULLET::::- Practice pronunciation and stroke order of Kana\nBULLET::::- Origin of Hiragana\nBULLET::::- Origin of Katakana\nBULLET::::- Kana web translator - Transliterate Kana to Rōmaji\nBULLET::::- Kana Copybook (PDF)\n"}
{"id": "17206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17206", "title": "KMS", "text": "KMS\n\nKMS may refer to:.\n\nBULLET::::- National Survey and Cadastre of Denmark, or \"Kort & Matrikelstyrelsen\"\n\nBULLET::::- Kabuki makeup syndrome\n\nBULLET::::- Kernel mode-setting, of computer display\nBULLET::::- KMS driver, Linux kernel device driver\nBULLET::::- KMS (hypertext), the Knowledge Management System hypertext system\nBULLET::::- Key Management Service, a Microsoft technology\nBULLET::::- Key management system in cryptography\nBULLET::::- Kwangmyŏngsŏng program of North Korean satellites, prefix like KMS-4\n\nBULLET::::- KMS state in quantum thermodynamics\n\n"}
{"id": "17209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17209", "title": "Knights of the Lambda Calculus", "text": "Knights of the Lambda Calculus\n\nThe Knights of the Lambda Calculus is a semi-fictional organization of expert Lisp and Scheme hackers. The name refers to the lambda calculus, a mathematical formalism invented by Alonzo Church, with which Lisp is intimately connected, and references the Knights Templar.\n\nThere is no actual organization that goes by the name \"Knights of the Lambda Calculus\"; it mostly only exists as a hacker culture in-joke. The concept most likely originated at MIT. For example, in the Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs video lectures, Gerald Jay Sussman presents the audience with the button, saying they are now members of this special group. However, according to the Jargon File, a \"well-known LISPer\" has been known to give out buttons with Knights insignia on them, and some people have claimed to have membership in the Knights.\n\nA group that evolved from or is similar to them, called \"The Knights of Eastern Calculus\", make a major appearance in the anime series \"Serial Experiments Lain\". References to MIT professors and other American computer scientists are prominent in Episode 11 of the series. At one point in the anime, Lain is seen with code displayed on her handheld device that appears to be Lisp.\n"}
{"id": "17210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17210", "title": "Knowbot", "text": "Knowbot\n\nA knowbot is a kind of bot that collects information by automatically gathering certain specified information from web sites.\n\nKNOWBOT is the acronym for Knowledge-Based Object Technology. This term, used as early as 1988 and known to have been implemented by December 1989 at the latest describes computer-based objects developed for collecting and storing specific information, in order to use that information to accomplish a specific task, and to enable sharing that information with other objects or processes. An early use of knowbots was to provide a computerized assistant to users to complete redundant detailed tasks without a need to train the user in computer technology.\n\nBULLET::::- Knowbot Information Service\nBULLET::::- Web crawler, a program that visits Web sites and gathers information according to some \"generalized\" criteria (opposed to user-specified criteria) and subsequently indexes it\n"}
{"id": "17211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17211", "title": "Knuth", "text": "Knuth\n\nKnuth is a name of Nordic origin. \"Knuth\" may refer to:\n\nAs a surname:\n\nBULLET::::- Donald Knuth, American computer scientist; whence:\nBULLET::::- \"The Art of Computer Programming\", often referred to by the author's name\nBULLET::::- Knuth's Algorithm X\nBULLET::::- 21656 Knuth, Asteroid\nBULLET::::- Knuth–Morris–Pratt algorithm\nBULLET::::- Fisher–Yates shuffle, also known as the Knuth Shuffle, an algorithm for randomly permuting sets\nBULLET::::- Knuth Prize, a prize for outstanding contributions to the foundations of computer science\nBULLET::::- Knuth reward check\nBULLET::::- Knuth's up-arrow notation, a method of notation of very large integers\nBULLET::::- Eigil Knuth, Danish explorer and archaeologist\nBULLET::::- Frederik Marcus Knuth, Danish taxonomist\nBULLET::::- Jeff Knuth, Queensland politician\nBULLET::::- Kate Knuth, US politician\nBULLET::::- Paul Knuth, German botanist\nBULLET::::- Reinhard Gustav Paul Knuth, German botanist\nBULLET::::- Shane Knuth, Queensland politician\nBULLET::::- Shay Knuth, \"Playboy\"'s Playmate of the Month for September 1969\nBULLET::::- \"Jason Knuth\", the subject of the dedication of Silver Session for Jason Knuth, a 1998 EP by Sonic Youth\n\nBULLET::::- Knut (disambiguation).\n"}
{"id": "17212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17212", "title": "KOMPILER", "text": "KOMPILER\n\nIn computing, the KOMPILER was one of the first language compilation and runtime systems for International Business Machines' IBM 701, the fastest commercial U.S. computer available in 1955.\n\nInformation on KOMPILER is listed on page 16 of Volume 2, Number 5 (May 1959) of the \"Communications of the ACM\". Known versions are KOMPILER 2 for IBM 701 and KOMPILER 3 for the IBM 704. KOMPILER was eventually replaced by a Fortran compiler on the IBM 704.\n\nBULLET::::- PACT (compiler)\n\nBULLET::::- HOPL: Kompiler.\n"}
{"id": "17213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17213", "title": "KornShell", "text": "KornShell\n\nKornShell (codice_1) is a Unix shell which was developed by David Korn at Bell Labs in the early 1980s and announced at USENIX on July 14, 1983. The initial development was based on Bourne shell source code. Other early contributors were Bell Labs developers Mike Veach and Pat Sullivan, who wrote the Emacs and vi-style line editing modes' code, respectively. KornShell is backward-compatible with the Bourne shell and includes many features of the C shell, inspired by the requests of Bell Labs users.\n\nKornShell complies with POSIX.2, Shell and Utilities, Command Interpreter (IEEE Std 1003.2-1992.) Major differences between KornShell and the traditional Bourne shell include:\nBULLET::::- Job control, command aliasing, and command history designed after the corresponding C shell features. Job control was added to the Bourne Shell in 1989.\nBULLET::::- A choice of three command line editing styles based on vi, Emacs, and Gosling Emacs.\nBULLET::::- Associative arrays and built-in floating point arithmetic operations (only available in the version of KornShell).\nBULLET::::- Dynamic extensibility of built-in commands (as of ).\n\nKornShell was originally proprietary software. In 2000 the source code was released under a license particular to AT&T, but since the 93q release in early 2005 it has been licensed under the Eclipse Public License. KornShell is available as part of the AT&T Software Technology (AST) Open Source Software Collection. As KornShell was initially only available through a proprietary license from AT&T, a number of free and open source alternatives were created. These include , , GNU , and .\n\nThe functionality of the original KornShell, , was used as a basis for the standard POSIX.2, Shell and Utilities, Command Interpreter (IEEE Std 1003.2-1992.)\n\nSome vendors still ship their own versions of the older variant, sometimes with extensions. is still maintained by its author. Releases of are versioned by appending a letter to the name; the current version is , following (which followed ); is in the beta phase ()\n\nAs \"Desktop KornShell\" (), is distributed as part of the Common Desktop Environment. This version also provides shell-level mappings for Motif widgets. It was intended as a competitor to Tcl/Tk.\n\nThe original KornShell, , became the default shell on AIX in version 4, with ksh93 being available separately.\n\nUnixWare 7 includes both and . The default Korn shell is , which is supplied as , and the older version is available as . UnixWare also includes when CDE is installed.\n\nThere are several software products related to KornShell:\nBULLET::::- – a fork of included as part of CDE.\nBULLET::::- – a fork of that provides access to the Tk widget toolkit.\nBULLET::::- – a Linux-based fork of OpenBSD's flavour of KornShell. It is used as the default shell in DeLi Linux.\nBULLET::::- – a free implementation of the KornShell language, forked from . It was originally developed for MirOS BSD and is licensed under permissive (though not public domain) terms; specifically, the MirOS Licence. In addition to its usage on BSD, this variant has replaced on Debian, and is the default shell on Android.\nBULLET::::- – an AmigaOS flavour that provides several Amiga-specific features, such as ARexx interoperability.\nBULLET::::- MKS Inc.'s MKS Korn shell – a proprietary implementation of the KornShell language from Microsoft Windows Services for UNIX (SFU) up to version 2.0; according to David Korn, the MKS Korn shell was not fully compatible with KornShell in 1998. In SFU version 3.0 Microsoft replaced the MKS Korn shell with a new POSIX.2-compliant shell as part of Interix.\nBULLET::::- KornShell is included in UWIN, a Unix compatibility package by David Korn.\n\nBULLET::::- Comparison of computer shells\nBULLET::::- List of Unix commands\nBULLET::::- The program\n\nBULLET::::- David G. Korn, Charles J. Northrup and Jeffery Korn The New KornShell—ksh93, Linux Journal, Issue 27, July 1996\n\nBULLET::::- Korn shell home page (AT&T ksh)\nBULLET::::- github for AT&T Software Technology (AST), including ksh source code.\nBULLET::::- Official KSH mailing lists\nBULLET::::- Public Domain Korn shell (pdksh)\nBULLET::::- MirBSD Korn Shell (mksh)\n"}
{"id": "17214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17214", "title": "Kilt", "text": "Kilt\n\nA kilt ( ) is a type of knee-length non-bifurcated skirt with pleats at the back, originating in the traditional dress of Gaelic men and boys in the Scottish Highlands. It is first recorded in the 16th century as the great kilt, a full-length garment whose upper half could be worn as a cloak. The small kilt or \"modern\" kilt emerged in the 18th century, and is essentially the bottom half of the great kilt. Since the 19th century, it has become associated with the wider culture of Scotland, and more broadly with Gaelic or Celtic heritage. It is most often made of woollen cloth in a tartan pattern.\n\nAlthough the kilt is most often worn on formal occasions and at Highland games and other sports events, it has also been adapted as an item of informal male clothing, returning to its roots as an everyday garment. Particularly in North America, kilts are now made for casual wear in a variety of materials. Alternative fastenings may be used and pockets inserted to avoid the need for a sporran. Kilts have also been adopted as female wear for some sports.\n\nThe kilt first appeared as the great kilt, the ' or belted plaid, during the 16th century, and is Gaelic in origin. The ' or great kilt was a full-length garment whose upper half could be worn as a cloak draped over the shoulder, or brought up over the head. A version of the \"\" (philibeg), or small kilt (also known as the walking kilt), similar to the modern kilt was invented by an English Quaker from Lancashire named Thomas Rawlinson some time in the 1720s. He felt that the belted plaid was \"cumbrous and unwieldy\", and his solution was to separate the skirt and convert it into a distinct garment with pleats already sewn, which he himself began wearing. His associate, Iain MacDonnell, chief of the MacDonnells of Inverness, also began wearing it, and when clansmen employed in logging, charcoal manufacture and iron smelting saw their chief wearing the new apparel, they soon followed suit. From there its use spread \"in the shortest space\" amongst the Highlanders, and even amongst some of the Northern Lowlanders. It has been suggested there is evidence that the philibeg with unsewn pleats was worn from the 1690s.\n\nThe name \"kilt\" is applied to a range of garments:\n\nBULLET::::- The traditional garment, either in its historical form, or in the modern adaptation now usual in Scotland (\"see History of the kilt\"), usually in a tartan pattern\nBULLET::::- The kilts worn by Irish pipe bands are based on the traditional Scottish garment but now in a single (solid) colour\nBULLET::::- Variants of the Scottish kilt adopted in other Celtic nations, such as the Welsh \"cilt\" and the Cornish \"cilt\"\n\nAccording to the \"Dictionary of the Scots Language\" and \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the noun derives from a verb \"to kilt\", originally meaning \"to gird up; to tuck up (the skirts) round the body\", which is apparently of Scandinavian origin.\n\nOrganisations that sanction and grade the competitions in Highland dancing and piping all have rules governing acceptable attire for the competitors. These rules specify that kilts are to be worn (except that in the national dances, the female competitors will be wearing the Aboyne dress).\n\nThe Scottish kilt displays uniqueness of design, construction, and convention which differentiate it from other garments fitting the general description. It is a tailored garment that is wrapped around the wearer's body at the natural waist (between the lowest rib and the hip) starting from one side (usually the wearer's left), around the front and back and across the front again to the opposite side. The fastenings consist of straps and buckles on both ends, the strap on the inside end usually passing through a slit in the waistband to be buckled on the outside; alternatively it may remain inside the waistband and be buckled inside.\n\nA kilt covers the body from the waist down to the centre of the knees. The overlapping layers in front are called \"aprons\" and are flat; the single layer of fabric around the sides and back is pleated. A kilt pin is fastened to the front apron on the free corner (but is not passed through the layer below, as its function is to add weight). Underwear may or may not be worn, as the wearer prefers, although tradition has it that a \"true Scotsman\" should wear nothing under his kilt. The Scottish Tartans Authority, however, warns that in some circumstances the practice could be \"childish and unhygienic\" and flying \"in the face of decency\".\n\nThe typical kilt as seen at modern Highland games events is made of twill woven worsted wool. The twill weave used for kilts is a \"2–2 type\", meaning that each weft thread passes over and under two warp threads at a time. The result is a distinctive diagonal-weave pattern in the fabric which is called the twill line. This kind of twill, when woven according to a given sett or written colour pattern \"(see below)\" is called tartan. In contrast kilts worn by Irish pipers are made from solid-colour cloth, with saffron or green being the most widely used colours.\n\nKilting fabric weights are given in ounces per yard and run from the very-heavy, regimental worsted of approximately down to a light worsted of about . The most common weights for kilts are and . The heavier weights are more appropriate for cooler weather, while the lighter weights would tend to be selected for warmer weather or for active use, such as Highland dancing. Some patterns are available in only a few weights.\n\nA modern kilt for a typical adult uses about 6–8 yards of single-width (about 26–30 inches) or about 3–4 yards of double-width (about 54–60 inches) tartan fabric. Double-width fabric is woven so that the pattern exactly matches on the selvage. Kilts are usually made without a hem because a hem would make the garment too bulky and cause it to hang incorrectly. The exact amount of fabric needed depends upon several factors including the size of the sett, the number of pleats put into the garment, and the size of the person. For a full kilt, 8 yards of fabric would be used regardless of size and the number of pleats and depth of pleat would be adjusted according to their size. For a very large waist, it may be necessary to use 9 yards of cloth.\n\nOne of the most-distinctive features of the authentic Scots kilt is the tartan pattern, the \"sett\", it exhibits. The association of particular patterns with individual clans and families can be traced back perhaps one or two centuries. It was only in the 19th-century Victorian era that the system of named tartans known today began to be systematically recorded and formalised, mostly by weaving companies for mercantile purposes. Up until this point, Highland tartans held regional associations rather than being identified with any particular clan.\n\nToday there are also tartans for districts, counties, societies and corporations. There are also setts for states and provinces; schools and universities; sporting activities; individuals; and commemorative and simple generic patterns that anybody can wear (see History of the kilt for the process by which these associations came about).\n\nSetts are always arranged horizontally and vertically, never diagonally (except when adapted for women's skirts). They are specified by their thread counts, the sequence of colours and their units of width. As an example, the Wallace tartan has a thread count given as \"K/4 R32 K32 Y/4\" (K is black, R is red, and Y is yellow). This means that 4 units of black thread will be succeeded by 32 units of red, etc., in both the warp and the weft. Typically, the units are the actual number of threads, but as long as the proportions are maintained, the resulting pattern will be the same. This thread count also includes a pivot point indicated by the slash between the colour and thread number. The weaver is supposed to reverse the weaving sequence at the pivot point to create a mirror image of the pattern. This is called a symmetrical tartan. Some tartans, like Buchanan, are asymmetrical, which means they do not have a pivot point. The weaver weaves the sequence all the way through and then starts at the beginning again for the next sett.\n\nSetts are further characterised by their size, the number of inches (or centimetres) in one full repeat. The size of a given sett depends on not only the number of threads in the repeat but also the weight of the fabric. This is because the heavier the fabric, the thicker the threads will be, and thus the same number of threads of a heavier-weight fabric will occupy more space. The colours given in the thread count are specified as in heraldry, although tartan patterns are not heraldic. The exact shade which is used is a matter of artistic freedom and will vary from one fabric mill to another as well as in dye lot to another within the same mill.\n\nTartans are commercially woven in four standard colour variations that describe the overall tone. \"Ancient\" or \"Old\" colours may be characterised by a slightly faded look intended to resemble the vegetable dyes that were once used, although in some cases \"Old\" simply identifies a tartan that was in use before the current one. Ancient greens and blues are lighter while reds appear orange. \"Modern\" colours are bright and show off modern aniline dyeing methods. The colours are bright red, dark hunter green, and usually navy blue. \"Weathered\" or \"Reproduction\" colours simulate the look of older cloth weathered by the elements. Greens turn to light brown, blues become grey, and reds are a deeper wine colour. The last colour variation is \"Muted\" which tends toward earth tones. The greens are olive, blues are slate blue, and red is an even deeper wine colour. This means that of the approximately 3500 registered tartans available in the Scottish Tartans Authority database as of 2004 there are four possible colour variations for each, resulting in around 14,000 recognised tartan choices.\n\nSetts were registered until 2008, with the \"International Tartan Index\" (\"ITI\") of the charitable organisation Scottish Tartans Authority (STA), which maintained a collection of fabric samples characterised by name and thread count, for free, which had its register, combined with others to form the \"Scottish Register of Tartans\" (\"SRT\") of the statutory body the National Archives of Scotland (NAS), if the tartan meets SRT's criteria, for UK£70 as of 2010. Although many tartans are added every year, most of the registered patterns available today were created in the 19th century onward by commercial weavers who worked with a large variety of colours. The rise of Highland romanticism and the growing Anglicisation of Scottish culture by the Victorians at the time led to registering tartans with clan names. Before that, most of these patterns were more connected to geographical regions than to any clan. There is therefore nothing symbolic about the colours, and nothing about the patterns is a reflection of the status of the wearer.\n\nAlthough ready-to-wear kilts can be obtained in standard sizes, a custom kilt is tailored to the individual proportions of the wearer. At least three measurements, the waist, hips, and length of the kilt, are usually required. Sometimes the rise (distance above the waist) or the fell (distance from waistline to the widest part of the hips) is also required.\n\nA properly made kilt, when buckled on the tightest holes of the straps, is not so loose that the wearer can easily twist the kilt around their body, nor so tight that it causes \"scalloping\" of the fabric where it is buckled. Additionally, the length of the kilt when buckled at the waist reaches a point no lower than halfway across the kneecap and no higher than about an inch above it.\n\nA kilt can be pleated with either box or knife pleats. A knife pleat is a simple fold, while the box pleat is bulkier, consisting of two knife pleats back-to-back. Knife pleats are the most common in modern civilian kilts. Regimental traditions vary. The Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders use box pleats, while the Black Watch make their kilts of the same tartan with knife pleats. These traditions were also passed on to affiliated regiments in the Commonwealth, and were retained in successor battalions to these regiments in the amalgamated Royal Regiment of Scotland.\n\nPleats can be arranged relative to the pattern in two ways. In \"pleating to the stripe\", one of the vertical stripes in the tartan is selected and the fabric is then folded so that this stripe runs down the center of each pleat. The result is that along the pleated section of the kilt (the back and sides) the pattern appears different from the unpleated front, often emphasising the horizontal bands rather than creating a balance between horizontal and vertical. This is often called military pleating because it is the style adopted by many military regiments. It is also widely used by pipe bands.\n\nIn \"pleating to the sett\", the fabric is folded so that the pattern of the sett is maintained and is repeated all around the kilt. This is done by taking up one full sett in each pleat, or two full setts if they are small. This causes the pleated sections to have the same pattern as the unpleated front.\n\nAny pleat is characterised by depth and width. The portion of the pleat that protrudes under the overlying pleat is the size or width. The pleat width is selected based on the size of the sett and the amount of fabric to be used in constructing the kilt, and will generally vary from about 1/2\" to about 3/4\".\n\nThe depth is the part of the pleat which is folded under the overlying pleat. It depends solely on the size of the tartan sett even when pleating to the stripe, since the sett determines the spacing of the stripes.\n\nThe number of pleats used in making kilts depends upon how much material is to be used in constructing the garment and upon the size of the sett.\n\nThe pleats across the fell are tapered slightly since the wearer's waist is usually narrower than the hips and the pleats are usually stitched down either by machine or by hand.\n\nIn Highland dancing, it is easy to see the effect of the stitching on the action of a kilt. The kilt hugs the dancer's body from the waist down to the hipline and, from there, in response to the dancer's movements, it breaks sharply out. The way the kilt moves in response to the dance steps is an important part of the dance. If the pleats were not stitched down in this portion of the kilt, the action, or movement, would be quite different.\n\nThe Scottish kilt is usually worn with kilt hose (woollen socks), turned down at the knee, often with garters and flashes, and a (Gaelic for \"purse\": a type of pouch), which hangs around the waist from a chain or leather strap. This may be plain or embossed leather, or decorated with sealskin, fur, or polished metal plating.\n\nOther common accessories, depending on the formality of the context, include:\n\nBULLET::::- A belt (usually with embossed buckle)\nBULLET::::- A jacket (of various traditional designs)\nBULLET::::- A kilt pin\nBULLET::::- A (Gaelic: \"black knife\": a small sheathed knife worn in the top of the hose)\nBULLET::::- Ghillie brogues\nBULLET::::- Occasionally worn with a ghillie shirt, although this is more casual and, being a relatively modern invention, shouldn't be confused with actual historic garments.\n\nToday most Scottish people regard kilts as formal dress or national dress. Although there are still a few people who wear a kilt daily, it is generally owned or hired to be worn at weddings or other formal occasions and may be worn by anyone regardless of nationality or descent. For semi-formal wear, kilts are usually worn with a Prince Charlie or an Argyll jacket. (Commercial suppliers have now produced equivalent jackets with Irish and Welsh themed styling.) Formal is white tie and requires a Regulation Doublet or higher.\n\nKilts are also used for parades by groups such as the Boys' Brigade and Scouts, and in many places kilts are seen in force at Highland games and pipe band championships as well as being worn at Scottish country dances and ceilidhs.\n\nCertain regiments/units of the British Army and armies of other Commonwealth nations (including Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa) with a Scottish lineage or heritage still continue to wear kilts as part of dress or duty uniform, though they have not been used in combat since 1940 Uniforms in which kilts are worn include Ceremonial Dress, Service Dress, and Barracks Dress. Kilts are considered appropriate for ceremonial parades, office duties, less formal parades, walking out, mess dinners, and classroom instruction or band practice. Ceremonial kilts have also been developed for the US Marine Corps, and the pipe and drum bands of the US Military Academy, US Naval Academy and Norwich University – The Military College of Vermont.\n\nIt is not uncommon to see kilts worn at Irish pubs in the United States, and it is becoming somewhat less rare to see them in the workplace. Casual use of kilts dressed down with lace-up boots or moccasins, and with T-shirts or golf shirts, is becoming increasingly familiar at Highland Games. The kilt is associated with a sense of Scottish national pride and will often be seen being worn, along with a football top, when members of the Tartan Army are watching a football or rugby match. The small sgian-dubh knife is sometimes replaced by a wooden or plastic alternative or omitted altogether for security concerns: for example, it typically is not allowed to be worn or carried onto a commercial aircraft.\n\nThough the origins of the Irish kilt continue to be a subject of debate, current evidence suggests that kilts originated in the Scottish Highlands and Isles and were worn by Irish nationalists from at least 1890 onwards and then cemented from the early 1900s as a symbol of Gaelic identity.\n\nA garment that has often been mistaken for kilts in early depictions is the Irish \"\", a long tunic traditionally made from solid colour cloth, with black, saffron and green. Solid coloured kilts were first adopted for use by Irish nationalists and thereafter by Irish regiments serving in the British Army, but they could often be seen in late 19th and early 20th century photos in Ireland especially at political and musical gatherings, as the kilt was re-adopted as a symbol of Gaelic nationalism in Ireland during this period.\n\nWithin the world of Irish dancing, boys' kilts have been largely abandoned, especially since the worldwide popularity of Riverdance and the revival and interest in Irish dancing generally.\n\nAlthough not a traditional component of national dress outside Scotland, kilts have become recently popular in the other Celtic nations as a sign of Celtic identity. Kilts and tartans can therefore also be seen in Ireland, Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, Brittany and Galicia. Although not considered a Celtic region, Northumbrian kilts in border tartan have also been adopted.\n\nThere are currently sixteen Breton tartans officially recorded in the Scottish tartan registries. The Breton tartans are: Brittany National (Breton National), Brittany Walking, Lead it Of, and a further nine county tartans (Kerne, Leon, Tregor, Gwened, Dol, St. Malo, Rennes, Nantes, St. Brieuc). Others have been recently created for smaller areas in Brittany (Ushent, Bro Vigoudenn and Menez Du \"Black Mountain\").\n\nThere are two Galician tartans recorded in the Scottish registries: Galicia and \"Gallaecia – Galician National\". There is historical evidence of the use of tartan and kilt in Galicia up to the 18th century.\n\nContemporary kilts (also known as modern kilts and, especially in the United States of America, utility kilts) have appeared in the clothing marketplace in Scotland, the US, and Canada in a range of fabrics, including leather, denim, corduroy, and cotton. They may be designed for formal or casual dress, for use in sports or outdoor recreation, or as white or blue collar workwear. Some are closely modelled on traditional Scottish kilts, but others are similar only in being knee-length skirt-like garments for men. They may have box pleats, symmetrical knife pleats and be fastened by studs or velcro instead of buckles. Many are designed to be worn without a sporran, and may have pockets or tool belts attached.\n\nIn Canada, kilts are widely common as part of female dress at schools with a uniform policy. As well, due to the rich Scottish heritage of the country, they may frequently be seen at weddings and formal events. In Nova Scotia, they may even be worn as common daily attire.\n\nIn 2008, a USPS letter carrier, Dean Peterson, made a formal proposal that the kilt be approved as an acceptable postal uniform—for reasons of comfort. The proposal was defeated at the convention of the 220,000-member National Association of Letter Carriers in 2008 by a large margin.\n\n5.11 Tactical produced a Tactical Duty Kilt as a result of the corporate April Fools' joke. The contemporary hybrid kilts are made up of tartan-woven fabric material.\n\nFemale athletes, especially lacrosse players, often wear kilts during games. They will typically wear compression shorts or spandex underneath. Kilts are popular among many levels of lacrosse, from youth leagues to college leagues, although some teams are replacing kilts with the more streamlined athletic skirt.\n\nMen's kilts are often seen in popular contemporary media. For example, in the Syfy series \"Tin Man\", side characters are shown wearing kilts as peasant working clothes. Trends in everyday fashion, especially in the Gothic subculture, have led to a popularisation of the kilt as an alternative to more conventional menswear. Some of these are made of PVC or cotton-polyester blends.\n\nBULLET::::- Shendyt\nBULLET::::- Argyle (pattern)\nBULLET::::- Belted plaid\nBULLET::::- Check (pattern)\nBULLET::::- Fly plaid\nBULLET::::- Full plaid\nBULLET::::- Highland dress\nBULLET::::- Trews\nBULLET::::- Dhoti\nBULLET::::- Lungi\nBULLET::::- Fustanella\n\n\nBULLET::::- Teall, Gordon; and Smith, Jr., Philip D. (1992). \"District Tartans\". Shepheard-Walwyn (London, United Kingdom). .\nBULLET::::- Thompson, J. Charles (1979). \"So You're Going to Wear the Kilt\". Heraldic Art Press (Arlington, Virginia). .\nBULLET::::- Kinloch Anderson, Deirdre (2013). \"Kinloch Anderson, A Scottish Tradition.\" Neil Wilson Publishing (Castle Douglas, United Kingdom)\n\nBULLET::::- The Scottish Tartans Authority\nBULLET::::- Acts Against the Highland Dress\nBULLET::::- Clans of the Scottish Highlands Fashion Plates from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries, featuring a variety of kilts\n"}
{"id": "17216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17216", "title": "Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language", "text": "Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language\n\nThe Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language, or KQML, is a language\nand protocol for communication among software agents and knowledge-based systems. It was\ndeveloped in the early 1990s as part of the DARPA knowledge Sharing Effort, which was aimed at developing techniques for building large-scale knowledge bases which are\nshareable and reusable. While originally conceived of as an interface to knowledge based systems, it was soon repurposed as an Agent communication language.\n\nWork on KQML was led by Tim Finin of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County and Jay Weber of EITech and involved contributions from many researchers.\n\nThe KQML message format and protocol can be used to interact with an intelligent system, either by an application program, or by another intelligent system. KQML's \"performatives\" are operations that agents perform on each other's knowledge and goal stores. Higher-level interactions such as contract nets and negotiation are built using these. KQML's \"communication facilitators\" coordinate the interactions of other agents to support knowledge sharing. \n\nExperimental prototype systems support concurrent engineering, intelligent design, intelligent planning, and scheduling.\n\nKQML is superseded by FIPA-ACL.\n"}
{"id": "17217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17217", "title": "KR", "text": "KR\n\nKR is the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 and WMO country code for South Korea\n\nKR or Kr may also refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- KR (basketball club), associated with Knattspyrnufélag Reykjavíkur\nBULLET::::- Knattspyrnufélag Reykjavíkur, an Icelandic football club\nBULLET::::- Kickoff returner, in American and Canadian football\n\nBULLET::::- Comores Aviation International (IATA airline designator KR)\nBULLET::::- Kenya Railways\nBULLET::::- Konkan Railway, India\nBULLET::::- Korea Rail Network Authority\nBULLET::::- Krasnodar International Airport (IATA airport code KR), serving the southern Russian city of Krasnodar\nBULLET::::- Province of Crotone, Italy, vehicle registration\n\nBULLET::::- .kr, country code top-level domain (ccTLD) of South Korea\nBULLET::::- KR (ANSI), an ANSI X3.64 escape sequence\nBULLET::::- K. R. Market, Bangalore, India\nBULLET::::- Kanuri language (ISO 639 alpha-2)\nBULLET::::- Kayser-Roth, clothing manufacturer in North Carolina\nBULLET::::- Kiribati (FIPS 10-4 country code), a sovereign state in Micronesia\nBULLET::::- Knowledge representation and reasoning, in artificial intelligence\nBULLET::::- Kroger, an American grocery chain, NYSE symbol\nBULLET::::- Krone, or Krona, several currencies\nBULLET::::- Krypton, a chemical element with symbol Kr\nBULLET::::- Grand Duke Konstantin Konstantinovich of Russia (1858–1915), poet known by his pen name \"KR\"\n"}
{"id": "17220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17220", "title": "Sara Jane Olson", "text": "Sara Jane Olson\n\nSara Jane Olson (born Kathleen Ann Soliah on January 16, 1947) was a member of the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA) in the 1970s. She grew up in Palmdale, California, the daughter of Norwegian-American parents, Elsie Soliah (née Engstrom) and Palmdale High School English teacher and coach Martin Soliah. She went into hiding in 1976 after having been indicted in a bombing case. She has lived much of her life in Minnesota under the alias Sara Jane Olson, which is now her legal name. Arrested in 1999, she pleaded guilty in 2001 to two counts of possessing explosives with intent to murder, and in 2003 to second-degree murder, both stemming from her SLA activities in the 1970s. She received a sentence of 14 years in prison.\n\nShe was mistakenly released for five days in March 2008, due to an error made in calculating her parole, before being rearrested. She was finally released on parole on March 17, 2009.\n\nKathleen Soliah was born in Fargo, North Dakota, while her family were living in Barnesville, Minnesota. When she was eight, her conservative Lutheran family relocated to Southern California. After graduating from the University of California, Santa Barbara, Soliah moved to Berkeley, California, with her boyfriend, James Kilgore. There, she met Angela Atwood at an acting audition where they both won lead roles. They became inseparable during the play's run. Atwood tried to sponsor Soliah into the SLA. Regardless, Soliah and Kilgore, along with her brother Steve and sister Josephine, followed the SLA closely without joining.\n\nWhen Atwood and other core members of the SLA were killed in 1974 during a standoff with police near Watts, Los Angeles, following their murder of the Oakland school superintendent, the Soliahs organized memorial rallies, including a rally in Berkeley's Willard Park (called Ho Chi Minh park by activists) where Soliah spoke in support of her friend Atwood, while being covertly filmed by the FBI. At that rally, Soliah said that her fellow SLA members had been: \n\nShe asserted that Atwood \"was a truly revolutionary woman ... among the first white women to fight so righteously for their beliefs and to die for what they believed in\".\n\nNow a fugitive, founding SLA member Emily Harris disguised herself and visited Soliah, who was on the job at a bookstore. Soliah later recalled, \"I was glad she was alive. I expected them to be killed at any time.\" She felt sorry for the group and agreed to help the remaining group hide from the police and FBI. She assisted them by procuring supplies for their San Francisco hideout and birth certificates of dead infants that could be used for identification purposes.\n\nOn April 21, 1975, SLA members robbed the Crocker National Bank in Carmichael, California, in the process killing 42-year-old Myrna Opsahl, a mother of four depositing money for her church. Patty Hearst, who was switch getaway driver during the crime, provided the original information that led the police to implicate the SLA in the robbery and murder; she also stated that Soliah was one of the actual robbers. According to Hearst, Soliah also kicked a pregnant teller in the abdomen, leading to a miscarriage.\n\nSeveral rounds of 9 mm ammunition spilled on the floor and found in Opsahl's body during the robbery bore manufacturing marks that matched that of ammunition loaded in a 9 mm Browning Hi-Power semi-automatic pistol found by police in Soliah's bedroom dresser drawer at the SLA safehouse on Precita Avenue in San Francisco. In 2002, new forensics technology allowed police to link these shells definitively to those found at Crocker Bank prior to charging the former members of SLA, including Soliah, with the crime. Prosecutor Michael Latin said that Soliah was tied to the crime through fingerprints, a palm print, and handwriting evidence. The palm print was found on a garage door from a garage in which the SLA kept a getaway car.\n\nOn August 21, 1975, a bomb that came within 1/16 of an inch of detonating was discovered where a Los Angeles Police Department patrol car had been parked in front of an International House of Pancakes restaurant earlier in the day. After the bomb was discovered, all Los Angeles police were ordered to search under their cars, and another bomb was found in front of a police department about a mile away. Soliah was accused of planting the bombs in an attempt to avenge the SLA members who had died a year earlier in the standoff with LA police.\n\nThe pipe bombs were rigged to detonate as the patrol cars drove away. One police officer present that day described the first bomb as one of \"the most dangerous pipe bombs he had ever seen\" and went on to say: \n\nAt Soliah's 2002 sentencing hearing on the bombing, police officer John Hall, who had been in the car on top of the bomb described a little girl who stood feet away with her family: \n\nSoliah was indicted in 1976 for setting the police bombs along with five other SLA members, but vanished before the trial could commence. When Soliah was eventually brought to trial years later, the evidence against her was not considered by prosecutors to be a \"slam dunk\", although enough to convince a jury of her guilt. Two witnesses who had originally testified in her grand jury indictment had died by the time she was found and brought to trial: a plumber who had sold materials used in the bomb had picked Soliah out of a lineup as one of the buyers, and a bomb expert had stated the explosive could have been built in Soliah's apartment. Police could not identify any fingerprints on the devices other than those of the officers who had disarmed them; however, Soliah's fingerprint, handwriting and signature were identified on a letter sent to order a fuse that could only be used for bomb-making purposes, and components matching those used in the police car bombs were found in a locked closet at the Precita Avenue hideout that Soliah lived in with the other members of SLA.\n\nIn February 1976, a grand jury indicted Soliah in the bombing case. Soliah went underground and became a fugitive for 23 years.\n\nShe moved to Minnesota, having assumed the alias Sara Jane Olson; the surname chosen being one of the most common names in Minnesota due to the state's large Scandinavian-American population. In 1980 she married the physician Gerald Frederick \"Fred\" Peterson, with whom she would have three daughters. Olson and Peterson spent time in Zimbabwe, where Peterson worked for a British Medical missionary group, before settling in Saint Paul, Minnesota, where Olson resumed her acting career. She was active in Saint Paul on community issues. Her husband described the family as interested in progressive social causes.\n\nOn March 3, 1999, and again on May 15, 1999, Soliah was profiled on the \"America's Most Wanted\" television program. After a tip generated by the show, she was arrested on June 16, 1999. Soliah was then charged with conspiracy to commit murder, possession of explosives, explosion, and attempt to ignite an explosive with intent to murder.\n\nShortly after her arrest, Soliah legally changed her name to her alias, Sara Jane Olson. She also published a cookbook titled \"Serving Time: America's Most Wanted Recipes\". On October 31, 2001, she accepted a plea bargain and pleaded guilty to two counts of possessing explosives with intent to murder. As part of a plea bargain, the other charges were dropped.\n\nImmediately after entering the plea, however, Olson told reporters that she was innocent and that she had decided to take a plea bargain due to the climate after the September 11 attacks, in which she felt an accused bomber could not receive a fair trial from a jury. \"It became clear to me that the incident would have a remarkable effect on the outcome of this trial ... the effect was probably going to be negative,\" she said. \"That's really what governed this decision, not the truth or honesty, but what was probably in my best interests and the interests of my family.\"\n\nAngered by Olson's announcement that she had lied in court, Superior Court Judge Larry Fidler ordered another hearing on November 6, at which he asked her several times if she was indeed guilty of the charges. Olson replied \"I want to make it clear, Your Honor, that I did not make that bomb. I did not possess that bomb. I did not plant that bomb. But under the concept of aiding and abetting, I plead guilty.\"\n\nOn November 13, Olson filed a motion requesting to withdraw her guilty plea and acknowledged that she did not misunderstand the judge when he read the charges against her. Rather, she said: \n\nOn December 3, 2001, Fidler offered to let Olson testify under oath about her role in the case. She refused. He then wondered \"I took those pleas twice ... were you lying to me then or are you lying to me now?\"—and denied her request to withdraw her plea. Observers expected her to serve only three to five years, but on January 18, 2002, she was sentenced to two consecutive 10-years-to-life terms. Fidler warned that according to California law, the Board of Prison Terms could later change the sentence to a lesser term. Olson's lawyers asserted that due to discrepancies between 1970s laws and current California laws, their client would most likely serve only five years, which could turn into two years for good behavior. The Board of Prison Terms did later change the sentence.\n\nAt her sentencing hearing, Olson's teenage daughter Leila, her pastor, and her husband spoke in her defense, while Olson's mother claimed on the stand that Olson had never been a part of the SLA and spoke against prosecutors and police she asserted had harassed the family.\n\nOn January 16, 2002, first-degree murder charges for the killing of Myrna Opsahl were filed against Olson and four other SLA members: Emily Harris, Bill Harris, Michael Bortin (Olson's brother-in law who had married her sister Josephine), and James Kilgore, who remained a fugitive. Judge Fidler arraigned Olson on the murder charges immediately following her sentencing hearing on January 18. Olson pleaded not guilty to that charge at the time. On November 7, along with the other three defendants, she pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of second degree murder. She was sentenced on February 14, 2003, for the maximum term allowed under her plea bargain, which was a six-year term concurrent to the 14-year sentence she was already serving.\n\nThe state Board of Prison Terms had scrapped her original sentence in October 2002 in exchange for a longer 14-year sentence, saying Olson's crimes had the potential for great violence and targeted multiple victims. In July 2004, a judge said there was \"no analysis\" of how the state Board of Prison Terms had decided 14 years was appropriate, and threw it out. Her sentence was instead converted to five years, four months. However, an appeals court panel restored her full 14-year sentence as of April 12, 2007. It ruled that a lower court did not follow procedure when they allowed Olson to appeal.\n\nOlson served her time at the Central California Women's Facility in Chowchilla. Her custody status was \"Close A\", which is reserved for inmates requiring the most supervision. This status limited her privileges and required that she be counted seven times a day. It also prevented her from being able to seek a relocation to a facility closer to her home. David Nickerson, Olson's attorney, stated that this status reflected the Department of Corrections' view that she was a potential flight risk.\n\nOlson's husband and three daughters continued to support her during her imprisonment and took turns visiting her frequently in Chowchilla. In an interview with \"Marie Claire\" (coincidentally published by Hearst Corporation), Olson's 23-year-old daughter Emily Peterson dismissed her mother's radical past with the SLA, saying \"She lived in Berkeley. It was kind of normal. I always tell people she wasn't a terrorist. She was an urban guerrilla.\" Olson herself has never expressed remorse or regret for her actions.\n\nOlson was released on parole from the Central California Women's Facility in Chowchilla on March 17, 2008. For five days, she stayed at her mother's home in Palmdale, and spent some time hiking with her husband.\n\nOn March 21, 2008, she was rearrested when it was decided that she had been mistakenly released a year early from prison due to a miscalculation by the parole board. Her attorney claimed that the action was a political move. Olson was taken back into custody by the California Department of Corrections and placed in the California Institution for Women in Corona for an additional year.\n\nAfter serving a total of seven years, about half of her sentence, Olson was released from prison on March 17, 2009, to serve her parole in Minnesota. Police unions in both Minnesota and California protested the arrangement, stating that they believe her parole should be served in California, where her crimes were committed. In a letter to California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty also protested Olson being allowed to return to Minnesota.\n\nOlson's 28-year-old daughter, Sophia Shorai, was a contestant in the 2011 season of the talent show \"American Idol\".\n\n\nBULLET::::- Chronology of the SLA from CourtTV News (only goes up to 2002)\nBULLET::::- Profile of Sara Jane Olson\nBULLET::::- Full Court TV coverage of the Kathleen Soliah bombing case\n"}
{"id": "17224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17224", "title": "Kent Recursive Calculator", "text": "Kent Recursive Calculator\n\nKRC (Kent Recursive Calculator) is a lazy functional language developed by David Turner from November 1979 to October 1981 based on SASL, with pattern matching, guards and ZF expressions (now more usually called list comprehensions).\nTwo implementations of KRC were written: David Turner's original one in BCPL running on EMAS, and Simon J. Croft's later one in C under Unix, and KRC was the main language used for teaching functional programming at the University of Kent at Canterbury (UK) from 1982 to 1985.\n\nThe direct successor to KRC is Miranda, which includes a polymorphic type discipline based on that of Milner's ML.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Functional Programming and its Applications\", David A. Turner, Cambridge U Press 1982.\n"}
{"id": "17226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17226", "title": "Kremvax", "text": "Kremvax\n\nKremvax was originally a fictitious Usenet site at the Kremlin, named like the then large number of Usenet VAXen with names of the form foovax. Kremvax was announced on April 1, 1984 in a posting ostensibly originated there by Soviet leader Konstantin Chernenko. The posting was actually forged by Piet Beertema of CWI (in Amsterdam) as an April Fool's prank. Other fictitious sites mentioned in the hoax were moskvax and kgbvax. The actual origin of the email was mcvax, one of the first European sites on the internet.\n\nSix years later Usenet was joined by demos.su, the first genuine site based in Moscow. Some readers needed convincing that the postings from it were not just another prank. Vadim Antonov, the senior programmer at Demos and the major poster from there until mid-1991, was quite aware of all this, and referred to it frequently in his own postings. Antonov later arranged to have the domain's gateway site named kremvax.demos.su, turning fiction into truth and, according to one account, \"demonstrating that the hackish sense of humor transcends cultural barriers\".\n\nBULLET::::- RELCOM\n\nBULLET::::- Original message archived on Google Groups\nBULLET::::- Author's Account\n"}
{"id": "17227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17227", "title": "KRL (programming language)", "text": "KRL (programming language)\n\nKRL is a knowledge representation language, developed by Daniel G. Bobrow and Terry Winograd while at Xerox PARC and Stanford University, respectively. It is a frame-based language. \nKRL was an attempt to produce a language which was nice to read and write for the engineers who had to write programs in it, processed like human memory, so you could have realistic AI programs, had an underlying semantics which was firmly grounded like logic languages, all in one, all in one language. And I think it - again, in hindsight - it just bogged down under the weight of trying to satisfy all those things at once. \n\n\"An Overview of KRL, a Knowledge Representation Language\", D.G. Bobrow and T. Winograd, Cognitive Sci 1:1 (1977).\n\nDaniel G. Bobrow, Terry Winograd, An Overview of KRL, A Knowledge Representation Language, Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Memo AIM 293, 1976.\n"}
{"id": "17230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17230", "title": "KSH", "text": "KSH\n\nKSH or ksh may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Kenyan shilling, the currency of Kenya\nBULLET::::- Korn shell, a Unix shell developed by David Korn in the early 1980s\nBULLET::::- Kölsch language (ISO 639-3 language code), a Ripuarian dialect spoken in Germany\nBULLET::::- , the Hungarian Central Statistical Office\nBULLET::::- Shahid Ashrafi Esfahani Airport (IATA airport code), in Kermanshah, Iran\nBULLET::::- Kerrville State Hospital, a mental hospital in Kerrville, Texas\n"}
{"id": "17231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17231", "title": "KSL", "text": "KSL\n\nKSL may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- KSL (radio), KSL-AM and KSL-FM, stations in Utah, US\nBULLET::::- KSL-TV, Utah, US\nBULLET::::- KSL.com, a Utah-based news website\nBULLET::::- Key Sounds Label, a Japanese record label\nBULLET::::- Knowledge Systems Laboratory, AI lab at Stanford\nBULLET::::- Korea StarCraft League, a tournament\n\nBULLET::::- Kate Sharpley Library, a library of anarchist publications\nBULLET::::- Kearsley railway station, England, station code\nBULLET::::- KSL City, a shopping mall, Johor, Malaysia\n\nBULLET::::- Kenyan Sign Language\nBULLET::::- Korean Sign Language\nBULLET::::- KSL cells, early form of hematopoietic stem cells\n"}
{"id": "17232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17232", "title": "Knowledge Systems Laboratory", "text": "Knowledge Systems Laboratory\n\nKnowledge Systems Laboratory (KSL) was an artificial intelligence research laboratory within the Department of Computer Science at Stanford University until 2007, located in the Gates Computer Science Building, Stanford. Work focused on knowledge representation for shareable engineering knowledge bases and systems, computational environments for modelling physical devices, architectures for adaptive intelligent systems, and expert systems for science and engineering. \nKSL had projects with Stanford Medical Informatics (SMI), the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab (SAIL), the Stanford Formal Reasoning Group (SFRG), the Stanford Logic Group, and the Stanford Center for Design Research (CDR).\n\nThis is a partial list (in alphabetical order) of past members:\n\nBULLET::::- Edward Feigenbaum\nBULLET::::- Richard Fikes\nBULLET::::- Diana E. Forsythe\nBULLET::::- Tom Gruber\nBULLET::::- William Clancey\nBULLET::::- Alon Y. Halevy\nBULLET::::- Deborah L. McGuinness\nBULLET::::- Paulo Pinheiro\nBULLET::::- Derek H. Sleeman\nBULLET::::- Barbara Hayes-Roth\nBULLET::::- Ruth Duran Huard\nBULLET::::- Lee Brownstein\n\nBULLET::::- Archived Publications: \"The Edward A. Feigenbaum Papers: Work in Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science at Stanford University\". Stanford University Libraries. Retrieved 22 July 2018.\n"}
{"id": "17233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17233", "title": "KSR", "text": "KSR\n\nKSR is an initialism that may mean:\n\nBULLET::::- Kendall Square Research, former supercomputer company, Cambridge, Massachusetts, US\nBULLET::::- Keyboard Send Receive, a type of teleprinter made by Teletype Corporation\nBULLET::::- \"KSR v. Teleflex\", a US patent lawsuit\nBULLET::::- Katahdin Scout Reservation, a BSA camp in Maine, US\nBULLET::::- KSR1 (kinase suppressor of Ras 1), an enzyme and gene\nBULLET::::- Kim Stanley Robinson, American science fiction author\n"}
{"id": "17234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17234", "title": "KTH", "text": "KTH\n\nKTH may refer to:\nBULLET::::- KTH Royal Institute of Technology, a university in Sweden\nBULLET::::- KTH Krynica, a Polish ice hockey team\nBULLET::::- Khyber Teaching Hospital, a university hospital in Pakistan\nBULLET::::- .kth, the extension of KDE theme files\n"}
{"id": "17240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17240", "title": "John-F.-Kennedy-Platz", "text": "John-F.-Kennedy-Platz\n\nJohn-F.-Kennedy-Platz (John F. Kennedy Square), formerly Rudolph-Wilde-Platz, in the Schöneberg section of Berlin is the square in front of the former city hall of West Berlin (Rathaus Schöneberg). It was here that US President John F. Kennedy gave his famous speech to the Berliners, in which he stated: \"\"Ich bin ein Berliner\"\". The square was renamed John-F.-Kennedy-Platz on 25 November 1963, three days after Kennedy's assassination, and a large plaque dedicated to Kennedy was mounted on a column at the entrance to the city hall.\n\nBULLET::::- Text, Audio, Video of Kennedy's Berlin Speech\n"}
{"id": "17241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17241", "title": "Kyoto Common Lisp", "text": "Kyoto Common Lisp\n\nKyoto Common Lisp (KCL) is an implementation of Common Lisp by Taichi Yuasa and Masami Hagiya, written in C to run under Unix-like operating systems. KCL is compiled to ANSI C. It conforms to Common Lisp as described in the 1984 first edition of Guy Steele's book Common Lisp the Language and is available under a licence agreement.\n\nKCL is notable in that it was implemented from scratch, outside of the standard committee, solely on the basis of the specification. It was one of the first Common Lisp implementations ever, and exposed a number of holes and mistakes in the specification that had gone unnoticed.\n\nBULLET::::- Austin Kyoto Common Lisp (AKCL) is a collection of ports, bug fixes, and performance improvements to KCL made by William Schelter. AKCL has been ported to a range of Unix workstations.\nBULLET::::- GNU Common Lisp (GCL) was derived from AKCL.\nBULLET::::- Embeddable Common-Lisp (ECL) was derived from KCL.\nBULLET::::- ManKai Common Lisp (MKCL) was derived from ECL.\nBULLET::::- Commercial versions of Kyoto Common Lisp were Ibuki Common Lisp and Delphi Common Lisp.\n"}
{"id": "17245", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17245", "title": "Karl Gustav Ahlefeldt", "text": "Karl Gustav Ahlefeldt\n\nKarl Gustav Henry Folmer Ahlefeldt (13 March 1910 – 25 March 1985) was a Danish film actor. He appeared in the Carl Theodor Dreyer masterpiece \"Gertrud\" (1965).\n\nBULLET::::- \"Familien Olsen\" – 1940\nBULLET::::- \"Sommerglæder\" – 1940\nBULLET::::- \"Tante Cramers testamente\" – 1941\nBULLET::::- \"Søren Søndervold\" – 1942\nBULLET::::- \"Hans onsdagsveninde\" – 1943\nBULLET::::- \"Elly Petersen\" – 1944\nBULLET::::- \"Teatertosset\" – 1944\nBULLET::::- \"Hans store aften\" – 1946\nBULLET::::- \"Op med lille Martha\" – 1946\nBULLET::::- \"Når katten er ude\" – 1947\nBULLET::::- \"Tre år efter\" – 1948\nBULLET::::- \"I gabestokken\" – 1950\nBULLET::::- \"Nålen\" – 1951\nBULLET::::- \"Frihed forpligter\" – 1951\nBULLET::::- \"Alt dette og Island med\" – 1951\nBULLET::::- \"Tag til marked i Fjordby\" – 1957\nBULLET::::- \"Det lille hotel\" – 1958\nBULLET::::- \"Mariannes bryllup\" – 1958\nBULLET::::- \"Gøngehøvdingen\" – 1961\nBULLET::::- \"Gertrud\" – 1964\nBULLET::::- \"Hurra for de blå husarer\" – 1970\nBULLET::::- \"Bejleren – en jysk røverhistorie\" – 1975\nBULLET::::- \"Familien Gyldenkål\" – 1975\n"}
{"id": "17246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17246", "title": "Kateretes", "text": "Kateretes\n\nKateretes is a genus of short-winged flower beetles in the family Kateretidae. There are about six described species in \"Kateretes\".\n\nThese six species belong to the genus \"Kateretes\":\nBULLET::::- \"Kateretes dalmatinus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kateretes flavicans\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kateretes mixtus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kateretes pusillus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kateretes rufilabris\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kateretes scissus\"\n\n"}
{"id": "17248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17248", "title": "Keflavík", "text": "Keflavík\n\nKeflavík (pronounced , meaning \"Driftwood Bay\") is a town in the Reykjanes region in southwest Iceland. As of 2016, its population when combined with the nearby town Njarðvík, is 15,129.\n\nIn 1995 it merged with Njarðvík and Hafnir to form a municipality called Reykjanesbær with a population of 15,233 (January 2016).\n\nFounded in the 16th century, Keflavík developed on account of its fishing and fish processing industry, founded by Scottish entrepreneurs and engineers. Later its growth continued from flight operations at the Keflavík International Airport which was built by the United States military during the 1940s. The airport used to hold a significant NATO military base and was a vital pre-jet refueling stop for trans-Atlantic commercial air traffic. It now serves as Iceland's main international hub.\n\nDuring World War II the military airfield served as a refueling and transit depot. During the Cold War, Naval Air Station Keflavik played an important role in monitoring marine and submarine traffic from the Norwegian and Greenland Seas into the Atlantic Ocean. Forces from the United States Air Force were added to provide radar monitoring, fighter intercept, in-flight refueling, and aerial/marine rescue. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, however, the base's role was cast into doubt. The base officially closed on 30 September 2006, when the United States withdrew the remaining 30 military personnel.\n\nIn Iceland, Keflavík was renowned as a rich source of musicians during the 1960s and 70s, and is therefore also known as \"bítlabærinn\" or \"The Beatle Town\".\n\nThe local geography is dominated by fields of basalt rubble, interspersed with a few hardy plants and mosses. On a clear day, one can see Snæfellsjökull across the bay, some 115 km away.\n\nThe climate of Keflavík is subarctic with cool summers and moderately cold winters. There is no truly dry month but July is the month that gets the least amount of precipitation. Winter high temperatures average above the freezing mark, and summer high temperatures are cool to mild. The warmest month on average is July with an average high of and the coldest is January with an average high of .\nThe town is represented in sports by Íþrótta- og ungmennafélag Keflavíkur.\n\nThe former NATO military base Naval Air Station Keflavik is used as a setting for an important story line in Tom Clancy's novel \"Red Storm Rising\". Clancy described the base, the geography, local flora, and the station equipment.\n\nBULLET::::- Cold War\nBULLET::::- Iceland Defense Force, headquartered in Keflavík until 2006\nBULLET::::- Uppspretta\n\nBULLET::::- Satellite picture by Google Maps\n"}
{"id": "17249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17249", "title": "James Parry", "text": "James Parry\n\nJames Parry (born July 13, 1967), commonly known by his nickname and username Kibo , is a Usenetter known for his sense of humor, various surrealist net pranks, an absurdly long .signature, and a machine-assisted knack for \"\": joining any thread in which \"kibo\" was mentioned. His exploits have earned him a multitude of enthusiasts, who celebrate him as the head deity of the parody religion \"Kibology\", centered on the humor newsgroup alt.religion.kibology.\n\nJames Parry grew up and lived in Scotia, New York. He showed early computing skills, such as being able to open up and reprogram ROM video game cartridges such as those for the Atari 2600, but was more interested in graphics and artistic pursuits. In this vein, he was initially a computer engineering major at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) in Troy, New York, but moved to Boston, Massachusetts in 1990 and attended Emerson College, where he studied videography and graphic design. At that time, he also worked as a typeface designer and for the world.std.com internet service provider. He developed several fonts in use today. One of his better-known works is the typography for Philip K. Dick's novel \"Gather Yourselves Together\".\n\nIn the early 1990s, as public awareness grew of the Internet and Usenet, Parry received publicity, including a cover story in \"Wired\" magazine and mentions in \"Playboy\" and \"The Times\". He became known on Usenet for grepping all occurrences of the term \"Kibo\"—whether intended to refer to Kibo himself or not—and replying, often in a fanciful manner. A typical exchange:\n\nThis practice became known as \"kibozing\". In 2006, Parry estimated that he had posted \"an average of 20 articles a week to alt.religion.kibology during the past 15 years, probably about 500 words of original content per article, that's... seven point eight words. Equivalent to about 100 books.\"\n\nHe is perhaps best known on Usenet for his famous (or infamous) \"Happynet Proclamation\" (1992), circulated to many newsgroups, some absurdly unrelated, which satirized the endless flamewars on the network, with Parry posing as a godlike being issuing an edict full of in-jokes and humor targets that claimed to unify all news into one glorious totality, \"happynet\". In the article, Kibo claimed that:\n\nKibology is a parody religion created by Parry, the central figure. Practitioners of Kibology are called \"Kibologists\" or (sometimes more disdainfully) \"Kibozos\". Parry began Kibology about 1989. In its early Usenet days it was centered in the newsgroups talk.bizarre and alt.slack, until the creation of alt.religion.kibology in late 1991. The religious satire of Kibology shares tenets of other parody religions, including similar concepts to the Flying Spaghetti Monster and Invisible Pink Unicorn. The alt.religion.kibology newsgroup remained active through the 1990s, with gradually less emphasis on the joke religion and more satirizing popular culture and internet culture. Other popular regular contributors kept the group active even during \"Kibo\"'s periodic absences from Usenet. In 2003, the group spawned a band, Interröbang Cartel, which by 2011 had written and recorded more than 80 songs.\n\nThe term \"bozo\" and related jokes like the physics particle the \"bozon\" were Parry hallmarks. Revisions of the Manifesto were published in 1994 and 1998. HappyWeb was introduced in 1999.\n\nIn 1992, at age 25 (ten years younger than the constitutional minimum age for election), he launched a spoof campaign for President of the United States.\n\nBULLET::::- Kibo's website\nBULLET::::- The alt.religion.kibology newsgroup (via Google Groups)\nBULLET::::- – .signature\nBULLET::::- Ted Faber Ted Faber's archive of early Kibology postings.\n"}
