{"id": "8082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8082", "title": "Diamond", "text": "Diamond\n\nDiamond is a solid form of the element carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal structure called diamond cubic. At room temperature and pressure, another solid form of carbon known as graphite is the chemically stable form, but diamond almost never converts to it. Diamond has the highest hardness and thermal conductivity of any natural material, properties that are utilized in major industrial applications such as cutting and polishing tools. They are also the reason that diamond anvil cells can subject materials to pressures found deep in the Earth.\n\nBecause the arrangement of atoms in diamond is extremely rigid, few types of impurity can contaminate it (two exceptions being boron and nitrogen). Small numbers of defects or impurities (about one per million of lattice atoms) color diamond blue (boron), yellow (nitrogen), brown (defects), green (radiation exposure), purple, pink, orange or red. Diamond also has relatively high optical dispersion (ability to disperse light of different colors).\n\nMost natural diamonds have ages between 1 billion and 3.5 billion years. Most were formed at depths between in the Earth's mantle, although a few have come from as deep as . Under high pressure and temperature, carbon-containing fluids dissolved minerals and replaced them with diamonds. Much more recently (tens to hundreds of million years ago), they were carried to the surface in volcanic eruptions and deposited in igneous rocks known as kimberlites and lamproites.\n\nSynthetic diamonds can be grown from high-purity carbon under high pressures and temperatures or from hydrocarbon gas by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Imitation diamonds can also be made out of materials such as cubic zirconia and silicon carbide. Natural, synthetic and imitation diamonds are most commonly distinguished using optical techniques or thermal conductivity measurements.\n\nDiamond is a solid form of pure carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal. Solid carbon comes in different forms known as allotropes depending on the type of chemical bond. The two most common allotropes of pure carbon are diamond and graphite. In graphite the bonds are sp orbital hybrids and the atoms form in planes with each bound to three nearest neighbors 120 degrees apart. In diamond they are sp and the atoms form tetrahedra with each bound to four nearest neighbors. Tetrahedra are rigid, the bonds are strong, and of all known substances diamond has the greatest number of atoms per unit volume, which is why it is both the hardest and the least compressible. It also has a high density, ranging from 3150 to 3530 kilograms per cubic metre (over three times the density of water) in natural diamonds and 3520 kg/m³ in pure diamond. In graphite, the bonds between nearest neighbors are even stronger but the bonds between planes are weak, so the planes can easily slip past each other. Thus, graphite is much softer than diamond. However, the stronger bonds make graphite less flammable.\n\nDiamonds have been adapted for many uses because of the material's exceptional physical characteristics. Of all known substances, it is the hardest and least compressible. It has the highest thermal conductivity and the highest sound velocity. It has low adhesion and friction, and its coefficient of thermal expansion is extremely low. Its optical transparency extends from the far infrared to the deep ultraviolet and it has high optical dispersion. It also has high electrical resistance. It is chemically inert, not reacting with most corrosive substances, and has excellent biological compatibility.\n\nThe equilibrium pressure and temperature conditions for a transition between graphite and diamond is well established theoretically and experimentally. The pressure changes linearly between at and at (the diamond/graphite/liquid triple point).\nHowever, the phases have a wide region about this line where they can coexist. At normal temperature and pressure, and , the stable phase of carbon is graphite, but diamond is metastable and its rate of conversion to graphite is negligible. However, at temperatures above about , diamond rapidly converts to graphite. Rapid conversion of graphite to diamond requires pressures well above the equilibrium line: at , a pressure of is needed.\n\nAbove the triple point, the melting point of diamond increases slowly with increasing pressure; but at pressures of hundreds of GPa, it decreases. At high pressures, silicon and germanium have a BC8 body-centered cubic crystal structure, and a similar structure is predicted for carbon at high pressures. At , the transition is predicted to occur at . \nThe most common crystal structure of diamond is called diamond cubic. It is formed of unit cells (see the figure) stacked together. Although there are 18 atoms in the figure, each corner atom is shared by eight unit cells and each atom in the center of a face is shared by two, so there are a total of eight atoms per unit cell. Each side of the unit cell is 3.57 angstroms in length.\n\nA diamond cubic lattice can be thought of as two interpenetrating face-centered cubic lattices with one displaced by 1/4 of the diagonal along a cubic cell, or as one lattice with two atoms associated with each lattice point. Looked at from a crystallographic direction, it is formed of layers stacked in a repeating ABCABC ... pattern. Diamonds can also form an ABAB ... structure, which is known as hexagonal diamond or lonsdaleite, but this is far less common and is formed under different conditions from cubic carbon.\n\nDiamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as \"macles\". As diamond's crystal structure has a cubic arrangement of the atoms, they have many facets that belong to a cube, octahedron, rhombicosidodecahedron, tetrakis hexahedron or disdyakis dodecahedron. The crystals can have rounded off and unexpressive edges and can be elongated. Diamonds (especially those with rounded crystal faces) are commonly found coated in \"nyf\", an opaque gum-like skin.\n\nSome diamonds have opaque fibers. They are referred to as \"opaque\" if the fibers grow from a clear substrate or \"fibrous\" if they occupy the entire crystal. Their colors range from yellow to green or gray, sometimes with cloud-like white to gray impurities. Their most common shape is cuboidal, but they can also form octahedra, dodecahedra, macles or combined shapes. The structure is the result of numerous impurities with sizes between 1 and 5 microns. These diamonds probably formed in kimberlite magma and sampled the volatiles.\n\nDiamonds can also form polycrystalline aggregates. There have been attempts to classify them into groups with names such as boart, ballas, stewartite and framesite, but there is no widely accepted set of criteria. Carbonado, a type in which the diamond grains were sintered (fused without melting by the application of heat and pressure), is black in color and tougher than single crystal diamond. It has never been observed in a volcanic rock. There are many theories for its origin, including formation in a star, but no consensus.\n\nDiamond is the hardest known natural material on both the Vickers scale and the Mohs scale. Diamond's great hardness relative to other materials has been known since antiquity, and is the source of its name.\n\nDiamond hardness depends on its purity, crystalline perfection and orientation: hardness is higher for flawless, pure crystals oriented to the <111> direction (along the longest diagonal of the cubic diamond lattice). Therefore, whereas it might be possible to scratch some diamonds with other materials, such as boron nitride, the hardest diamonds can only be scratched by other diamonds and nanocrystalline diamond aggregates.\n\nThe hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone. Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds, it maintains its polish extremely well. Unlike many other gems, it is well-suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching—perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings, which are often worn every day.\n\nThe hardest natural diamonds mostly originate from the Copeton and Bingara fields located in the New England area in New South Wales, Australia. These diamonds are generally small, perfect to semiperfect octahedra, and are used to polish other diamonds. Their hardness is associated with the crystal growth form, which is single-stage crystal growth. Most other diamonds show more evidence of multiple growth stages, which produce inclusions, flaws, and defect planes in the crystal lattice, all of which affect their hardness. It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges.\n\nSomewhat related to hardness is another mechanical property \"toughness\", which is a material's ability to resist breakage from forceful impact. The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 7.5–10 MPa·m. This value is good compared to other ceramic materials, but poor compared to most engineering materials such as engineering alloys, which typically exhibit toughnesses over 100 MPa·m. As with any material, the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage. Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others. Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones, prior to faceting. \"Impact toughness\" is one of the main indexes to measure the quality of synthetic industrial diamonds.\n\nDiamond has compressive yield strength of 130–140GPa. This exceptionally high value, along with the hardness and transparency of diamond, are the reasons that diamond anvil cells are the main tool for high pressure experiments. These anvils have reached pressures of . Much higher pressures may be possible with nanocrystalline diamonds.\n\nUsually, attempting to deform bulk diamond crystal by tension or bending results in brittle fracture. However, when single crystalline diamond is in the form of nanometer-sized wires or needles (~100–300 nanometers in diameter), they can be elastically stretched by as much as 9 percent tensile strain without failure, with a maximum local tensile stress of ∼89 to 98 GPa, very close to the theoretical limit for this material.\n\nOther specialized applications also exist or are being developed, including use as semiconductors: some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors, in contrast to most diamonds, which are excellent electrical insulators. The conductivity and blue color originate from boron impurity. Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice, donating a hole into the valence band.\n\nSubstantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally undoped diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition. This conductivity is associated with hydrogen-related species adsorbed at the surface, and it can be removed by annealing or other surface treatments.\n\nDiamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic, which means the diamonds' surface cannot be wet by water, but can be easily wet and stuck by oil. This property can be utilized to extract diamonds using oil when making synthetic diamonds. However, when diamond surfaces are chemically modified with certain ions, they are expected to become so hydrophilic that they can stabilize multiple layers of water ice at human body temperature.\n\nThe surface of diamonds is partially oxidized. The oxidized surface can be reduced by heat treatment under hydrogen flow. That is to say, this heat treatment partially removes oxygen-containing functional groups. But diamonds (spC) are unstable against high temperature (above about ) under atmospheric pressure. The structure gradually changes into spC above this temperature. Thus, diamonds should be reduced under this temperature.\n\nAt room temperature, diamonds do not react with any chemical reagents including strong acids and bases. \n\nIn an atmosphere of pure oxygen, diamond has an ignition point that ranges from to ; smaller crystals tend to burn more easily. It increases in temperature from red to white heat and burns with a pale blue flame, and continues to burn after the source of heat is removed. By contrast, in air the combustion will cease as soon as the heat is removed because the oxygen is diluted with nitrogen. A clear, flawless, transparent diamond is completely converted to carbon dioxide; any impurities will be left as ash. Heat generated from cutting a diamond will not start a fire, and neither will a cigarette lighter, but house fires and blow torches are hot enough. Jewelers must be careful when molding the metal in a diamond ring.\n\nDiamond powder of an appropriate grain size (around 50 microns) burns with a shower of sparks after ignition from a flame. Consequently, pyrotechnic compositions based on synthetic diamond powder can be prepared. The resulting sparks are of the usual red-orange color, comparable to charcoal, but show a very linear trajectory which is explained by their high density. Diamond also reacts with fluorine gas above about .\n\nDiamond has a wide bandgap of corresponding to the deep ultraviolet wavelength of 225 nanometers. This means that pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal. Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities. The diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong, and only atoms of nitrogen, boron and hydrogen can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations (up to atomic percents). Transition metals nickel and cobalt, which are commonly used for growth of synthetic diamond by high-pressure high-temperature techniques, have been detected in diamond as individual atoms; the maximum concentration is 0.01% for nickel and even less for cobalt. Virtually any element can be introduced to diamond by ion implantation.\n\nNitrogen is by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds and is responsible for the yellow and brown color in diamonds. Boron is responsible for the blue color. Color in diamond has two additional sources: irradiation (usually by alpha particles), that causes the color in green diamonds, and plastic deformation of the diamond crystal lattice. Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown and perhaps pink and red diamonds. In order of increasing rarity, yellow diamond is followed by brown, colorless, then by blue, green, black, pink, orange, purple, and red. \"Black\", or Carbonado, diamonds are not truly black, but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance. Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless. Most diamond impurities replace a carbon atom in the crystal lattice, known as a carbon flaw. The most common impurity, nitrogen, causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present. The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the \"normal color range\", and applies a grading scale from \"D\" (colorless) to \"Z\" (light yellow). Diamonds of a different color, such as blue, are called \"fancy colored\" diamonds and fall under a different grading scale.\n\nIn 2008, the Wittelsbach Diamond, a blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain, fetched over US$24 million at a Christie's auction. In May 2009, a blue diamond fetched the highest price per carat ever paid for a diamond when it was sold at auction for 10.5 million Swiss francs (6.97 million euros, or US$9.5 million at the time). That record was, however, beaten the same year: a vivid pink diamond was sold for $10.8 million in Hong Kong on December 1, 2009.\n\nDiamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity (900–).. Their high refractive index is also indicative, but other materials have similar refractivity. Diamonds cut glass, but this does not positively identify a diamond because other materials, such as quartz, also lie above glass on the Mohs scale and can also cut it. Diamonds can scratch other diamonds, but this can result in damage to one or both stones. Hardness tests are infrequently used in practical gemology because of their potentially destructive nature. The extreme hardness and high value of diamond means that gems are typically polished slowly, using painstaking traditional techniques and greater attention to detail than is the case with most other gemstones; these tend to result in extremely flat, highly polished facets with exceptionally sharp facet edges. Diamonds also possess an extremely high refractive index and fairly high dispersion. Taken together, these factors affect the overall appearance of a polished diamond and most diamantaires still rely upon skilled use of a loupe (magnifying glass) to identify diamonds \"by eye\".\n\nDiamonds are extremely rare, with concentrations of at most parts per billion in source rock. Before the 20th century, most diamonds were found in alluvial deposits. Loose diamonds are also found along existing and ancient shorelines, where they tend to accumulate because of their size and density. Rarely, they have been found in glacial till (notably in Wisconsin and Indiana), but these deposits are not of commercial quality. These types of deposit were derived from localized igneous intrusions through weathering and transport by wind or water.\n\nMost diamonds come from the Earth's mantle, and most of this section discusses those diamonds. However, there are other sources. Some blocks of the crust, or terranes, have been buried deep enough as the crust thickened so they experienced ultra-high-pressure metamorphism. These have evenly distributed \"microdiamonds\" that show no sign of transport by magma. In addition, when meteorites strike the ground, the shock wave can produce high enough temperatures and pressures for \"microdiamonds\" and \"nanodiamonds\" to form. Impact-type microdiamonds can be used as an indicator of ancient impact craters. Popigai crater in Russia may have the world's largest diamond deposit, estimated at trillions of carats, and formed by an asteroid impact.\n\nA common misconception is that diamonds are formed from highly compressed coal. Coal is formed from buried prehistoric plants, and most diamonds that have been dated are far older than the first land plants. It is possible that diamonds can form from coal in subduction zones, but diamonds formed in this way are rare, and the carbon source is more likely carbonate rocks and organic carbon in sediments, rather than coal.\n\nDiamonds are far from evenly distributed over the Earth. A rule of thumb known as Clifford's rule states that they are almost always found in kimberlites on the oldest part of cratons, the stable cores of continents with typical ages of 2.5 billion years or more. However, there are exceptions. The Argyle diamond mine in Australia, the largest producer of diamonds by weight in the world, is located in a \"mobile belt\", also known as an \"orogenic belt\", a weaker zone surrounding the central craton that has undergone compressional tectonics. Instead of kimberlite, the host rock is lamproite. Lamproites with diamonds that are not economically viable are also found in the United States, India and Australia. In addition, diamonds in the Wawa belt of the Superior province in Canada and microdiamonds in the island arc of Japan are found in a type of rock called lamprophyre.\n\nKimberlites can be found in narrow (1 to 4 meters) dikes and sills, and in pipes with diameters that range from about 75 m to 1.5 km. Fresh rock is dark bluish green to greenish gray, but after exposure rapidly turns brown and crumbles. It is hybrid rock with a chaotic mixture of small minerals and rock fragments (clasts) up to the size of watermelons. They are a mixture of xenocrysts and xenoliths (minerals and rocks carried up from the lower crust and mantle), pieces of surface rock, altered minerals such as serpentine, and new minerals that crystallized during the eruption. The texture varies with depth. The composition forms a continuum with carbonatites, but the latter have too much oxygen for carbon to exist in a pure form. Instead, it is locked up in the mineral calcite ().\n\nAll three of the diamond-bearing rocks (kimberlite, lamproite and lamprophyre) lack certain minerals (melilite and kalsilite) that are incompatible with diamond formation. In kimberlite, olivine is large and conspicuous, while lamproite has Ti-phlogopite and lamprophyre has biotite and amphibole. They are all derived from magma types that erupt rapidly from small amounts of melt, are rich in volatiles and magnesium oxide, and are less oxidizing than more common mantle melts such as basalt. These characteristics allow the melts to carry diamonds to the surface before they dissolve.\n\nKimberlite pipes can be difficult to find. They weather quickly (within a few years after exposure) and tend to have lower topographic relief than surrounding rock. If they are visible in outcrops, the diamonds are never visible because they are so rare. In any case, kimberlites are often covered with vegetation, sediments, soils or lakes. In modern searches, geophysical methods such as aeromagnetic surveys, electrical resistivity and gravimetry, help identify promising regions to explore. This is aided by isotopic dating and modeling of the geological history. Then surveyors must go to the area and collect samples, looking for kimberlite fragments or \"indicator minerals\". The latter have compositions that reflect the conditions where diamonds form, such as extreme melt depletion or high pressures in eclogites. However, indicator minerals can be misleading; a better approach is geothermobarometry, where the compositions of minerals are analyzed as if they were in equilibrium with mantle minerals.\n\nFinding kimberlites requires persistence, and only a small fraction contain diamonds that are commercially viable. The only major discoveries since about 1980 have been in Canada. Since existing mines have lifetimes of as little as 25 years, there could be a shortage of new diamonds in the future.\n\nDiamonds are dated by analyzing inclusions using the decay of radioactive isotopes. Depending on the elemental abundances, one can look at the decay of rubidium to strontium, samarium to neodymium, uranium to lead, argon-40 to argon-39, or rhenium to osmium. Those found in kimberlites have ages ranging from 1 to 3.5 billion years, and there can be multiple ages in the same kimberlite, indicating multiple episodes of diamond formation. The kimberlites themselves are much younger. Most of them have ages between tens of millions and 300 million years old, although there are some older exceptions (Argyle, Premier and Wawa). Thus, the kimberlites formed independently of the diamonds and served only to transport them to the surface. Kimberlites are also much younger than the cratons they have erupted through. The reason for the lack of older kimberlites is unknown, but it suggests there was some change in mantle chemistry or tectonics. No kimberlite has erupted in human history.\n\nMost gem-quality diamonds come from depths of 150–250 km in the lithosphere. Such depths occur below cratons in \"mantle keels\", the thickest part of the lithosphere. These regions have high enough pressure and temperature to allow diamonds to form and they are not convecting, so diamonds can be stored for billions of years until a kimberlite eruption samples them.\n\nHost rocks in a mantle keel include harzburgite and lherzolite, two type of peridotite. The most dominant rock type in the upper mantle, peridotite is an igneous rock consisting mostly of the minerals olivine and pyroxene; it is low in silica and high in magnesium. However, diamonds in peridotite rarely survive the trip to the surface. Another common source that does keep diamonds intact is eclogite, a metamorphic rock that typically forms from basalt as an oceanic plate plunges into the mantle at a subduction zone.\n\nA smaller fraction of diamonds (about 150 have been studied) come from depths of 330–660 km, a region that includes the transition zone. They formed in eclogite but are distinguished from diamonds of shallower origin by inclusions of majorite (a form of garnet with excess silicon). A similar proportion of diamonds comes from the lower mantle at depths between 660 and 800 km.\n\nDiamond is thermodynamically stable at high pressures and temperatures, with the phase transition from graphite occurring at greater temperatures as the pressure increases. Thus, underneath continents it becomes stable at temperatures of 950 degrees Celsius and pressures of 4.5 gigapascals, corresponding to depths of 150 kilometers or greater. In subduction zones, which are colder, it becomes stable at temperatures of 800 degrees C and pressures of 3.5 gigapascals. At depths greater than 240 km, iron-nickel metal phases are present and carbon is likely to be either dissolved in them or in the form of carbides. Thus, the deeper origin of some diamonds may reflect unusual growth environments.\n\nIn 2018 the first known natural samples of a phase of ice called Ice VII were found as inclusions in diamond samples. The inclusions formed at depths between 400 and 800 km, straddling the upper and lower mantle, and provide evidence for water-rich fluid at these depths.\n\nThe mantle has roughly one billion gigatonnes of carbon (for comparison, the atmosphere-ocean system has about 44,000 gigatonnes). The carbon has two stable isotopes, C and C, in a ratio of approximately 99:1 by mass. This ratio has a wide range in meteorites, which implies that it also varied a lot in the early Earth. It can also be altered by surface processes like photosynthesis. The fraction is generally compared to a standard sample using a ratio δC expressed in parts per thousand. Common rocks from the mantle such as basalts, carbonatites and kimberlites have ratios between −8 and −2. On the surface, organic sediments have an average of −25 while carbonates have an average of 0.\n\nPopulations of diamonds from different sources have distributions of δC that vary markedly. Peridotitic diamonds are mostly within the typical mantle range; eclogitic diamonds have values from −40 to +3, although the peak of the distribution is in the mantle range. This variability implies that they are not formed from carbon that is \"primordial\" (having resided in the mantle since the Earth formed). Instead, they are the result of tectonic processes, although (given the ages of diamonds) not necessarily the same tectonic processes that act in the present.\n\nDiamonds in the mantle form through a \"metasomatic\" process where a C-O-H-N-S fluid or melt dissolves minerals in a rock and replaces them with new minerals. (The vague term C-O-H-N-S is commonly used because the exact composition is not known.) Diamonds form from this fluid either by reduction of oxidized carbon (e.g., CO or CO) or oxidation of a reduced phase such as methane.\n\nUsing probes such as polarized light, photoluminescence and cathodoluminescence, a series of growth zones can be identified in diamonds. The characteristic pattern in diamonds from the lithosphere involves a nearly concentric series of zones with very thin oscillations in luminescence and alternating episodes where the carbon is resorbed by the fluid and then grown again. Diamonds from below the lithosphere have a more irregular, almost polycrystalline texture, reflecting the higher temperatures and pressures as well as the transport of the diamonds by convection.\n\nGeological evidence supports a model in which kimberlite magma rose at 4–20 meters per second, creating an upward path by hydraulic fracturing of the rock. As the pressure decreases, a vapor phase exsolves from the magma, and this helps to keep the magma fluid. At the surface, the initial eruption explodes out through fissures at high speeds (over ). Then, at lower pressures, the rock is eroded, forming a pipe and producing fragmented rock (breccia). As the eruption wanes, there is pyroclastic phase and then metamorphism and hydration produces serpentinites.\n\nAlthough diamonds on Earth are rare, they are very common in space. In meteorites, about three percent of the carbon is in the form of nanodiamonds, having diameters of a few nanometers. Sufficiently small diamonds can form in the cold of space because their lower surface energy makes them more stable than graphite. The isotopic signatures of some nanodiamonds indicate they were formed outside the Solar System in stars.\n\nHigh pressure experiments predict that large quantities of diamonds condense from methane into a \"diamond rain\" on the ice giant planets Uranus and Neptune. Some extrasolar planets may be almost entirely composed of diamond.\n\nDiamonds may exist in carbon-rich stars, particularly white dwarfs. One theory for the origin of carbonado, the toughest form of diamond, is that it originated in a white dwarf or supernova. Diamonds formed in stars may have been the first minerals.\n\nThe most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment, and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials. The markets for gem-grade and industrial-grade diamonds value diamonds differently.\n\nThe dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds. In the 20th century, experts in gemology developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem. Four characteristics, known informally as the \"four Cs\", are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds: these are its mass in \"carats\" (a carat being equal to 0.2 grams), \"cut\" (quality of the cut is graded according to proportions, symmetry and polish), \"color\" (how close to white or colorless; for fancy diamonds how intense is its hue), and \"clarity\" (how free is it from inclusions). A large, flawless diamond is known as a paragon.\n\nA large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists. Although most gem-grade diamonds are sold newly polished, there is a well-established market for resale of polished diamonds (e.g. pawnbroking, auctions, second-hand jewelry stores, diamantaires, bourses, etc.). One hallmark of the trade in gem-quality diamonds is its remarkable concentration: wholesale trade and diamond cutting is limited to just a few locations; in 2003, 92% of the world's diamonds were cut and polished in Surat, India. Other important centers of diamond cutting and trading are the Antwerp diamond district in Belgium, where the International Gemological Institute is based, London, the Diamond District in New York City, the Diamond Exchange District in Tel Aviv, and Amsterdam. One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits: several large primary kimberlite-pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share (such as the Jwaneng mine in Botswana, which is a single large-pit mine that can produce between of diamonds per year). Secondary alluvial diamond deposits, on the other hand, tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometers (e.g., alluvial deposits in Brazil).\n\nThe production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players, and concentrated in traditional diamond trading centers, the most important being Antwerp, where 80% of all rough diamonds, 50% of all cut diamonds and more than 50% of all rough, cut and industrial diamonds combined are handled. This makes Antwerp a de facto \"world diamond capital\". The city of Antwerp also hosts the Antwerpsche Diamantkring, created in 1929 to become the first and biggest diamond bourse dedicated to rough diamonds. Another important diamond center is New York City, where almost 80% of the world's diamonds are sold, including auction sales.\n\nThe De Beers company, as the world's largest diamond mining company, holds a dominant position in the industry, and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British imperialist Cecil Rhodes. De Beers is currently the world's largest operator of diamond production facilities (mines) and distribution channels for gem-quality diamonds. The Diamond Trading Company (DTC) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers-operated mines. De Beers and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40% of annual world diamond production. For most of the 20th century over 80% of the world's rough diamonds passed through De Beers, but by 2001–2009 the figure had decreased to around 45%, and by 2013 the company's market share had further decreased to around 38% in value terms and even less by volume. De Beers sold off the vast majority of its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s – early 2000s and the remainder largely represents working stock (diamonds that are being sorted before sale). This was well documented in the press but remains little known to the general public.\n\nAs a part of reducing its influence, De Beers withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased, at the end of 2008, purchasing Russian diamonds mined by the largest Russian diamond company Alrosa. As of January 2011, De Beers states that it only sells diamonds from the following four countries: Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Canada. Alrosa had to suspend their sales in October 2008 due to the global energy crisis, but the company reported that it had resumed selling rough diamonds on the open market by October 2009. Apart from Alrosa, other important diamond mining companies include BHP Billiton, which is the world's largest mining company; Rio Tinto Group, the owner of the Argyle (100%), Diavik (60%), and Murowa (78%) diamond mines; and Petra Diamonds, the owner of several major diamond mines in Africa.\n\nFurther down the supply chain, members of The World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) act as a medium for wholesale diamond exchange, trading both polished and rough diamonds. The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centers such as Tel Aviv, Antwerp, Johannesburg and other cities across the US, Europe and Asia. In 2000, the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts. WFDB's additional activities include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years, as well as the establishment of the \"International Diamond Council\" (IDC) to oversee diamond grading.\n\nOnce purchased by Sightholders (which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three-year supply contract with DTC), diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones ('industrial' stones are regarded as a by-product of the gemstone market; they are used for abrasives). The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide. Traditional diamond cutting centers are Antwerp, Amsterdam, Johannesburg, New York City, and Tel Aviv. Recently, diamond cutting centers have been established in China, India, Thailand, Namibia and Botswana. Cutting centers with lower cost of labor, notably Surat in Gujarat, India, handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds, while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America. The recent expansion of this industry in India, employing low cost labor, has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible.\n\nDiamonds prepared as gemstones are sold on diamond exchanges called \"bourses\". There are 28 registered diamond bourses in the world. Bourses are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses, after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer. Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry, or sold unset (\"loose\"). According to the Rio Tinto Group, in 2002 the diamonds produced and released to the market were valued at US$9 billion as rough diamonds, US$14 billion after being cut and polished, US$28 billion in wholesale diamond jewelry, and US$57 billion in retail sales.\n\nMined rough diamonds are converted into gems through a multi-step process called \"cutting\".\nDiamonds are extremely hard, but also brittle and can be split up by a single blow. Therefore, diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills, scientific knowledge, tools and experience. Its final goal is to produce a faceted jewel where the specific angles between the facets would optimize the diamond luster, that is dispersion of white light, whereas the number and area of facets would determine the weight of the final product. The weight reduction upon cutting is significant and can be of the order of 50%. Several possible shapes are considered, but the final decision is often determined not only by scientific, but also practical considerations. For example, the diamond might be intended for display or for wear, in a ring or a necklace, singled or surrounded by other gems of certain color and shape. Some of them may be considered as classical, such as round, pear, marquise, oval, hearts and arrows diamonds, etc. Some of them are special, produced by certain companies, for example, Phoenix, Cushion, Sole Mio diamonds, etc.\n\nThe most time-consuming part of the cutting is the preliminary analysis of the rough stone. It needs to address a large number of issues, bears much responsibility, and therefore can last years in case of unique diamonds. The following issues are considered:\nBULLET::::- The hardness of diamond and its ability to cleave strongly depend on the crystal orientation. Therefore, the crystallographic structure of the diamond to be cut is analyzed using X-ray diffraction to choose the optimal cutting directions.\nBULLET::::- Most diamonds contain visible non-diamond inclusions and crystal flaws. The cutter has to decide which flaws are to be removed by the cutting and which could be kept.\nBULLET::::- The diamond can be split by a single, well calculated blow of a hammer to a pointed tool, which is quick, but risky. Alternatively, it can be cut with a diamond saw, which is a more reliable but tedious procedure.\n\nAfter initial cutting, the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing. Unlike cutting, which is a responsible but quick operation, polishing removes material by gradual erosion and is extremely time consuming. The associated technique is well developed; it is considered as a routine and can be performed by technicians. After polishing, the diamond is reexamined for possible flaws, either remaining or induced by the process. Those flaws are concealed through various diamond enhancement techniques, such as repolishing, crack filling, or clever arrangement of the stone in the jewelry. Remaining non-diamond inclusions are removed through laser drilling and filling of the voids produced.\n\nMarketing has significantly affected the image of diamond as a valuable commodity.\n\nN. W. Ayer & Son, the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid-20th century, succeeded in reviving the American diamond market. And the firm created new markets in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before. N. W. Ayer's marketing included product placement, advertising focused on the diamond product itself rather than the De Beers brand, and associations with celebrities and royalty. Without advertising the De Beers brand, De Beers was advertising its competitors' diamond products as well, but this was not a concern as De Beers dominated the diamond market throughout the 20th century. De Beers' market share dipped temporarily to 2nd place in the global market below Alrosa in the aftermath of the global economic crisis of 2008, down to less than 29% in terms of carats mined, rather than sold. The campaign lasted for decades but was effectively discontinued by early 2011. De Beers still advertises diamonds, but the advertising now mostly promotes its own brands, or licensed product lines, rather than completely \"generic\" diamond products. The campaign was perhaps best captured by the slogan \"a diamond is forever\". This slogan is now being used by De Beers Diamond Jewelers, a jewelry firm which is a 50%/50% joint venture between the De Beers mining company and LVMH, the luxury goods conglomerate.\n\nBrown-colored diamonds constituted a significant part of the diamond production, and were predominantly used for industrial purposes. They were seen as worthless for jewelry (not even being assessed on the diamond color scale). After the development of Argyle diamond mine in Australia in 1986, and marketing, brown diamonds have become acceptable gems. The change was mostly due to the numbers: the Argyle mine, with its of diamonds per year, makes about one-third of global production of natural diamonds; 80% of Argyle diamonds are brown.\n\nIndustrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and thermal conductivity, making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds, such as the 4 Cs, irrelevant for most applications. 80% of mined diamonds (equal to about annually) are unsuitable for use as gemstones and are used industrially. In addition to mined diamonds, synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s; another of synthetic diamond is produced annually for industrial use (in 2004; in 2014 it is , 90% of which is produced in China). Approximately 90% of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin.\n\nThe boundary between gem-quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly defined and partly depends on market conditions (for example, if demand for polished diamonds is high, some lower-grade stones will be polished into low-quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use). Within the category of industrial diamonds, there is a sub-category comprising the lowest-quality, mostly opaque stones, which are known as bort.\n\nIndustrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness, which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools. As the hardest known naturally occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds. Common industrial applications of this property include diamond-tipped drill bits and saws, and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive. Less expensive industrial-grade diamonds, known as bort, with more flaws and poorer color than gems, are used for such purposes. Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds, as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining, leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives.\n\nSpecialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high-pressure experiments (see diamond anvil cell), high-performance bearings, and limited use in specialized windows. With the continuing advances being made in the production of synthetic diamonds, future applications are becoming feasible. The high thermal conductivity of diamond makes it suitable as a heat sink for integrated circuits in electronics.\n\nApproximately of diamonds are mined annually, with a total value of nearly US$9 billion, and about are synthesized annually.\n\nRoughly 49% of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa, although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada, India, Russia, Brazil, and Australia. They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes, which can bring diamond crystals, originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form, to the surface. The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as concerns over the sale of \"blood diamonds\" or \"conflict diamonds\" by African paramilitary groups. The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world.\n\nOnly a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds. The ore is crushed, during which care is required not to destroy larger diamonds, and then sorted by density. Today, diamonds are located in the diamond-rich density fraction with the help of X-ray fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are done by hand. Before the use of X-rays became commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.\n\nHistorically, diamonds were found only in alluvial deposits in Guntur and Krishna district of the Krishna River delta in Southern India. India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BC to the mid-18th century AD, but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non-Indian diamonds were found in 1725. Currently, one of the most prominent Indian mines is located at Panna.\n\nDiamond extraction from primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond Fields in South Africa.\nProduction has increased over time and now an accumulated total of have been mined since that date. Twenty percent of that amount has been mined in the last five years, and during the last 10 years, nine new mines have started production; four more are waiting to be opened soon. Most of these mines are located in Canada, Zimbabwe, Angola, and one in Russia.\n\nIn the U.S., diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Montana. In 2004, the discovery of a microscopic diamond in the U.S. led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana. The Crater of Diamonds State Park in Arkansas is open to the public, and is the only mine in the world where members of the public can dig for diamonds.\n\nToday, most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia (mostly in Sakha Republic, for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Botswana, Australia (Northern and Western Australia) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nIn 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, according to the British Geological Survey. Australia boasts the richest diamantiferous pipe, with production from the Argyle diamond mine reaching peak levels of 42 metric tons per year in the 1990s.\nThere are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil.\nDiamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes.\n\nIn some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries, revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines, using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations. Diamonds sold through this process are known as \"conflict diamonds\" or \"blood diamonds\".\n\nIn response to public concerns that their diamond purchases were contributing to war and human rights abuses in central and western Africa, the United Nations, the diamond industry and diamond-trading nations introduced the Kimberley Process in 2002. The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups. This is done by requiring diamond-producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities. Although the Kimberley Process has been moderately successful in limiting the number of conflict diamonds entering the market, some still find their way in. According to the International Diamond Manufacturers Association, conflict diamonds constitute 2–3% of all diamonds traded. Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process: (1) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders, and (2) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered \"clean\".\n\nThe Canadian Government has set up a body known as the Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct to help authenticate Canadian diamonds. This is a stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the \"conflict free\" label of Canadian diamonds.\n\nSynthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth. The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones. This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds, which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century. However, in recent years it has become possible to produce gem-quality synthetic diamonds of significant size. It is possible to make colorless synthetic gemstones that, on a molecular level, are identical to natural stones and so visually similar that only a gemologist with special equipment can tell the difference.\n\nThe majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow and are produced by so-called \"high-pressure high-temperature\" (HPHT) processes. The yellow color is caused by nitrogen impurities. Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue, green or pink, which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis.\nAnother popular method of growing synthetic diamond is chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The growth occurs under low pressure (below atmospheric pressure). It involves feeding a mixture of gases (typically 1 to 99 methane to hydrogen) into a chamber and splitting them to chemically active radicals in a plasma ignited by microwaves, hot filament, arc discharge, welding torch or laser. This method is mostly used for coatings, but can also produce single crystals several millimeters in size (see picture).\n\nAs of 2010, nearly all 5,000 million carats (1,000 tonnes) of synthetic diamonds produced per year are for industrial use. Around 50% of the 133 million carats of natural diamonds mined per year end up in industrial use. Mining companies' expenses average 40 to 60 US dollars per carat for natural colorless diamonds, while synthetic manufacturers' expenses average $2,500 per carat for synthetic, gem-quality colorless diamonds. However, a purchaser is more likely to encounter a synthetic when looking for a fancy-colored diamond because nearly all synthetic diamonds are fancy-colored, while only 0.01% of natural diamonds are.\n\nA diamond simulant is a non-diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond, and may be referred to as diamante. Cubic zirconia is the most common. The gemstone moissanite (silicon carbide) can be treated as a diamond simulant, though more costly to produce than cubic zirconia. Both are produced synthetically.\n\nDiamond enhancements are specific treatments performed on natural or synthetic diamonds (usually those already cut and polished into a gem), which are designed to better the gemological characteristics of the stone in one or more ways. These include laser drilling to remove inclusions, application of sealants to fill cracks, treatments to improve a white diamond's color grade, and treatments to give fancy color to a white diamond.\n\nCoatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more \"diamond-like\" appearance. One such substance is diamond-like carbon—an amorphous carbonaceous material that has some physical properties similar to those of the diamond. Advertising suggests that such a coating would transfer some of these diamond-like properties to the coated stone, hence enhancing the diamond simulant. Techniques such as Raman spectroscopy should easily identify such a treatment.\n\nEarly diamond identification tests included a scratch test relying on the superior hardness of diamond. This test is destructive, as a diamond can scratch another diamond, and is rarely used nowadays. Instead, diamond identification relies on its superior thermal conductivity. Electronic thermal probes are widely used in the gemological centers to separate diamonds from their imitations. These probes consist of a pair of battery-powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip. One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip: if the stone being tested is a diamond, it will conduct the tip's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop. This test takes about two to three seconds.\n\nWhereas the thermal probe can separate diamonds from most of their simulants, distinguishing between various types of diamond, for example synthetic or natural, irradiated or non-irradiated, etc., requires more advanced, optical techniques. Those techniques are also used for some diamonds simulants, such as silicon carbide, which pass the thermal conductivity test. Optical techniques can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds. They can also identify the vast majority of treated natural diamonds. \"Perfect\" crystals (at the atomic lattice level) have never been found, so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections, arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth, that allow them to be distinguished from each other.\n\nLaboratories use techniques such as spectroscopy, microscopy and luminescence under shortwave ultraviolet light to determine a diamond's origin. They also use specially made instruments to aid them in the identification process. Two screening instruments are the \"DiamondSure\" and the \"DiamondView\", both produced by the DTC and marketed by the GIA.\n\nSeveral methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed, depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond. CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence. D-J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemmological Institute's Diamond Spotter. Stones in the D-Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer, a tool developed by De Beers. Similarly, natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws, such as inclusions of foreign material, that are not seen in synthetic diamonds.\n\nScreening devices based on diamond type detection can be used to make a distinction between diamonds that are certainly natural and diamonds that are potentially synthetic. Those potentially synthetic diamonds require more investigation in a specialized lab. Examples of commercial screening devices are D-Screen (WTOCD / HRD Antwerp), Alpha Diamond Analyzer (Bruker / HRD Antwerp) and D-Secure (DRC Techno).\n\nOccasionally, large thefts of diamonds take place. In February 2013 armed robbers carried out a raid at Brussels Airport and escaped with gems estimated to be worth US$50M (£32M; €37M). The gang broke through a perimeter fence and raided the cargo hold of a Swiss-bound plane. The gang have since been arrested and large amounts of cash and diamonds recovered.\n\nThe identification of stolen diamonds presents a set of difficult problems. Rough diamonds will have a distinctive shape depending on whether their source is a mine or from an alluvial environment such as a beach or river—alluvial diamonds have smoother surfaces than those that have been mined. Determining the provenance of cut and polished stones is much more complex.\n\nThe Kimberley Process was developed to monitor the trade in rough diamonds and prevent their being used to fund violence. Before exporting, rough diamonds are certificated by the government of the country of origin. Some countries, such as Venezuela, are not party to the agreement. The Kimberley Process does not apply to local sales of rough diamonds within a country.\n\nDiamonds may be etched by laser with marks invisible to the naked eye. Lazare Kaplan, a US-based company, developed this method. However, whatever is marked on a diamond can readily be removed.\n\nThe name \"diamond\" is derived from the ancient Greek \"ἀδάμας\" \"(adámas\"), \"proper\", \"unalterable\", \"unbreakable\", \"untamed\", from ἀ- (a-), \"un-\" + \"δαμάω\" (\"damáō\"), \"I overpower\", \"I tame\". Diamonds are thought to have been first recognized and mined in India, where significant alluvial deposits of the stone could be found many centuries ago along the rivers Penner, Krishna and Godavari. Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3,000 years but most likely 6,000 years.\n\nDiamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India. Their usage in engraving tools also dates to early human history. The popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply, improved cutting and polishing techniques, growth in the world economy, and innovative and successful advertising campaigns.\n\nIn 1772, the French scientist Antoine Lavoisier used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen, and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide, proving that diamond is composed of carbon. Later in 1797, the English chemist Smithson Tennant repeated and expanded that experiment. By demonstrating that burning diamond and graphite releases the same amount of gas, he established the chemical equivalence of these substances.\n\nBULLET::::- Deep carbon cycle\nBULLET::::- Diamondoid\nBULLET::::- List of diamonds\nBULLET::::- List of largest rough diamonds\nBULLET::::- List of minerals\nBULLET::::- Superhard material\nBULLET::::- Extraterrestrial diamonds\n\n\nBULLET::::- Properties of diamond: Ioffe database\nBULLET::::- \"A Contribution to the Understanding of Blue Fluorescence on the Appearance of Diamonds\". (2007) Gemological Institute of America (GIA)\nBULLET::::- Tyson, Peter (November 2000). \"Diamonds in the Sky\". Retrieved March 10, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Have You Ever Tried to Sell a Diamond?\n"}
{"id": "8083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8083", "title": "Dr. Dre", "text": "Dr. Dre\n\nAndre Romelle Young (born February 18, 1965), known professionally as Dr. Dre, is an American rapper, record producer, entrepreneur, record executive, actor, and audio engineer. He is the founder and CEO of Aftermath Entertainment and Beats Electronics, and was previously co-owner of Death Row Records. Dr. Dre began his career as a member of the World Class Wreckin' Cru in 1985, but found fame with the influential gangsta rap group N.W.A, which popularized explicit lyrics in rap to detail the violence of street life. He is credited as a key figure in the crafting and popularization of West Coast G-funk, a hip hop subgenre characterized as synthesizer-based with slow, heavy beats. , he is the third richest figure in hip hop, with a net worth of US$770 million.\n\nDr. Dre's solo debut studio album \"The Chronic\" (1992), released under Death Row Records, made him one of the best-selling American music artists of 1993. It earned him a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance for the single \"Let Me Ride\", as well as several accolades for the single \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\". That year, he produced Death Row labelmate Snoop Doggy Dogg's quadruple platinum debut \"Doggystyle\", and mentored producers such as his step-brother Warren G (leading to the multi-platinum debut \"Regulate...G Funk Era\" in 1994) and Snoop Dogg's cousin Daz Dillinger (leading to the double-platinum debut \"Dogg Food\" by Tha Dogg Pound in 1995). In 1996, Dr. Dre left Death Row Records to establish his own label, Aftermath Entertainment. He produced a compilation album, \"Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath,\" in 1996, and released a solo album, \"2001,\" in 1999. During the 2000s, Dr. Dre focused on producing other artists, occasionally contributing vocals. Dr. Dre signed Eminem in 1998 and 50 Cent in 2002, and co-produced their albums.\n\nDr. Dre has won six Grammy Awards, including Producer of the Year; Non-Classical. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Dre number 56 on the list of 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. He has produced albums for and overseen the careers of many rappers, including 2Pac, Eminem, The D.O.C., Snoop Dogg, Xzibit, Knoc-turn'al, 50 Cent, The Game, Kendrick Lamar and Anderson .Paak. He has also had acting roles in movies such as \"Set It Off\", \"The Wash\" and \"Training Day\".\n\nDr. Dre was born as Andre Romelle Young in Compton, California on February 18, 1965, the first child of Theodore and Verna Young. His middle name, Romelle, is derived from his father's amateur rhythm and blues singing group, The Romells. His parents married in 1964, separated in 1968, and divorced in 1972. His mother later remarried to Curtis Crayon and had three children: sons Jerome and Tyree (both deceased) and daughter Shameka. In 1976, Dr. Dre began attending Vanguard Junior High School in Compton, but due to gang violence, he transferred to the safer suburban Roosevelt Junior High School. The family moved often, and they lived in apartments and houses in Compton, Carson, Long Beach and in the Watts and South Central neighborhoods in Los Angeles. Dr. Dre has said that he was mostly raised by his grandmother in New Wilmington Arms housing project in Compton. His mother later married Warren Griffin, which added three stepsisters and one stepbrother to the family; the stepbrother would eventually become rapper Warren G.\n\nDr. Dre is the cousin of producer Sir Jinx. He attended Centennial High School in Compton during his freshman year in 1979, but transferred to Fremont High School in South Central Los Angeles due to poor grades. He attempted to enroll in an apprenticeship program at Northrop Aviation Company, but poor grades at school made him ineligible. Thereafter, he focused on his social life and entertainment for the remainder of his high school years. Dr. Dre fathered a son with Cassandra Joy Greene named Curtis (born December 15, 1981). Curtis was brought up by his mother and first met his father 20 years later, when Curtis became rapper Hood Surgeon.\n\nInspired by the Grandmaster Flash song \"The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel\", Dr. Dre often attended a club called Eve After Dark to watch many DJs and rappers performing live. He subsequently became a DJ in the club, initially under the name \"Dr. J\", based on the nickname of Julius Erving, his favorite basketball player. At the club, he met aspiring rapper Antoine Carraby, later to become member DJ Yella of N.W.A. Soon afterwards he adopted the moniker Dr. Dre, a mix of previous alias Dr. J and his first name, referring to himself as the \"Master of Mixology\". Eve After Dark had a back room with a small four-track studio. In this studio, Dre and Yella recorded several demos. In their first recording session, they recorded a song entitled \"Surgery\", with the lyrics \"calling Dr. Dre to surgery\" serving as the chorus to the song. He later joined the musical group World Class Wreckin' Cru under Kru-Cut in 1984. The group would become stars of the electro-hop scene that dominated early 1980s West Coast hip hop. \"Surgery\", which was officially released after being recorded prior to the group's official formation, would prominently feature Dr. Dre on the turntable. The record would become the group's first hit, selling 50,000 copies within the Compton area.\n\nDr. Dre and DJ Yella also performed mixes for local radio station KDAY, boosting ratings for its afternoon rush-hour show \"The Traffic Jam\". Dr. Dre's earliest recordings were released in 1994 on a compilation titled \"Concrete Roots\". Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the website AllMusic described the compiled music, released \"several years before Dre developed a distinctive style\", as \"surprisingly generic and unengaging\" and \"for dedicated fans only\".\n\nHis frequent absences from school jeopardized his position as a diver on his school's swim team. After high school, he attended Chester Adult School in Compton following his mother's demands for him to get a job or continue his education. After brief attendance at a radio broadcasting school, he relocated to the residence of his father and residence of his grandparents before returning to his mother's house. He later dropped out of Chester to focus on performing at the Eve's After Dark nightclub.\n\nIn 1986, Dr. Dre met rapper O'Shea Jackson—known as Ice Cube—who collaborated with him to record songs for Ruthless Records, a hip hop record label run by local rapper Eazy-E. N.W.A and fellow West Coast rapper Ice-T are widely credited as seminal artists of the gangsta rap genre, a profanity-heavy subgenre of hip hop, replete with gritty depictions of urban crime and gang lifestyle. Not feeling constricted to racially charged political issues pioneered by rap artists such as Public Enemy or Boogie Down Productions, N.W.A favored themes and uncompromising lyrics, offering stark descriptions of violent, inner-city streets. Propelled by the hit \"Fuck tha Police\", the group's first full album \"Straight Outta Compton\" became a major success, despite an almost complete absence of radio airplay or major concert tours. The Federal Bureau of Investigation sent Ruthless Records a warning letter in response to the song's content.\n\nAfter Ice Cube left N.W.A in 1989 over financial disputes, Dr. Dre produced and performed for much of the group's second album \"Efil4zaggin\". He also produced tracks for a number of other acts on Ruthless Records, including Eazy-E's 1988 solo debut \"Eazy-Duz-It\", Above the Law's 1990 debut \"Livin' Like Hustlers\", Michel'le's 1989 self-titled debut, The D.O.C.'s 1989 debut \"No One Can Do It Better\", J.J. Fad's 1988 debut \"Supersonic\" and funk rock musician Jimmy Z's 1991 album \"Muzical Madness\"\n\nAfter a dispute with Eazy-E, Dre left the group at the peak of its popularity in 1991 under the advice of friend, and N.W.A lyricist, The D.O.C. and his bodyguard at the time, Suge Knight. Knight, a notorious strongman and intimidator, was able to have Eazy-E release Young from his contract and, using Dr. Dre as his flagship artist, founded Death Row Records. In 1992 Young released his first single, the title track to the film \"Deep Cover\", a collaboration with rapper Snoop Dogg, whom he met through Warren G. Dr. Dre's debut solo album was \"The Chronic\", released under Death Row Records with Suge Knight as executive producer. Young ushered in a new style of rap, both in terms of musical style and lyrical content, including introducing a number of artists to the industry including Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, Daz Dillinger, RBX, The Lady of Rage, Nate Dogg and Jewell.\n\nOn the strength of singles such as \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\", \"Let Me Ride\", and \"Fuck wit Dre Day (and Everybody's Celebratin')\" (known as \"Dre Day\" for radio and television play), all of which featured Snoop Dogg as guest vocalist, \"The Chronic\" became a cultural phenomenon, its G-funk sound dominating much of hip hop music for the early 1990s. In 1993 the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified the album triple platinum, and Dr. Dre also won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance for his performance on \"Let Me Ride\". For that year, \"Billboard\" magazine also ranked Dr. Dre as the eighth best-selling musical artist, \"The Chronic\" as the sixth best-selling album, and \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\" as the 11th best-selling single.\n\nBesides working on his own material, Dr. Dre produced Snoop Dogg's debut album \"Doggystyle\", which became the first debut album for an artist to enter the \"Billboard\" 200 album charts at number one. In 1994 Dr. Dre produced some songs on the soundtracks to the films \"Above the Rim\" and \"Murder Was the Case\". He collaborated with fellow N.W.A member Ice Cube for the song \"Natural Born Killaz\" in 1995. For the film \"Friday\", Dre recorded \"Keep Their Heads Ringin'\", which reached number ten on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and number 1 on the Hot Rap Singles (now Hot Rap Tracks) charts.\n\nIn 1995, Death Row Records signed rapper 2Pac, and began to position him as their major star: he collaborated with Dr. Dre on the commercially successful single \"California Love\", which became both artists' first song to top the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. However, in March 1996 Young left the label amidst a contract dispute and growing concerns that label boss Suge Knight was corrupt, financially dishonest and out of control. Later that year, he formed his own label, Aftermath Entertainment, under the distribution label for Death Row Records, Interscope Records. Subsequently, Death Row Records suffered poor sales by 1997, especially following the death of 2Pac and the racketeering charges brought against Knight.\n\nDr. Dre also appeared on the single \"No Diggity\" by R&B group Blackstreet in 1996: it too was a sales success, topping the Hot 100 for four consecutive weeks, and later won the award for Best R&B Vocal by a Duo or Group at the 1997 Grammy Awards. After hearing it for the first time, several of Dr. Dre's former Death Row colleagues, including 2Pac, recorded and attempted to release a song titled \"Toss It Up\", containing numerous insults aimed at Dr. Dre and using a deliberately similar instrumental to \"No Diggity\", but were forced to replace the production after Blackstreet issued the label with a cease and desist order stopping them from distributing the song.\n\nThe \"Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath\" album, released on November 26, 1996, featured songs by Dr. Dre himself, as well as by newly signed Aftermath Entertainment artists, and a solo track \"Been There, Done That\", intended as a symbolic farewell to gangsta rap. Despite being classified platinum by the RIAA, the album was not very popular among music fans. In October 1996, Dre performed \"Been There, Done That\" on \"Saturday Night Live\". In 1997, Dr. Dre produced several tracks on The Firm's \"The Album\"; it was met with largely negative reviews from critics. Rumors began to abound that Aftermath was facing financial difficulties. Aftermath Entertainment also faced a trademark infringement lawsuit by the underground thrash metal band Aftermath. \"First Round Knock Out\", a compilation of various tracks produced and performed by Dr. Dre, was also released in 1996, with material ranging from World Class Wreckin' Cru to N.W.A to Death Row recordings. Dr. Dre chose to take no part in the ongoing East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry of the time, instead producing for, and appearing on, several New York artists' releases, such as Nas' \"Nas Is Coming\", LL Cool J's \"Zoom\" and Jay-Z's \"Watch Me\".\n\nThe turning point for Aftermath came in 1998, when Jimmy Iovine, the head of Aftermath's parent label Interscope, suggested that Dr. Dre sign Eminem, a white rapper from Detroit. Dre produced three songs and provided vocals for two on Eminem's successful and controversial debut album \"The Slim Shady LP\", released in 1999. The Dr. Dre-produced lead single from that album, \"My Name Is\", brought Eminem to public attention for the first time, and the success of \"The Slim Shady LP\" – it reached number two on the \"Billboard\" 200 and received general acclaim from critics – revived the label's commercial ambitions and viability.\n\nDr. Dre's second solo album, \"2001\", released on November 16, 1999, was considered an ostentatious return to his gangsta rap roots. It was initially titled \"The Chronic 2000\" to imply being a sequel to his debut solo effort \"The Chronic\" but was re-titled \"2001\" after Death Row Records released an unrelated compilation album with the title \"\" in May 1999. Other tentative titles included \"The Chronic 2001\" and \"Dr. Dre\". The album featured numerous collaborators, including Devin the Dude, Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, Xzibit, Nate Dogg, Eminem, Knoc-turn'al, King T, Defari, Kokane, Mary J. Blige and new protégé Hittman, as well as co-production between Dre and new Aftermath producer Mel-Man. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the website AllMusic described the sound of the album as \"adding ominous strings, soulful vocals, and reggae\" to Dr. Dre's style. The album was highly successful, charting at number two on the \"Billboard\" 200 charts and has since been certified six times platinum, validating a recurring theme on the album: Dr. Dre was still a force to be reckoned with, despite the lack of major releases in the previous few years. The album included popular hit singles \"Still D.R.E.\" and \"Forgot About Dre\", both of which Dr. Dre performed on NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\" on October 23, 1999. Dr. Dre won the Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical in 2000, and joined the Up in Smoke Tour with fellow rappers Eminem, Snoop Dogg, and Ice Cube that year as well.\n\nDuring the course of \"2001\"'s popularity, Dr. Dre was involved in several lawsuits. Lucasfilm Ltd., the film company behind the Star Wars film franchise, sued him over the use of the THX-trademarked \"Deep Note\". The Fatback Band also sued Dr. Dre over alleged infringement regarding its song \"Backstrokin'\" in his song \"Let's Get High\" from the \"2001\" album; Dr. Dre was ordered to pay $1.5 million to the band in 2003. French jazz musician Jacques Loussier sued Aftermath for $10 million in March 2002, claiming that the Dr. Dre-produced Eminem track \"Kill You\" plagiarized his composition \"Pulsion\". The online music file-sharing company Napster also settled a lawsuit with him and metal band Metallica in the summer of 2001, agreeing to block access to certain files that artists do not want to have shared on the network.\n\nFollowing the success of \"2001\", Dr. Dre focused on producing songs and albums for other artists. He co-produced six tracks on Eminem's landmark \"Marshall Mathers LP\", including the Grammy-winning lead single, \"The Real Slim Shady\". The album itself earned a Grammy and proved to be the fastest-selling rap album of all time, moving 1.76 million units in its first week alone. He produced the single \"Family Affair\" by R&B singer Mary J. Blige for her album \"No More Drama\" in 2001. He also produced \"Let Me Blow Ya Mind\", a duet by rapper Eve and No Doubt lead singer Gwen Stefani and signed R&B singer Truth Hurts to Aftermath in 2001. Dr. Dre was the executive producer of Eminem's 2002 release, \"The Eminem Show\". He produced three songs on the album, one of which was released as a single, and he appeared in the award-winning video for \"Without Me\". He also produced The D.O.C.'s 2003 album \"Deuce\", where he made a guest appearance on the tracks \"Psychic Pymp Hotline\", \"Gorilla Pympin'\" and \"Judgment Day\".\n\nAnother copyright-related lawsuit hit Dr. Dre in the fall of 2002, when Sa Re Ga Ma, a film and music company based in Calcutta, India, sued Aftermath Entertainment over an uncredited sample of the Lata Mangeshkar song \"Thoda Resham Lagta Hai\" on the Aftermath-produced song \"Addictive\" by singer Truth Hurts. In February 2003, a judge ruled that Aftermath would have to halt sales of Truth Hurts' album \"Truthfully Speaking\" if the company would not credit Mangeshkar.\n\nAnother successful album on the Aftermath label was \"Get Rich or Die Tryin'\", the 2003 major-label debut album by Queens, New York-based rapper 50 Cent. Dr. Dre produced or co-produced four tracks on the album, including the hit single \"In da Club\", a joint production between Aftermath, Eminem's boutique label Shady Records and Interscope. Eminem's fourth album since joining Aftermath, \"Encore\", again saw Dre taking on the role of executive producer, and this time he was more actively involved in the music, producing or co-producing a total of eight tracks, including three singles. In November 2004, at the \"Vibe\" magazine awards show in Los Angeles, Dr. Dre was attacked by a fan named Jimmy James Johnson, who was supposedly asking for an autograph. In the resulting scuffle, then-G-Unit rapper Young Buck stabbed the man. Johnson claimed that Suge Knight, president of Death Row Records, paid him $5,000 to assault Dre in order to humiliate him before he received his Lifetime Achievement Award. Knight immediately went on CBS's \"The Late Late Show\" to deny involvement and insisted that he supported Dr. Dre and wanted Johnson charged. In September 2005, Johnson was sentenced to a year in prison and ordered to stay away from Dr. Dre until 2008.\n\nDr. Dre also produced \"How We Do\", a 2005 hit single from rapper The Game from his album \"The Documentary\", as well as tracks on 50 Cent's successful second album \"The Massacre\". For an issue of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine in April 2005, Dr. Dre was ranked 54th out of 100 artists for \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list \"The Immortals: The Greatest Artists of All Time\". Kanye West wrote the summary for Dr. Dre, where he stated Dr. Dre's song \"Xxplosive\" as where he \"got (his) whole sound from\".\n\nIn November 2006, Dr. Dre began working with Raekwon on his album \"Only Built 4 Cuban Linx II\". He also produced tracks for the rap albums \"Buck the World\" by Young Buck, \"Curtis\" by 50 Cent, \"Tha Blue Carpet Treatment\" by Snoop Dogg, and \"Kingdom Come\" by Jay-Z. Dre also appeared on Timbaland's track \"Bounce\", from his 2007 solo album, \"Timbaland Presents Shock Value\" alongside, Missy Elliott, and Justin Timberlake. During this period, The D.O.C. stated that Dre had been working with him on his fourth album \"Voices through Hot Vessels\", which he planned to release after \"Detox\" arrived.\n\nPlanned but unreleased albums during Dr. Dre's tenure at Aftermath have included a full-length reunion with Snoop Dogg titled \"Breakup to Makeup\", an album with fellow former N.W.A member Ice Cube which was to be titled \"Heltah Skeltah\", an N.W.A reunion album, and a joint album with fellow producer Timbaland titled \"Chairmen of the Board\".\n\nIn 2007, Dr. Dre's third studio album, formerly known as \"Detox\", was slated to be his final studio album. Work for the upcoming album dates back to 2001, where its first version was called \"the most advanced rap album ever\", by producer Scott Storch. Later that same year, he decided to stop working on the album to focus on producing for other artists, but then changed his mind; the album had initially been set for a fall 2005 release. Producers confirmed to work on the album include DJ Khalil, Nottz, Bernard \"Focus\" Edwards Jr., Hi-Tek, J.R. Rotem, RZA, Jay-Z, Warren G, and Boi-1da. Snoop Dogg claimed that \"Detox\" was finished, according to a June 2008 report by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine. After another delay based on producing other artists' work, \"Detox\" was then scheduled for a 2010 release, coming after 50 Cent's \"Before I Self Destruct\" and Eminem's \"Relapse\", an album for which Dr. Dre handled the bulk of production duties. In a Dr Pepper commercial that debuted on May 28, 2009, he premiered the first official snippet of \"Detox\". 50 Cent and Eminem asserted in an interview on BET's \"106 & Park\" that Dr. Dre had around a dozen songs finished for \"Detox\".\n\nOn December 15, 2008, Dre appeared in the remix of the song \"Set It Off\" by Canadian rapper Kardinal Offishall (also with Pusha T); the remix debuted on DJ Skee's radio show. At the beginning of 2009, Dre produced, and made a guest vocal performance on, the single \"Crack a Bottle\" by Eminem and the single sold a record 418,000 downloads in its first week and reached the top of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart on the week of February 12, 2009. Along with this single, in 2009 Dr. Dre produced or co-produced 19 of 20 tracks on Eminem's album \"Relapse\". These included other hit singles \"We Made You\", \"Old Time's Sake\", and \"3 a.m.\" (The only track Dre did not produce was the Eminem-produced single \"Beautiful\".) On April 20, 2010, \"Under Pressure\", featuring Jay-Z and co-produced with Scott Storch, was confirmed by Jimmy Iovine and Dr. Dre during an interview at Fenway Park as the album's first single. The song leaked prior to its intended release in an unmixed, unmastered form without a chorus on June 16, 2010; however, critical reaction to the song was lukewarm, and Dr. Dre later announced in an interview that the song, along with any other previously leaked tracks from \"Detox\"s recording process, would not appear on the final version of the album. Two genuine singles – \"Kush\", a collaboration with Snoop Dogg and fellow rapper Akon, and \"I Need a Doctor\" with Eminem and singer Skylar Grey – were released in the United States during November 2010 and February 2011 respectively: the latter achieved international chart success, reaching number four on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and later being certified double platinum by the RIAA and the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). On June 25, 2010, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers honored Dr. Dre with its Founders Award for inspiring other musicians.\nIn an August 2010 interview, Dr. Dre stated that an instrumental album titled \"The Planets\" is in its first stages of production; each song being named after a planet in the Solar System. On September 3, Dr. Dre showed support to longtime protégé Eminem, and appeared on his and Jay-Z's Home & Home Tour, performing hit songs such as \"Still D.R.E.\", \"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\", and \"Crack a Bottle\", alongside Eminem and another protégé, 50 Cent. Sporting an \"R.I.P. Proof\" shirt, Dre was honored by Eminem telling Detroit's Comerica Park to do the same. They did so, by chanting \"DEEE-TOX\", to which he replied, \"I'm coming!\" On November 14, 2011, Dre announced that he would be taking a break from music after he finished producing for artists Slim the Mobster and Kendrick Lamar. In this break, he stated that he would \"work on bringing his Beats By Dre to a standard as high as Apple\" and would also spend time with his family. On January 9, 2012, Dre headlined the final nights of the 2012 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, on the weekends of April 13–15 and April 20–22, 2012.\n\nIn a June 2014 interview with RapUpTV, Marsha Ambrosius talked about working on Dr. Dre's third album. She stated that she had gone to Hawaii before the end of 2013 for a few weeks to work with him on \"so many things\" including his upcoming album and a project of her own among other unspecified projects. Ambrosius also told RapUpTV that Dr. Dre's third album is no longer called \"Detox\", but didn't reveal the new title. In a September interview with Shots Fired that same year, Aftermath Entertainment in-house producer Dawaun Parker confirmed the title change. Parker also refrained from revealing the new title because of the fact that the title hadn't been leaked online. He also told Shots Fired that there are as many as 300 beats that have been created for the album over the years, but few of them have had vocals recorded over them.\n\nThe length of time that \"Detox\" had been recorded for, as well as the limited amount of material that had been officially released or leaked from the recording sessions, had given it considerable notoriety within the music industry. Numerous release dates (including the ones mentioned above) had been given for the album over the years since it was first announced, although none of them transpired to be genuine. Several musicians closely affiliated with Dr. Dre, including Snoop Dogg, fellow rappers 50 Cent, The Game and producer DJ Quik, had speculated in interviews that the album will never be released, due to Dr. Dre's business and entrepreneurial ventures having interfered with recording work, as well as causing him to lose motivation to record new material.\n\nOn his Beats 1 radio show \"The Pharmacy\" on August 1, 2015, Dre announced that he would release what would be his final album, titled \"Compton\". It is inspired by the N.W.A biopic \"Straight Outta Compton\" and is a compilation-style album, featuring a number of frequent collaborators, including Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar, Xzibit and The Game, among others. It was released exclusively for iTunes and Apple Music on August 7. A physical version was published on August 21. In an interview with \"Rolling Stone\", he revealed that he had about 20 to 40 tracks for \"Detox\" but he didn't release it because it didn't meet his standards and he thought he was done being an artist. He also revealed that he suffers from social anxiety and due to this he remains secluded and out of attention.\n\nOn February 12, 2016, it was revealed that Apple would create its first original scripted television series and it would star Dr. Dre. Called \"Vital Signs\", it is set to reflect the life of Dr. Dre. Dr. Dre was an executive producer on the show before the show's cancelation sometime in 2017.\n\nIn October 2016, Sean Combs brought out Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg and others on his Bad Boy Reunion tour.\n\nDr. Dre made his first on screen appearance as a weapons dealer in the 1996 bank robbery movie \"Set It Off\". In 2001, Dr. Dre also appeared in the movies \"The Wash\" and \"Training Day\". A song of his, \"Bad Intentions\" (featuring Knoc-Turn'Al) and produced by Mahogany, was featured on \"The Wash\" soundtrack. Dr. Dre also appeared on two other songs \"On the Blvd.\" and \"The Wash\" along with his co-star Snoop Dogg. \n\nIn February 2007 it was announced that Dr. Dre would produce dark comedies and horror films for New Line Cinema-owned company Crucial Films, along with longtime video director Phillip Atwell. Dr. Dre announced \"This is a natural switch for me, since I've directed a lot of music videos, and I eventually want to get into directing.\" Along with fellow member Ice Cube, Dr. Dre produced \"Straight Outta Compton\" (2015), a biographical film about N.W.A.\n\nIn July 2008, Dr. Dre released his first brand of headphones, Beats by Dr. Dre. The line consisted of Beats Studio, a circumaural headphone; Beats Tour, an in-ear headphone; Beats Solo & Solo HD, a supra-aural headphone; Beats Spin; Heartbeats by Lady Gaga, also an in-ear headphone; and Diddy Beats. In autumn 2009, Hewlett-Packard participated in a deal to bundle Beats By Dr. Dre with some HP laptops and headsets. HP and Dr. Dre announced the deal on October 9, 2009, at a press event in Santa Monica, California. An exclusive laptop, known as the HP ENVY 15 Beats limited edition, was released for sale October 22. In May 2014, technology giant Apple purchased the Beats brand for $3 billion, Apple's most expensive purchase by far. The deal made Dr. Dre the \"richest man in hip hop\", surpassing Diddy.\n\nDuring May 2013, Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine donated a $70 million endowment to the University of Southern California to create the USC Jimmy Iovine and Andre Young Academy for Arts, Technology and the Business of Innovation. The goal of the Academy has been stated as \"to shape the future by nurturing the talents, passions, leadership and risk-taking of uniquely qualified students who are motivated to explore and create new art forms, technologies, and business models.\" The first class of the Academy began in September 2014.\n\nIn June 2017, it was announced that Dr. Dre has committed $10 million to the construction of a performing arts center for the new Compton High School. The center will encompass creative resources and a 1,200-seat theater, and is expected to break ground in 2020. The project is a partnership between Dr. Dre and the Compton Unified School District.\n\nBULLET::::- \"St. Ides\"\nBULLET::::- \"Coors Light\"\nBULLET::::- \"Dr. Pepper\"\nBULLET::::- \"Chrysler 300S\"—Imported from Detroit\n\nAn urban legend surfaced in 2011 when a tumblr blog titled Dr. Dre Started Burning Man began promulgating the notion that the producer, rapper and entrepreneur had discovered Burning Man in 1995 during a music video shoot and offered to cover the cost of the event's permit from the Nevada Bureau of Land Management under an agreement with the festival's organizers that he could institute an entrance fee system, which had not existed before his participation. This claim was supported by an alleged letter from Dre to Nicole Threatt Young that indicated that Dre had shared his experience witnessing the Burning Man festival with her.\n\n\"Business Insider\" mentions the portion of the letter where Dr. Dre purportedly states \"someone should get behind this...and make some money off these fools\" and compares Dr. Dre's potential entrepreneurial engagement with Burning Man as a parallel to Steve Jobs' efforts to centralize and profit from the otherwise unorganized online music industry. According to Salon, Dr. Dre's ethos seems to be aligned with seven of the ten principles of the Burning Man community: \"radical self-reliance, radical self-expression, communal effort, civic responsibility, leaving no trace, participation and immediacy.\"\n\nDr. Dre is renowned for constantly evolving his production style through the years, while always keeping in touch with his roots and re-shaping elements from previous work. In the start of his career as a producer for the World Class Wreckin Cru with DJ Alonzo Williams in the mid-1980s, his beats were in the electro-hop style pioneered by The Unknown DJ, and that of early hip-hop groups like the Beastie Boys and Whodini. These influences are evident in Eazy-E's 1986 song \"Boyz-n-the-Hood,\" which Dre produced. Sampling was at the time a key element of Dre's production, the E-mu SP-1200 being his primary instrument in the N.W.A days.\n\nIn 1987, Dr. Dre sampled the Ohio Players' ARP synth riffs from their 1973 funk hit \"Funky Worm\" in the N.W.A song \"Dopeman\". Being the first hip-hop producer to sample the song, Dre both paved the way for the future popularization of the G-funk style within hip-hop, and established heavy synthesizer solos as an integral part of his production style. Dr. Dre was also one of the very first producers to interpolate the then little-known drum break from The Winstons' \"Amen, Brother\" in the N.W.A song \"Straight Outta Compton\". This break has since becοme a staple in not only hip-hop, but all popular music, having been used in over 1700 songs.\n\nFrom \"Straight Outta Compton\" on, Dre uses live musicians to replay old melodies rather than sampling them. With Ruthless Records, collaborators included guitarist Mike \"Crazy Neck\" Sims, multi-instrumentalist Colin Wolfe, DJ Yella and sound engineer Donovan \"The Dirt Biker\" Sound. Dre is receptive of new ideas from other producers, one example being his fruitful collaboration with Above the Law's producer Cold 187um while at Ruthless. Cold 187 um was at the time experimenting with 1970s P-Funk samples (Parliament, Funkadelic, Bootsy Collins, George Clinton etc.), that Dre also utilized. Dre has since been accused of \"stealing\" the concept of G-funk from Cold 187 um.\n\nUpon leaving Ruthless and forming Death Row Records in 1991, Dre called on veteran West Coast DJ Chris \"The Glove\" Taylor and sound engineer Greg \"Gregski\" Royal, along with Colin Wolfe, to help him on future projects. His 1992 album \"The Chronic\" is thought to be one of the most well-produced hip-hop albums of all time. Musical themes included hard-hitting synthesizer solos played by Wolfe, bass-heavy compositions, background female vocals and Dre fully embracing 1970s funk samples. Dre used a minimoog synth to replay the melody from Leon Haywood's 1972 song \"I Wanna Do Somethin' Freaky to You\" for the Chronic's first single \"Nuthin' but a \"G\" Thang\" which became a global hit. For his new protégé Snoop Doggy Dogg's album \"Doggystyle\", Dre collaborated with then 19-year-old producer Daz Dillinger, who received co-production credits on songs \"Serial Killa\" and \"For all My Niggaz & Bitches\", The Dramatics bass player Tony \"T. Money\" Green, guitarist Ricky Rouse, keyboardists Emanuel \"Porkchop\" Dean and Sean \"Barney Rubble\" Thomas and engineer Tommy Daugherty, as well as Warren G and Sam Sneed, who are credited with bringing several samples to the studio.\n\nThe influence of \"The Chronic\" and \"Doggystyle\" on the popular music of the 1990s went not only far beyond the West Coast, but beyond hip-hop as a genre. Artists as diverse as Master P (\"Bout It, Bout It\"), George Michael (\"Fastlove\"), Mariah Carey (\"Fantasy\"), Luis Miguel (\"Dame\"), and The Spice Girls (\"Say You'll Be There\") used G-funk instrumentation in their songs. Bad Boy Records producer Chucky Thompson stated in the April 2004 issue of \"XXL\" magazine that the sound of \"Doggystyle\" and \"The Chronic\" was the basis for the Notorious B.I.G.'s 1995 hit single \"Big Poppa\":\n\nIn 1994, starting with the Murder was the Case soundtrack, Dre attempted to push the boundaries of G-funk further into a darker sound. In songs such as \"Murder was the Case\" and \"Natural Born Killaz\", the synthesizer pitch is higher and the drum tempo is slowed down to 91 BPM (87 BPM in the remix) to create a dark and gritty atmosphere. Percussion instruments, particularly sleigh bells, are also present. Dre's frequent collaborators from this period included Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania natives Stuart \"Stu-B-Doo\" Bullard, a multi-instrumentalist from the Ozanam Strings Orchestra, Sam Sneed, Stephen \"Bud'da\" Anderson, and percussionist Carl \"Butch\" Small. This style of production has been influential far beyond the West Coast. The beat for the Houston-based group Geto Boys 1996 song \"Still\" follows the same drum pattern as \"Natural Born Killaz\" and Eazy E's \"Wut Would U Do\" (a diss to Dre) is similar to the original \"Murder was the Case\" instrumental. This style of production is usually accompanied by horror and occult-themed lyrics and imagery, being crucial to the creation of horrorcore.\n\nBy 1996, Dre was again looking to innovate his sound. He recruited keyboardist Camara Kambon to play the keys on \"Been There, Done That\", and through Bud'da and Sam Sneed he was introduced to fellow Pittsburgh native Melvin \"Mel-Man\" Bradford. At this time, he also switched from using the E-mu SP-1200 to the Akai MPC3000 drum kit and sampler, which he still uses today. Beginning with his 1996 compilation Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath, Dre's production has taken a less sample-based approach, with loud, layered snare drums dominating the mix, while synthesizers are still omnipresent. In his critically acclaimed second album, 2001, live instrumentation takes the place of sampling, a famous example being \"The Next Episode\", in which keyboardist Camara Kambon re-played live the main melody from David McCallum's 1967 jazz-funk work \"The Edge\". For every song on \"2001\", Dre had a keyboardist, guitarist and bassist create the basic parts of the beat, while he himself programmed the drums, did the sequencing and overdubbing and added sound effects, and later mixed the songs. During this period, Dre's signature \"west coast whistle\" riffs are still present albeit in a lower pitch, as in \"Light Speed\", \"Housewife\", \"Some L.A. Niggaz\" and Eminem's \"Guilty Conscience\" hook. The sound of \"2001\" had tremendous influence on hip-hop production, redefining the West Coast's sound and expanding the G-funk of the early 1990s. To produce the album, Dre and Mel-Man relied on the talents of Scott Storch and Camara Kambon on the keys, Mike Elizondo and Colin Wolfe on bass guitar, Sean Cruse on lead guitar and sound engineers Richard \"Segal\" Huredia and Mauricio \"Veto\" Iragorri.\n\nFrom the mid-2000s, Dr. Dre has taken on a more soulful production style, using more of a classical piano instead of a keyboard, and having claps replace snares, as evidenced in songs such as Snoop Dogg's \"Imagine\" and \"Boss' Life\", Busta Rhymes' \"Get You Some\" and \"Been Through the Storm\", Stat Quo's \"Get Low\" and \"The Way It Be\", Jay-Z's \"Lost One\", Nas' \"Hustlers\", and several beats on Eminem's Relapse album. Soul and R&B pianist Mark Batson, having previously worked with The Dave Matthews Band, Seal and Maroon 5 has been credited as the architect of this sound. Besides Batson, Aftermath producer and understudy of Dre's, Dawaun Parker, who has named Q-Tip and J Dilla as his primary influences, is thought to be responsible for giving Dre's newest beats an East Coast feel.\n\nDr. Dre has said that his primary instrument in the studio is the Akai MPC3000, a drum machine and sampler, and that he often uses as many as four or five to produce a single recording. He cites 1970s funk musicians such as George Clinton, Isaac Hayes and Curtis Mayfield as his primary musical influences. Unlike most rap producers, he tries to avoid samples as much as possible, preferring to have studio musicians re-play pieces of music he wants to use, because it allows him more flexibility to change the pieces in rhythm and tempo. In 2001 he told \"Time\" magazine, \"I may hear something I like on an old record that may inspire me, but I'd rather use musicians to re-create the sound or elaborate on it. I can control it better.\" Other equipment he uses includes the E-mu SP-1200 drum machine and other keyboards from such manufacturers as Korg, Rhodes, Wurlitzer, Moog, and Roland. Dr. Dre also stresses the importance of equalizing drums properly, telling Scratch magazine in 2004 that he \"used the same drum sounds on a couple of different songs on one album before but you'd never be able to tell the difference because of the EQ.\" Dr. Dre also uses the digital audio workstation Pro Tools and uses the software to combine hardware drum machines and vintage analog keyboards and synthesizers.\n\nAfter founding Aftermath Entertainment in 1996, Dr. Dre took on producer Mel-Man as a co-producer, and his music took on a more synthesizer-based sound, using fewer vocal samples (as he had used on \"Lil' Ghetto Boy\" and \"Let Me Ride\" on \"The Chronic\", for example). Mel-Man has not shared co-production credits with Dr. Dre since approximately 2002, but fellow Aftermath producer Focus has credited Mel-Man as a key architect of the signature Aftermath sound.\n\nIn 1999, Dr. Dre started working with Mike Elizondo, a bassist, guitarist, and keyboardist who has also produced, written and played on records for female singers such as Poe, Fiona Apple and Alanis Morissette, In the past few years Elizondo has since worked for many of Dr. Dre's productions. Dr. Dre also told \"Scratch\" magazine in a 2004 interview that he has been studying piano and music theory formally, and that a major goal is to accumulate enough musical theory to score movies. In the same interview he stated that he has collaborated with famed 1960s songwriter Burt Bacharach by sending him hip hop beats to play over, and hopes to have an in-person collaboration with him in the future.\n\nDr. Dre has stated that he is a perfectionist and is known to pressure the artists with whom he records to give flawless performances. In 2006, Snoop Dogg told the website Dubcnn.com that Dr. Dre had made new artist Bishop Lamont re-record a single bar of vocals 107 times. Dr. Dre has also stated that Eminem is a fellow perfectionist, and attributes his success on Aftermath to his similar work ethic. He gives a lot of input into the delivery of the vocals and will stop an MC during a take if it is not to his liking. However, he gives MCs that he works with room to write lyrics without too much instruction unless it is a specifically conceptual record, as noted by Bishop Lamont in the book \"How to Rap\".\n\nA consequence of his perfectionism is that some artists who initially sign deals with Dr. Dre's Aftermath label never release albums. In 2001, Aftermath released the soundtrack to the movie \"The Wash\", featuring a number of Aftermath acts such as Shaunta, Daks, Joe Beast and Toi. To date, none have released full-length albums on Aftermath and have apparently ended their relationships with the label and Dr. Dre. Other noteworthy acts to leave Aftermath without releasing albums include King Tee, \"2001\" vocalist Hittman, Joell Ortiz, Raekwon and Rakim.\n\nOver the years, word of other collaborators who have contributed to Dr. Dre's work has surfaced. During his tenure at Death Row Records, it was alleged that Dr. Dre's stepbrother Warren G and Tha Dogg Pound member Daz made many uncredited contributions to songs on his solo album \"The Chronic\" and Snoop Doggy Dogg's album \"Doggystyle\" (Daz received production credits on Snoop's similar-sounding, albeit less successful album \"Tha Doggfather\" after Young left Death Row Records).\n\nIt is known that Scott Storch, who has since gone on to become a successful producer in his own right, contributed to Dr. Dre's second album \"2001\"; Storch is credited as a songwriter on several songs and played keyboards on several tracks. In 2006 he told \"Rolling Stone\":\n\nCurrent collaborator Mike Elizondo, when speaking about his work with Young, describes their recording process as a collaborative effort involving several musicians. In 2004 he claimed to \"Songwriter Universe\" magazine that he had written the foundations of the hit Eminem song \"The Real Slim Shady\", stating, \"I initially played a bass line on the song, and Dr. Dre, Tommy Coster Jr. and I built the track from there. Eminem then heard the track, and he wrote the rap to it.\" This account is essentially confirmed by Eminem in his book \"Angry Blonde\", stating that the tune for the song was composed by a studio bassist and keyboardist while Dr. Dre was out of the studio but Young later programmed the song's beat after returning.\n\nA group of disgruntled former associates of Dr. Dre complained that they had not received their full due for work on the label in the September 2003 issue of \"The Source\". A producer named Neff-U claimed to have produced the songs \"Say What You Say\" and \"My Dad's Gone Crazy\" on \"The Eminem Show\", the songs \"If I Can't\" and \"Back Down\" on 50 Cent's \"Get Rich or Die Tryin'\", and the beat featured on Dr. Dre's commercial for Coors beer.\n\nAlthough Young studies piano and musical theory, he serves as more of a conductor than a musician himself, as Josh Tyrangiel of \"TIME\" magazine has noted:\n\nAlthough Snoop Dogg retains working relationships with Warren G and Daz, who are alleged to be uncredited contributors on the hit albums \"The Chronic\" and \"Doggystyle\", he states that Dr. Dre is capable of making beats without the help of collaborators, and that he is responsible for the success of his numerous albums. Dr. Dre's prominent studio collaborators, including Scott Storch, Elizondo, Mark Batson and Dawaun Parker, have shared co-writing, instrumental, and more recently co-production credits on the songs where he is credited as the producer.\n\nAnderson Paak also praised Dr. Dre in a 2016 interview with \"Music Times,\" telling the publication that it was a dream come true to work with Dre.\n\nIt is acknowledged that most of Dr. Dre's raps are written for him by others, though he retains ultimate control over his lyrics and the themes of his songs. As Aftermath producer Mahogany told \"Scratch\": \"It's like a class room in [the booth]. He'll have three writers in there. They'll bring in something, he'll recite it, then he'll say, 'Change this line, change this word,' like he's grading papers.\"\nAs seen in the credits for tracks Young has appeared on, there are often multiple people who contribute to his songs (although often in hip hop many people are officially credited as a writer for a song, even the producer).\n\nIn the book \"How to Rap\", RBX explains that writing \"The Chronic\" was a \"team effort\" and details how he ghostwrote \"Let Me Ride\" for Dre. In regard to ghostwriting lyrics he says, \"Dre doesn't profess to be no super-duper rap dude – Dre is a super-duper producer\". As a member of N.W.A, The D.O.C. wrote lyrics for him while he stuck with producing. New York City rapper Jay-Z ghostwrote lyrics for the single \"Still D.R.E.\" from Dr. Dre's album \"2001\".\n\nBULLET::::- In 1981, Dr. Dre and Cassandra Joy Greene had a son named Curtis Young when Dr. Dre was 16 years old and Greene was 15 years old. Curtis Young is an aspiring rapper who goes by the rap moniker \"Hood Surgeon.\"\nBULLET::::- In 1983, Dr. Dre and Lisa Johnson (who was 15 years old) had a daughter named La Tanya Danielle Young. Together they have three daughters.\nBULLET::::- In 1988, Dr. Dre and Jenita Porter had a son, Andre Young Jr. In 1990, Porter sued Dr. Dre in Orange County Superior Court seeking $5,000 of child support per month. On August 23, 2008, Andre Young Jr. died at the age of 20 at his mother's Woodland Hills home. The coroner determined that he died from an overdose of heroin and morphine.\nBULLET::::- From 1988 to 1996, Dr. Dre dated singer Michel'le, who frequently contributed vocals to Ruthless Records and Death Row Records albums. In 1991, they had a son, Marcel.\nBULLET::::- In 1996, Dr. Dre married Nicole Threatt, the ex-wife of NBA player Sedale Threatt. They have two children together: a son named Truice (born 1997) and a daughter named Truly (born 2001).\n\nDr. Dre has been accused of violence against multiple women.\n\nOn January 27, 1991, at a music industry party at the Po Na Na Souk club in Hollywood, Dr. Dre assaulted television host Dee Barnes of the Fox television program \"Pump it Up\", following an episode of \"Pump It Up\" where her interview with NWA had been followed by an interview with Ice Cube in which he dissed NWA and mocked The DOC's change in voice after a near-fatal accident. Barnes filed a $22.7 million lawsuit in response to the incident. Subsequently, Dr. Dre was fined $2,500, given two years' probation, ordered to undergo 240 hours of community service, and given a spot on an anti-violence public service announcement on television. The civil suit was settled out of court. Barnes stated that he \"began slamming her face and the right side of her body repeatedly against a wall near the stairway.\" Dr. Dre later commented: \"People talk all this shit, but you know, somebody fucks with me, I'm gonna fuck with them. I just did it, you know. Ain't nothing you can do now by talking about it. Besides, it ain't no big thing – I just threw her through a door.\"\n\nIn March 2015, Michel'le, the mother of one of his children, accused him of subjecting her to domestic violence during their time together as a couple, but did not initiate legal action. Their abusive relationship is portrayed in her 2016 biopic \".\" \n\nBen Westhoff, author of \"Original Gangstas: the Untold Story of Dr Dre, Eazy-E, Ice Cube, Tupac Shakur, and the Birth of West Coast Rap\", investigated claims of Dr. Dre's alleged abuse. He tracked down Lisa Johnson, the mother of three of Dr. Dre's children. Johnson stated that he beat her many times, including while she was pregnant. She was granted a restraining order against him. \n\nFormer labelmate Tairrie B claimed that Dre assaulted her at a post-Grammy party in 1990, in response to her track \"Ruthless Bitch.\"\n\nDuring press for the 2015 film \"Straight Outta Compton,\" questions about the portrayal and behavior of Dr. Dre and other prominent figures in the rap community about violence against women – and the question about its absence in the film – were raised. The discussion about the film led to Dre addressing his past behavior in the press. In August 2015, in an interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Dre lamented his abusive past, saying, \"I made some fucking horrible mistakes in my life. I was young, fucking stupid. I would say all the allegations aren't true—some of them are. Those are some of the things that I would like to take back. It was really fucked up. But I paid for those mistakes, and there's no way in hell that I will ever make another mistake like that again.\"\n\nIn a statement to \"The New York Times\" on August 21, 2015, Dre again addressed his abusive past, stating, \"Twenty-five years ago I was a young man drinking too much and in over my head with no real structure in my life. However, none of this is an excuse for what I did. I've been married for 19 years and every day I'm working to be a better man for my family, seeking guidance along the way. I'm doing everything I can so I never resemble that man again.\" He went on to apologize to all the women he abused, saying, \"I apologize to the women I've hurt. I deeply regret what I did and know that it has forever impacted all of our lives.\"\n\nDr. Dre pleaded guilty in October 1992 in a case of battery of a police officer and was convicted on two additional battery counts stemming from a brawl in the lobby of the New Orleans hotel in May 1991.\n\nOn January 10, 1994, Dr. Dre was arrested after leading police on a 90 mph pursuit through Beverly Hills in his 1987 Ferrari. It was revealed Dr. Dre had a blood-alcohol of 0.16, twice the state's legal limit. The conviction violated Dre's battery conviction in 1991 and he was sentenced to eight months in prison in September 1994.\n\nIn 2001, Dr. Dre earned a total of about US$52 million from selling part of his share of Aftermath Entertainment to Interscope Records and his production of such hit songs that year as \"Family Affair\" by Mary J. Blige. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine thus named him the second highest-paid artist of the year. Dr. Dre was ranked 44th in 2004 from earnings of $11.4 million, primarily from production royalties from such projects as albums from G-Unit and D12 and the single \"Rich Girl\" by singer Gwen Stefani and rapper Eve. Forbes estimated his net worth at US$270 million in 2012. The same publication later reported that he acquired US$110 million via his various endeavors in 2012, making him the highest–paid artist of the year.\n\nIncome from the 2014 sale of Beats to Apple, contributing to what \"Forbes\" termed \"the biggest single-year payday of any musician in history\", made Dr. Dre the world's richest musical performer of 2015.\n\nOn April 4, 2016, TMZ and the \"New York Daily News\" reported that Suge Knight had accused Dre and the Los Angeles Sheriff's Department of a kill-for-hire plot in the 2014 shooting of Knight in club 1 OAK.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Chronic\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"2001\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Compton\" (2015)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Wash\" (2001)\n\nwith World Class Wreckin' Cru\nBULLET::::- \"World Class\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Rapped in Romance\" (1986)\n\nwith N.W.A.\nBULLET::::- \"N.W.A. and the Posse\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"Straight Outta Compton\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"100 Miles and Runnin'\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Niggaz4Life\" (1991)\n\n 2014\n\nDr. Dre has won six Grammy Awards. Three of them are for his production work.\nalign=center1990\n\"We're All in the Same Gang\"\nrowspan=\"2\" Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group\n\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\"1994\n\"Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang\" \n\n\"Let Me Ride\"\nrowspan=\"2\"Best Rap Solo Performance\n\nalign=center1996\n\"Keep Their Heads Ringin'\"\n\nalign=center1997\n\"California Love\" \nBest Rap Performance by a Duo or Group\n\n\"No Diggity\" \nBest R&B Song\n\n\"Still D.R.E.\" \nrowspan=\"4\"Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group\n\n\"Guilty Conscience\" \n\n\"Forgot About Dre\" \n\n\"The Next Episode\" \n\nrowspan=\"2\"\"The Marshall Mathers LP\" \nAlbum of the Year\n\nrowspan=\"2\"Best Rap Album \n\n\"2001\"\n\nrowspan=\"3\"Himself\nrowspan=\"3\"Producer of the Year, Non-Classical\n\nalign=center2002\n\nrowspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;\"2003\n\n\"Knoc\" \nBest Music Video, Short Form\n\n\"The Eminem Show\" \nAlbum of the Year\n\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\"2004\n\"In da Club\" \nBest Rap Song\n\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\"2006\n\"Love. Angel. Music. Baby.\" \nAlbum of the Year\n\n\"Encore\" \nrowspan=\"2\"Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group\n\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\"2010\n\"Crack a Bottle\" \n\n\"Relapse\" \nBest Rap Album\n\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\"2011\n\"Recovery\" \nAlbum of the Year\n\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\"2012\nrowspan=\"2\"\"I Need a Doctor\" \nBest Rap/Sung Collaboration\n\nBest Rap Song\n\n\"good kid, m.A.A.d city\" \nAlbum of the Year\n\n\"Compton\"\nBest Rap Album\n\n!Year\n!Nominated work\n!Award\n!Result\nalign=center1993\n\"Nuthin' But a \"G\" Thang\"\nrowspan=\"4\"Best Rap Video\n\nalign=center1994\n\"Let Me Ride\"\n\nalign=center1995\n\"Keep Their Heads Ringin'\"\n\nBest Choreography in a Video\n\n\"My Name Is\"\nBest Direction\n\n\"Guilty Conscience\"\nBreakthrough Video\n\nalign=center2000\n\"The Real Slim Shady\"\nBest Direction in a Video\n\nalign=center2000\n\"Forgot About Dre\"\nBest Rap Video\n\nalign=center2001\n\"Stan\"\nBest Direction in a Video\n\nalign=center2009\n\"Nuthin' But a \"G\" Thang\"\nBest Video (That Should Have Won a Moonman)\n\n+ Films\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! Notes\n\"The Wash\"\n\n+ Video games\n! Year\n! Title\n! Role\n! Notes\n\n+ Biographical portrayals in film\n! Year !! Title !! Portrayed by !! Notes\nrowspan=\"2\"2017\n\nBULLET::::- Works cited\nBULLET::::- Kenyatta, Kelly. \"You Forgot About Dre!: The Unauthorized Biography of Dr. Dre and Eminem: From NWA to Slim Shady: A Tale of Gangsta Rap, Violence, and Hit Records\". Los Angeles: Busta Books, 2001. . .\nBULLET::::- Ro, Ronin. \"Dr. Dre The Biography\". New York: Thunder's Mouth Press, 2007. . .\n\n"}
{"id": "8085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8085", "title": "Delicate Arch", "text": "Delicate Arch\n\nDelicate Arch is freestanding natural arch located in Arches National Park, near Moab in Grand County, Utah, United States. The arch is the most widely recognized landmark in Arches National Park and is depicted on Utah license plates and a postage stamp commemorating Utah's centennial anniversary of admission to the Union in 1996. The Olympic torch relay for the 2002 Winter Olympics passed through the arch.\n\nBecause of its distinctive shape, the arch was known as \"the Chaps\" and \"the Schoolmarm's Bloomers\" by local cowboys. Many other names have been applied to this arch including \"Bloomers Arch\", \"Marys Bloomers\", \"Old Maids Bloomers\", \"Pants Crotch\", \"Salt Wash Arch\", and \"School Marms Pants\". The arch was given its current name by Frank Beckwith, leader of the Arches National Monument Scientific Expedition, who explored the area in the winter of 1933–1934. Although there is a rumor that the names of Delicate Arch and Landscape Arch were inadvertently exchanged due to a signage mixup by the National Park Service (NPS), this is false.\n\nThis arch played no part in the original designation of the area as a national monument (Arches National Monument) in 1929, and was not included within the original boundaries; it was added when the monument was enlarged in 1938.\n\nIn the 1950s, the NPS investigated the possibility of applying a clear plastic coating to the arch to protect it from further erosion and eventual destruction. The idea was ultimately abandoned as impractical and contrary to NPS principles.\n\nDelicate Arch is formed of Entrada Sandstone. The original sandstone fin was gradually worn away by weathering and erosion, leaving the arch. Other arches in the park were formed the same way but, due to placement and less dramatic shape, are not as famous.\n\nDuring the summer, white-throated swifts (\"Aeronautes saxatalis\") nest in the top of the arch.\n\nNature photographer Michael Fatali started a fire under the arch in September 2000 to demonstrate nighttime photography techniques to a group of amateur photographers. The fire discolored portions of the sandstone near the arch. Fatali was placed on probation and fined $10,900 in restitution to the NPS for the cost of cleanup efforts.\n\nIn May 2006, climber Dean Potter made the first recorded free solo—no ropes or protection—ascent of this formation. Climbing Delicate Arch was not explicitly forbidden under the rules in force at the time; however, most climbers accepted that the named arch formations should not be climbed. The NPS has since closed the loophole by disallowing climbs on any named arch within the park year-round. Slacklining and the placement of new fixed anchors on new climbs is also prohibited. Controversy erupted when photographs taken after Potter's climb appeared to show damage caused by a climbing technique called top roping. Potter stated on several occasions that he never top-roped the arch, and no photos exist of Potter using a top rope setup on the arch. A previous climber may have top-roped the arch, leaving the existing rope scars.\n\nBULLET::::- Arches National Park Delicate Arch page\nBULLET::::- Arches National Park Trails Page\nBULLET::::- Panorama Under Arch\nBULLET::::- Beautiful Places episode of Delicate Arch\nBULLET::::- Panoramic View of Delicate Arch at Sunset\n"}
{"id": "8086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8086", "title": "Deed poll", "text": "Deed poll\n\nA deed poll (plural: deeds poll) is a legal document binding only to a single person or several persons acting jointly to express an active intention. It is, strictly speaking, not a contract because it binds only one party and expresses an intention instead of a promise.\n\nThe most common use is a name change through a deed of change of name (often referred to simply as a \"deed poll\"). Deeds poll are used for this purpose in countries including the United Kingdom, Ireland, Hong Kong and Singapore. In the UK, a deed poll can also be used to change a child's name, as long as everyone with parental responsibility for the child consents to it and the child does not object to it. The child's parents execute the deed poll on the child's behalf. In some other jurisdictions, a person may simply start using a new name without any formal legal process. The usual requirements are that the new name must be used exclusively and that the change must not be made with intent to defraud. In Australia, prior to 1 November 2000, name change was formerly accomplished by deed poll but now is done by completing a Change of Name form.\n\nAnother common use is to partition land into different sections. For example, a piece of land may be partitioned (or carved out) by a deed poll into Section A and the Remaining Portion thereof. This form of deed poll is commonly used in Hong Kong.\n\nA deed poll may also be used (in England and Wales) for clergy of the Church of England to relinquish their holy orders.\n\nA Bond, a Power of Attorney, and a 'Will' are also good examples of a Deed Poll as they are made by grantor alone.\n\nThe term \"deed\", also known in this context as a \"specialty\", is common to signed written undertakings not supported by consideration: the seal (even if not a literal wax seal but only a notional one referred to by the execution formula, \"signed, sealed and delivered\", or even merely \"executed as a deed\") is deemed to be the consideration necessary to support the obligation. \"Poll\" is an archaic legal term referring to documents with straight edges; these distinguished a deed binding only one person from one affecting more than a single person (an \"indenture\", so named during the time when such agreements would be written out repeatedly on a single sheet, then the copies separated by being irregularly torn or cut, i.e. \"indented\", so that each party had a document with corresponding tears, to discourage forgery).\n\nBULLET::::- Change your name by deed poll - UK Government advice\nBULLET::::- Enrolment of Deeds and other Documents at the UK Ministry of Justice website\n"}
{"id": "8088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8088", "title": "Documentary film", "text": "Documentary film\n\nA documentary film is a nonfictional motion picture intended to document reality, primarily for the purposes of instruction, education, or maintaining a historical record. \"Documentary\" has been described as a \"filmmaking practice, a cinematic tradition, and mode of audience reception\" that is continually evolving and is without clear boundaries. Documentary films were originally called \"actuality\" films and were only a minute or less in length. Over time documentaries have evolved to be longer in length and to include more categories, such as educational, observational, and even \"docufiction\". Documentaries are also educational and often used in schools to teach various principles. Social media platforms such as YouTube, have allowed documentary films to improve the ways films are distributed and able to educate and broaden the reach of people who receive the information.\n\nPolish writer and filmmaker Bolesław Matuszewski was among those who identified the mode of documentary film. He wrote two of the earliest texts on cinema \"Une nouvelle source de l'histoire\" (eng. A New Source of History) and \"La photographie animée\" (eng. Animated photography). Both were published in 1898 in French and among the early written works to consider the historical and documentary value of the film. Matuszewski is also among the first filmmakers to propose the creation of a Film Archive to collect and keep safe visual materials.\n\nIn popular myth, the word \"documentary\" was coined by Scottish documentary filmmaker John Grierson in his review of Robert Flaherty's film \"Moana\" (1926), published in the \"New York Sun\" on 8 February 1926, written by \"The Moviegoer\" (a pen name for Grierson).\n\nGrierson's principles of documentary were that cinema's potential for observing life could be exploited in a new art form; that the \"original\" actor and \"original\" scene are better guides than their fiction counterparts to interpreting the modern world; and that materials \"thus taken from the raw\" can be more real than the acted article. In this regard, Grierson's definition of documentary as \"creative treatment of actuality\" has gained some acceptance, with this position at variance with Soviet film-maker Dziga Vertov's provocation to present \"life as it is\" (that is, life filmed surreptitiously) and \"life caught unawares\" (life provoked or surprised by the camera).\n\nThe American film critic Pare Lorentz defines a documentary film as \"a factual film which is dramatic.\" Others further state that a documentary stands out from the other types of non-fiction films for providing an opinion, and a specific message, along with the facts it presents.\n\nDocumentary practice is the complex process of creating documentary projects. It refers to what people do with media devices, content, form, and production strategies in order to address the creative, ethical, and conceptual problems and choices that arise as they make documentaries.\n\nDocumentary filmmaking can be used as a form of journalism, advocacy, or personal expression.\n\nEarly film (pre-1900) was dominated by the novelty of showing an event. They were single-shot moments captured on film: a train entering a station, a boat docking, or factory workers leaving work. These short films were called \"actuality\" films; the term \"documentary\" was not coined until 1926. Many of the first films, such as those made by Auguste and Louis Lumière, were a minute or less in length, due to technological limitations (example on YouTube).\n\nFilms showing many people (for example, leaving a factory) were often made for commercial reasons: the people being filmed were eager to see, for payment, the film showing them. One notable film clocked in at over an hour and a half, \"The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight\". Using pioneering film-looping technology, Enoch J. Rector presented the entirety of a famous 1897 prize-fight on cinema screens across the United States.\n\nIn May 1896, Bolesław Matuszewski recorded on film few surgical operations in Warsaw and Saint Petersburg hospitals. In 1898, French surgeon Eugène-Louis Doyen invited Bolesław Matuszewski and Clément Maurice and proposed them to recorded his surgical operations. They started in Paris a series of surgical films sometime before July 1898. Until 1906, the year of his last film, Doyen recorded more than 60 operations. Doyen said that his first films taught him how to correct professional errors he had been unaware of. For scientific purposes, after 1906, Doyen combined 15 of his films into three compilations, two of which survive, the six-film series \"Extirpation des tumeurs encapsulées\" (1906), and the four-film \"Les Opérations sur la cavité crânienne\" (1911). These and five other of Doyen's films survive.\nBetween July 1898 and 1901, the Romanian professor Gheorghe Marinescu made several science films in his neurology clinic in Bucharest: \"Walking Troubles of Organic Hemiplegy\" (1898), \"The Walking Troubles of Organic Paraplegies\" (1899), \"A Case of Hysteric Hemiplegy Healed Through Hypnosis\" (1899), \"The Walking Troubles of Progressive Locomotion Ataxy\" (1900), and \"Illnesses of the Muscles\" (1901). All these short films have been preserved. The professor called his works \"studies with the help of the cinematograph,\" and published the results, along with several consecutive frames, in issues of \"La Semaine Médicale\" magazine from Paris, between 1899 and 1902. In 1924, Auguste Lumiere recognized the merits of Marinescu's science films: \"I've seen your scientific reports about the usage of the cinematograph in studies of nervous illnesses, when I was still receiving \"La Semaine Médicale,\" but back then I had other concerns, which left me no spare time to begin biological studies. I must say I forgot those works and I am thankful to you that you reminded them to me. Unfortunately, not many scientists have followed your way.\"\n\nTravelogue films were very popular in the early part of the 20th century. They were often referred to by distributors as \"scenics.\" Scenics were among the most popular sort of films at the time. An important early film to move beyond the concept of the scenic was \"In the Land of the Head Hunters\" (1914), which embraced primitivism and exoticism in a staged story presented as truthful re-enactments of the life of Native Americans.\n\nContemplation is a separate area. Pathé is the best-known global manufacturer of such films of the early 20th century. A vivid example is \"Moscow Clad in Snow\" (1909).\n\nBiographical documentaries appeared during this time, such as the feature \"Eminescu-Veronica-Creangă\" (1914) on the relationship between the writers Mihai Eminescu, Veronica Micle and Ion Creangă (all deceased at the time of the production) released by the Bucharest chapter of Pathé.\n\nEarly color motion picture processes such as Kinemacolor—known for the feature \"With Our King and Queen Through India\" (1912)—and Prizmacolor—known for \"Everywhere With Prizma\" (1919) and the five-reel feature \"Bali the Unknown\" (1921)—used travelogues to promote the new color processes. In contrast, Technicolor concentrated primarily on getting their process adopted by Hollywood studios for fictional feature films.\n\nAlso during this period, Frank Hurley's feature documentary film, \"South\" (1919), about the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition was released. The film documented the failed Antarctic expedition led by Ernest Shackleton in 1914.\n\nWith Robert J. Flaherty's \"Nanook of the North\" in 1922, documentary film embraced romanticism; Flaherty filmed a number of heavily staged romantic films during this time period, often showing how his subjects would have lived 100 years earlier and not how they lived right then. For instance, in \"Nanook of the North\", Flaherty did not allow his subjects to shoot a walrus with a nearby shotgun, but had them use a harpoon instead. Some of Flaherty's staging, such as building a roofless igloo for interior shots, was done to accommodate the filming technology of the time.\n\nParamount Pictures tried to repeat the success of Flaherty's \"Nanook\" and \"Moana\" with two romanticized documentaries, \"Grass\" (1925) and \"Chang\" (1927), both directed by Merian Cooper and Ernest Schoedsack.\n\nCity symphony films were avant-garde films made during the 1920s to 1930s. These films were particularly influenced by modern art: namely Cubism, Constructivism, and Impressionism. (See A.L Rees, 2011) According to Scott Macdonald (2010), city symphony film can be located as an intersection between documentary and avant-garde film: \"avant-doc\". However, A.L. Rees suggest to see them as avant-garde films. (Rees, 2011: 35)\n\nCity symphony films include \"Manhatta\" (dir. Paul Strand, 1921), \"Paris Nothing but the Hours\" (dir. Alberto Cavalcanti, 1926), \"Twenty Four Dollar Island\" (dir. Robert Flaherty, 1927), \"Études sur Paris\" (dir. André Sauvage, 1928), \"The Bridge\" (1928) and \"Rain\" (1929), both by Joris Ivens, \"São Paulo, Sinfonia da Metrópole\" (dir. Adalberto Kemeny, 1929), \"\" (dir. Walter Ruttman, 1927), and \"The Man with a Movie Camera\" (dir. Dziga Vertov, 1929).\nA city symphony film, as the name suggests, is usually based around a major metropolitan city area and seek to capture the lives, events and activities of the city. It can be abstract and cinematographic (see Walter Ruttmann's \"Berlin\") or utilise Russian Montage theory (See Dziga Vertov's \"Man with a Movie Camera\"). But most importantly, a city symphony film is like a cine-poem and is shot and edited like a \"symphony\". \nThe continental, or realist, tradition focused on humans within human-made environments, and included the so-called \"city symphony\" films such as Walter Ruttmann's \"Berlin, Symphony of a City\" (of which Grierson noted in an article that \"Berlin\" represented what a documentary should not be), Alberto Cavalcanti's \"Rien que les heures\", and Dziga Vertov's \"Man with a Movie Camera\". These films tend to feature people as products of their environment, and lean towards the avant-garde.\n\nDziga Vertov was central to the Soviet \"Kino-Pravda\" (literally, \"cinematic truth\") newsreel series of the 1920s. Vertov believed the camera—with its varied lenses, shot-counter shot editing, time-lapse, ability to slow motion, stop motion and fast-motion—could render reality more accurately than the human eye, and made a film philosophy out of it.\n\nThe newsreel tradition is important in documentary film; newsreels were also sometimes staged but were usually re-enactments of events that had already happened, not attempts to steer events as they were in the process of happening. For instance, much of the battle footage from the early 20th century was staged; the cameramen would usually arrive on site after a major battle and re-enact scenes to film them.\n\nThe propagandist tradition consists of films made with the explicit purpose of persuading an audience of a point. One of the most celebrated and controversial propaganda films is Leni Riefenstahl's film \"Triumph of the Will\" (1935), which chronicled the 1934 Nazi Party Congress and was commissioned by Adolf Hitler. Leftist filmmakers Joris Ivens and Henri Storck directed \"Borinage\" (1931) about the Belgian coal mining region. Luis Buñuel directed a \"surrealist\" documentary \"Las Hurdes\" (1933).\n\nPare Lorentz's \"The Plow That Broke the Plains\" (1936) and \"The River\" (1938) and Willard Van Dyke's \"The City\" (1939) are notable New Deal productions, each presenting complex combinations of social and ecological awareness, government propaganda, and leftist viewpoints. Frank Capra's \"Why We Fight\" (1942–1944) series was a newsreel series in the United States, commissioned by the government to convince the U.S. public that it was time to go to war. Constance Bennett and her husband Henri de la Falaise produced two feature-length documentaries, \"\" (1935) filmed in Bali, and \"Kilou the Killer Tiger\" (1936) filmed in Indochina.\n\nIn Canada, the Film Board, set up by John Grierson, was created for the same propaganda reasons. It also created newsreels that were seen by their national governments as legitimate counter-propaganda to the psychological warfare of Nazi Germany (orchestrated by Joseph Goebbels).\nIn Britain, a number of different filmmakers came together under John Grierson. They became known as the Documentary Film Movement. Grierson, Alberto Cavalcanti, Harry Watt, Basil Wright, and Humphrey Jennings amongst others succeeded in blending propaganda, information, and education with a more poetic aesthetic approach to documentary. Examples of their work include \"Drifters\" (John Grierson), \"Song of Ceylon\" (Basil Wright), \"Fires Were Started\", and \"A Diary for Timothy\" (Humphrey Jennings). Their work involved poets such as W. H. Auden, composers such as Benjamin Britten, and writers such as J. B. Priestley. Among the best known films of the movement are \"Night Mail\" and \"Coal Face\".\n\nFilm \"Calling mr. Smith\" (1943) was anti-nazi color film created by Stefan Themerson and being both documentary and avant-garde film against war. It was one of the first anti-nazi films in history.\n\nCinéma vérité (or the closely related direct cinema) was dependent on some technical advances in order to exist: light, quiet and reliable cameras, and portable sync sound.\n\nCinéma vérité and similar documentary traditions can thus be seen, in a broader perspective, as a reaction against studio-based film production constraints. Shooting on location, with smaller crews, would also happen in the French New Wave, the filmmakers taking advantage of advances in technology allowing smaller, handheld cameras and synchronized sound to film events on location as they unfolded.\n\nAlthough the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, there are important differences between cinéma vérité (Jean Rouch) and the North American \"Direct Cinema\" (or more accurately \"\"), pioneered by, among others, Canadians Allan King, , and Pierre Perrault, and Americans Robert Drew, Richard Leacock, Frederick Wiseman, and Albert and David Maysles.\n\nThe directors of the movement take different viewpoints on their degree of involvement with their subjects. Kopple and Pennebaker, for instance, choose non-involvement (or at least no overt involvement), and Perrault, Rouch, Koenig, and Kroitor favor direct involvement or even provocation when they deem it necessary.\n\nThe films \"Chronicle of a Summer\" (Jean Rouch), \"Dont Look Back\" (D. A. Pennebaker), \"Grey Gardens\" (Albert and David Maysles), \"Titicut Follies\" (Frederick Wiseman), \"Primary\" and \"\" (both produced by Robert Drew), \"Harlan County, USA\" (directed by Barbara Kopple), \"Lonely Boy\" (Wolf Koenig and Roman Kroitor) are all frequently deemed cinéma vérité films.\n\nThe fundamentals of the style include following a person during a crisis with a moving, often handheld, camera to capture more personal reactions. There are no sit-down interviews, and the shooting ratio (the amount of film shot to the finished product) is very high, often reaching 80 to one. From there, editors find and sculpt the work into a film. The editors of the movement—such as Werner Nold, Charlotte Zwerin, Muffie Myers, Susan Froemke, and Ellen Hovde—are often overlooked, but their input to the films was so vital that they were often given co-director credits.\n\nFamous cinéma vérité/direct cinema films include \"Les Raquetteurs\", \"Showman\", \"Salesman\", \"Near Death\", and \"The Children Were Watching\".\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, documentary film was often conceived as a political weapon against neocolonialism and capitalism in general, especially in Latin America, but also in a changing Quebec society. \"La Hora de los hornos\" (\"The Hour of the Furnaces\", from 1968), directed by Octavio Getino and Arnold Vincent Kudales Sr., influenced a whole generation of filmmakers. Among the many political documentaries produced in the early 1970s was \"Chile: A Special Report,\" public television's first in-depth expository look of the September 1973 overthrow of the Salvador Allende government in Chile by military leaders under Augusto Pinochet, produced by documentarians Ari Martinez and José Garcia.\n\nBox office analysts have noted that this film genre has become increasingly successful in theatrical release with films such as \"Fahrenheit 9/11\", \"Super Size Me\", \"Food, Inc.\", \"Earth\", \"March of the Penguins\", \"Religulous\", and \"An Inconvenient Truth\" among the most prominent examples. Compared to dramatic narrative films, documentaries typically have far lower budgets which makes them attractive to film companies because even a limited theatrical release can be highly profitable.\n\nThe nature of documentary films has expanded in the past 20 years from the cinema verité style introduced in the 1960s in which the use of portable camera and sound equipment allowed an intimate relationship between filmmaker and subject. The line blurs between documentary and narrative and some works are very personal, such as the late Marlon Riggs's \"Tongues Untied\" (1989) and \"Black Is...Black Ain't\" (1995), which mix expressive, poetic, and rhetorical elements and stresses subjectivities rather than historical materials.\n\nHistorical documentaries, such as the landmark 14-hour \"Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years\" (1986—Part 1 and 1989—Part 2) by Henry Hampton, \"4 Little Girls\" (1997) by Spike Lee, and \"The Civil War\" by Ken Burns, UNESCO awarded independent film on slavery 500 Years Later, expressed not only a distinctive voice but also a perspective and point of views. Some films such as \"The Thin Blue Line\" by Errol Morris incorporated stylized re-enactments, and Michael Moore's \"Roger & Me\" placed far more interpretive control with the director. The commercial success of these documentaries may derive from this narrative shift in the documentary form, leading some critics to question whether such films can truly be called documentaries; critics sometimes refer to these works as \"mondo films\" or \"docu-ganda.\" However, directorial manipulation of documentary subjects has been noted since the work of Flaherty, and may be endemic to the form due to problematic ontological foundations.\n\nDocumentary filmmakers are increasingly utilizing social impact campaigns with their films. Social impact campaigns seek to leverage media projects by converting public awareness of social issues and causes into engagement and action, largely by offering the audience a way to get involved. Examples of such documentaries include \"Kony 2012\", \"Salam Neighbor, Gasland\", \"Living on One Dollar\", and \"Girl Rising\".\n\nAlthough documentaries are financially more viable with the increasing popularity of the genre and the advent of the DVD, funding for documentary film production remains elusive. Within the past decade, the largest exhibition opportunities have emerged from within the broadcast market, making filmmakers beholden to the tastes and influences of the broadcasters who have become their largest funding source.\n\nModern documentaries have some overlap with television forms, with the development of \"reality television\" that occasionally verges on the documentary but more often veers to the fictional or staged. The \"making-of\" documentary shows how a movie or a computer game was produced. Usually made for promotional purposes, it is closer to an advertisement than a classic documentary.\n\nModern lightweight digital video cameras and computer-based editing have greatly aided documentary makers, as has the dramatic drop in equipment prices. The first film to take full advantage of this change was Martin Kunert and Eric Manes' \"Voices of Iraq\", where 150 DV cameras were sent to Iraq during the war and passed out to Iraqis to record themselves.\n\nFilms in the documentary form without words have been made. From 1982, the Qatsi trilogy and the similar \"Baraka\" could be described as visual tone poems, with music related to the images, but no spoken content. \"Koyaanisqatsi\" (part of the Qatsi trilogy) consists primarily of slow motion and time-lapse photography of cities and many natural landscapes across the United States. \"Baraka\" tries to capture the great pulse of humanity as it flocks and swarms in daily activity and religious ceremonies.\n\n\"Bodysong\" was made in 2003 and won a British Independent Film Award for \"Best British Documentary.\"\n\nThe 2004 film \"Genesis\" shows animal and plant life in states of expansion, decay, sex, and death, with some, but little, narration.\n\nBULLET::::- Voice-over narrator\nThe traditional style for narration is to have a dedicated narrator read a script which is dubbed onto the audio track. The narrator never appears on camera and may not necessarily have knowledge of the subject matter or involvement in the writing of the script.\nBULLET::::- Silent narration\nThis style of narration uses title screens to visually narrate the documentary. The screens are held for about 5–10 seconds to allow adequate time for the viewer to read them. They are similar to the ones shown at the end of movies based on true stories, but they are shown throughout, typically between scenes.\nBULLET::::- Hosted narrator\nIn this style, there is a host who appears on camera, conducts interviews, and who also does voice-overs.\n\nDocufiction is a hybrid genre from two basic ones, fiction film and documentary, practiced since the first documentary films were made.\n\nFake-fiction is a genre which deliberately presents real, unscripted events in the form of a fiction film, making them appear as staged. The concept was introduced by Pierre Bismuth to describe his 2016 film \"Where is Rocky II?\"\n\nA DVD documentary is a documentary film of indeterminate length that has been produced with the sole intent of releasing it for direct sale to the public on DVD(s), as different from a documentary being made and released first on television or on a cinema screen (a.k.a. theatrical release) and subsequently on DVD for public consumption.\n\nThis form of documentary release is becoming more popular and accepted as costs and difficulty with finding TV or theatrical release slots increases. It is also commonly used for more \"specialist\" documentaries, which might not have general interest to a wider TV audience. Examples are military, cultural arts, transport, sports, etc.\n\nCompilation films were pioneered in 1927 by Esfir Schub with \"The Fall of the Romanov Dynasty\". More recent examples include \"Point of Order\" (1964), directed by Emile de Antonio about the McCarthy hearings. Similarly, \"The Last Cigarette\" combines the testimony of various tobacco company executives before the U.S. Congress with archival propaganda extolling the virtues of smoking.\n\nPoetic documentaries, which first appeared in the 1920s, were a sort of reaction against both the content and the rapidly crystallizing grammar of the early fiction film. The poetic mode moved away from continuity editing and instead organized images of the material world by means of associations and patterns, both in terms of time and space. Well-rounded characters—\"lifelike people\"—were absent; instead, people appeared in these films as entities, just like any other, that are found in the material world. The films were fragmentary, impressionistic, lyrical. Their disruption of the coherence of time and space—a coherence favored by the fiction films of the day—can also be seen as an element of the modernist counter-model of cinematic narrative. The \"real world\"—Nichols calls it the \"historical world\"—was broken up into fragments and aesthetically reconstituted using film form. Examples of this style include Joris Ivens' \"Rain\" (1928), which records a passing summer shower over Amsterdam; László Moholy-Nagy's \"Play of Light: Black, White, Grey (1930)\", in which he films one of his own kinetic sculptures, emphasizing not the sculpture itself but the play of light around it; Oskar Fischinger's abstract animated films; Francis Thompson's \"N.Y., N.Y.\" (1957), a city symphony film; and Chris Marker's \"Sans Soleil\" (1982).\n\nExpository documentaries speak directly to the viewer, often in the form of an authoritative commentary employing voiceover or titles, proposing a strong argument and point of view. These films are rhetorical, and try to persuade the viewer. (They may use a rich and sonorous male voice.) The (voice-of-God) commentary often sounds \"objective\" and omniscient. Images are often not paramount; they exist to advance the argument. The rhetoric insistently presses upon us to read the images in a certain fashion. Historical documentaries in this mode deliver an unproblematic and \"objective\" account and interpretation of past events.\n\nExamples: TV shows and films like \"Biography\", \"America's Most Wanted\", many science and nature documentaries, Ken Burns' \"The Civil War\" (1990), Robert Hughes' \"The Shock of the New\" (1980), John Berger's \"Ways Of Seeing\" (1974), Frank Capra's wartime \"Why We Fight\" series, and Pare Lorentz's \"The Plow That Broke The Plains\" (1936).\n\nObservational documentaries attempt to simply and spontaneously observe lived life with a minimum of intervention. Filmmakers who worked in this subgenre often saw the poetic mode as too abstract and the expository mode as too didactic. The first observational docs date back to the 1960s; the technological developments which made them possible include mobile lightweight cameras and portable sound recording equipment for synchronized sound. Often, this mode of film eschewed voice-over commentary, post-synchronized dialogue and music, or re-enactments. The films aimed for immediacy, intimacy, and revelation of individual human character in ordinary life situations.\n\nParticipatory documentaries believe that it is impossible for the act of filmmaking to not influence or alter the events being filmed. What these films do is emulate the approach of the anthropologist: participant-observation. Not only is the filmmaker part of the film, we also get a sense of how situations in the film are affected or altered by their presence. Nichols: \"The filmmaker steps out from behind the cloak of voice-over commentary, steps away from poetic meditation, steps down from a fly-on-the-wall perch, and becomes a social actor (almost) like any other. (Almost like any other because the filmmaker retains the camera, and with it, a certain degree of potential power and control over events.)\" The encounter between filmmaker and subject becomes a critical element of the film. Rouch and Morin named the approach cinéma vérité, translating Dziga Vertov's kinopravda into French; the \"truth\" refers to the truth of the encounter rather than some absolute truth.\n\nReflexive documentaries do not see themselves as a transparent window on the world; instead, they draw attention to their own constructedness, and the fact that they are representations. How does the world get represented by documentary films? This question is central to this subgenre of films. They prompt us to \"question the authenticity of documentary in general.\" It is the most self-conscious of all the modes, and is highly skeptical of \"realism\". It may use Brechtian alienation strategies to jar us, in order to \"defamiliarize\" what we are seeing and how we are seeing it.\n\nPerformative documentaries stress subjective experience and emotional response to the world. They are strongly personal, unconventional, perhaps poetic and/or experimental, and might include hypothetical enactments of events designed to make us experience what it might be like for us to possess a certain specific perspective on the world that is not our own, e.g. that of black, gay men in Marlon Riggs's \"Tongues Untied\" (1989) or Jenny Livingston's \"Paris Is Burning\" (1991). This subgenre might also lend itself to certain groups (e.g. women, ethnic minorities, gays and lesbians, etc.) to \"speak about themselves\". Often, a battery of techniques, many borrowed from fiction or avant-garde films, are used. Performative docs often link up personal accounts or experiences with larger political or historical realities.\n\nDocumentaries are shown in schools around the world in order to educate students. Used to introduce various topics to children, they are often used with a school lesson or shown many times to reinforce an idea.\n\nThere are several challenges associated with translation of documentaries. The main two are working conditions and problems with terminology.\n\nDocumentary translators very often have to meet tight deadlines. Normally, the translator has between five and seven days to hand over the translation of a 90-minute programme. Dubbing studios typically give translators a week to translate a documentary, but in order to earn a good salary, translators have to deliver their translations in a much shorter period, usually when the studio decides to deliver the final programme to the client sooner or when the broadcasting channel sets a tight deadline, e.g. on documentaries discussing the latest news.\n\nAnother problem is the lack of postproduction script or the poor quality of the transcription. A correct transcription is essential for a translator to do their work properly, however many times the script is not even given to the translator, which is a major impediment since documentaries are characterised by \"the abundance of terminological units and very specific proper names\". When the script is given to the translator, it is usually poorly transcribed or outright incorrect making the translation unnecessarily difficult and demanding because all of the proper names and specific terminology have to be correct in a documentary programme in order for it to be a reliable source of information, hence the translator has to check every term on their own. Such mistakes in proper names are for instance: \"Jungle Reinhard instead of Django Reinhart, Jorn Asten instead of Jane Austen, and Magnus Axle instead of Aldous Huxley\".\n\nThe process of translation of a documentary programme requires working with very specific, often scientific terminology. Documentary translators usually are not specialist in a given field. Therefore, they are compelled to undertake extensive research whenever asked to make a translation of a specific documentary programme in order to understand it correctly and deliver the final product free of mistakes and inaccuracies. Generally, documentaries contain a large amount of specific terms, with which translators have to familiarise themselves on their own, for example:\nThe documentary \"Beetles, Record Breakers\" makes use of 15 different terms to refer to beetles in less than 30 minutes (longhorn beetle, cellar beetle, stag beetle, burying beetle or gravediggers, sexton beetle, tiger beetle, bloody nose beetle, tortoise beetle, diving beetle, devil’s coach horse, weevil, click beetle, malachite beetle, oil beetle, cockchafer), apart from mentioning other animals such as horseshoe bats or meadow brown butterflies.\nThis poses a real challenge for the translators because they have to render the meaning, i.e. find an equivalent, of a very specific, scientific term in the target language and frequently the narrator uses a more general name instead of a specific term and the translator has to rely on the image presented in the programme to understand which term is being discussed in order to transpose it in the target language accordingly. Additionally, translators of minorised languages often have to face another problem: some terms may not even exist in the target language. In such case, they have to create new terminology or consult specialists to find proper solutions. Also, sometimes the official nomenclature differs from the terminology used by actual specialists, which leaves the translator to decide between using the official vocabulary that can be found in the dictionary, or rather opting for spontaneous expressions used by real experts in real life situations.\n\nBULLET::::- Actuality film\nBULLET::::- Animated documentary\nBULLET::::- Citizen media\nBULLET::::- Concert film\nBULLET::::- Dance film\nBULLET::::- Docudrama\nBULLET::::- Documentary mode\nBULLET::::- Ethnofiction\nBULLET::::- Ethnographic film\nBULLET::::- Filmmaking\nBULLET::::- List of documentary films\nBULLET::::- List of documentary film festivals\nBULLET::::- List of documentary television channels\nBULLET::::- List of directors and producers of documentaries\nBULLET::::- Mockumentary\nBULLET::::- Mondo film\nBULLET::::- Nature documentary\nBULLET::::- Outline of film\nBULLET::::- Participatory video\nBULLET::::- Political cinema\nBULLET::::- Public-access television\nBULLET::::- Reality film\nBULLET::::- Rockumentary\nBULLET::::- Sponsored film\nBULLET::::- Television documentary\nBULLET::::- Travel documentary\nBULLET::::- Visual anthropology\nBULLET::::- Web documentary\nBULLET::::- Women's cinema\nBULLET::::- Grierson Awards\nBULLET::::- Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature\nBULLET::::- Joris Ivens Award, International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam (IDFA), (named after Joris Ivens)\nBULLET::::- Filmmaker Award, Margaret Mead Film Festival\nBULLET::::- Grand Prize, Visions du Réel\n\nBULLET::::- Aitken, Ian (ed.). \"Encyclopedia of the Documentary Film\". New York: Routledge, 2005. .\nBULLET::::- Barnouw, Erik. \"Documentary: A History of the Non-Fiction Film\", 2nd rev. ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993. . Still a useful introduction.\nBULLET::::- Ron Burnett. \"Reflections on the Documentary Cinema\"\nBULLET::::- Burton, Julianne (ed.). \"The Social Documentary in Latin America\". Pittsburgh, Penn.: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1990. .\nBULLET::::- Dawson, Jonathan. \"Dziga Vertov\".\nBULLET::::- Ellis, Jack C., and Betsy A. McLane. \"A New History of Documentary Film.\" New York: Continuum International, 2005. , .\nBULLET::::- Goldsmith, David A. \"The Documentary Makers: Interviews with 15 of the Best in the Business\". Hove, East Sussex: RotoVision, 2003. .\nBULLET::::- Klotman, Phyllis R. and Culter, Janet K.(eds.). \"Struggles for Representation: African American Documentary Film and Video\" Bloomington and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1999. .\nBULLET::::- Leach, Jim, and Jeannette Sloniowski (eds.). \"Candid Eyes: Essays on Canadian Documentaries\". Toronto; Buffalo: University of Toronto Press, 2003. , .\nBULLET::::- Nichols, Bill. \"Introduction to Documentary\", Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 2001. , .\nBULLET::::- Nichols, Bill. \"Representing Reality: Issues and Concepts in Documentary\". Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1991. , .\nBULLET::::- Nornes, Markus. \"Forest of Pressure: Ogawa Shinsuke and Postwar Japanese Documentary\". Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007. , .\nBULLET::::- Nornes, Markus. \"Japanese Documentary Film: The Meiji Era through Hiroshima\". Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2003. , .\nBULLET::::- Rotha, Paul, \"Documentary diary; An Informal History of the British Documentary Film, 1928–1939\". New York: Hill and Wang, 1973. .\nBULLET::::- Saunders, Dave. \"Direct Cinema: Observational Documentary and the Politics of the Sixties\". London: Wallflower Press, 2007. , .\nBULLET::::- Saunders, Dave. \"Documentary: The Routledge Film Guidebook\". London: Routledge, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Tobias, Michael. \"The Search for Reality: The Art of Documentary Filmmaking\". Studio City, CA: Michael Wiese Productions 1997.\nBULLET::::- Walker, Janet, and Diane Waldeman (eds.). \"Feminism and Documentary\". Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999. , .\nBULLET::::- Wyver, John. \"The Moving Image: An International History of Film, Television & Radio\". Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd. in association with the British Film Institute, 1989. .\nBULLET::::- Murdoch.edu, Documentary—reading list\n\nBULLET::::- Emilie de Brigard, \"The History of Ethnographic Film,\" in \"Principles of Visual Anthropology\", ed. Paul Hockings. Berlin and New York : Mouton de Gruyter, 1995, pp. 13–43.\nBULLET::::- Leslie Devereaux, \"Cultures, Disciplines, Cinemas,\" in \"Fields of Vision. Essays in Film Studies, Visual Anthropology and Photography\", ed. Leslie Devereaux & Roger Hillman. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995, pp. 329–339.\nBULLET::::- Faye Ginsburg, Lila Abu-Lughod and Brian Larkin (eds.), \"Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain\". Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Anna Grimshaw, \"The Ethnographer's Eye: Ways of Seeing in Modern Anthropology\". Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001. .\nBULLET::::- Karl G. Heider, \"Ethnographic Film\". Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Luc de Heusch, \"Cinéma et Sciences Sociales\", Paris: UNESCO, 1962. Published in English as \"The Cinema and Social Science. A Survey of Ethnographic and Sociological Films\". UNESCO, 1962.\nBULLET::::- Fredric Jameson, \"Signatures of the Visible\". New York & London: Routledge, 1990.\nBULLET::::- Pierre-L. Jordan, \"Premier Contact-Premier Regard\", Marseille: Musées de Marseille. Images en Manoeuvres Editions, 1992.\nBULLET::::- André Leroi-Gourhan, \"Cinéma et Sciences Humaines. Le Film Ethnologique Existe-t-il?,\" \"Revue de Géographie Humaine et d'Ethnologie\" 3 (1948), pp. 42–50.\nBULLET::::- David MacDougall, \"Transcultural Cinema\". Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998. .\nBULLET::::- David MacDougall, \"Whose Story Is It?,\" in \"Ethnographic Film Aesthetics and Narrative Traditions\", ed. Peter I. Crawford and Jan K. Simonsen. Aarhus, Intervention Press, 1992, pp. 25–42.\nBULLET::::- Fatimah Tobing Rony, \"The Third Eye: Race, Cinema and Ethnographic Spectacle\". Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996. .\nBULLET::::- Georges Sadoul, \"Histoire Générale du Cinéma\". Vol. 1, \"L'Invention du Cinéma 1832–1897\". Paris: Denöel, 1977, pp. 73–110.\nBULLET::::- Pierre Sorlin, \"Sociologie du Cinéma\", Paris: Aubier Montaigne, 1977, pp. 7–74.\nBULLET::::- Charles Warren, \"Introduction, with a Brief History of Nonfiction Film,\" in \"Beyond Document. Essays on Nonfiction Film\", ed. Charles Warren. Hanover and London: Wesleyan University Press, 1996, pp. 1–22.\nBULLET::::- Ismail Xavier, \"Cinema: Revelação e Engano,\" in \"O Olhar\", ed. Adauto Novaes. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1993, pp. 367–384.\n"}
{"id": "8090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8090", "title": "Day of the Tentacle", "text": "Day of the Tentacle\n\nDay of the Tentacle, also known as Maniac Mansion II: Day of the Tentacle, is a 1993 graphic adventure game developed and published by LucasArts. It is the sequel to the 1987 game \"Maniac Mansion\". The game's plot follows Bernard Bernoulli and his friends Hoagie and Laverne as they attempt to stop the evil Purple Tentacle—a sentient, disembodied tentacle—from taking over the world. The player takes control of the trio and solves puzzles while using time travel to explore different periods of history.\n\nDave Grossman and Tim Schafer co-led the game's development, their first time in such a role. The pair carried over a limited number of elements from \"Maniac Mansion\" and forwent the character selection aspect to simplify development. Inspirations included Chuck Jones cartoons and the history of the United States. \"Day of the Tentacle\" is the eighth LucasArts title to use the SCUMM engine.\n\nThe game was released simultaneously on floppy disk and CD-ROM to critical acclaim and commercial success. Critics focused on its cartoon-style visuals and comedic elements. \"Day of the Tentacle\" has featured regularly in lists of \"top\" games published more than two decades after its release, and aspects have been referenced in popular culture. A remaster of \"Day of the Tentacle\" was developed by Schafer's current studio, Double Fine Productions, and released on March 22, 2016, for the PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Windows and OS X.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" follows the point-and-click two-dimensional adventure game formula, first established by the original \"Maniac Mansion\". Players direct the controllable characters around the game world by clicking with the computer mouse. To interact with the game world, players choose from a set of nine commands arrayed on the screen (such as \"pick up\", \"use\", or \"talk to\") and then on an object in the world. This was the last SCUMM game to use the original interface of having the bottom of the screen being taken up by a verb selection and inventory; starting with the next game to use the SCUMM engine, \"Sam & Max Hit the Road\", the engine was modified to scroll through a more concise list of verbs with the right mouse button and having the inventory on a separate screen.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" uses time travel extensively; early in the game, the three main protagonists are separated across time by the effects of a faulty time machine. The player, after completing certain puzzles, can then freely switch between these characters, interacting with the game's world in the separate time periods. Certain small inventory items can be shared by placing the item into the \"Chron-o-Johns\", modified portable toilets that instantly transport objects to the other time period, while other items are shared by simply leaving the item in a past time period to be picked up by a character in a future period. Changes made to a past time period will affect a future one, and many of the game's puzzles are based on the effect of time travel, aging of certain items, and alterations of the time stream. For example, one puzzle requires the player, while in the future era where Purple Tentacle has succeeded, to send a medical chart of a Tentacle back to the past, having it used as the design of the American flag, then collecting one such flag in the future to be used as a Tentacle disguise to allow that character to roam freely.\n\nThe whole original \"Maniac Mansion\" game can be played on a computer resembling a Commodore 64 inside the \"Day of the Tentacle\" game; this practice has since been repeated by other game developers, but at the time of \"Day of the Tentacle's\" release, it was unprecedented.\n\nFive years after the events of \"Maniac Mansion\", Purple Tentacle—a mutant monster and lab assistant created by mad scientist Dr. Fred Edison—drinks toxic sludge from a river behind Dr. Fred's laboratory. The sludge causes him to grow a pair of flipper-like arms, develop vastly increased intelligence, and a thirst for global domination. Dr. Fred plans to resolve the issue by killing Purple Tentacle and his harmless, friendly brother Green Tentacle, but Green Tentacle sends a plea of help to his old friend, the nerd Bernard Bernoulli. Bernard travels to the Edison family motel with his two housemates, deranged medical student Laverne and roadie Hoagie, and frees the tentacles. Purple Tentacle escapes to resume his quest to take over the world.\n\nSince Purple Tentacle's plans are flawless and unstoppable, Dr. Fred decides to use his Chron-o-John time machines to send Bernard, Laverne, and Hoagie to the day before to turn off his Sludge-o-Matic machine, thereby preventing Purple Tentacle's exposure to the sludge. However, because Dr. Fred used an imitation diamond rather than a real diamond as a power source for the time machine, the Chron-o-Johns break down in operation. Laverne is sent 200 years in the future, where humanity has been enslaved and Purple Tentacle rules the world from the Edison mansion, while Hoagie is dropped 200 years in the past, where the motel is being used by the Founding Fathers as a retreat to write the United States Constitution. Bernard is returned to the present. To salvage Dr. Fred's plan, Bernard must acquire a replacement diamond for the time machine, while both Hoagie and Laverne must restore power to their respective Chron-o-John pods by plugging them in. To overcome the lack of electricity in the past, Hoagie recruits the help of Benjamin Franklin and Dr. Fred's ancestor, Red Edison, to build a superbattery to power his pod, while Laverne evades capture by the tentacles long enough to run an extension cord to her unit. The three send small objects back and forth in time through the Chron-o-Johns and make changes to history to help the others complete their tasks.\n\nEventually, Bernard uses Dr. Fred's family fortune of royalties from the \"Maniac Mansion\" TV series to purchase a real diamond, while his friends manage to power their Chron-o-Johns. Soon, the three are reunited in the present. Purple Tentacle arrives, hijacks a Chron-o-John, and takes it to the previous day to prevent them from turning off the sludge machine; he is pursued by Green Tentacle in another pod. With only one Chron-o-John pod left, Bernard, Hoagie, and Laverne use it to pursue the tentacles to the previous day, while Dr. Fred uselessly tries to warn them of using the pod together, referencing the film \"The Fly\". Upon arriving, the trio exit the pod only to discover that they have been turned into a three-headed monster, their bodies merging into one during the transfer. Meanwhile, Purple Tentacle has used the time machine to bring countless versions of himself from different moments in time to the same day to prevent the Sludge-o-Matic from being deactivated. Bernard and his friends defeat the Purple Tentacles guarding the Sludge-o-Matic, turn off the machine, and prevent the whole series of events from ever happening. Returning to the present, Dr. Fred discovers that the three have not been turned into a monster at all but have just gotten stuck in the same set of clothes; they are then ordered by Dr. Fred to get out of his house. The game ends with the credits rolling over a tentacle-shaped American flag, one of the more significant results of their tampering in history.\n\nFollowing a string of successful adventure games, LucasArts assigned Dave Grossman and Tim Schafer to lead development of a new game. The two had previously assisted Ron Gilbert with the creation of \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" and \"\", and the studio felt that Grossman and Schafer were ready to manage a project. The company believed that the pair's humor matched well with that of \"Maniac Mansion\" and suggested working on a sequel. The two developers agreed and commenced production. Gilbert and Gary Winnick, the creators of \"Maniac Mansion\", collaborated with Grossman and Schafer on the initial planning and writing. The total budget for the game was about $600,000, according to Schafer.\n\nIn planning the plot, the four designers considered a number of concepts, eventually choosing an idea of Gilbert's about time travel that they believed was the most interesting. The four discussed what time periods to focus on, settling on the Revolutionary War and the future. The Revolutionary War offered opportunities to craft many puzzles around that period, such as changing the Constitution to affect the future. Grossman noted the appeal of the need to make wide-sweeping changes such as the Constitution just to achieve a small personal goal, believing this captured the essence of adventure games. The future period allowed them to explore the nature of cause and effect without any historical bounds. Grossman and Schafer decided to carry over previous characters that they felt were the most entertaining. The two considered the Edison family \"essential\" and chose Bernard because of his \"unqualified nerdiness\". Bernard was considered \"everyone's favorite character\" from \"Maniac Mansion\", and was the clear first choice for the protagonists. The game's other protagonists, Laverne and Hoagie, were based on a Mexican ex-girlfriend of Grossman's and a Megadeth roadie named Tony that Schafer had met, respectively. Schafer and Grossman planned to use a character selection system similar to the first game, but felt that it would have complicated the design process and increased production costs. Believing that it added little to the gameplay, they removed it early in the process and reduced the number of player characters from six to three. The dropped characters included Razor, a female musician from the previous game; Moonglow, a short character in baggy clothes; and Chester, a black beat poet. Ideas for Chester, however, morphed into new twin characters in the Edison family. The smaller number of characters reduced the strain on the game's engine in terms of scripting and animation.\n\nThe staff collaboratively designed the characters. They first discussed the character personalities, which Larry Ahern used to create concept art. Ahern wanted to make sure that the art style was consistent and the character designs were established early, in contrast to what had happened with \"Monkey Island 2\", in which various artists came in later to help fill in necessary art assets as necessary, creating a disjointed style. Looney Tunes animation shorts, particularly the Chuck Jones-directed \"Rabbit of Seville\", \"What's Opera, Doc?\" and \"Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century\" inspired the artistic design. The cartoonish style also lent itself to providing larger visible faces to enable more expressive characters. Peter Chan designed backgrounds, spending around two days to progress from concept sketch to final art for each background. Chan too used Looney Tunes as influence for the backgrounds, trying to emulate the style of Jones and Maurice Noble. Ahern and Chan went back and forth with character and background art to make sure both styles worked together without too much distraction. They further had Jones visit their studio during development to provide input into their developing art. The choice of art style inspired further ideas from the designers. Grossman cited cartoons featuring Pepé Le Pew, and commented that the gag involving a painted white stripe on Penelope Pussycat inspired a puzzle in the game. The artists spent a year creating the in-game animations.\n\nThe script was written in the evening, when fewer people were in the office. Grossman considered it the easiest aspect of production, but encountered difficulties when writing with others around.\n\nGrossman and Schafer brainstormed regularly to devise the time travel puzzles, and collaborated with members of the development team as well as other LucasArts employees. They would identify puzzle problems and work towards a solution similar to how the game plays. Most issues were addressed prior to programming, but some details were left unfinished to work on later. The staff conceived puzzles involving the U.S.'s early history based on their memory of their compulsory education, and using the more legendary aspects of history, such as George Washington cutting down a cherry tree to appeal to international audiences. To complete the elements, Grossman researched the period to maintain historical accuracy, visiting libraries and contacting reference librarians. The studio, however, took creative license towards facts to fit them into the game's design.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" features a four-minute long animated opening credit sequence, the first LucasArts game to have such. Ahern noted that their previous games would run the credits over primarily still shots which would only last for a few minutes, but with \"Tentacle\", the team had grown so large that they worried this approach would be boring to players. They assigned Kyle Balda, an intern at CalArts, to create the animated sequence, with Chan helping to create minimalist backgrounds to aid in the animation. Originally this sequence was around seven minutes long, and included the three characters arriving at the mansion and releasing Purple Tentacle. Another LucasArts designer, Hal Barwood, suggested they cut it in half, leading to the shortened version as in the released game, and having the player take over when they arrive at the mansion.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" uses the SCUMM engine developed for \"Maniac Mansion\". LucasArts had gradually modified the engine since its creation. For example, the number of input verbs was reduced and items in the character's inventory are represented by icons rather than text. While implementing an animation, the designers encountered a problem later discovered to be a limitation of the engine. Upon learning of the limitation, Gilbert reminisced about the file size of the first game. The staff then resolved to include it in the sequel.\n\nThe title was the first LucasArts adventure game to incorporate voice work on release. The game was not originally planned to include voice work, as at the time, the install base for CD-ROM was too low. As they neared the end of 1992, CD-ROM sales grew significantly. The general manager of LucasArts, Kelly Flock, recognizing that the game would not be done in time by the end of the year to make the holiday release, suggested that the team include voice work for the game, giving them more time to complete the title.\n\nVoice director Tamlynn Barra managed that aspect of the game. Schafer and Grossman described how they imagined the characters' voices and Barra sought audition tapes of voice actors to meet the criteria. She presented the best auditions to the pair. Schafer's sister Ginny was among the auditions, and she was chosen for Nurse Edna. Schafer opted out of the decision for her selection to avoid nepotism. Grossman and Schafer encountered difficulty selecting a voice for Bernard. To aid the process, Grossman commented that the character should sound like Les Nessman from the television show \"WKRP in Cincinnati\". Barra responded that she knew the agent of the character's actor, Richard Sanders, and brought Sanders on the project. Denny Delk and Nick Jameson were among those hired, and provided voice work for around five characters each. Recording for the 4,500 lines of dialog occurred at Studio 222 in Hollywood. Barra directed the voice actors separately from a sound production booth. She provided context for each line and described aspects of the game to aid the actors. The voice work in Day of the Tentacle was widely praised for its quality and professionalism in comparison to Sierra's talkie games of the period which suffered from poor audio quality and limited voice acting (some of which consisted of Sierra employees rather than professional talent).\n\nThe game's music was composed by Peter McConnell, Michael Land and Clint Bajakian. The three had worked together to share the duties equally of composing the music for \"Monkey Island 2\" and \"Fate of Atlantis\", and continued this approach for \"Day of the Tentacle\". According to McConnell, he had composed most of the music taking place in the game's present, Land for the future, and Bajakian for the past, outside of Dr. Fred's theme for the past which McConnell had done. The music was composed around the cartoonist nature of the game play, further drawing on Looney Tunes' use of parodying classical works of music, and playing on set themes for all of the major characters in the game. Many of these themes had to be composed to take into account different processing speeds of computers at the time, managed by the iMUSE music interface; such themes would include shorter repeating patterns that would play while the game's screen scrolled across, and then once the screen was at the proper place, the music would continue on to a more dramatic phrase.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" was one of the first games concurrently released on CD-ROM and floppy disk. A floppy disk version was created to accommodate consumers that had yet to purchase CD-ROM drives. The CD-ROM format afforded the addition of audible dialog. The capacity difference between the two formats necessitated alterations to the floppy disk version. Grossman spent several weeks reducing files sizes and removing files such as the audio dialog to fit the game onto six diskettes.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" was a moderate commercial success; according to \"Edge\", it sold roughly 80,000 copies by 2009. Tim Schafer saw this as an improvement over his earlier projects, the \"Monkey Island\" games, which had been commercial flops. The game was critically acclaimed. Charles Ardai of \"Computer Gaming World\" wrote in September 1993, \"Calling \"Day of the Tentacle\" a sequel to \"Maniac Mansion\" ... is a little like calling the space shuttle a sequel to the slingshot\". He enjoyed the game's humor and interface, and praised the designers for removing \"dead end\" scenarios and player character death. Ardai lauded the voice acting, writing that it \"would have done the late Mel Blanc proud\", and compared the game's humor, animation, and camera angles to \"Looney Toons gems from the 40s and 50s\". He concluded, \"I expect that this game will keep entertaining people for quite some time to come\". In April 1994 the magazine said of the CD version that Sanders's Bernard was among \"many other inspired performances\", concluding that \"Chuck Jones would be proud\". In May 1994 the magazine said of one multimedia kit bundling the CD version that \"it packs more value into the kit than the entire software packages of some of its competitors\". Sandy Petersen of \"Dragon\" stated that its graphics \"are in a stupendous cartoony style\", while praising its humor and describing its sound and music as \"excellent\". Although the reviewer considered it \"one of the best\" graphic adventure games, he noted that, like LucasArts' earlier \"Loom\", it was extremely short; he wrote that he \"felt cheated somehow when I finished the game\". He ended the review, \"Go, Lucasfilm! Do this again, but do make the next game longer!\".\n\nPhil LaRose of \"The Advocate\" called it \"light-years ahead of the original\", and believed that its \"improved controls, sound and graphics are an evolutionary leap to a more enjoyable gaming experience\". He praised the interface, and summarized the game as \"another of the excellent LucasArts programs that place a higher premium on the quality of entertainment and less on the technical knowledge needed to make it run\". The \"Boston Herald\"s Geoff Smith noted that \"the animation of the cartoonlike characters is of TV quality\", and praised the removal of dead ends and character death. He ended, \"It's full of lunacy, but for anyone who likes light-hearted adventure games, it's well worth trying\". Vox Day of \"The Blade\" called its visuals \"well done\" and compared them to those of \"The Ren & Stimpy Show\". The writer praised the game's humor, and stated that \"both the music and sound effects are hilarious\"; he cited the voice performance of Richard Sanders as a high point. He summarized the game as \"both a good adventure and a funny cartoon\".\n\nLim Choon Wee of the \"New Straits Times\" highly praised the game's humor, which he called \"brilliantly funny\". The writer commented that the game's puzzles relied on \"trial and error\" with \"no underlying logic\", but stated that the game \"remains fun\" despite this issue, and concluded that \"Day of the Tentacle\" was \"definitely the comedy game of the year\". Daniel Baum of \"The Jerusalem Post\" called it \"one of the funniest, most entertaining and best-programmed computer games I have ever seen\", and lauded its animation. He wrote that the game provided \"a more polished impression\" than either \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" or \"\". The writer stated that its high system requirements were its only drawback, and believed that a Sound Blaster card was required to fully appreciate the game. In a retrospective review, Adventure Gamers' Chris Remo wrote, \"If someone were to ask for a few examples of games that exemplify the best of the graphic adventure genre, \"Day of the Tentacle\" would certainly be near the top\".\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle\" has been featured regularly in lists of \"top\" games. In 1994, \"PC Gamer US\" named \"Day of the Tentacle\" the 46th best computer game ever. In June 1994 it and \"\" won \"Computer Gaming World\"s Adventure Game of the Year award. The editors stated that \"\"Day of the Tentacle\"s fluid animation sequences underscore a strong script and solid game play ... story won out over technological innovation in this genre\". In 1996, the magazine ranked it as the 34th best game of all time, writing: \"\"DOTT\" completely blew away its ancestor, \"Maniac Mansion\", with its smooth animated sequences, nifty plot and great voiceovers.\" Adventure Gamers included the game as the top entry on its 20 Greatest Adventure Games of All Time List in 2004, and placed it sixth on its Top 100 All-Time Adventure Games in 2011. The game has appeared on several IGN lists. The website rated it number 60 and 84 on its top 100 games list in 2005 and 2007, respectively. IGN named \"Day of the Tentacle\" as part of their top 10 LucasArts adventure games in 2009, and ranked the Purple Tentacle 82nd in a list of top 100 videogame villains in 2010. ComputerAndVideoGames.com ranked it at number 30 in 2008, and GameSpot also listed \"Day of the Tentacle\" as one of the greatest games of all time.\n\nFans of \"Day of the Tentacle\" created a webcomic, \"The Day After the Day of the Tentacle\", using the game's graphics. The 1993 LucasArts title \"Zombies Ate My Neighbors\" features a stage dedicated to \"Day of the Tentacle\". The artists for \"Day of the Tentacle\" shared office space with the \"Zombies Ate My Neighbors\" development team. The team included the homage after frequently seeing artwork for \"Day of the Tentacle\" during the two games' productions. In describing what he considered \"the most rewarding moment\" of his career, Grossman stated that the game's writing and use of spoken and subtitled dialog assisted a learning-disabled child in learning how to read. Telltale Games CEO Dan Connors commented in 2009 that an episodic game based on \"Day of the Tentacle\" would be \"feasible\". However, he cautioned that such an endeavor would hinge on the sales of the \"Monkey Island\" titles released that year.\n\nIn 2018, a fan-made sequel entitled \"Return of the Tentacle\" was released for free by a team from Germany. The game imitates the art-style of the \"Remastered\" edition and features full voice-acting.\n\nAccording to Kotaku, a remastered version of \"Day of the Tentacle\" was in the works at LucasArts Singapore before the sale of LucasArts to Disney in 2012. Though never officially approved, the game used a pseudo-3D art style and was nearly 80% complete, according to one person close to the project, but was shelved in the days before the closure of LucasArts.\n\nAt PlayStation Experience 2014, Schafer announced that a remastered version of \"Day of the Tentacle\", simply titled \"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\", was being developed by his studio, Double Fine Productions. The remaster was released on March 22, 2016, for PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Microsoft Windows and OS X, with a Linux version released at July 11 together with a mobile port for iOS.\n\nSchafer credited both LucasArts and Disney for help in creating the remaster, which follows from a similar remastering of \"Grim Fandango\", as well by Double Fine, in January 2015. Schafer said when they originally were about to secure the rights to \"Grim Fandango\" from LucasArts to make the remaster, they did not originally have plans to redo the other LucasArts adventure games, but with the passionate response they got on the news of the \"Grim Fandango\" remaster, they decided to continue these efforts. Schafer described getting the rights to \"Day of the Tentacle\" a \"miracle\" though aided by the fact that many of the executives in the legal rights chain had fond memories of playing these games and helped to secure the rights. Schafer has expressed interest in continuing to restore these older titles, listing \"Full Throttle\" as his next goal, which is also confirmed to release in the future. 2 Player Productions, which has worked before with Double Fine to document their game development process, also created a mini-documentary for \"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\", which included a visit to the Skywalker Ranch, where LucasArts games were originally developed, where much of the original concept art and digital files for the game and other LucasArts adventure games were archived.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\" retains its two-dimensional cartoon-style art, redrawn at higher resolution for modern computers. The high resolution character art was updated by a team led by Yujin Keim with consultation of Ahern and Chan. Keim's team used many of the original sketches of characters and assets from the two and emulated their style with improvements for modern graphics systems. Matt Hansen worked on recreating the background assets in high resolution. As with the \"Grim Fandango\" remaster, the player can switch back and forth between the original graphics and the high-resolution version. The game includes a more streamlined interaction menu, a command wheel akin to the approach used in \"Broken Age\", but the player can opt to switch back to the original interface. The game's soundtrack has been redone within MIDI adapted to work with the iMUSE system. There is an option to listen to commentary from the original creators, including Schafer, Grossman, Chan, McConnell, Ahern, and Bajakian. The remaster contains the fully playable version of the original \"Maniac Mansion\", though no enhancements have been made to that game-within-a-game.\n\n\"Day of the Tentacle: Remastered\" has received positive reviews, with the PC version having an aggregate review score of 87/100 tallied by \"Metacritic\". Reviewers generally praised the title as having not lost its charm since its initial release, but found some aspects of the remastering to be lackluster. Richard Corbett for \"Eurogamer\" found the game \"every bit as well crafted now as it was in 1993\", but found the processes used to provide high-definition graphics from the original 16-bit graphics to making some of the required shortcuts taken in 1993 for graphics, such as background dithering and low animation framerates, more obvious on modern hardware. \"IGN\"s Jared Petty also found the remastered to still be enjoyable, and found the improvement on the graphics to be \"glorious\", but worried that the lack of a hint system, as was added in \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" remastered version, would put off new players to the game. Bob Mackey for \"USgamer\" found that while past remastered adventure games have highlighted how much has changed in gamers' expectations since the heyday of adventure games in the 1990s, \"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\" \"rises above these issues to become absolutely timeless\".\n"}
{"id": "8091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8091", "title": "Douglas Adams", "text": "Douglas Adams\n\nDouglas Noel Adams (11 March 1952 – 11 May 2001) was an English author, screenwriter, essayist, humorist, satirist and dramatist.\n\nAdams was author of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\", which originated in 1978 as a BBC radio comedy before developing into a \"trilogy\" of five books that sold more than 15 million copies in his lifetime and generated a television series, several stage plays, comics, a video game, and in 2005 a feature film. Adams's contribution to UK radio is commemorated in The Radio Academy's Hall of Fame.\n\nAdams also wrote \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" (1987) and \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\" (1988), and co-wrote \"The Meaning of Liff\" (1983), \"The Deeper Meaning of Liff\" (1990), \"Last Chance to See\" (1990), and three stories for the television series \"Doctor Who\"; he also served as script editor for the show's seventeenth season in 1979. He also co-wrote the Monty Python sketch “Patient Abuse” which appeared in the final episode of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\". A posthumous collection of his works, including an unfinished novel, was published as \"The Salmon of Doubt\" in 2002.\n\nAdams was an advocate for environmentalism and conservation, a lover of fast cars, technological innovation and the Apple Macintosh, and a self-proclaimed radical atheist.\n\nAdams was born on 11 March 1952 to Janet (née Donovan; 1927–2016) and Christopher Douglas Adams (1927–1985) in Cambridge. The family moved to the East End of London a few months after his birth, where his sister, Susan, was born three years later. His parents divorced in 1957; Douglas, Susan, and their mother moved to an RSPCA animal shelter in Brentwood, Essex, run by his maternal grandparents.\n\nAdams attended Primrose Hill Primary School in Brentwood. At nine, he passed the entrance exam for Brentwood School. He attended the prep school from 1959 to 1964, then the main school until December 1970. Adams was by age 12 and stopped growing at . His form master, Frank Halford, said Adams's height had made him stand out and that he had been self-conscious about it. His ability to write stories made him well known in the school. He became the only student ever to be awarded a ten out of ten by Halford for creative writing, something he remembered for the rest of his life, particularly when facing writer's block.\n\nSome of his earliest writing was published at the school, such as a report on its photography club in \"The Brentwoodian\" in 1962, or spoof reviews in the school magazine \"Broadsheet\", edited by Paul Neil Milne Johnstone, who later became a character in \"The Hitchhiker's Guide\". He also designed the cover of one issue of the \"Broadsheet\", and had a letter and short story published in \"The Eagle\", the boys' comic, in 1965. A poem entitled \"A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle and an account of some of the difficulties thereto pertaining\" written by Adams in January 1970, at the age of 17, was discovered in a cupboard at the school in early 2014.\n\nOn the strength of an essay on religious poetry that discussed the Beatles and William Blake, he was awarded an Exhibition in English at St John's College, Cambridge, going up in 1971. He wanted to join the Footlights, an invitation-only student comedy club that has acted as a hothouse for comic talent. He was not elected immediately as he had hoped, and started to write and perform in revues with Will Adams (no relation) and Martin Smith, forming a group called \"Adams-Smith-Adams\", and became a member of the Footlights by 1973. Despite doing very little work—he recalled having completed three essays in three years—he graduated in 1974 with a 2:2 in English literature.\n\nAfter leaving university Adams moved back to London, determined to break into TV and radio as a writer. An edited version of the \"Footlights Revue\" appeared on BBC2 television in 1974. A version of the Revue performed live in London's West End led to Adams being discovered by Monty Python's Graham Chapman. The two formed a brief writing partnership, earning Adams a writing credit in episode 45 of \"Monty Python\" for a sketch called \"Patient Abuse\". The pair also co-wrote the \"Marilyn Monroe\" sketch which appeared on the soundtrack album of \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\". Adams is one of only two people other than the original Python members to get a writing credit (the other being Neil Innes).\n\nAdams had two brief appearances in the fourth series of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\". At the beginning of episode 42, \"The Light Entertainment War\", Adams is in a surgeon's mask (as Dr. Emile Koning, according to on-screen captions), pulling on gloves, while Michael Palin narrates a sketch that introduces one person after another but never gets started. At the beginning of episode 44, \"Mr. Neutron\", Adams is dressed in a pepper-pot outfit and loads a missile onto a cart driven by Terry Jones, who is calling for scrap metal (\"Any old iron...\"). The two episodes were broadcast in November 1974. Adams and Chapman also attempted non-Python projects, including \"Out of the Trees\".\n\nAt this point Adams's career stalled; his writing style was unsuited to the then-current style of radio and TV comedy. To make ends meet he took a series of odd jobs, including as a hospital porter, barn builder, and chicken shed cleaner. He was employed as a bodyguard by a Qatari family, who had made their fortune in oil.\n\nDuring this time Adams continued to write and submit sketches, though few were accepted. In 1976 his career had a brief improvement when he wrote and performed \"Unpleasantness at Brodie's Close\" at the Edinburgh Fringe festival. By Christmas, work had dried up again, and a depressed Adams moved to live with his mother. The lack of writing work hit him hard and low confidence became a feature of Adams's life; \"I have terrible periods of lack of confidence [..] I briefly did therapy, but after a while I realised it was like a farmer complaining about the weather. You can't fix the weather – you just have to get on with it\".\n\nSome of Adams's early radio work included sketches for \"The Burkiss Way\" in 1977 and \"The News Huddlines\". He also wrote, again with Chapman, 20 February 1977 episode of \"Doctor on the Go\", a sequel to the \"Doctor in the House\" television comedy series. After the first radio series of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide\" became successful, Adams was made a BBC radio producer, working on \"Week Ending\" and a pantomime called \"Black Cinderella Two Goes East\". He left after six months to become the script editor for \"Doctor Who\".\n\nIn 1979, Adams and John Lloyd wrote scripts for two half-hour episodes of \"Doctor Snuggles\": \"The Remarkable Fidgety River\" and \"The Great Disappearing Mystery\" (episodes eight and twelve). John Lloyd was also co-author of two episodes from the original \"Hitchhiker\" radio series (\"Fit the Fifth\" and \"Fit the Sixth\", also known as \"Episode Five\" and \"Episode Six\"), as well as \"The Meaning of Liff\" and \"The Deeper Meaning of Liff\".\n\nAdams sent the script for the \"HHGG\" pilot radio programme to the \"Doctor Who\" production office in 1978, and was commissioned to write \"The Pirate Planet\". He had also previously attempted to submit a potential film script, called \"Doctor Who and the Krikkitmen\", which later became his novel \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" (which in turn became the third \"Hitchhiker's Guide\" radio series). Adams then went on to serve as script editor on the show for its seventeenth season in 1979. Altogether, he wrote three \"Doctor Who\" serials starring Tom Baker as the Doctor:\nBULLET::::- \"The Pirate Planet\" (the second serial in the \"Key to Time\" arc, in season 16)\nBULLET::::- \"City of Death\" (with producer Graham Williams, from an original storyline by writer David Fisher. It was transmitted under the pseudonym \"David Agnew\")\nBULLET::::- \"Shada\" (only partially filmed; not televised due to industry disputes, but was later completed using animation for the unfinished scenes and broadcast as \"Doctor Who: The Lost Episode\" on BBC America 19 July 2018)\n\nThe episodes authored by Adams are some of the few that were not novelised as Adams would not allow anyone else to write them, and asked for a higher price than the publishers were willing to pay. \"Shada\" was later adapted as a novel by Gareth Roberts in 2012 and \"City of Death\" and \"The Pirate Planet\" by James Goss in 2015 and 2017 respectively.\n\nElements of \"Shada\" and \"City of Death\" were reused in Adams's later novel \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\", in particular, the character of Professor Chronotis. Big Finish Productions eventually remade \"Shada\" as an audio play starring Paul McGann as the Doctor. Accompanied by partially animated illustrations, it was webcast on the BBC website in 2003, and subsequently released as a two-CD set later that year. An omnibus edition of this version was broadcast on the digital radio station BBC7 on 10 December 2005.\n\nIn the \"Doctor Who\" 2012 Christmas episode \"The Snowmen\", writer Steven Moffat was inspired by a storyline that Adams pitched called \"The Doctor Retires\".\n\n\"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" was a concept for a science-fiction comedy radio series pitched by Adams and radio producer Simon Brett to BBC Radio 4 in 1977. Adams came up with an outline for a pilot episode, as well as a few other stories (reprinted in Neil Gaiman's book \"\") that could be used in the series.\nAccording to Adams, the idea for the title occurred to him while he lay drunk in a field in Innsbruck, Austria, gazing at the stars. He was carrying a copy of the \"Hitch-hiker's Guide to Europe\", and it occurred to him that \"somebody ought to write a \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\"\".\n\nDespite the original outline, Adams was said to make up the stories as he wrote. He turned to John Lloyd for help with the final two episodes of the first series. Lloyd contributed bits from an unpublished science fiction book of his own, called \"GiGax\". Very little of Lloyd's material survived in later adaptations of \"Hitchhiker's\", such as the novels and the TV series. The TV series was based on the first six radio episodes, and sections contributed by Lloyd were largely re-written.\n\nBBC Radio 4 broadcast the first radio series weekly in the UK in March and April 1978. The series was distributed in the United States by National Public Radio. Following the success of the first series, another episode was recorded and broadcast, which was commonly known as the Christmas Episode. A second series of five episodes was broadcast one per night, during the week of 21–25 January 1980.\n\nWhile working on the radio series (and with simultaneous projects such as \"The Pirate Planet\") Adams developed problems keeping to writing deadlines that got worse as he published novels. Adams was never a prolific writer and usually had to be forced by others to do any writing. This included being locked in a hotel suite with his editor for three weeks to ensure that \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\" was completed. He was quoted as saying, \"I love deadlines. I love the whooshing noise they make as they go by.\" Despite the difficulty with deadlines, Adams wrote five novels in the series, published in 1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1992.\n\nThe books formed the basis for other adaptations, such as three-part comic book adaptations for each of the first three books, an interactive text-adventure computer game, and a photo-illustrated edition, published in 1994. This latter edition featured a 42 Puzzle designed by Adams, which was later incorporated into paperback covers of the first four \"Hitchhiker's\" novels (the paperback for the fifth re-used the artwork from the hardback edition).\n\nIn 1980, Adams began attempts to turn the first \"Hitchhiker's\" novel into a film, making several trips to Los Angeles, and working with Hollywood studios and potential producers. The next year, the radio series became the basis for a BBC television mini-series broadcast in six parts. When he died in 2001 in California, he had been trying again to get the film project started with Disney, which had bought the rights in 1998. The screenplay got a posthumous re-write by Karey Kirkpatrick, and the resulting film was released in 2005.\n\nRadio producer Dirk Maggs had consulted with Adams, first in 1993, and later in 1997 and 2000 about creating a third radio series, based on the third novel in the \"Hitchhiker's\" series. They also discussed the possibilities of radio adaptations of the final two novels in the five-book \"trilogy\". As with the film, this project was realised only after Adams's death. The third series, \"The Tertiary Phase\", was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in September 2004 and was subsequently released on audio CD. With the aid of a recording of his reading of \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" and editing, Adams can be heard playing the part of Agrajag posthumously. \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\" and \"Mostly Harmless\" made up the fourth and fifth radio series, respectively (on radio they were titled \"The Quandary Phase\" and \"The Quintessential Phase\") and these were broadcast in May and June 2005, and also subsequently released on Audio CD. The last episode in the last series (with a new, \"more upbeat\" ending) concluded with, \"The very final episode of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" by Douglas Adams is affectionately dedicated to its author.\"\n\nBetween Adams's first trip to Madagascar with Mark Carwardine in 1985, and their series of travels that formed the basis for the radio series and non-fiction book \"Last Chance to See\", Adams wrote two other novels with a new cast of characters. \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" was published in 1987, and was described by its author as \"a kind of ghost-horror-detective-time-travel-romantic-comedy-epic, mainly concerned with mud, music and quantum mechanics\". It was derived from two Doctor Who serials Adams had written.\n\nA sequel, \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\", was published a year later. This was an entirely original work, Adams's first since \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish.\" After the book tour, Adams set off on his round-the-world excursion which supplied him with the material for \"Last Chance to See\".\n\nAdams played the guitar left-handed and had a collection of twenty-four left-handed guitars when he died (having received his first guitar in 1964). He also studied piano in the 1960s. Pink Floyd and Procol Harum had important influence on Adams' work.\n\nAdams's official biography shares its name with the song \"Wish You Were Here\" by Pink Floyd. Adams was friends with Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour and, on Adams's 42nd birthday, he was invited to make a guest appearance at Pink Floyd's concert of 28 October 1994 at Earls Court in London, playing guitar on the songs \"Brain Damage\" and \"Eclipse\". Adams chose the name for Pink Floyd's 1994 album, \"The Division Bell\", by picking the words from the lyrics to one of its tracks, \"High Hopes\". Gilmour also performed at Adams's memorial service in 2001, and what would have been Adams's 60th birthday party in 2012.\n\nDouglas Adams created an interactive fiction version of \"HHGG\" with Steve Meretzky from Infocom in 1984. In 1986 he participated in a week-long brainstorming session with the Lucasfilm Games team for the game \"\". Later he was also involved in creating \"Bureaucracy\" as a parody of events in his own life.\n\nAdams was a founder-director and Chief Fantasist of The Digital Village, a digital media and Internet company with which he created \"Starship Titanic\", a Codie award-winning and BAFTA-nominated adventure game, which was published in 1998 by Simon & Schuster. Terry Jones wrote the accompanying book, entitled \"Douglas Adams' Starship Titanic\", since Adams was too busy with the computer game to do both. In April 1999, Adams initiated the h2g2 collaborative writing project, an experimental attempt at making \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" a reality, and at harnessing the collective brainpower of the internet community. It was hosted by BBC Online from 2001 to 2011.\n\nIn 1990, Adams wrote and presented a television documentary programme \"Hyperland\" which featured Tom Baker as a \"software agent\" (similar to the assistant pictured in Apple's Knowledge Navigator video of future concepts from 1987), and interviews with Ted Nelson, the co-inventor of hypertext and the person who coined the term. Adams was an early adopter and advocate of hypertext.\n\nAdams described himself as a \"radical atheist\", adding \"radical\" for emphasis so he would not be asked if he meant agnostic. He told American Atheists that this conveyed the fact that he really meant it. He imagined a sentient puddle who wakes up one morning and thinks, \"This is an interesting world I find myself in – an interesting hole I find myself in – fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact it fits me staggeringly well, must have been made to have me in it!\" to demonstrate his view that the fine-tuned universe argument for God was a fallacy.\n\nHe remained fascinated by religion because of its effect on human affairs. \"I love to keep poking and prodding at it. I've thought about it so much over the years that that fascination is bound to spill over into my writing.\"\n\nThe evolutionary biologist and atheist Richard Dawkins uses Adams's influence to exemplify arguments for non-belief in his 2006 book \"The God Delusion\". Dawkins dedicated the book to Adams, whom he jokingly called \"possibly [my] only convert\" to atheism and wrote on his death that \"Science has lost a friend, literature has lost a luminary, the mountain gorilla and the black rhino have lost a gallant defender.\"\n\nAdams was also an environmental activist who campaigned on behalf of endangered species. This activism included the production of the non-fiction radio series \"Last Chance to See\", in which he and naturalist Mark Carwardine visited rare species such as the kakapo and baiji, and the publication of a tie-in book of the same name. In 1992 this was made into a CD-ROM combination of audiobook, e-book and picture slide show.\n\nAdams and Mark Carwardine contributed the 'Meeting a Gorilla' passage from \"Last Chance to See\" to the book \"The Great Ape Project\". This book, edited by Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer, launched a wider-scale project in 1993, which calls for the extension of moral equality to include all great apes, human and non-human.\n\nIn 1994, he participated in a climb of Mount Kilimanjaro while wearing a rhino suit for the British charity organisation Save the Rhino International. Puppeteer William Todd-Jones, who had originally worn the suit in the London Marathon to raise money and bring awareness to the group, also participated in the climb wearing a rhino suit; Adams wore the suit while travelling to the mountain before the climb began. About £100,000 was raised through that event, benefiting schools in Kenya and a black rhinoceros preservation programme in Tanzania. Adams was also an active supporter of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund.\n\nSince 2003, Save the Rhino has held an annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lecture around the time of his birthday to raise money for environmental campaigns.\n\nAdams bought his first word processor in 1982, having considered one as early as 1979. His first purchase was a Nexu. In 1983, when he and Jane Belson went to Los Angeles, he bought a DEC Rainbow. Upon their return to England, Adams bought an Apricot, then a BBC Micro and a Tandy 1000. In \"Last Chance to See\" Adams mentions his Cambridge Z88, which he had taken to Zaire on a quest to find the northern white rhinoceros.\n\nAdams's posthumously published work, \"The Salmon of Doubt\", features several articles by him on the subject of technology, including reprints of articles that originally ran in \"MacUser\" magazine, and in \"The Independent on Sunday\" newspaper. In these Adams claims that one of the first computers he ever saw was a Commodore PET, and that he had \"adored\" his Apple Macintosh (\"or rather my family of however many Macintoshes it is that I've recklessly accumulated over the years\") since he first saw one at Infocom's offices in Boston in 1984.\n\nAdams was a Macintosh user from the time they first came out in 1984 until his death in 2001. He was the first person to buy a Mac in Europe, the second being Stephen Fry. Adams was also an \"Apple Master\", celebrities whom Apple made into spokespeople for its products (others included John Cleese and Gregory Hines). Adams's contributions included a rock video that he created using the first version of iMovie with footage featuring his daughter Polly. The video was available on Adams's .Mac homepage. Adams installed and started using the first release of Mac OS X in the weeks leading up to his death. His very last post to his own forum was in praise of Mac OS X and the possibilities of its Cocoa programming framework. He said it was \"awesome...\", which was also the last word he wrote on his site.\n\nAdams used email to correspond with Steve Meretzky in the early 1980s, during their collaboration on Infocom's version of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". While living in New Mexico in 1993 he set up another e-mail address and began posting to his own USENET newsgroup, alt.fan.douglas-adams, and occasionally, when his computer was acting up, to the comp.sys.mac hierarchy. Challenges to the authenticity of his messages later led Adams to set up a message forum on his own website to avoid the issue. In 1996, Adams was a keynote speaker at the Microsoft Professional Developers Conference (PDC) where he described the personal computer as being a modelling device. The video of his keynote speech is archived on Channel 9.\nAdams was also a keynote speaker for the April 2001 Embedded Systems Conference in San Francisco, one of the major technical conferences on embedded system engineering.\n\nAdams moved to Upper Street, Islington, in 1981 and to Duncan Terrace, a few minutes' walk away, in the late 1980s.\n\nIn the early 1980s Adams had an affair with novelist Sally Emerson, who was separated from her husband at that time. Adams later dedicated his book \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" to Emerson. In 1981 Emerson returned to her husband, Peter Stothard, a contemporary of Adams's at Brentwood School, and later editor of \"The Times\". Adams was soon introduced by friends to Jane Belson, with whom he later became romantically involved. Belson was the \"lady barrister\" mentioned in the jacket-flap biography printed in his books during the mid-1980s (\"He [Adams] lives in Islington with a lady barrister and an Apple Macintosh\"). The two lived in Los Angeles together during 1983 while Adams worked on an early screenplay adaptation of \"Hitchhiker's\". When the deal fell through, they moved back to London, and after several separations (\"He is currently not certain where he lives, or with whom\") and a broken engagement, they married on 25 November 1991.\n\nAdams and Belson had one daughter together, Polly Jane Rocket Adams, born on 22 June 1994, shortly after Adams turned 42. In 1999 the family moved from London to Santa Barbara, California, where they lived until his death. Following the funeral, Jane Belson and Polly Adams returned to London. Belson died on 7 September 2011 of cancer, aged 59.\n\nAdams died of a heart attack on 11 May 2001, aged 49, after resting from his regular workout at a private gym in Montecito, California. His funeral was held on 16 May in Santa Barbara. His ashes were placed in Highgate Cemetery in north London in June 2002. A memorial service was held on 17 September 2001 at St Martin-in-the-Fields church, Trafalgar Square, London. This became the first church service broadcast live on the web by the BBC.\n\nTwo days before Adams died, the Minor Planet Center announced the naming of asteroid 18610 Arthurdent. In 2005, the asteroid 25924 Douglasadams was named in his memory.\n\nIn May 2002, \"The Salmon of Doubt\" was published, containing many short stories, essays, and letters, as well as eulogies from Richard Dawkins, Stephen Fry (in the UK edition), Christopher Cerf (in the US edition), and Terry Jones (in the US paperback edition). It also includes eleven chapters of his unfinished novel, \"The Salmon of Doubt\", which was originally intended to become a new Dirk Gently novel, but might have later become the sixth \"Hitchhiker\" novel.\n\nOther events after Adams's death included a webcast production of \"Shada\", allowing the complete story to be told, radio dramatisations of the final three books in the \"Hitchhiker's\" series, and the completion of the film adaptation of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". The film, released in 2005, posthumously credits Adams as a producer, and several design elements – including a head-shaped planet seen near the end of the film – incorporated Adams's features.\n\nA 12-part radio series based on the Dirk Gently novels was announced in 2007.\n\nBBC Radio 4 also commissioned a third Dirk Gently radio series based on the incomplete chapters of \"The Salmon of Doubt\", and written by Kim Fuller; but this was dropped in favour of a BBC TV series based on the two completed novels. A sixth \"Hitchhiker\" novel, \"And Another Thing...\", by \"Artemis Fowl\" author Eoin Colfer, was released on 12 October 2009 (the 30th anniversary of the first book), published with the support of Adams's estate. A BBC Radio 4 \"Book at Bedtime\" adaptation and an audio book soon followed.\n\nOn 25 May 2001, two weeks after Adams's death, his fans organised a tribute known as Towel Day, which has been observed every year since then.\n\nIn 2018, John Lloyd presented an hour-long episode of the BBC Radio Four documentary \"Archive on 4\", discussing Adams' private papers, which are held at St John's College, Cambridge. The episode is available online.\n\nA street in São José, Santa Catarina, Brazil is named in Adams' honour.\n\n style=\"text-align:center;\"\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Year\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Award\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Work\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Category\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Result\n! style=\"background:#B0C4DE;\"  Reference\n1979\nHugo Award\n\"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" \nBest Dramatic Presentation\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Private Life of Genghis Khan\" (1975), based on a comedy sketch Adams co-wrote with Graham Chapman (short story)\nBULLET::::- \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (1978) (radio series)\nBULLET::::- \"The Pirate Planet\" (1978), a Doctor Who serial\nBULLET::::- \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (1979) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"City of Death\" (1979), a Doctor Who serial\nBULLET::::- \"Shada\" (1979–1980), a Doctor Who serial\nBULLET::::- \"The Restaurant at the End of the Universe\" (1980) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"Life, the Universe and Everything\" (1982) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"The Meaning of Liff\" (1983 (book), with John Lloyd)\nBULLET::::- \"So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish\" (1984) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (1984, with Steve Meretzky) (computer game)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1985, with Geoffrey Perkins)\nBULLET::::- \"Young Zaphod Plays It Safe (short story)\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"A Christmas Fairly Story\" (1986, with Terry Jones), and\nBULLET::::- \"Supplement to The Meaning of Liff\" (1986, with John Lloyd and Stephen Fry), both part of\nBULLET::::- \"The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book\" (1986, edited with Peter Fincham)\nBULLET::::- \"Bureaucracy\" (1987) (computer game)\nBULLET::::- \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" (1987) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\" (1988) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"The Deeper Meaning of Liff\" (1990, with John Lloyd)\nBULLET::::- \"Last Chance to See\" (1990, with Mark Carwardine) (book)\nBULLET::::- \"Mostly Harmless\" (1992) (novel)\nBULLET::::- \"The Illustrated Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Douglas Adams's Starship Titanic\" (1997), written by Terry Jones, based on an idea by Adams\nBULLET::::- \"Starship Titanic\" (computer game) (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"h2g2\" (internet project) (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"The Internet: The Last Battleground of the 20th century\" (radio series) (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Future\" (radio series) (2001) final project for BBC Radio 4 before his death\nBULLET::::- \"Parrots, the universe and everything\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"The Salmon of Doubt\" (2002), unfinished novel manuscript (11 chapters), short stories, essays, and interviews (also available as an audiobook, read by Simon Jones)\nBULLET::::- \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (2005) (film)\n style=\"background:#ccc; text-align:center;\"\n! Production\n! Notes\n! Broadcaster\n\"Monty Python's Flying Circus\"\nBULLET::::- \"Party Political Broadcast on Behalf of the Liberal Party\" (1974)\nBBC Two\n\"Out of the Trees\"\nBULLET::::- Television pilot (1976)\nBBC Two\n\"Doctor on the Go\"\nBULLET::::- \"For Your Own Good\" (1977)\nITV\n\"Doctor Who\"\n4 stories with 13 episodes (1978-1979, 1983): \nBULLET::::- \"The Pirate Planet\" (1978, 4 episodes)\nBULLET::::- \"Destiny of the Daleks\" (1979, 4 episodes) (uncredited)\nBULLET::::- \"City of Death\" (co-written with Graham Williams, 1979, 4 episodes)\nBULLET::::- \"The Five Doctors\" (1983) (clips from his partially filmed but unaired script for 1980’s \"Shada\")\nBBC One\n\"Doctor Snuggles\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Great Disappearing Mystery\" (1979)\nBULLET::::- \"The Remarkable Fidgety River\" (1979)\nITV\n\"Not the Nine O'Clock News\"\nBULLET::::- Unknown episodes (1979)\nBBC Two\n\"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\"\nBULLET::::- 6 episodes (1981)\nBBC Two\n\"Hyperland\"\nBULLET::::- Television documentary (1990)\nBBC Two\n\"Doctor Who: The Lost Episode\"\nBULLET::::- Television special (2018) (1980’s unaired \"Shada\", with animated inserts of sections not completed in 1980)\nBBC America\n\nBULLET::::- Adams, Douglas (1998). Is there an Artificial God?, speech at \"Digital Biota 2\", Cambridge, England, September 1998.\nBULLET::::- Dawkins, Richard (2003). \"Eulogy for Douglas Adams,\" in \"A devil's chaplain: reflections on hope, lies, science, and love\". Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.\nBULLET::::- Felch, Laura (2004). Don't Panic: Douglas Adams and the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy by Neil Gaiman, May 2004\nBULLET::::- Ray, Mohit K (2007). \"Atlantic Companion to Literature in English\", Atlantic Publishers and Distributors.\nBULLET::::- Webb, Nick (2005a). \"Wish You Were Here: The Official Biography of Douglas Adams\". Ballantine Books.\nBULLET::::- Webb, Nick (2005b). \"Adams, Douglas Noël (1952–2001)\", \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\", Oxford University Press, January 2005. Retrieved 25 October 2005.\nBULLET::::- Roberts, Jem (2014) \"The Frood: The Authorised & Very Official Biography of Douglas Adams & The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy\" Preface Publishing. \"The Frood\"\n\nBULLET::::- Herbert, R. (1980). The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (Book Review). Library Journal, 105(16), 1982.\nBULLET::::- Adams, J., & Brown, R. (1981). The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (Book Review). School Library Journal, 27(5), 74.\nBULLET::::- Nickerson, S. L. (1982). The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book). Library Journal, 107(4), 476.\nBULLET::::- Nickerson, S. L. (1982). Life, the Universe, and Everything (Book). Library Journal, 107(18), 2007.\nBULLET::::- Morner, C. (1982). The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book Review). School Library Journal, 28(8), 87.\nBULLET::::- Morner, C. (1983). Life, the Universe and Everything (Book Review). School Library Journal, 29(6), 93.\nBULLET::::- Shorb, B. (1985). So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish (Book). School Library Journal, 31(6), 90.\nBULLET::::- The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul (Book). (1989). Atlantic (02769077), 263(4), 99.\nBULLET::::- Hoffert, B., & Quinn, J. (1990). Last Chance To See (Book). Library Journal, 115(16), 77.\nBULLET::::- Reed, S. S., & Cook, I. I. (1991). Dances with kakapos. People, 35(19), 79.\nBULLET::::- Last Chance to See (Book). (1991). Science News, 139(8), 126.\nBULLET::::- Field, M. M., & Steinberg, S. S. (1991). Douglas Adams. Publishers Weekly, 238(6), 62.\nBULLET::::- Dieter, W. (1991). Last Chance to See (Book). Smithsonian, 22(3), 140.\nBULLET::::- Dykhuis, R. (1991). Last Chance To See (Book). Library Journal, 116(1), 140.\nBULLET::::- Beatty, J. (1991). Good Show (Book). Atlantic (02769077), 267(3), 131.\nBULLET::::- A guide to the future. (1992). Maclean's, 106(44), 51.\nBULLET::::- Zinsser, J. (1993). Audio reviews: Fiction. Publishers Weekly, 240(9), 24.\nBULLET::::- Taylor, B., & Annichiarico, M. (1993). Audio reviews. Library Journal, 118(2), 132.\nBULLET::::- Good reads. (1995). NetGuide, 2(4), 109.\nBULLET::::- Stone, B. (1998). The unsinkable starship. Newsweek, 131(15), 78.\nBULLET::::- Gaslin, G. (2001). Galaxy Quest. Entertainment Weekly, (599), 79.\nBULLET::::- So long, and thanks for all the fish. (2001). Economist, 359(8222), 79.\nBULLET::::- Geier, T., & Raftery, B. M. (2001). Legacy. Entertainment Weekly, (597), 11.\nBULLET::::- Passages. (2001). Maclean's, 114(21), 13.\nBULLET::::- Don't panic! Douglas Adams to keynote Embedded show. (2001). Embedded Systems Programming, 14(3), 10.\nBULLET::::- Ehrenman, G. (2001). World Wide Weird. InternetWeek, (862), 15.\nBULLET::::- Zaleski, J. (2002). The Salmon of Doubt (Book). Publishers Weekly, 249(15), 43.\nBULLET::::- Mort, J. (2002). The Salmon of Doubt (Book). Booklist, 98(16), 1386.\nBULLET::::- Lewis, D. L. (2002). Last Time Round The Galaxy. Quadrant Magazine, 46(9), 84.\nBULLET::::- Burns, A. (2002). The Salmon of Doubt (Book). Library Journal, 127(15), 111.\nBULLET::::- Burns, A., & Rhodes, B. (2002). The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book). Library Journal, 127(19), 118.\nBULLET::::- Kaveney, R. (2002). A cheerful whale. TLS, (5173), 23.\nBULLET::::- Pearl, N., & Welch, R. (2003). The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy (Book). Library Journal, 128(11), 124.\nBULLET::::- Preying on composite materials. (2003). R&D Magazine, 45(6), 44.\nBULLET::::- Webb, N. (2003). The Berkeley Hotel hostage. Bookseller, (5069), 25.\nBULLET::::- The author who toured the universe. (2003). Bookseller, (5060), 35.\nBULLET::::- Osmond, A. (2005). Only human. Sight & Sound, 15(5), 12–15.\nBULLET::::- Culture vulture. (2005). Times Educational Supplement, (4640), 19.\nBULLET::::- Maughan, S. (2005). Audio Bestsellers/Fiction. Publishers Weekly, 252(30), 17.\nBULLET::::- Hitchhiker At The Science Museum. (2005). In Britain, 14(10), 9.\nBULLET::::- Rea, A. (2005). The Adams asteroids. New Scientist, 185(2488), 31.\nBULLET::::- Most Improbable Adventure. (2005). Popular Mechanics, 182(5), 32.\nBULLET::::- The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy: The Tertiary Phase. (2005). Publishers Weekly, 252(14), 21.\nBULLET::::- Bartelt, K. R. (2005). Wish You Were Here: The Official Biography of Douglas Adams. Library Journal, 130(4), 86.\nBULLET::::- Larsen, D. (2005). I was a teenage android. New Zealand Listener, 198(3390), 37–38.\nBULLET::::- Tanner, J. C. (2005). Simplicity: it's hard. Telecom Asia, 16(6), 6.\nBULLET::::- Nielsen Bookscan Charts. (2005). Bookseller, (5175), 18–21.\nBULLET::::- Buena Vista launches regional site to push Hitchhiker's movie. (2005). New Media Age, 9.\nBULLET::::- Shynola bring Beckland to life. (2005). Creative Review, 25(3), 24–26.\nBULLET::::- Carwardine, M. (15 September 2007). The baiji: So long and thanks for all the fish. New Scientist. pp. 50–53.\nBULLET::::- Czarniawska, B. (2008). Accounting and gender across times and places: An excursion into fiction. Accounting, Organizations & Society, 33(1), 33–47.\nBULLET::::- Pope, M. (2008). Life, the Universe, Religion and Science. Issues, (82), 31–34.\nBULLET::::- Bearne, S. (2008). BBC builds site to trail Last Chance To See TV series. New Media Age, 08.\nBULLET::::- Arrow to reissue Adams. (2008). Bookseller, (5352), 14.\nBULLET::::- Page, B. (2008). Colfer is new Hitchhiker. Bookseller, (5350), 7.\nBULLET::::- I've got a perfect puzzle for you. (2009). Bookseller, (5404), 42.\nBULLET::::- Mostly Harmless... (2009). Bookseller, (5374), 46.\nBULLET::::- Penguin and PanMac hitch a ride together. (2009). Bookseller, (5373), 6.\nBULLET::::- Adams, Douglas. Britannica Biographies [serial online]. October 2010;:1\nBULLET::::- Douglas (Noël) Adams (1952–2001). Hutchinson's Biography Database [serial online]. July 2011;:1\nBULLET::::- My life in books. (2011). Times Educational Supplement, (4940), 27.\nBULLET::::- , established by him, and still operated by The Digital Village\nBULLET::::- Douglas Adams speech at Digital Biota 2 (1998) (The audio of the speech)\nBULLET::::- Guardian Books \"Author Page\", with profile and links to further articles.\nBULLET::::- Douglas Adams & his Computer article about his Mac IIfx\nBULLET::::- BBC2 \"Omnibus\" tribute to Adams, presented by Kirsty Wark, 4 August 2001\nBULLET::::- Mueller, Rick and Greengrass, Joel (2002). \"Life, The Universe and Douglas Adams\", documentary.\nBULLET::::- Simpson, M.J. (2001). \"The Pocket Essential Hitchhiker's Guide\". . Updated April 2005\nBULLET::::- Special edition of BBC Book Club featuring Douglas Adams, first broadcast 2 January 2000 on BBC Radio 4\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "8092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8092", "title": "Drum and bass", "text": "Drum and bass\n\nDrum and bass (also written as \"drum 'n' bass\"; commonly abbreviated as \"D&B\", \"DnB\" or \"D'n'B\") is a genre of electronic music characterised by fast breakbeats (typically 160–180 beats per minute) with heavy bass and sub-bass lines, sampled sources, and synthesizers. The style grew out of breakbeat hardcore and jungle in the United Kingdom during the early 1990s. The popularity of drum and bass at its commercial peak ran parallel to several other homegrown dance styles in the UK. A major influence was the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound. Another feature of the style is the complex syncopation of the drum tracks' breakbeat.\n\nDrum and bass subgenres include breakcore, ragga jungle, hardstep, darkstep, techstep, neurofunk, ambient drum and bass, liquid funk (aka liquid drum and bass), jump up, drumfunk, funkstep, sambass, and drill 'n' bass. From its roots in the UK, the style has established itself around the world. Drum and bass has influenced many other genres like hip hop, big beat, dubstep, house, trip hop, ambient music, techno, jazz, rock and pop. Drum and bass is dominated by a relatively small group of record labels. Major international music labels had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene until BMG Rights Management acquired RAM in February 2016. Drum and bass remains most popular in the UK, although it has developed scenes all around the world in countries such as the United States, Germany, the Netherlands, South Africa, Belgium, New Zealand, Greece, Canada, Austria, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia and Australia.\n\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, a growing nightclub and overnight outdoor event culture gave birth to a new electronic music style in the rave scene, which combined sampled syncopated beats, or breakbeats, and other samples from a wide range of different musical genres and, occasionally, samples of music, dialogue and effects from films and television programmes. A faster subgenre was known as \"hardcore\", but from as early as 1991, some musical tracks made up of these high-tempo break beats, with heavy basslines and samples of older Jamaican music, were referred to as \"jungle techno\". (influenced by Jack Smooth and Basement Records), and later just \"jungle\", which became recognised as a separate musical genre popular at raves and on pirate radio in Britain.\n\nIt is important to note when discussing the history of drum and bass prior to jungle, music was becoming faster and more experimental. Professional DJ and producer Costica Kristian Di Vogli (known professionally as CK) stated, \"There was a progression as far as the speed of music is concerned. Anyone buying vinyl every week from 1989 to 1992 noticed this.\"\n\nBy 1994, jungle had begun to gain mainstream popularity, and fans of the music (often referred to as junglists) became a more recognisable part of youth subculture. The genre further developed, incorporating and fusing elements from a wide range of existing musical genres, including the raggamuffin sound, dancehall, MC chants, dub basslines, and increasingly complex, heavily edited breakbeat percussion. Despite the affiliation with the ecstasy-fuelled rave scene, jungle also inherited associations with violence and criminal activity, both from the gang culture that had affected the UK's hip-hop scene and as a consequence of jungle's often aggressive or menacing sound and themes of violence (usually reflected in the choice of samples). However, this developed in tandem with the often positive reputation of the music as part of the wider rave scene and dancehall-based Jamaican music culture prevalent in London. By 1995, whether as a reaction to, or independently of this cultural schism, some jungle producers began to move away from the ragga-influenced style and create what would become collectively labelled, for convenience, as drum and bass.\n\nAs the genre became generally more polished and sophisticated technically, it began to expand its reach from pirate radio to commercial stations and gain widespread acceptance (circa 1995–1997). It also began to split into recognisable subgenres such as jump-up and Hardstep. As a lighter and often jazz-influenced style of drum and bass called \"intelligent drum and bass\" gained mainstream appeal, additional subgenres emerged including techstep (circa 1996–1997), which drew greater influence from techno music and the soundscapes of science fiction and anime films.\n\nThe popularity of drum and bass at its commercial peak ran parallel to several other genres native to the UK, including big beat and hard house. Towards the turn of the millennium, however, its popularity was deemed to have dwindled, as the UK garage offshoot known as speed garage yielded several hit singles. Speed garage shared high tempos and heavy basslines with drum and bass, but otherwise followed the established conventions of \"house music\", with this and its freshness giving it an advantage commercially. di Vogli says, \"It is often forgotten by my students that a type of music called \"garage house\" existed in the late 1980s alongside hip house, acid house and other forms of house music.\" He continues, \"This new garage of the mid-90s was not a form of house or a progression of garage house. The beats and tempo that define house are entirely different. This did cause further confusion in the presence of new house music of the mid-1990s being played alongside what was now being called garage.\"\n\nDespite this, the emergence of further subgenres and related styles such as liquid funk brought a wave of new artists incorporating new ideas and techniques, supporting continual evolution of the genre. To this day, drum and bass makes frequent appearances in mainstream media and popular culture including in television, as well as being a major reference point for subsequent genres such as grime and dubstep, and producing successful artists including Chase & Status, Netsky, Metrik, and Pendulum.\n\nDrum and bass incorporates a number of scenes and styles, from the highly electronic, industrial sounds of techstep to the use of conventional, acoustic instrumentation that characterize the more jazz-influenced end of the spectrum. The sounds of drum and bass are extremely varied due to the range of influences behind the music. Drum and bass could at one time be defined as a strictly electronic musical genre, with the only \"live\" element being the DJ's selection and mixing of records during a set. \"Live\" drum and bass using electric, electronic and acoustic instruments played by musicians on stage emerged over the ensuing years of the genre's development.\n\nA very obvious and strong influence on jungle and drum and bass, thanks to the British African-Caribbean sound system scene, is the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound, with pioneers like King Tubby, Peter Tosh, Sly & Robbie, Bill Laswell, Lee Perry, Mad Professor, Roots Radics, Bob Marley and Buju Banton heavily influencing the music. This influence has lessened with time, but is still evident, with many tracks containing ragga vocals.\n\nAs a musical style built around funk or syncopated rock and roll breaks, James Brown, Al Green, Marvin Gaye, Ella Fitzgerald, Gladys Knight & the Pips, Billie Holiday, Aretha Franklin, Otis Redding, the Supremes, the Commodores, Jerry Lee Lewis, and even Michael Jackson acted as funk influences on the music. Jazz pioneer Miles Davis has been named as a possible influence. Blues artists like Lead Belly, Robert Johnson, Charlie Patton, Muddy Waters and B.B King have also been cited by producers as inspirations. Even modern avant-garde composers such as Henryk Gorecki have received mention. One of the most influential tracks in drum and bass history was \"Amen Brother\" by The Winstons, which contains a drum solo that has since become known as the \"Amen break\", which, after being extensively used in early hip hop music, went on to become the basis for the rhythms used in drum and bass.\n\nKevin Saunderson released a series of bass-heavy, minimal techno cuts as Reese/The Reese Project in the late '80s, which were hugely influential in drum and bass. One of his more famous basslines (Reese – \"Just Want Another Chance\", Incognito Records, 1988) was indeed sampled on Renegade's \"Terrorist\" and countless others since, being known simply as the 'Reese' bassline. He followed these up with equally influential (and bassline-heavy) tracks in the UK hardcore style as Tronik House in 1991–1992. Another Detroit artist who was important to the scene was Carl Craig. The sampled-up jazz break on Craig's \"Bug in the Bassbin\" was also influential on the newly emerging sound. DJs at the Heaven nightclub on \"Rage\" nights used to play it as fast as their Technics record decks would go, pitching it up in the process.\n\nBy the late 1980s and early 1990s, the tradition of breakbeat use in hip hop production had influenced the sound of breakbeat hardcore, which in turn led to the emergence of jungle, drum and bass, and other genres that shared the same use of broken beats. Drum and bass shares many musical characteristics with hip-hop, though it is nowadays mostly stripped of lyrics. Grandmaster Flash, Roger Troutman, Afrika Bambaata, Run DMC, Mac Dre, Public Enemy, Schooly D, N.W.A, Kid Frost, Wu-Tang Clan, Dr. Dre, Mos Def, Beastie Boys and the Pharcyde are very often directly sampled, regardless of their general influence.\n\nClearly, drum and bass has been influenced by other music genres, though influences from sources external to the electronic dance music scene perhaps lessened following the shifts from jungle to drum and bass, and through to so-called \"intelligent drum and bass\" and techstep. It still remains a fusion music style.\n\nSome tracks are illegally remixed and released on white label (technically bootleg), often to acclaim. For example, DJ Zinc's remix of The Fugees' \"Ready or Not\", also known as \"Fugee Or Not\", was eventually released with the Fugees' permission after talk of legal action, though ironically, the Fugees' version infringed Enya's copyright to an earlier song. White labels, along with dubplates, played an important part in drum and bass musical culture.\n\nThe Amen break was synonymous with early drum and bass productions but other samples have had a significant impact, including the Apache, Funky Drummer, \"Soul Pride\", \"Scorpio\" and \"Think (About It)\" breaks. Early pioneers often used Akai samplers and sequencers on the Atari ST to create their tracks.\n\nOf equal importance is the TR-808 kick drum, an artificially pitch-downed or elongated bass drum sound sampled from Roland's classic TR-808 drum machine, and a sound which has been subject to an enormous amount of experimentation over the years.\n\nMany drum and bass tracks have featured more than one sampled breakbeat in them and a technique of switching between two breaks after each bar developed. Examples of this can be heard on mid-90s releases such as J Majik's \"Your Sound\". A more recent commonly used break is the \"Tramen\", which combines the Amen break, a James Brown funk breakbeat (\"Tighten Up\" or \"Samurai\" break) and an Alex Reece drum and bass breakbeat.\n\nThe relatively fast drum beat forms a canvas on which a producer can create tracks to appeal to almost any taste and often will form only a background to the other elements of the music. Syncopated breakbeats remain the most distinctive element as without these a high-tempo 4/4 dance track could be classified as techno or gabber.\n\nThe complex syncopation of the drum tracks' breakbeat is another facet of production on which producers can spend a very large amount of time. The Amen break is generally acknowledged to have been the most-used (and often considered the most powerful) break in drum and bass.\n\nThe genre places great importance on the bassline, in this case a deep sub-bass musical pattern which can be felt physically through powerful sound systems due to the low-range frequencies favoured. There has been considerable exploration of different timbres in the bass line region, particularly within techstep. The bass lines most notably originate from sampled sources or synthesizers. Bass lines performed with a bass instrument, whether it is electric, acoustic or a double bass, are less common, but examples can be found in the work of artists such as Shapeshifter, Squarepusher, Pendulum, Roni Size and STS9.\n\nAtmospheric pads and samples may be added over the fundamental drum and bass to provide different feels. These have included \"light\" elements such as ambient pads as found in ambient electronica and samples of jazz and world musics, or \"dark\" elements such as dissonant pads and sci-fi samples to induce anxiety in the dancer.\n\nOld-school DnB usually included an MC providing vocals. Some styles (such as jazz influenced DnB) also include melodic instruments soloing over the music.\n\nDrum and bass is usually between 160–180 BPM, in contrast to other breakbeat-based dance styles such as nu skool breaks, which maintain a slower pace at around 130–140 BPM. A general upward trend in tempo has been observed during the evolution of drum and bass. The earliest forms of drum and bass clocked in at around 130 bpm in 1990/1991, speeding up to around 155–165 BPM by 1993. Since around 1996, drum and bass tempos have predominantly stayed in the 170–180 range. Recently, some producers have started to once again produce tracks with slower tempos (that is, in the 150-170 bpm range), but the mid-170s tempo is still a hallmark of the drum and bass sound.\n\nA track combining the same elements (broken beat, bass, production techniques) as a drum and bass track, but with a slower tempo (say 140 BPM), might not be drum and bass, but instead may qualify as a drum and bass-influenced breakbeat track.\n\nMany mixing points begin or end with a \"drop\". The drop is the point in a track where a switch of rhythm or bassline occurs and usually follows a recognisable build section and breakdown. Sometimes, the drop is used to switch between tracks, layering components of different tracks, as the two records may be simply ambient breakdowns at this point. Some DJs prefer to combine breakbeats, a more difficult exercise. Some drops are so popular that the DJ will \"rewind\" or \"reload\" or \"lift up\" the record by spinning it back and restarting it at the build. The drop is often a key point from the point of view of the dance floor, since the drum breaks often fade out to leave an ambient intro playing. When the beats re-commence they are often more complex and accompanied by a heavier bassline, encouraging the crowd to begin dancing.\n\nDrum and bass exhibits a full frequency response which can sometimes only be fully appreciated on sound systems which can handle very low frequencies, including sub-bass frequencies that are often felt more than heard. As befits its name, the bass element of the music is particularly pronounced, with the comparatively sparse arrangements of drum and bass tracks allowing room for basslines that are deeper than most other forms of dance music. Consequently, drum and bass parties are often advertised as featuring uncommonly loud and bass-heavy sound systems.\n\nThere are however many albums specifically designed for personal listening. The DJ mix is a particularly popular form of release, with a popular DJ or producer mixing live, or on a computer, a variety of tracks for personal listening. Additionally, there are many albums containing unmixed tracks, suited for home or car listening.\n\nAlthough this practice has declined in popularity, DJs are often accompanied by one or more MCs, drawing on the genre's roots in hip hop and reggae/ragga.\n\nMCs do not generally receive the same level of recognition as producer/DJs, and some events are specifically marketed as being MC-free. There are relatively few well-known drum and bass MCs, including Stevie Hyper D (deceased), MC GQ, MC Moose, MC Dett, MC Fearless, the Ragga Twins, Dynamite MC, MC Fats, MC Conrad, Shabba D, Skibadee, Bassman, MC Stamina, MC Fun, Evil B, Trigga, Eskman, Harry Shotta, Mr Traumatik and MC Infinity.\n\nMany musicians have adapted drum and bass to live performances, which feature instruments such as drums (acoustic or electronic), samplers, synthesizers, turntables, bass (either upright or electric) and guitars (acoustic or electric). Samplers have also been used live by assigning samples to a specific drum pad or key on drum pads or synthesizers. MCs are frequently featured in live performances.\n\nDrum and bass artists who perform using live instruments include:\n\nBULLET::::- Apollo 440\nBULLET::::- The Brains\nBULLET::::- Camo & Krooked (as Zeitgeist)\nBULLET::::- Chase & Status\nBULLET::::- DJ Fresh (as FRESH:LIVE)\nBULLET::::- Dieselboy\nBULLET::::- Fred V\nBULLET::::- Grafix\nBULLET::::- Goldie\nBULLET::::- High Contrast\nBULLET::::- KJ Sawka\nBULLET::::- LiveSummit\nBULLET::::- London Elektricity (as London Elektricity Big Band)\nBULLET::::- Modestep\nBULLET::::- Nerve (Jojo Mayer's band)\nBULLET::::- Netsky (as Netsky LIVE!)\nBULLET::::- N.O.H.A.\nBULLET::::- Pendulum\nBULLET::::- The Qemists\nBULLET::::- Reprazent\nBULLET::::- Roni Size\nBULLET::::- Rudimental\nBULLET::::- Salmonella Dub\nBULLET::::- Shapeshifter\nBULLET::::- Sigma\nBULLET::::- Squarepusher\nBULLET::::- Sub Focus\nBULLET::::- Wilkinson\n\nSmaller scenes within the drum and bass community have developed and the scene as a whole has become much more fractured into specific subgenres, which have been grouped into \"light\" (influenced by ambient, jazz, and world music) and \"heavy\" (influenced by industrial music, sci-fi, and anxiety) styles, including:\n\nBULLET::::- Ragga drum & bass was inspired by the original ragga jungle style, with influences from reggae and dancehall music. Notable artists include Shy FX, T Power, Congo Natty, Potential Bad Boy, Marcus Visionary, Serial Killaz, Ed Solo, Deekline, Isaac Maya, Run Tingz Cru, Psychofreud, Benny Page and vocalists such as David Boomah, Top Cat, Tenor Fly and General Levy.\nBULLET::::- Jump-up, appearing in the mid-1990s, employs heavy and energetic drum and bass, characterized by robotic and heavy bass sounds. It also is generally less serious and contains more humor than other subgenres. Notable artists include DJ Hazard, Generation Dub (Original Sin & Sub Zero), Baron, Desire, Cabbie, Macky Gee, Clipz, Nightwalker, Callide, Hedex, Epsy, Taxman, Jaydan, Sub Zero, Original Sin, Annix, Konichi, Decimal Bass, Spaow, Nu Elementz, Tyke, DJ Zen, Majistrate, Twisted Individual, Distorted Minds, TC, Heist, DJ Guv, Looney, Premium, Upgrade, DJ Pleasure, DJ Hype and his label Playaz Recordings.\nBULLET::::- \"Clownstep\" is a derogatory term sometimes used to describe excessively silly and/or cliched jump-up.\nBULLET::::- Drumstep or halftime is a combination of drum and bass and dubstep, where the beat structure is half time, while the remaining elements still adhere to the usual sub-bass and tempo of drum and bass.\nBULLET::::- Drill 'n' bass (also known as Fungle and Spunk jazz) incorporates double-time drum 'n' bass with undanceable rhythms, low-brow humor, and ambient vibes. The subgenre was developed by Squarepusher and Aphex Twin, whose rapid and irregularly syncopated basslines discouraged dancing. Other pioneers include Bogdan Raczynski and Datach'i.\n\nBULLET::::- Intelligent drum & bass or intelligent jungle is a smoother style, influenced by ambient music, chillout, jazz and Soul music. It was pioneered by such artists as Omni Trio, Peshay, Foul Play, Seba, Blu Mar Ten, Nookie, Hyper-On-Experience, DJ Pulse, Higher Sense, Deep Blue (Sean O'Keefe, Cause4Concern Records), Photek, Jack Smooth (Basement Records), Blame, LTJ Bukem and his label Good Looking Records, and the label Moving Shadow.\nBULLET::::- Atmospheric drum and bass creates a calmer yet more synthetic sound. It was pioneered by Calibre, Zero Tolerance (Zero T) & Beta 2, London Elektricity, High Contrast, Logistics, , Danny Byrd, Cyantific, Netsky, Lenzman, Technimatic (Technicolour & Komatic), Hobzee & Zyon Base, Paul T & Edward Oberon, Hybrid Minds and labels such as Hospital Records, Fokuz Records and Liquid V.\nBULLET::::- Jazzstep or jazzy jungle demonstrates heavy influence by jazz. It uses typical jazz scales, rhythms and instrumentation. Notable artists include Roni Size & Reprazent, Goldie, Utah Jazz, Morgan Sullyvan, Makoto, Alex Reece, and DJ Dextrous.\nBULLET::::- Liquid funk (or simply \"liquid\") draws heavily on harmonic and melodic grooves, and samples from funk, jazz, soul, R&B, disco, house and breakbeat. The first liquid-only event was \"Liquidiser\" at Bristol Academy.\nBULLET::::- Sambass, a Brazilian drum and bass style, incorporates elements from samba, bossa nova and other Latin music styles. Pioneered by artists such as DJ Marky, XRS, DJ Patife and Bryan Gee's label.\n\nBULLET::::- Darkstep is characterized by fast drums and a general dark mood, drawing influences from dark ambient, industrial and hardcore music. Prominent artists include Technical Itch, Dylan, Kryptic Minds & Leon Switch, B-Key, Resonant Evil, Infiltrata, SPL, Counterstrike, Evol Intent, The Panacea, Limewax, and Current Value.\nBULLET::::- Techstep is characterized by sci-fi soundscapes and samples from science fiction culture. Pioneered by artists such as Bad Company UK (DJ Fresh, D-Bridge, Maldini & Vegas) Ed Rush, Optical, Konflict (Kemal & Rob Data), Dom & Roland, Dillinja, Ram Trilogy (Ant Miles, Andy C & Shimon), Moving Fusion, Decoder & Substance, Digital & Spirit, Future Cut, Dylan, Loxy & Ink, Total Science, D.Kay, Stakka & Skynet and Keaton with Usual Suspects or Universal Project, Klute, Concord Dawn, and the label Moving Shadow.\nBULLET::::- Neurofunk or neuro is the progression from techstep incorporating more elements from jazz and funk. Prominent artists include Ed Rush, Optical, Matrix, Bad Company UK, Cause 4 Concern, TeeBee, Future Prophecies, Black Sun Empire, DLR, Calyx, Hive, Gridlok, Noisia, Phace & Misanthrop, Silent Witness & Break, State Of Mind, The Upbeats, Chase & Status, Jade, Mindscape, Spor, Psidream, Catacomb, Rregula and The Clamps.\nBULLET::::- Breakcore is a style of electronic dance music largely influenced by hardcore, jungle, digital hardcore and industrial music that is characterized by its use of heavy kick drums, breaks and a wide palette of sampling sources, played at high tempos.\nBULLET::::- Hardstep is a harder style which uses gritty basslines and heavy yet simple electronic melodies. Notable artists include Dillinja (early work), DJ Krust, Mampi Swift, Dieselboy, Current Value, Tre Technics, MachineCode\n\nBorn around the same time as jungle, breakcore and digital hardcore share many of the elements of drum and bass and to the uninitiated, tracks from the extreme end of drum and bass may sound identical to breakcore thanks to speed, complexity, impact and maximum sonic density combined with musical experimentation. German drum and bass DJ The Panacea is also one of the leading digital hardcore artists. Raggacore resembles a faster version of the ragga-influenced jungle music of the 1990s, similar to breakcore but with more friendly dancehall beats (dancehall itself being a very important influence on drum and bass). Darkcore, a direct influence on drum and bass, was combined with influences of drum and bass itself leading to the creation of darkstep. There is considerable crossover from the extreme edges of drum and bass, breakcore, darkcore, digital hardcore and raggacore with fluid boundaries.\n\nDubstep originated from DnB slowed down to half speed and mixed with dub reggae, as experimental mixes on B-sides of garage records.\n\nIntelligent dance music (IDM) is a form of art music based on DnB and other electronic dance musics, exploring their boundaries using ideas from science, technology, contemporary classical music and progressive rock, often creating un-danceable, art gallery style music. Pioneered by Aphex Twin, Squarepusher and other artists on Warp Records.\n\nThe genre has influenced many other genres like hip hop, big beat, house music, trip hop, ambient music, techno, rock and pop, with artists such as Bill Laswell, Incubus, Pitchshifter, Linkin Park, The Roots, Talvin Singh, MIDIval Punditz, Missy Elliott, The Freestylers, Bowery Electric, Nine Inch Nails, David Bowie (the last two both using elements of Goldie's \"Timeless\") and others quoting drum and bass and using drum and bass techniques and elements. Recently created in the United States is a genre called ghettotech which contains synth and basslines similar to drum and bass.\n\nDrum and bass is dominated by a small group of record labels. These are run mainly by DJ–producers, such as London Elektricity's Hospital Records, Andy C and Scott Bourne's RAM, Goldie's Metalheadz, Kasra's Critical Music, DJ Friction's Shogun Audio, DJ Fresh's Breakbeat Kaos, Ed Rush & Optical's Virus Recordings, Futurebound's Viper Recordings and DJ Hype, Pascal, NoCopyrightSounds and formerly DJ Zinc's True Playaz (now known as Real Playaz as of 2006).\n\nPrior to 2016, the major international music labels such as Sony Music and Universal had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene, with the exception of some notable signings, including Pendulum's \"In Silico\" LP to Warner. Roni Size's label played a big, if not the biggest, part in the creation of drum and bass with their dark, baseline sounds. V Recordings also played a large part of the development of drum and bass. Roni Size, Krust and DJ Die produced some of the first tracks to be considered mainstream drum and bass tracks.\n\nBMG Rights Management acquired Ram Records in February 2016, making a strategic investment to help RAM Records (a London-based drum and bass record company co-owned by Andy C and his business partner Scott Bourne). RAM Records has been pushing the boundaries of drum and bass further into the mainstream with artists such as Chase and Status and Sub Focus. Bringing back UK jungle music artists from LTJ Bukem's label Good Looking artists Bay B Kane, breakbeat hardcore heavyweight Nebula II and original junglist Gappa G.\n\nNow defunct labels, include Rob Playford's Moving Shadow, running from 1990 until 2007, which played a pivotal role in the nineties drum and bass scene, releasing records by artists such as Omni Trio.\n\nOriginally drum and bass was mostly sold in 12-inch vinyl single format. With the emergence of drum and bass into mainstream music markets, more albums, compilations and DJ mixes started to be sold on CDs. As digital music became more popular, websites focused on electronic music, such as Beatport, began to sell drum and bass in digital format.\n\nThe bulk of drum and bass vinyl records and CDs are distributed globally and regionally by a relatively small number of companies such as SRD (Southern Record Distributors), ST Holdings, & Nu Urban Music Limited.\n\nAs of 11 September 2012, Nu Urban ceased trading and RSM Tenon were instructed to assist in convening statutory meetings of members and creditors to appoint a liquidator. This left many labels short on sales, as Nu Urban were one of the main distributors for the vinyl market in the drum and bass scene.\n\nDespite its roots in the UK (with Fabric being the epicentre of DnB), still treated as the \"home\" of drum and bass, the style has firmly established itself around the world. There are strong scenes in other English-speaking countries including Australia, Canada, South Africa, the United States, and New Zealand.\n\nDnB is popular in continental Europe. The Czech Republic currently hosts the largest drum and bass festival in the world, LET IT ROLL, with an annual attendance of approximately 30,000. The genre is also encountered in Slovakia, and local producers in both countries such as A-Cray, Rido, Forbidden Society, L Plus, B-Complex, Changing Faces, Lixx, Dephzac, and Gabanna are becoming well known worldwide. There are several other drum and bass festivals being held each year in these countries, including Trident Festival, Exploration Festival, or Hoofbeats Open Air in the summer, or one-night events such as LET IT ROLL Winter, Imagination Festival, and LET IT ROLL Winter Slovakia in the colder months. During club season, promoters race between each other to organize better events, often resulting in up to ten parties being held during one weekend, with no more than a two-hour travel between them.\n\nAustria has a large emerging DnB scene with many artists such as Camo & Krooked, Mefjus, Fourward, Body & Soul, Ill.Skillz and mainly the Mainframe record label being all based in or around Vienna. Notable venues and events include \"The Hive\" and \"Beat It\" held at Flex almost every Thursday and Saturday, \"Vollkontakt\" at Fluc, \"Switch\" at Flex, and the monthly Mainframe Recordings Label Night hosted at Arena by label head Disaszt.\n\nIn Ireland, the biggest scene by far is in Dublin, with a night every Sunday by the Initial Kru mostly showcasing local DJ's but occasionally bringing over international guests such as Spirit and Seba. Record label Boey Audio also run events showcasing local, national and international acts, as well as promoters such as Sól Fúd, Ragga Jungle Dublin and Springfield Crew Massive. There are much smaller regional scenes in areas such as Limerick, Cork and Galway which usually have monthly nights.\n\nBrazilian drum and bass is sometimes referred to as \"sambass\", with a specific samba-influenced style and sound made popular by artists like DJ Marky and XRS.\n\nIn Venezuela and Mexico, artists have created their own forms of drum and bass, combining it with experimental musical forms.\n\nIn Colombia, there is a large underground scene. RE.set and Bogotá Project are two collectives that organize drum and bass events in the city, as well as a bi-annual event called Radikal Styles that brings together local talent and international big names.\n\nToday, drum and bass is widely promoted using different methods such as video sharing services like YouTube and Dailymotion, blogs, radio, and television, the latter being the most uncommon method. More recently, music networking websites such as SoundCloud and Mixcloud have become powerful tools for artist recognition, providing a vast platform that enables quick responses to new tracks. Record labels have adopted the use of podcasts. Prior to the rise of the internet, drum and bass was commonly broadcast over pirate radio.\n\nThe three highest-profile radio stations playing drum and bass shows are BBC Radio 1 with The Drum and Bass Show - formerly with Friction, who was replaced with René LaVice in 2017, simulcast in the US and Canada on Sirius XM, and DJ Hype on Kiss 100 in London. Fabio and Grooverider previously held a long-standing drum and bass show on Radio 1. Radio 1 also had a 'One in the Jungle' show.\n\nThe BBC's \"urban\" station BBC Radio 1Xtra used to feature the genre heavily, with DJ Bailey (show axed as of 29 August 2012) and Crissy Criss (show axed as of August 2014) as its advocates. The network also organizes a week-long tour of the UK each year called Xtra Bass. London pirate radio stations have been instrumental in the development of drum and bass, with stations such as Kool FM (which continues to broadcast today having done so since 1991), Origin FM, Don FM (the only drum and bass pirate to have gained a temporary legal license), Renegade Radio 107.2FM, Rude FM, Wax FM and Eruption among the most influential.\n\nAs of 2014, despite higher profile stations such as 1Xtra scaling back their drum and bass specialist coverage, the genre has made its way into UK top 10 charts with drum and bass inspired tracks from artists such as Rudimental and Sigma. Earlier in August 2014, before Crissy Criss' show was axed, the BBC held a whole prime time evening event dedicated to showcasing drum and bass by allowing four major labels to participate.\n\nAs of November 2014, there have been 6 drum & bass songs reaching the no.1 spot on the UK's top 40 chart, since the genre was first being played on the radio, around 1993. The first of these was in 2012. The fact that all 6 of these songs have reached number 1 in only two years shows the increase in popularity and commercialisation of the genre in recent years. The artists that produced these songs are Sigma, Rudimental and DJ Fresh (all have had two No.1 hits).\n\nInternet radio stations, acting in the same light as pirate stations, have also been an instrumental part in promoting drum and bass music; the majority of them funded by listener and artist donations.\n\nDrum and bass was supported by Ministry of Sound radio from the early 2000s until 2014 and later featuring Tuesday shows from labels such as Metalheadz, Fabio & Grooverider, DJ Marky, Viper Recordings, Shogun Audio and Hospital Records. From September 2014, Ministry abruptly dropped all non-mainstream genres to focus on mainstream EDM, causing disappointment amongst the fans of the D&B community. The leading Drum & Bass radio Station is now Denver's DnB Radio, established in 2003 by M. Ramirez.\n\nIn Toronto, The Prophecy on 89.5 CIUT-FM with Marcus Visionary, DJ Prime and Mr. Brown Is North America's longest running Jungle Radio show.\n\nAlbum 88.5 (Atlanta) and C89.5fm (Seattle) have shows showcasing drum and bass.\n\nIn New York, \"DNB NYC RADIO\" show with Host Dj Benzocaine on 90.3 WHCR-FM has a weekly 3 hour show which broadcasts in New York and New Jersey which plays only Drum and Bass every Thursday starting at 3 am. \"DNB NYC RADIO\" is the only weekly Drum and Bass show on the FM dial in Northeastern United States.\n\nSeattle also has a long-standing electronica show known as Expansions on 90.3 FM KEXP. The rotating DJs include Kid Hops, whose shows are made up mostly of drum and bass. In Columbus, Ohio WCBE 90.5 has a two-hour electronic only showcase, \"All Mixed Up,\" Saturday nights at 10 pm. At the same time WUFM 88.7 plays its \"Electronic Playground.\"\n\nAlso, Tulsa, Oklahoma's rock station, 104.5 The Edge, has a two-hour show starting at 10 pm Saturday nights called Edge Essential Mix mixed by DJ Demko showcasing electronic and drum and bass style. While the aforementioned shows in Ohio rarely play drum and bass, the latter plays the genre with some frequency.\n\nIn Tucson, Arizona, 91.3 FM KXCI has a two-hour electronic show known as \"Digital Empire\", Friday nights at 10 pm (MST). Resident DJ Trinidad showcases various styles of electronica, with the main focus being drum and bass, jungle & dubstep.\n\nIn Augusta, Georgia, Zarbizarre of the Cereal Killaz hosts a show called FreQuency on WHHD on Friday nights from 11 pm until 1 am, showcasing drum and bass during the 2nd hour of the show.\n\nThe best-known drum and bass publication was \"Kmag\" magazine (formerly called \"Knowledge Magazine\") before it went completely online in August 2009. Although it's still live, after 20 years Kmag ceased updating their site at the end of 2014. Kmag has announced a book to celebrate their 25th anniversary to be published in December 2019. Kmag's publishing arm, Vision, published Brian Belle-Fortune's \"All Crews Journeys Through Jungle Drum & Bass Culture\" in 2004.\n\nOther publications include the longest running drum and bass magazine worldwide, \"ATM Magazine\", and Austrian-based \"Resident\". London-based \"DJ\" magazine has also been running a widely respected drum and bass reviews page since 1994, written by Alex Constantinides, which many followers refer to when seeking out new releases to investigate. In 2012 Alex stopped writing the reviews, and they are now contributed by Whisky Kicks.\n\nBULLET::::- \"All Crews: Journeys Through Jungle / Drum and Bass Culture\" (2005) by Brian Belle-Fortune (), nonfiction\nBULLET::::- \"Roots 'n Future\" in \"Energy Flash\" (1998) by Simon Reynolds, Picador (), nonfiction (British edition)\nBULLET::::- \"Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of Techno and Rave Culture\" (1998) by Simon Reynolds, Routledge. (), nonfiction (American edition)\nBULLET::::- \"Rumble in the Jungle: The Invisible History of Drum and Bass\" (2002) by Steven Quinn, in: \"Transformations\", No 3 (2002), nonfiction () PDF file\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1997) by Martin James, Boxtree (), nonfiction\nBULLET::::- \"The Rough Guide to Drum 'n' Bass\" (1999) by Peter Shapiro and Alexix Maryon (), nonfiction\nBULLET::::- \"King Rat\" (1998) by China Miéville (), fiction\n\nThe earliest mainstream drum and bass releases include Shy FX and UK Apache's single \"Original Nuttah\" from 1994 and Goldie's album \"Timeless\" from 1995. Other early examples include the Mercury Music Prize winning albums \"New Forms\" (1997) from Reprazent and \"OK\" (1998) from Talvin Singh, 4hero's Mercury-nominated \"Two Pages\" from 1998, and Pendulum's \"Hold Your Colour\" in 2005 (the best selling drum and bass album of all time).\n\nVideo games such as \"Bomberman Hero\", Hi-Rez Studios' \"\", Electronic Arts' \"\", Rockstar Games' \"Grand Theft Auto\" series, and Sony's Wipeout series from Pure onward have contained drum and bass tracks. Microsoft Studios' \"Forza Horizon 2, 3 and 4\" feature a Hospital Records radio channel.\n\nThe genre has some popularity in soundtracks; for instance, \"Ultrasonic Sound\" was used in \"The Matrix's\" soundtrack, and the E-Z Rollers' song \"Walk This Land\" appeared in the film \"Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels\". Ganja Kru's \"Super Sharp Shooter\" is heard in the 2006 film \"Johnny Was\".\n\nThe Channel 4 show \"Skins\" uses the genre in some episodes, notably in the first series' third episode, \"Jal\", where Shy FX and UK Apache's \"Original Nuttah\" was played in Fazer's club.\n\nBULLET::::- Dogs On Acid\nBULLET::::- List of electronic music genres\nBULLET::::- List of jungle and drum and bass artists\nBULLET::::- List of jungle and drum and bass emcees\n\nBULLET::::- bassblog.pro Bass Blog - Drum And Bass Mixes. DJ Mixes promotion since 2009.\nBULLET::::- DnbLyrics.com, The biggest collection of Drum And Bass Lyrics\nBULLET::::- History of drum & bass, a BBC timeline on the history of drum & bass with track listings, quotes and samples\n"}
{"id": "8095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8095", "title": "Donald Knuth", "text": "Donald Knuth\n\nDonald Ervin Knuth ( ; born January 10, 1938) is an American computer scientist, mathematician, and professor emeritus at Stanford University. He is the 1974 recipient of the ACM Turing Award, informally considered the Nobel Prize of computer science.\n\nHe is the author of the multi-volume work \"The Art of Computer Programming\". He contributed to the development of the rigorous analysis of the computational complexity of algorithms and systematized formal mathematical techniques for it. In the process he also popularized the asymptotic notation. In addition to fundamental contributions in several branches of theoretical computer science, Knuth is the creator of the TeX computer typesetting system, the related METAFONT font definition language and rendering system, and the Computer Modern family of typefaces.\n\nAs a writer and scholar, Knuth created the WEB and CWEB computer programming systems designed to encourage and facilitate literate programming, and designed the MIX/MMIX instruction set architectures. Knuth strongly opposes granting software patents, having expressed his opinion to the United States Patent and Trademark Office and European Patent Organisation.\n\nKnuth was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to German-Americans Ervin Henry Knuth and Louise Marie Bohning. His father had two jobs: running a small printing company and teaching bookkeeping at Milwaukee Lutheran High School. Donald, a student at Milwaukee Lutheran High School, received academic accolades there, especially because of the ingenious ways that he thought of solving problems. For example, in eighth grade, he entered a contest to find the number of words that the letters in \"Ziegler's Giant Bar\" could be rearranged to create. Although the judges only had 2,500 words on their list, Donald found 4,500 words, winning the contest. As prizes, the school received a new television and enough candy bars for all of his schoolmates to eat.\n\nIn 1956, Knuth received a scholarship to the Case Institute of Technology (now part of Case Western Reserve University) in Cleveland, Ohio. He also joined Beta Nu Chapter of the Theta Chi fraternity. While studying physics at the Case Institute of Technology, Knuth was introduced to the IBM 650, one of the early mainframes. After reading the computer's manual, Knuth decided to rewrite the assembly and compiler code for the machine used in his school, because he believed he could do it better.\n\nIn 1958, Knuth created a program to help his school's basketball team win their games. He assigned \"values\" to players in order to gauge their probability of getting points, a novel approach that \"Newsweek\" and \"CBS Evening News\" later reported on.\n\nKnuth was one of the founding editors of Case Institute's \"Engineering and Science Review\", which won a national award as best technical magazine in 1959. He then switched from physics to mathematics, and in 1960 he received his bachelor of science degree, simultaneously being given a master of science degree by a special award of the faculty who considered his work exceptionally outstanding.\n\nIn 1963, with mathematician Marshall Hall as his adviser, he earned a PhD in mathematics from the California Institute of Technology.\n\nAfter receiving his PhD, Knuth joined Caltech's faculty as an assistant professor.\n\nHe accepted a commission to write a book on computer programming language compilers. While working on this project, Knuth decided that he could not adequately treat the topic without first developing a fundamental theory of computer programming, which became \"The Art of Computer Programming\". He originally planned to publish this as a single book. As Knuth developed his outline for the book, he concluded that he required six volumes, and then seven, to thoroughly cover the subject. He published the first volume in 1968.\n\nJust before publishing the first volume of \"The Art of Computer Programming\", Knuth left Caltech to accept employment with the Institute for Defense Analyses' Communications Research Division, then situated on the Princeton University campus, which was performing mathematical research in cryptography to support the National Security Agency.\n\nKnuth then left this position to join the Stanford University faculty in 1969, where he is now Fletcher Jones Professor of Computer Science, Emeritus.\n\nKnuth is a writer, as well as a computer scientist. Knuth has been called the \"father of the analysis of algorithms\".\n\nIn the 1970s, Knuth described computer science as \"a totally new field with no real identity. And the standard of available publications was not that high. A lot of the papers coming out were quite simply wrong. ... So one of my motivations was to put straight a story that had been very badly told.\" By 2011, the first three volumes and part one of volume four of his series had been published. \"Concrete Mathematics: A Foundation for Computer Science\" 2nd ed., which originated with an expansion of the mathematical preliminaries section of Volume 1 of \"TAoCP\", has also been published.\n\nBill Gates has praised the difficulty of the subject matter in \"The Art of Computer Programming\", stating, \"If you think you're a really good programmer ... You should definitely send me a résumé if you can read the whole thing.\"\n\nKnuth is also the author of \"Surreal Numbers\", a mathematical novelette on John Conway's set theory construction of an alternate system of numbers. Instead of simply explaining the subject, the book seeks to show the development of the mathematics. Knuth wanted the book to prepare students for doing original, creative research.\n\nIn 1995, Knuth wrote the foreword to the book \"A=B\" by Marko Petkovšek, Herbert Wilf and Doron Zeilberger. Knuth is also an occasional contributor of language puzzles to \"\".\n\nKnuth has also delved into recreational mathematics. He contributed articles to the \"Journal of Recreational Mathematics\" beginning in the 1960s, and was acknowledged as a major contributor in Joseph Madachy's \"Mathematics on Vacation\".\n\nKnuth has also appeared in a number of Numberphile and Computerphile videos on YouTube where he has discussed topics from writing Surreal Numbers to why he doesn't use email.\n\nIn addition to his writings on computer science, Knuth, a Lutheran, is also the author of \"3:16 Bible Texts Illuminated\", in which he examines the Bible by a process of systematic sampling, namely an analysis of chapter 3, verse 16 of each book. Each verse is accompanied by a rendering in calligraphic art, contributed by a group of calligraphers under the leadership of Hermann Zapf. Subsequently, he was invited to give a set of lectures on his 3:16 project, resulting in another book, \"Things a Computer Scientist Rarely Talks About\", where he published the lectures \"\"God and Computer Science\"\".\n\nAs a member of the academic and scientific community, Knuth is strongly opposed to the policy of granting software patents for trivial solutions that should be obvious, but has expressed more nuanced views for nontrivial solutions such as the interior-point method of linear programming. He has expressed his disagreement directly to both the United States Patent and Trademark Office and European Patent Organisation.\n\nKnuth gives informal lectures a few times a year at Stanford University, which he titled \"Computer Musings\". He was a visiting professor at the Oxford University Department of Computer Science in the United Kingdom until 2017 and an Honorary Fellow of Magdalen College.\n\nIn the 1970s the publishers of TAOCP abandoned Monotype in favor of phototypesetting. Knuth became so frustrated with the inability of the latter system to approach the quality of the previous volumes, which were typeset using the older system, that he took time out to work on digital typesetting and created TeX and Metafont.\n\nWhile developing TeX, Knuth created a new methodology of programming, which he called literate programming, because he believed that programmers should think of programs as works of literature. \"Instead of imagining that our main task is to instruct a computer what to do, let us concentrate rather on explaining to human beings what we want a computer to do.\"\n\nKnuth embodied the idea of literate programming in the WEB system. The same WEB source is used to \"weave\" a TeX file, and to \"tangle\" a Pascal source file. These in their turn produce a readable description of the program and an executable binary respectively. A later iteration of the system, CWEB, replaces Pascal with C.\n\nKnuth used WEB to program TeX and METAFONT, and published both programs as books: \"The TeXbook\", which is originally published in 1984, and \"The METAFONTbook\", which is originally published in 1986. Around the same time, LaTeX, the now-widely-adopted macro package based on TeX, was first developed by Leslie Lamport, who later published its first user manual in 1986.\n\nDonald Knuth married Nancy Jill Carter on 24 June 1961, while he was a graduate student at the California Institute of Technology. They have two children: John Martin Knuth and Jennifer Sierra Knuth.\n\nKnuth's Chinese name is Gao Dena (). In 1977, he was given this name by Frances Yao, shortly before making a 3-week trip to China. In his 1980 volume of \"The Art of Computer Programming\" (), Knuth explains that he embraced his Chinese name because he wanted to be known by the growing numbers of computer programmers in China at the time. In 1989, his Chinese name was placed atop the \"Journal of Computer Science and Technology\" header, which Knuth says \"makes me feel close to all Chinese people although I cannot speak your language\".\n\nIn 2006, Knuth was diagnosed with prostate cancer. He underwent surgery in December that year and stated, \"a little bit of radiation therapy ... as a precaution but the prognosis looks pretty good\", as he reported in his video autobiography.\n\nKnuth used to pay a finder's fee of $2.56 for any typographical errors or mistakes discovered in his books, because \"256 pennies is one hexadecimal dollar\", and $0.32 for \"valuable suggestions\". According to an article in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's \"Technology Review\", these Knuth reward checks are \"among computerdom's most prized trophies\". Knuth had to stop sending real checks in 2008 due to bank fraud, and instead now gives each error finder a \"certificate of deposit\" from a publicly listed balance in his fictitious \"Bank of San Serriffe\".\n\nHe once warned a correspondent, \"Beware of bugs in the above code; I have only proved it correct, not tried it.\"\n\nKnuth published his first \"scientific\" article in a school magazine in 1957 under the title \"The Potrzebie System of Weights and Measures\". In it, he defined the fundamental unit of length as the thickness of \"Mad\" No. 26, and named the fundamental unit of force \"whatmeworry\". \"Mad\" published the article in issue No. 33 (June 1957).\n\nTo demonstrate the concept of recursion, Knuth intentionally referred \"Circular definition\" and \"Definition, circular\" to each other in the index of \"The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 1\".\n\nThe preface of \"Concrete Mathematics\" has the following paragraph:\n\nAt the TUG 2010 Conference, Knuth announced a satirical XML-based successor to TeX, titled \"iTeX\" (, performed with a bell ringing), which would support features such as arbitrarily scaled irrational units, 3D printing, input from seismographs and heart monitors, animation, and stereophonic sound.\n\nIn 1971, Knuth was the recipient of the first ACM Grace Murray Hopper Award. He has received various other awards including the Turing Award, the National Medal of Science, the John von Neumann Medal, and the Kyoto Prize.\n\nKnuth was elected a Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society (DFBCS) in 1980 in recognition of Knuth's contributions to the field of computer science.\n\nIn 1990 he was awarded the one-of-a-kind academic title of \"Professor of The Art of Computer Programming\", which has since been revised to \"Professor Emeritus of The Art of Computer Programming\".\n\nKnuth was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1975. In 1992, he became an associate of the French Academy of Sciences. Also that year, he retired from regular research and teaching at Stanford University in order to finish \"The Art of Computer Programming\". He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2003.\n\nKnuth was elected as a Fellow (first class of Fellows) of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics in 2009 for his outstanding contributions to mathematics. He is a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters. In 2012, he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. Other awards and honors include:\n\nBULLET::::- First ACM Grace Murray Hopper Award, 1971\nBULLET::::- Turing Award, 1974\nBULLET::::- Lester R. Ford Award, 1975 and 1993\nBULLET::::- Josiah Willard Gibbs Lecturer, 1978\nBULLET::::- National Medal of Science, 1979\nBULLET::::- Franklin Medal, 1988\nBULLET::::- John von Neumann Medal, 1995\nBULLET::::- Harvey Prize from the Technion, 1995\nBULLET::::- Kyoto Prize, 1996\nBULLET::::- Fellow of the Computer History Museum \"for his fundamental early work in the history of computing algorithms, development of the TeX typesetting language, and for major contributions to mathematics and computer science.\" 1998\nBULLET::::- Asteroid 21656 Knuth, named in his honor in May 2001\nBULLET::::- Katayanagi Prize, 2010\nBULLET::::- BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in the category of Information and Communication Technologies, 2010\nBULLET::::- Turing Lecture, 2011\nBULLET::::- Stanford University School of Engineering Hero Award, 2011\nA short list of his publications include:\n\n\"The Art of Computer Programming\":\n\"Computers and Typesetting\" (all books are hardcover unless otherwise noted):\n\nBULLET::::1. , x+483pp.\nBULLET::::2. (softcover).\nBULLET::::3. , xviii+600pp.\nBULLET::::4. , xii+361pp.\nBULLET::::5. (softcover).\nBULLET::::6. , xviii+566pp.\nBULLET::::7. , xvi+588pp.\n\nBooks of collected papers:\nBULLET::::1. , (paperback)\nBULLET::::2. , (paperback)\nBULLET::::3. Donald E. Knuth, Selected Papers on Design of Algorithms (Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information—CSLI Lecture Notes, no. 191), 2010. (cloth), (paperback)\nBULLET::::4. Donald E. Knuth, Selected Papers on Fun and Games (Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information—CSLI Lecture Notes, no. 192), 2011. (cloth), (paperback)\nBULLET::::5. Donald E. Knuth, Companion to the Papers of Donald Knuth (Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information—CSLI Lecture Notes, no. 202), 2011. (cloth), (paperback)\nOther books:\n\nBULLET::::1. xiv+657 pp.\nBULLET::::2. Donald E. Knuth, The Stanford GraphBase: A Platform for Combinatorial Computing (New York, ACM Press) 1993. second paperback printing 2009.\nBULLET::::3. Donald E. Knuth, 3:16 Bible Texts Illuminated (Madison, Wisconsin: A-R Editions), 1990.\nBULLET::::4. Donald E. Knuth, Things a Computer Scientist Rarely Talks About (Center for the Study of Language and Information—CSLI Lecture Notes no 136), 2001.\nBULLET::::5. Donald E. Knuth, MMIXware: A RISC Computer for the Third Millennium (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag— Lecture Notes in Computer Science, no. 1750), 1999. viii+550pp.\nBULLET::::6. Donald E. Knuth and Silvio Levy, The CWEB System of Structured Documentation (Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley), 1993. iv+227pp. . Third printing 2001 with hypertext support, ii + 237 pp.\nBULLET::::7. Donald E. Knuth, Tracy L. Larrabee, and Paul M. Roberts, Mathematical Writing (Washington, D.C.: Mathematical Association of America), 1989. ii+115pp\nBULLET::::8. Daniel H. Greene and Donald E. Knuth, Mathematics for the Analysis of Algorithms (Boston: Birkhäuser), 1990. viii+132pp.\nBULLET::::9. Donald E. Knuth, Mariages Stables: et leurs relations avec d'autres problèmes combinatoires (Montréal: Les Presses de l'Université de Montréal), 1976. 106pp.\nBULLET::::10. Donald E. Knuth, Axioms and Hulls (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag—Lecture Notes in Computer Science, no. 606), 1992. ix+109pp.\n\nBULLET::::- Asymptotic notation\nBULLET::::- Attribute grammar\nBULLET::::- CC system\nBULLET::::- Dancing Links\nBULLET::::- Knuth -yllion\nBULLET::::- Knuth Prize\nBULLET::::- Knuth shuffle\nBULLET::::- Knuth's Algorithm X\nBULLET::::- Knuth's Simpath algorithm\nBULLET::::- Knuth's up-arrow notation\nBULLET::::- Davis-Knuth dragon\nBULLET::::- Bender–Knuth involution\nBULLET::::- Trabb Pardo–Knuth algorithm\nBULLET::::- Fisher–Yates shuffle\nBULLET::::- Man or boy test\nBULLET::::- Plactic monoid\nBULLET::::- Quater-imaginary base\nBULLET::::- TeX\nBULLET::::- Termial\nBULLET::::- The Complexity of Songs\nBULLET::::- Uniform binary search\nBULLET::::- List of pioneers in computer science\nBULLET::::- List of science and religion scholars\n\n\nBULLET::::- Donald Knuth's home page at Stanford University.\nBULLET::::- Knuth discusses software patenting, structured programming, collaboration and his development of TeX.\nBULLET::::- Biography of Donald Knuth from the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences\nBULLET::::- Donald Ervin Knuth – Stanford Lectures (Archive)\n"}
{"id": "8097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8097", "title": "Dairy product", "text": "Dairy product\n\nDairy products or milk products are a type of food produced from or containing the milk of mammals. They are primarily produced from mammals such as cattle, water buffaloes, goats, sheep, camels and humans. Dairy products include food items such as yogurt, cheese and butter. A facility that produces dairy products is known as a dairy, or dairy factory. Dairy products are consumed worldwide, with the exception of most of East and Southeast Asia and parts of central Africa.\n\nMilk is produced after optional homogenization or pasteurization, in several grades after standardization of the fat level, and possible addition of the bacteria \"Streptococcus lactis\" and \"Leuconostoc citrovorum.\" Milk can be broken down into several different categories based on type of product produced, including cream, butter, cheese, infant formula, and yogurt.\n\nMilk varies in fat content. Skim milk is milk with zero fat, while whole milk products contain fat. \n\nYogurt, milk fermented by thermophilic bacteria, mainly\"Streptococcus salivarius\" ssp. \"thermophilus\" and \"Lactobacillus delbrueckii\" ssp. \"bulgaricus\" sometimes with additional bacteria, such as \"Lactobacillus acidophilus\"\nButter, mostly milk fat, produced by churning cream\n\nBULLET::::- \"Ghee\", clarified butter, by gentle heating of butter and removal of the solid matter\nBULLET::::- \"Smen\", a fermented, clarified butter used in Moroccan cooking\nBULLET::::- Anhydrous milkfat (clarified butter)\n\nCheese, produced by coagulating milk, separating from whey and letting it ripen, generally with bacteria and sometimes also with certain molds\nCasein\nCustard\nBULLET::::- \"Vla\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ice cream, slowly frozen cream, milk, flavors and emulsifying additives (dairy ice cream)\nBULLET::::- Gelato, slowly frozen milk and water, lesser fat than ice cream\nBULLET::::- Ice milk, low-fat version of ice cream\nBULLET::::- Frozen custard\nBULLET::::- Frozen yogurt, yogurt with emulsifiers\n\nDairy products can cause problems for individuals who have lactose intolerance or a milk allergy. People who experience lactose intolerance usually prefer to avoid milk and other lactose-containing dairy products, as they may cause symptoms such as abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, gas, and nausea. Milk treated to be lactose free offers an alternative.\n\nExcessive consumption of dairy products can contribute significant amounts of cholesterol and saturated fat to the diet, which can increase the risk of heart disease, and cause other serious health problems.\n\nThere is no excess cardiovascular risk with dietary calcium intake, but calcium supplements are associated with a higher risk of coronary artery calcification.\n\nConsumption of dairy products does not cause mucus production, and will not make cold or asthma symptoms worse. This widely held belief stems from some people mistaking the thin coat of residue left behind after consuming milk or ice cream for mucus.\n\nRates of dairy consumption vary widely worldwide. High-consumption countries consume more than 150 kg per capita per year. These countries are: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Costa Rica, most European counties, Israel, Kyrgyzstan, North America and Pakistan. Medium-consumption countries consume 30 to 150 kg per capita per year. These countries are: India, Iran, Japan, Kenya, Mexico, Mongolia, New Zealand, North and Southern Africa, most of the Middle East, and most of Latin America and the Caribbean. Low-consumption countries consume under 30 kg per capita per year. These countries are: Senegal, most of Central Africa, and most of East and Southeast Asia.\n\nSome groups avoid dairy products for non-health-related reasons:\n\nReligious – Some religions restrict or do not allow for the consumption of dairy products. For example, some scholars of Jainism advocate not consuming any dairy products because dairy is perceived to involve violence against cows. Orthodox Judaism requires that meat and dairy products not be served at the same meal, served or cooked in the same utensils, or stored together, as prescribed in .\n\nVegans – Veganism is the avoidance of all animal products, including dairy products, most often due to the ethics regarding how dairy products are produced. The ethical reasons for avoiding meat and dairy products include how dairy is produced, how the animals are handled, and the environmental effect of dairy production. According to a report of the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization in 2010 the dairy sector accounted for 4 percent of global man-made greenhouse gas emissions.\n\nBULLET::::- Fermented milk products\nBULLET::::- List of dairy products\nBULLET::::- List of dairy product companies in the United States\nBULLET::::- List of foods\nBULLET::::- Milk substitute\nBULLET::::- Plant milk\n\nBULLET::::- Rankin, H. F. (1922) \"Imbucase: the Story of the B. C. I. C. of the Ministry of Food\". Edinburgh: Edinburgh Press (B.C.I.C.=Butter and Cheese Imports Committee)\n\nBULLET::::- Questions and Answers on dairy products\nBULLET::::- Guide for homemade kefir\n"}
{"id": "8099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8099", "title": "Dave Grohl", "text": "Dave Grohl\n\nDavid Eric Grohl (born January 14, 1969) is an American singer, songwriter, musician and director. He is the founder, lead vocalist, rhythm guitarist and primary songwriter of the rock band Foo Fighters since 1994, and was the best known and longest-serving drummer for Nirvana from late 1990 to early 1994, when Nirvana disbanded following the death of Kurt Cobain. Grohl is also the drummer and co-founder of the rock supergroup Them Crooked Vultures, and wrote the music and performed all the instruments for his short-lived side projects Late! and Probot. He has also recorded and toured with Queens of the Stone Age.\n\nFoo Fighters meld melodic elements with heavier ones and have found worldwide success and won multiple awards, most notably with four of their albums winning Grammy Awards for Best Rock Album. Grohl established himself as a highly appreciated drummer with Nirvana and in 2014 was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame alongside bandmates Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic in the group's first year of eligibility. In 2010, Grohl was described by Ken Micallef, co-author of the book \"Classic Rock Drummers\", as one of the most influential rock musicians of the previous 20 years.\n\nDavid Eric Grohl was born on January 14, 1969, in Warren, Ohio, the son of teacher Virginia Jean (\"née\" Hanlon) and newswriter James Harper Grohl (19382014). In addition to being an award-winning journalist, James had also served as the special assistant to Sen. Robert A. Taft and was described as \"a talented political observer who possessed the ability to call every major election with uncanny accuracy\". Grohl is of German, Irish, and Slovak descent. When he was a child, Grohl's family moved to Springfield, Virginia. When Grohl was seven, his parents divorced, and he subsequently grew up with his mother. At the age of 12, he began learning to play guitar. He grew tired of lessons and instead taught himself, and he eventually began playing in bands with friends. At that age, \"I was going in the direction of faster, louder, darker while my sister, Lisa, three years older, was getting seriously into new wave territory. We'd meet in the middle sometimes with Bowie and Siouxsie And The Banshees\". At 13, Grohl and his sister spent the summer in Evanston, Illinois, at their cousin Tracy's house. Tracy introduced them to punk rock by taking the pair to shows by a variety of punk bands. His first concert was Naked Raygun at The Cubby Bear in Chicago in 1982 when he was 13 years old. Grohl recalled, \"From then on we were totally punk. We went home and bought \"Maximumrocknroll\" and tried to figure it all out.\"\n\nIn Virginia, Grohl attended Thomas Jefferson High School as a freshman. He was elected vice president of his freshman class and in that capacity would manage to play bits of songs by punk bands like Circle Jerks and Bad Brains over the school intercom before his morning announcements. Grohl's mother decided that he should transfer to Bishop Ireton High School in Alexandria because his cannabis use was negatively impacting his grades. He stayed there for two years, beginning with a repeat of his first year. After his second year, he transferred yet again to Annandale High School. While in high school, Grohl played in several local bands, including a stint as guitarist in a band called Freak Baby. It was during this period that Grohl taught himself to play drums. When Freak Baby kicked out its bass player, Grohl decided to switch to drums. The reconstituted band renamed themselves Mission Impossible.\n\nIn a 2013 interview with Sam Jones, Grohl mentioned he didn't take drumming lessons and instead learned from \"listening to Rush records and Punk Rock.\" Dave mentions drummer Neil Peart and Rush's 2112 album as early influences: \"When I got '2112' when I was eight years old, it f***ing changed the direction of my life. I heard the drums. It made me want to become a drummer.\"\n\nDuring his developing years as a drummer, Grohl cited John Bonham as his greatest influence, and eventually had Bonham's three-rings symbol tattooed on his wrist. Mission Impossible later rebranded themselves Fast before breaking up, after which Grohl joined the hardcore punk band Dain Bramage in December 1985. Dain Bramage ended in March 1987 when Grohl quit without any warning to join Scream., having produced the \"I Scream Not Coming Down\" LP. Many of Grohl's early influences were at the , a live music venue in Washington, D.C. He said, \"I went to the 9:30 Club hundreds of times. I was always so excited to get there, and I was always bummed when it closed. I spent my teenage years at the club and saw some shows that changed my life.\" Grohl said in an interview with \"The Guardian\", \"They don't understand that when I was 15 and had \"Zen Arcade\", that's when I decided that I loved this music. For me to do anything else for the sole reason of doing something different would be so contrived.\"\n\nAt age 17, Grohl auditioned with local DC favorites Scream to fill the vacancy left by the departure of drummer Kent Stax. In order to be considered for the position, Grohl lied about his age, claiming he was older. To Grohl's surprise, the band asked him to join and so he dropped out of high school in his junior year. He has been quoted as saying, \"I was 17 and extremely anxious to see the world, so I did it.\" Over the next four years, Grohl toured extensively with the band, recording a couple of live albums (their show of May 4, 1990 in Alzey, Germany being released by Tobby Holzinger as \"Your Choice Live Series Vol.10\") and two studio albums, \"No More Censorship\" and \"Fumble\", on which Grohl penned and sang vocals on the song \"Gods Look Down\".\n\nWhile playing in Scream, Grohl became a fan of the Melvins and eventually befriended the band. During a 1990 tour stop on the West Coast, Melvins' Buzz Osborne took a couple of his friends, Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic, to see the band.\n\nA few months later, Scream unexpectedly disbanded mid-tour following the departure of bassist Skeeter Thompson, who left to join The Four Horsemen. Grohl called Osborne for advice and Osborne informed him that Nirvana was looking for a drummer and gave Grohl the phone numbers of Cobain and Novoselic, who subsequently invited Grohl to Seattle to audition for Nirvana. Grohl soon joined the band full-time.\n\nAt the time that Grohl joined Nirvana, the band had already recorded several demos for the follow-up to their debut album \"Bleach\", having spent time recording with producer Butch Vig in Wisconsin. Initially, the plan was to release the album on Sub Pop, but the band received a great deal of interest based on the demos. Grohl spent the initial months with Nirvana traveling to various labels as the band shopped for a deal, eventually signing with DGC Records. In the spring of 1991, the band entered Sound City Studios in Los Angeles to record \"Nevermind\" (as seen in Grohl's 2013 documentary \"Sound City\").\n\nUpon its release, \"Nevermind\" (1991) exceeded all expectations and became a worldwide commercial success. At the same time, Grohl was compiling and recording his own material, which he released on a cassette called \"Pocketwatch\" in 1992 on indie label Simple Machines. Rather than using his own name, Grohl released the cassette under the pseudonym \"Late!\"\n\nIn the later years of Nirvana, Grohl's songwriting contributions increased. In Grohl's initial months in Seattle, Cobain overheard him working on a song called \"Color Pictures of a Marigold\", and the two subsequently worked on it together. Grohl would later record the song for the \"Pocketwatch\" cassette. Grohl stated in a 2014 episode of \"\" that Cobain reacted by kissing him upon first hearing a demo of \"Alone + Easy Target\" that Grohl had recently recorded.\n\nDuring the sessions for \"In Utero\", Nirvana decided to re-record \"Color Pictures of a Marigold\" released this version as a B-side on the \"Heart-Shaped Box\" single, titled simply \"Marigold\". Grohl also contributed the main guitar riff for \"Scentless Apprentice\". Cobain admitted in a late 1993 MTV interview that he initially thought the riff was \"kind of boneheaded\", but was gratified at how the song developed (a process captured in part in a demo on the Nirvana box set \"With the Lights Out\"). Cobain noted that he was excited at the possibility of having Novoselic and Grohl contribute more to the band's songwriting.\n\nPrior to their 1994 European tour, the band scheduled session time at Robert Lang Studios in Seattle to work on demos. For most of the three-day session, Cobain was absent, so Novoselic and Grohl worked on demos of their own songs. The duo completed several of Grohl's songs, including future Foo Fighters songs \"Exhausted\", \"Big Me\", \"February Stars\", and \"Butterflies\". On the third day of the session, Cobain finally arrived, and the band recorded a demo of a song later named \"You Know You're Right\". It was the band's final studio recording.\n\nThe Cobain, Novoselic and Grohl incarnation of Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on April 10, 2014, 20 years after the death of Cobain.\n\nFollowing Cobain's death in April 1994, Grohl retreated, unsure of where to go and what to do with himself. In October 1994, Grohl scheduled studio time, again at Robert Lang Studios, and quickly recorded a fifteen-track demo. With the exception of a single guitar part on \"X-Static\" played by Greg Dulli of the Afghan Whigs, Grohl performed all of the instruments himself.\n\nAt the same time, Grohl wondered if his future might be in drumming for other bands. In November, Grohl took a brief turn with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, including a performance on \"Saturday Night Live\". Petty asked him to join permanently, but Grohl declined. He was also rumored as a possible replacement for Pearl Jam drummer Dave Abbruzzese and even performed with the band for a song or two at three shows during Pearl Jam's March 1995 Australian tour. However, by then, Pearl Jam had already settled on ex-Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons, and Grohl had other solo plans in the works.\n\nAfter passing the demo around, Grohl found himself with considerable major label interest. Nirvana's A&R rep Gary Gersh had subsequently taken over as president of Capitol Records and lured Grohl to sign with the label. Grohl did not want the effort to be considered the start of a solo career, so he recruited other band members: former Germs and touring Nirvana guitarist Pat Smear and two members of the recently disbanded Sunny Day Real Estate, William Goldsmith (drums) and Nate Mendel (bass). Rather than re-record the album, Grohl's demo was given a professional mix by Rob Schnapf and Tom Rothrock and was released in July 1995 as Foo Fighters' debut album.\n\nDuring a break between tours, the band entered the studio and recorded a cover of Gary Numan's \"Down in the Park\". In February 1996, Grohl and his then-wife Jennifer Youngblood made a brief cameo appearance on \"The X-Files\" third-season episode \"Pusher\".\n\nAfter touring for the self-titled album for more than a year, Grohl returned home and began work on the soundtrack to the 1997 movie \"Touch\". Grohl performed all of the instruments and vocals himself, save for vocals from Veruca Salt singer Louise Post on the title track, keyboards by Barrett Jones (who also co-produced the record) on one track, and vocals and guitar by X's John Doe on \"This Loving Thing (Lynn's Song)\". Grohl completed the recording in two weeks, and immediately joined Foo Fighters to work on their follow-up.\n\nIn the midst of the initial sessions for Foo Fighters' second album, tension emerged between Grohl and drummer William Goldsmith. According to Goldsmith, \"Dave had me do 96 takes of one song, and I had to do thirteen hours' worth of takes on another one. [...] It just seemed that everything I did wasn't good enough for him, or anyone else\". Goldsmith also believed that Capitol and producer Gil Norton wanted Grohl to drum on the album. With the album seemingly complete, Grohl headed home to Virginia with a copy of the rough mixes and found himself unhappy with the results. Grohl penned a few new songs, recording one of them, \"Walking After You\", by himself at a studio in Washington, D.C. Inspired by the session, Grohl opted to move the band, without Goldsmith's knowledge, to Los Angeles to re-record most of the album with Grohl behind the kit. After the sessions were complete, Goldsmith officially announced his departure from the band.\n\nSpeaking in 2011 about the tension surrounding the departure of Goldsmith, Grohl explained that \"there were a lot of reasons it didn't work out, but there was also a part of [him] that was like, you know, [he doesn't] know if [he's] finished playing the drums yet\". He also stated that he wished he had \"handled things differently\".\nThe effort was released in May 1997 as the band's second album, \"The Colour and the Shape\", which eventually cemented Foo Fighters as a staple of rock radio. The album spawned several hits, including \"Everlong\", \"My Hero\", and \"Monkey Wrench\". Just prior to the album's release, former Alanis Morissette drummer Taylor Hawkins joined the band on drums. The following September, Smear (a close friend of Jennifer Youngblood) left the band, citing a need to settle down following a lifetime of touring. Smear was subsequently replaced by Grohl's former Scream bandmate Franz Stahl. Stahl was kicked out of the band prior to recording of Foo Fighters' third album and was replaced by touring guitarist Chris Shiflett, who later became a full-fledged member during the recording of \"One by One\".\n\nGrohl's life of non-stop touring and travel continued with Foo Fighters' popularity. During his infrequent pauses he lived in Seattle and Los Angeles before returning to Alexandria, Virginia. It was there that he turned his basement into a recording studio where the 1999 album \"There Is Nothing Left to Lose\" was recorded. It was recorded following the departure from Capitol and their former president Gary Gersh. Grohl described the recording experience as \"intoxicating at times\" because the band members were left completely to their own devices. He added, \"One of the advantages of finishing the record before we had a new label was that it was purely our creation. It was complete and not open to outside tampering.\"\n\nIn 2000, the band recruited Queen guitarist Brian May to add some guitar flourish to a cover of Pink Floyd's \"Have a Cigar\", a song which Foo Fighters previously recorded as a b-side. The friendship between the two bands resulted in Grohl and Taylor Hawkins being asked to induct Queen into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001. Grohl and Hawkins joined May and Queen drummer Roger Taylor to perform \"Tie Your Mother Down\", with Grohl standing in on vocals for Freddie Mercury. May later contributed guitar work for the song \"Tired of You\" on the ensuing Foo Fighters album, as well as on an unreleased Foo Fighters song called \"Knucklehead\".\n\nNear the end of 2001, Foo Fighters returned to the studio to work on their fourth album. After four months in the studio, with the sessions finished, Grohl accepted an invitation to join Queens of the Stone Age and helped them to record their 2002 album \"Songs for the Deaf\". (Grohl can be seen drumming for the band in the video for the song \"No One Knows\".) After a brief tour through North America, Britain and Japan with the band and feeling rejuvenated by the effort, Grohl recalled the other band members to completely re-record their album at his studio in Virginia. The effort became their fourth album, \"One by One\". While initially pleased with the results, in another 2005 \"Rolling Stone\" interview, Grohl admitted to not liking the record: \"Four of the songs were good, and the other seven I never played again in my life. We rushed into it, and we rushed out of it.\"\n\nOn November 23, 2002, Grohl achieved a historical milestone by replacing himself on the top of the \"Billboard\" Modern rock chart, when \"You Know You're Right\" by Nirvana was replaced by \"All My Life\" by Foo Fighters. When \"All My Life\" ended its run, after a one-week respite, \"No One Knows\" by Queens of the Stone Age took the number one spot. Between October 26, 2002 and March 1, 2003 Grohl was in the number one spot on the Modern rock charts for 17 of 18 successive weeks, as a member of three different groups.\n\nGrohl and Foo Fighters released their fifth album \"In Your Honor\" on June 14, 2005. Prior to starting work on the album, the band spent almost a year relocating Grohl's home-based Virginia studio to a brand new facility, dubbed Studio 606, located in a warehouse near Los Angeles. Featuring collaborations with John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age and Norah Jones, the album was a departure from previous efforts, and included one rock and one acoustic disc.\nFoo Fighters' sixth studio album \"Echoes, Silence, Patience & Grace\" was released on September 25, 2007. It was recorded during a three-month period between March 2007 and June 2007, and its release was preceded by the first single \"The Pretender\" on September 17. The second single, \"Long Road to Ruin\", was released on December 3, 2007, followed by the third single, \"Let It Die\", June 24, 2008.\n\nOn November 3, 2009, Foo Fighters released their first \"Greatest Hits\" collection, consisting of 16 tracks including a previously unreleased acoustic version of \"Everlong\" and two new tracks \"Wheels\" and \"Word Forward\" which were produced by Nevermind's producer Butch Vig. Grohl has been quoted saying the \"Greatest Hits\" is too early and \"... can look like an obituary\". He does not feel they have written their best hits yet.\n\nThe Foo Fighters' seventh studio album, \"Wasting Light\", was released on April 12, 2011. It is the first Foo Fighters album to reach No. 1 in the United States. Despite rumors of a hiatus, Grohl confirmed in January 2013 that the band had completed writing material for their follow-up to \"Wasting Light\".\n\nGrohl and the Foo Fighters sometimes perform as a cover band \"Chevy Metal, \"as they did in May 2015 at \"Conejo Valley Days\", a county fair in Thousand Oaks, California.\n\nOn May 19, 2012, the Foo Fighters appeared with Mick Jagger on \"Saturday Night Live\". They performed the Jagger/Richards songs \"19th Nervous Breakdown\" and \"It's Only Rock 'n Roll\".\n\nOn November 10, 2014, the Foo Fighters released their eighth studio album, \"Sonic Highways\".\n\nOn June 12, 2015, while playing a show in Gothenburg, Sweden, Grohl fell off the stage, breaking his leg. He left temporarily and returned with a cast to finish the concert. Afterward, the band cancelled the remainder of its European tour. To avoid having to cancel the band's upcoming North American tour, Grohl designed a large \"elevated throne\" which would allow him to perform on stage with a broken leg. The throne was unveiled at a concert of July 4, where Grohl used the stage's video screens to show the crowd video of him falling from the stage in Gothenburg as well as X-rays of his broken leg. Beginning with the show of July 4, the Foo Fighters began selling new tour merchandise rebranding the band's North American tour as the \"Broken Leg Tour\". Grohl later lent his throne to Axl Rose of Guns N' Roses after Rose suffered a similar injury on April 1, 2016, the band's first show with Slash and Duff McKagan in nearly 20 years.\n\nOn July 31, 2015, Grohl posted a personal reply to Fabio Zaffagnini, Marco Sabiu, and the 1,000 participants of the \"Rockin' 1000\" project in Cesena, Italy, thanking them for their combined performance of the Foo Fighters' song \"Learn to Fly\" from their 1999 album \"There Is Nothing Left to Lose\", indicating (in broken Italian), \"\"... I promise [the Foo Fighters will] see you soon\".\" On November 3, the Foo Fighters performed in Cesena, where Dave invited some \"Rockin' 1000\" members onto the stage to perform with the band.\n\nOn September 15, 2017, the Foo Fighters released their ninth studio album \"Concrete and Gold\", which became the band's second album to debut at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200.\n\nApart from his main bands, Grohl has been involved in other music projects. In 1992, he played drums on Buzz Osborne's Kiss-styled solo-EP \"King Buzzo\", where he was credited as \"Dale Nixon\", a pseudonym that Greg Ginn adopted to play bass on Black Flag's \"My War\". He also released the music cassette Pocketwatch under the pseudonym \"Late!\" on the now defunct indie label, Simple Machines.\n\nIn 1993, Grohl was recruited to help recreate the music of The Beatles' early years for the movie \"Backbeat;\" he played drums in an \"all-star\" lineup that included Greg Dulli of the Afghan Whigs, indie producer Don Fleming, Mike Mills of R.E.M., Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth, and Dave Pirner of Soul Asylum. A music video was filmed for the song \"Money\" while Grohl was with Nirvana on their 1994 European tour, footage of Grohl was filmed later and included.\n\nLater in 1994, Grohl played drums on two tracks for Mike Watt's \"Ball-Hog or Tugboat?\". In early 1995, Grohl and Foo Fighters played their first US tour opening for Watt and helped make up Watt's supporting band. Nicknamed the \"Ringspiel\" tour, Watt's band featured Grohl and William Goldsmith on drums, Eddie Vedder and Pat Smear on guitar, and Watt on bass.\nDuring the early 2000s, Grohl spent time in his basement studio writing and recording a number of songs for a metal project. Over the span of several years, he recruited his favorite metal vocalists from the 1980s, including Lemmy of Motörhead, Conrad \"Cronos\" Lant from Venom, King Diamond, Scott Weinrich, Snake of Voivod and Max Cavalera of Sepultura, to perform the vocals for the songs. The project was released in 2004 under the nickname Probot.\n\nAlso in 2003, Grohl stepped behind the kit to perform on Killing Joke's second self-titled album. The move surprised some Nirvana fans, given that Nirvana had been accused of stealing the opening riff of \"Come as You Are\" from Killing Joke's 1984 song \"Eighties\". However, the controversy failed to create a lasting rift between the bands. Foo Fighters covered Killing Joke's \"Requiem\" during the late 1990s, and were even joined by Killing Joke singer Jaz Coleman for a performance of the song at a show in New Zealand in 2003. Also in 2003, at the 45th Annual Grammy Awards, Grohl performed in an ad-hoc supergroup with Bruce Springsteen, Elvis Costello, and Steven Van Zandt for a performance in tribute of then-recently deceased singer/guitarist Joe Strummer.\nGrohl and Tyler were there and performed to induct the band Rush to the Rock n Roll hall of fame.\n\nGrohl lent his drumming skills to other artists during the early 2000s. In 2000, he played drums and sang on a track, \"Goodbye Lament\", from Tony Iommi's album \"Iommi\". In 2001, Grohl performed on Tenacious D's debut album, and appeared in the video for lead single \"Tribute\" as a demon. He later appeared in the duo's 2006 movie \"Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny\" as the devil in the song \"The Pick of Destiny\", and performed on its soundtrack. He also performed drums for their 2012 album \"Rize of the Fenix\". In 2002, Grohl helped Chan Marshall of Cat Power on the album \"You Are Free\" and played with Queens of the Stone Age on their album \"Songs for the Deaf\". Grohl also toured with the band in support of the album, delaying work on the Foo Fighters' album \"One by One\". In 2004, Grohl drummed on several tracks for Nine Inch Nails' 2005 album \"With Teeth\", later returning to play drums on 'The Idea of You' from their 2016 EP \"Not the Actual Events\". He also drummed on the song \"Bad Boyfriend\" on Garbage's 2005 album \"Bleed Like Me\". Most recently, he recorded all the drums on Juliette and the Licks's 2006 album \"Four on the Floor\" and the song \"For Us\" from Pete Yorn's 2006 album \"Nightcrawler\". Beyond drumming, Grohl contributed guitar to a cover of Neil Young's \"I've Been Waiting For You\" on David Bowie's 2002 album \"Heathen\".\n\nIn June 2008, Grohl was Paul McCartney's special guest for a concert at the Anfield football stadium in Liverpool, in one of the central events of the English city's year as European Capital of Culture. Grohl joined McCartney's band singing backup vocals and playing guitar on \"Band on the Run\" and drums on \"Back in the U.S.S.R.\" and \"I Saw Her Standing There\". Grohl also performed with McCartney at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards, again playing drums on \"I Saw Her Standing There\". Grohl also helped pay tribute to McCartney at the 2010 Kennedy Center Honors along with No Doubt, Norah Jones, Steven Tyler, James Taylor, and Mavis Staples. He sang a duet version of \"Maybe I'm Amazed\" with Norah Jones on December 5, 2010.\n\nGrohl played drums on the tracks \"Run with the Wolves\" and \"Stand Up\" on The Prodigy's 2009 album \"Invaders Must Die\".\nIn July 2009, it was revealed that Grohl was recording with Josh Homme and John Paul Jones as Them Crooked Vultures. The trio performed their first show together on August 9, 2009, at Metro in Chicago. The band played their first UK gig on August 26, 2009, with a surprise appearance at Brixton Academy in London, supporting the Arctic Monkeys. The band released their debut album Them Crooked Vultures on November 16, 2009 in the UK and November 17, 2009 in the US.\n\nOn February 6, 2010, Grohl performed with his band Them Crooked Vultures the songs \"Mind Eraser, No Chaser\" and \"New Fang\" as musical guests on \"Saturday Night Live.\" Grohl appeared as a middle-aged punk rock drummer reuniting the group \"Crisis of Conformity\" (fronted by Fred Armisen) after 25 years in a skit later on in the episode.\n\nIn mid-2010, Dave Grohl added his name to the list of contributing rock star voice cameos for Cartoon Network's heavy metal parody/tribute show, Metalocalypse. He voiced the controversial Syrian dictator, Abdule Malik in the season 3 finale, \"Doublebookedklok\".\n\nOn October 23, 2010, Grohl performed with Tenacious D at BlizzCon. He appeared as the drummer for the entire concert, and a year later he returned with Foo Fighters and played another set there, this time as guitarist and vocalist.\n\nAlso in 2010, Grohl helped write and performed on drums for \"Watch This\" with guitarist Slash and Duff McKagan on Slash's self-titled album that also included many other famous artists.\n\nIn October 2011, Grohl temporarily joined Cage the Elephant as a replacement on tour after drummer Jared Champion's appendix burst.\n\nGrohl directed a documentary entitled Sound City which is about the Van Nuys studio of the same name where \"Nevermind\" was recorded that shut down its music operations in 2011.\n\nOn November 6, 2012, following the departure of Joey Castillo from Queens of the Stone Age, Grohl has been confirmed as the drummer for the band on the upcoming album.\n\nAt the Paul McCartney joined Grohl and the surviving members of Nirvana (Krist Novoselic and touring guitarist Pat Smear) to perform \"Cut Me Some Slack\", a song later recorded for the Sound City soundtrack. In what was regarded as a Nirvana reunion with McCartney as a stand-in for Kurt Cobain, this was the first time in eighteen years that the three had played alongside each other.\n\nIn February 2013, Grohl filled in as host of \"Chelsea Lately\" for a week. Guests included Elton John, who disclosed on the E! show that he would appear with Grohl on the next Queens of the Stone Age album. Grohl had previously hosted the show during the first week of December 2012 as part of \"Celebrity Guest Host Week\".\n\nGrohl delivered a keynote speech at the 2013 South by Southwest conference in Austin Texas, U.S. on the morning of March 14. Lasting just under an hour, the speech covered Grohl's musical life from his youth through to his role with the Foo Fighters and emphasized the importance of each individual's voice, regardless of who the individual is: \"There is no right or wrong—there is only your voice... What matters most is that it's your voice. Cherish it. Respect it. Nurture it. Challenge it. Respect it\". Grohl also admitted during the speech that Psy's \"Gangnam Style\" was one of his favorite songs of \"the past decade\". He also referenced Edgar Winter's instrumental \"Frankenstein\" as being the song that made him want to become a musician.\nOn November 6, 2013, Dave Grohl played drums at the 2013 CMA Awards replacing drummer Chris Fryar for Country Music band Zac Brown Band. The band debuted their new song \"Day for the Dead\". Grohl also produced Zac Brown Band's EP The Grohl Sessions, Vol. 1.\n\nGrohl also featured on drums for new indie hip-hop band RDGLDGRN. He worked with them closely on their EP. The group asked fellow Northern Virginia native Dave Grohl, who was filming his Sound City documentary, to drum on \"I Love Lamp\". Grohl agreed and played drums for the entire record, with the exception of \"Million Fans\", which features a sampled breakbeat.\n\nGrohl, a fan of theatrical Swedish metal band Ghost, produced their EP \"If You Have Ghost\". He was also featured in a number of songs on the EP. Grohl played rhythm guitar for the song \"If You Have Ghosts\" (a cover of a Roky Erickson song), and drums on \"I'm a Marionette\" (an ABBA cover) as well as \"Waiting for the Night\" (a Depeche Mode cover). According to a member of Ghost, Grohl has appeared live in concert with the band wearing the same identity concealing outfit that the rest of the band usually wears.\n\nOn May 20, 2015, David Letterman selected Grohl and the Foo Fighters to play \"Everlong\" as the last musical guest on the final episode of \"Late Show with David Letterman\". Letterman stated that he considered \"Everlong\" to be his favorite song and that he and the band were \"joined at the hip\" ever since the band canceled tour dates to play his first show back from heart bypass surgery at his request.\n\nIn September, the all-star covers album by the Alice Cooper-led Hollywood Vampires supergroup was released and features Grohl playing drums on the medley \"One/Jump Into the Fire\".\n\nOn August 10, 2018, Grohl released \"Play\", a solo recording lasting over 22 minutes. A mini documentary accompanied it.\n\nOn December 1, 2015 Grohl appeared on an episode of \"The Muppets\" where he competed in a \"drum off\" with Animal.\n\nGrohl appeared in the 50th anniversary season of Sesame Street back in February 2019.\n\nInspired by California Jam, to celebrate the release of Foo Fighters' ninth studio album \"Concrete and Gold\" and kick off its North American tour, Cal Jam 17, a music festival curated by Grohl and Foo Fighters, was held from October 67, 2017 at Glen Helen Amphitheater, with 27,800 attendees, 3,100 campers, and 9 arrests, the week after the mass shooting at the Route 91 Harvest festival in Las Vegas.\n\nCal Jam 18 was held October 5–6, 2018 in San Bernardino, California which featured the Foo Fighters and a Nirvana reunion.\n\nDave Grohl plays a large number of guitars, but his two primary guitars are both based on the Gibson ES-335. His primary recording guitar is an original cherry red Gibson Trini Lopez Standard that he bought in the early 1990s because he liked the look of the diamond-shaped holes. His primary stage guitar is his signature model Pelham Blue Gibson DG-335, which was designed by Gibson based on the Trini Lopez Standard specs, but in a different color and with a stop tailpiece instead of the Trini Lopez's trapeze tailpiece. He also has another signature guitar called the \"Memphis Dave Grohl ES-335\" in silver finish that is otherwise similar to the DG-335. His primary acoustic guitar is a black Elvis Presley model Gibson Dove.\n\nDave's drum kit, as designed by Drum Workshop, features five different sized toms ranging from 5x8 inches to 16x18 inches, a 19-inch crash cymbal, two 20-inch crash cymbals, an 18-inch China cymbal, a 24-inch ride cymbal, and a standard kick drum, snare drum, and hi-hat.\n\nGrohl married Jennifer Leigh Youngblood (born November 6, 1971), a photographer from Grosse Pointe, Michigan, in 1994 and later divorced in 1997, after separating in December 1996. On August 2, 2003, he married Jordyn Blum and they have three daughters: Violet Maye (born April 15, 2006), Harper Willow (born April 17, 2009) and Ophelia Saint (born August 1, 2014).\n\nIn 2012, Grohl was estimated to be the third wealthiest drummer in the world, behind Ringo Starr and Phil Collins, with a fortune of $260 million.\n\nGrohl doesn't read music and plays only by ear.\n\nGrohl has been vocal in his views on drug misuse, contributing to a 2009 anti-drug video for the BBC. \"I have never done cocaine, ever in my life. I have never done heroin, I have never done speed,\" he said in a 2008 interview, adding that he stopped smoking cannabis and taking LSD at the age of 20. In the BBC video, he said, \"I've seen people die. It ain't easy being young, but that stuff doesn't make it any easier\". However he is a well known coffee addict, and drinks on average 6 cups of coffee every morning. In 2009 he was admitted to a hospital with chest pains he experienced as a result of a caffeine overdose.\n\nIn May 2006, Grohl sent a note of support to the two trapped miners in the Beaconsfield mine collapse in Tasmania, Australia. In the initial days following the collapse one of the men requested an iPod with the Foo Fighters album \"In Your Honor\" to be sent down to them through a small hole. Grohl's note read, in part, \"Though I'm halfway around the world right now, my heart is with you both, and I want you to know that when you come home, there's two tickets to any Foos show, anywhere, and two cold beers waiting for yous. Deal?\" In October 2006, one of the miners took up his offer, joining Grohl for a drink after a Foo Fighters acoustic concert at the Sydney Opera House. Grohl wrote an instrumental piece for the meeting, which he pledged to include on the band's next album. The song, titled \"Ballad of the Beaconsfield Miners\", appears on Foo Fighters' 2007 release \"Echoes, Silence, Patience & Grace\", and features Kaki King.\n\nGrohl is an advocate for LGBT rights. He has worn a White Knot ribbon to various events to promote whiteknot.org. When questioned about the knot, he responded, \"You know what that's about? I believe in love and I believe in equality and I believe in marriage equality\". Grohl's gay rights activism dates back to the early 1990s, when he and the other members of Nirvana performed at a benefit to raise money to fight Oregon Ballot Measure 9. \"Measure 9 goes against American traditions of mutual respect and freedom, and Nirvana wants to do their part to end bigotry and narrow-mindedness everywhere,\" the group stated. The ballot measure was ultimately defeated on November 3, 1992. Grohl has also participated in two counter-protests against the Westboro Baptist Church for their anti-gay stance, once by performing \"Keep It Clean\" on the back of a flatbed truck and most recently by Rickrolling them.\n\nGrohl is a Democrat. He supported President Barack Obama, and performed \"My Hero\" in September at the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina.\n\nIn August 2009, Grohl was given the key to the city of Warren, Ohio and performed the songs \"Everlong\", \"Times Like These\", and \"My Hero\". A roadway in downtown Warren named \"David Grohl Alley\" has been dedicated to him with murals by local artists.\nDave Grohl's hometown of Warren, Ohio unveiled gigantic drumsticks in 2012 to honor him. According to \"The Hollywood Reporter\", the massive pair broke the Guinness World Record. The record-breaking drumsticks were shown to the public for the first time on July 7 during a concert at the Warren Amphitheater.\n\nOn November 11, 2014, Grohl joined Bruce Springsteen and Zac Brown on stage at the Concert for Valor in Washington, D.C. to support U.S. troops and veterans.\n\nGrohl's first solo \"Rolling Stone\" cover story appeared on December 4, 2014.\n\nIn 2000, while on tour with Foo Fighters in Australia, Grohl was arrested by Australian police while driving a scooter under the influence following a concert on the Gold Coast in Queensland. He was fined $400 and had his Australian driving permit revoked for three months. Following the incident, Grohl stated, \"So, people, I guess if there's anything to learn here, it's: don't drive after a few beers, even if you feel entirely capable like I did.\"\n\n!Year\n!Film\n!Role\n!Notes\n1992\nHimself\nDocumentary\n2000\n\"Is It Fall Yet?\"\nDaniel Dotson\nVoice only\n2005\nHimself\nDocumentary\n2006\n\"Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny\"\nSatan\nPerformed drums, vocals, and guitar.\n2010\n\"Lemmy\"\nHimself\nRockumentary\n2011\n\"The Muppets\"\nAnimool\nCameo\n2011\nHimself\nRockumentary\n2012\n\"See a Little Light: A Celebration of the Music and Legacy of Bob Mould\"\nHimself\nPerformed guitar, drums, vocals\n2013\n\"Sound City\"\nDirector\nDocumentary\n2014\n\"Salad Days\"\nHimself\nDocumentary\n2015\nHimself\nDocumentary\n2015\n\"All Things Must Pass\"\nHimself\nDocumentary\n\n!Year\n!Series\n!Role\n!Notes\n1996\n\"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\"\nHimself\n\n2006\n\"The West Wing\"\nHimself\nPerformed vocals and guitar.\n2013\n\"Drunk History\"\nMemphis Mafia\n\n2013\n\"The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange\"\nHimself\n\n2013\n\"Chelsea Lately\"\nHimself\nGuest host\n2014\n\"Sonic Highways\"\nHimself\n\n2014\n\"Off Camera\"\nHimself\n\n2015\n\"The Muppets\"\nHimself\n\n2016\n\"Drunk History\"\nAmerican Congressman\nEpisode: \"Hamilton\"\n2017\n\"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\"\nGuest Host\n\n2019\n\"Sesame Street\"\nHimself\nPerformed vocals and guitar.\n\nBULLET::::- (Foo Fighters)\nBULLET::::- Dave Grohl's Gearboard\nBULLET::::- Dave Grohl Band Discography\nBULLET::::- Live Review at ArtistDirect.com\n"}
{"id": "8100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8100", "title": "Dollar", "text": "Dollar\n\nDollar (symbol: $) is the name of more than 20 currencies, including those of Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Jamaica, Liberia, Namibia, New Zealand, Singapore, Taiwan, and the United States. The U.S. dollar is also the official currency of the Caribbean Netherlands, East Timor, Ecuador, El Salvador, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Palau, and Zimbabwe. One dollar is generally divided into 100 cents.\n\nOn 15 January 1520, the Kingdom of Bohemia began minting coins from silver mined locally in Joachimsthal and marked on reverse with the Bohemian lion. The coins were called \"joachimsthaler\", which became shortened in common usage to \"thaler\" or \"taler\". The German name \"Joachimsthal\" literally means \"Joachim's valley\" or \"Joachim's dale\".\nThis name found its way into other languages: Czech and Slovenian \"tolar\", Hungarian tallér, Danish and Norwegian \"(rigs) daler\", Swedish \"(riks) daler\", Icelandic \"dalur\", Dutch \" (rijks) daalder or daler\", Ethiopian \"ታላሪ (\"talari\")\", Italian \"tallero\", Greek τάλληρον, τάλιρο, \"tàlleron\", \"tàliro\", Polish \"talar\", Persian \"dare\", as well as – via Dutch – into English as \"dollar\".\n\nA later Dutch coin also depicting a lion was called the \"leeuwendaler or leeuwendaalder\", literally 'lion daler'. The Dutch Republic produced these coins to accommodate its booming international trade. The \"leeuwendaler\" circulated throughout the Middle East and was imitated in several German and Italian cities. This coin was also popular in the Dutch East Indies and in the Dutch New Netherland Colony (New York). It was in circulation throughout the Thirteen Colonies during the 17th and early 18th centuries and was popularly known as \"lion (or lyon) dollar\". The currencies of Romania and Bulgaria are, to this day, 'lion' (\"leu\"/\"lev\"). The modern American-English pronunciation of \"dollar\" is still remarkably close to the 17th century Dutch pronunciation of \"daler\". Some well-worn examples circulating in the Colonies were known as \"dog dollars\".\n\nSpanish pesos – having the same weight and shape – came to be known as \"Spanish\" dólar. By the mid-18th century, the lion dollar had been replaced by Spanish dollar, the famous \"pieces of eight\", which were distributed widely in the Spanish colonies in the New World and in the Philippines.\n\nThe sign is first attested in business correspondence in the 1770s as a scribal abbreviation \"p\", referring to the Spanish American peso, that is, the \"Spanish dollar\" as it was known in British North America. These late 18th- and early 19th-century manuscripts show that the \"s\" gradually came to be written over the \"p\" developing a close equivalent to the \"$\" mark, and this new symbol was retained to refer to the American dollar as well, once this currency was adopted in 1785 by the United States.\n\nBy the time of the American Revolution, Spanish dólar gained significance because they backed paper money authorized by the individual colonies and the Continental Congress. Common in the Thirteen Colonies, Spanish dólar were even legal tender in one colony, Virginia.\n\nOn April 2, 1792, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton reported to Congress the precise amount of silver found in Spanish dollar coins in common use in the states. As a result, the United States dollar was defined as a unit of pure silver weighing 371 4/16th grains (24.057 grams), or 416 grains of standard silver (standard silver being defined as 1,485 parts fine silver to 179 parts alloy). It was specified that the \"money of account\" of the United States should be expressed in those same \"dollars\" or parts thereof. Additionally, all lesser-denomination coins were defined as percentages of the dollar coin, such that a half-dollar was to contain half as much silver as a dollar, quarter-dollars would contain one-fourth as much, and so on.\n\nIn an act passed in January 1837, the dollar's alloy (amount of non-silver metal present) was set at 15%. Subsequent coins would contain the same amount of pure silver as previously, but were reduced in overall weight (to 412.25 grains). On February 21, 1853, the quantity of silver in the lesser coins was reduced, with the effect that their denominations no longer represented their silver content relative to dollar coins.\n\nVarious acts have subsequently been passed affecting the amount and type of metal in U.S. coins, so that today there is no legal definition of the term \"dollar\" to be found in U.S. statute. Currently the closest thing to a definition is found in United States Code Title 31, Section 5116, paragraph b, subsection 2: \"The Secretary [of the Treasury] shall sell silver under conditions the Secretary considers appropriate for at least $1.292929292 a fine troy ounce.\" However, the dollar's constitutional meaning has remained unchanged through the years (\"see\", United States Constitution).\n\nSilver was mostly removed from U.S. coinage by 1965 and the dollar became a free-floating fiat currency without a commodity backing defined in terms of real gold or silver. The US Mint continues to make silver $1-denomination coins, but these are not intended for general circulation.\n\nThe quantity of silver chosen in 1792 to correspond to one dollar, namely, 371.25 grains of pure silver, is very close to the geometric mean of one troy pound and one pennyweight. In what follows, \"dollar\" will be used as a unit of mass. A troy pound being 5760 grains and a pennyweight being 240 times smaller, or 24 grains, the geometric mean is, to the nearest hundredth, 371.81 grains. This means that the ratio of a pound to a dollar (15.52) roughly equals the ratio of a dollar to a pennyweight (15.47). These ratios are also very close to the ratio of a gram to a grain: 15.43. Finally, in the United States, the ratio of the value of gold to the value of silver in the period from 1792 to 1873 averaged to about 15.5, being 15 from 1792 to 1834 and around 16 from 1834 to 1873. This is also nearly the value of the gold to silver ratio determined by Isaac Newton in 1717.\n\nThat these three ratios are all approximately equal has some interesting consequences. Let the gold to silver ratio be exactly 15.5. Then a pennyweight of gold, that is 24 grains of gold, is nearly equal in value to a dollar of silver (1 dwt of gold = $1.002 of silver). Second, a dollar of gold is nearly equal in value to a pound of silver ($1 of gold = 5754 3/8 grains of silver = 0.999 Lb of silver). Third, the number of grains in a dollar (371.25) roughly equals the number of grams in a troy pound (373.24).\n\nThe actual process of defining the US silver dollar had nothing to do with any geometric mean. The US government simply sampled all Spanish milled dollars in circulation in 1792 and arrived at the average weight in common use. And this was 371.25 grains of fine silver.\n\nThere are two quotes in the plays of William Shakespeare referring to dollars as money. Coins known as \"thistle dollars\" were in use in Scotland during the 16th and 17th centuries, and use of the English word, and perhaps even the use of the coin, may have begun at the University of St Andrews. This might be supported by a reference to the sum of \"ten thousand dollars\" in \"Macbeth\" (act I, scene II) (an anachronism because the real Macbeth, upon whom the play was based, lived in the 11th century). In the Sherlock Holmes story \"The Man with the Twisted Lip\" by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, published in 1891, an Englishman posing as a London beggar describes the shillings and pounds he collected as dollars.\n\nIn 1804, a British five-shilling piece, or crown, was sometimes called \"dollar\". It was an overstruck Spanish eight real coin (the famous \"piece of eight\"), the original of which was known as a Spanish dollar. Large numbers of these eight-real coins were captured during the Napoleonic Wars, hence their re-use by the Bank of England. They remained in use until 1811. During World War II, when the U.S. dollar was (approximately) valued at five shillings, the half crown (2s 6d) acquired the nickname \"half dollar\" in the UK.\n\nChinese demand for silver in the 19th and early 20th centuries led several countries, notably the United Kingdom, United States and Japan, to mint trade dollars, which were often of slightly different weights from comparable domestic coinage. Silver dollars reaching China (whether Spanish, trade, or other) were often stamped with Chinese characters known as \"chop marks\", which indicated that that particular coin had been assayed by a well-known merchant and deemed genuine.\n\nPrior to 1873, the silver dollar circulated in many parts of the world, with a value in relation to the British gold sovereign of roughly $1 = 4s 2d (21p approx). As a result of the decision of the German Empire to stop minting silver \"thaler\" coins in 1871, in the wake of the Franco-Prussian War, the worldwide price of silver began to fall. This resulted in the U.S. Coinage Act (1873) which put the United States onto a 'de facto' gold standard. Canada and Newfoundland were already on the gold standard, and the result was that the value of the dollar in North America increased in relation to silver dollars being used elsewhere, particularly Latin America and the Far East. By 1900, value of silver dollars had fallen to 50 percent of gold dollars. Following the abandonment of the gold standard by Canada in 1931, the Canadian dollar began to drift away from parity with the U.S. dollar. It returned to parity a few times, but since the end of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates that was agreed to in 1944, the Canadian dollar has been floating against the U.S. dollar. The silver dollars of Latin America and South East Asia began to diverge from each other as well during the course of the 20th century. The Straits dollar adopted a gold exchange standard in 1906 after it had been forced to rise in value against other silver dollars in the region. Hence, by 1935, when China and Hong Kong came off the silver standard, the Straits dollar was worth 2s 4d (11.5p approx) sterling, whereas the Hong Kong dollar was worth only 1s 3d sterling (6p approx).\n\nThe term \"dollar\" has also been adopted by other countries for currencies which do not share a common history with other dollars. Many of these currencies adopted the name after moving from a £sd-based to a decimalized monetary system. Examples include the Australian dollar, the New Zealand dollar, the Jamaican dollar, the Cayman Islands dollar, the Fiji dollar, the Namibian dollar, the Rhodesian dollar, the Zimbabwe dollar, and the Solomon Islands dollar.\nBULLET::::- The \"tala\" is based on the Samoan pronunciation of the word \"dollar\".\nBULLET::::- The Slovenian tolar had the same etymological origin as dollar (that is, \"thaler\").\n! Currency\n!ISO 4217 code\n! Countries\n! Established\n! Preceding currency\nEast Caribbean dollar\nAustralian dollar\nBahamian dollar\nBahamian pound\nBarbadian dollar\nBelize dollar\nBermudian dollar\nBrunei dollar\n\nCanadian dollar\nCayman Islands dollar\nEast Caribbean dollar\nUnited States dollar\n2002\nFijian dollar\nEast Caribbean dollar\nGuyanese dollar\nHong Kong dollar\nJamaican dollar\nKiribati dollar along with the Australian dollar\nLiberian dollar\n\nNamibian dollar along with the South African rand\nAustralian dollar\n1966\n\nNew Zealand dollar\n\nEast Caribbean dollar\n\nSingapore dollar\nSolomon Islands dollar\nSurinamese dollar\nNew Taiwan dollar\nTrinidad and Tobago dollar\nBritish West Indies dollar\nTuvaluan dollar along with the Australian dollar\n1976\n\nUnited States dollar\nZimbabwean dollar\n\nBULLET::::- : East Caribbean dollar\nBULLET::::- : US dollar\nBULLET::::- : US dollar (alongside the pound sterling)\nBULLET::::- : Canadian dollar (alongside the krone)\nBULLET::::- : US dollar\nBULLET::::- : East Caribbean dollar\nBULLET::::- : US dollar\nBULLET::::- : Canadian dollar (alongside the euro)\nBULLET::::- : US dollar\nBULLET::::- : US dollar\n\nBULLET::::- Afghanistan: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Argentina: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Bolivia: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Cambodia: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Costa Rica: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Cuba: Canadian dollar\nBULLET::::- Guatemala: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Lebanon: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Macau: Hong Kong dollar\nBULLET::::- Maldives: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Myanmar: US dollar\nBULLET::::- North Korea: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Panama: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Paraguay: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Peru: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Philippines: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Uruguay: US dollar\nBULLET::::- Venezuela: US dollar\n\nBULLET::::- Confederate States of America: The Confederate States dollar issued from March 1861 to 1865\nBULLET::::- Ethiopia: The name \"Ethiopian dollar\" was used in the English text on the birr banknotes before the Derg takeover in 1974.\nBULLET::::- Malaysia: the Malaysian ringgit used to be called the \"Malaysian Dollar\". The surrounding territories (that is, Malaya, British North Borneo, Sarawak, Brunei, and Singapore) used several varieties of dollars (for example, Straits dollar, Malayan dollar, Sarawak dollar, British North Borneo dollar; Malaya and British Borneo dollar) before Malaya, British North Borneo, Sarawak, Singapore and Brunei gained their independence from the United Kingdom. See also for a complete list of currencies.\nBULLET::::- Sierra Leone: The Sierra Leonean dollar was used from 1791 to 1805. It was subdivided into 100 cents and was issued by the Sierra Leone Company. The dollar was pegged to sterling at a rate of 1 dollar = 4 shillings 2 pence.\nBULLET::::- Spain: the Spanish dollar is closely related to the dollars and euros used today.\nBULLET::::- Rhodesia: the Rhodesian dollar replaced the Rhodesian pound in 1970 and it was used until Zimbabwe came into being in 1980.\nBULLET::::- Republic of Texas: the Texas dollar was issued between January 1839 and September 1840.\nBULLET::::- Zimbabwe: once used the Zimbabwe dollar, but abolished it and now uses the South African rand, the US dollar, the Euro, the Pound sterling, the Botswana pula, the Chinese yuan, the Indian rupee and the Japanese yen.\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian Tire money\nBULLET::::- Disney dollars\nBULLET::::- Eurodollar\nBULLET::::- Fiat money\nBULLET::::- List of circulating currencies\nBULLET::::- North American currency union Amero\nBULLET::::- Petrodollar\nBULLET::::- United States one hundred-dollar bill\nBULLET::::- Dollar, Clackmannanshire, a town in Scotland\n\nBULLET::::- Etymonline (word history). for \"buck\"; Etymonline (word history) for \"dollar\"\nBULLET::::- Currency converter. CNNMoney.com\n"}
{"id": "8101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8101", "title": "Dutch", "text": "Dutch\n\nDutch commonly refers to:\nBULLET::::- Something of, from, or related to the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Dutch people ()\nBULLET::::- Dutch language ()\n\nDutch may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Dutch, West Virginia, a community in the United States\nBULLET::::- Pennsylvania Dutch Country\n\nBULLET::::- Germanic peoples, the original meaning of the term \"Dutch\" in English\nBULLET::::- Pennsylvania Dutch, a group of early Germanic immigrants to Pennsylvania\n\nBULLET::::- Dutch (nickname), a list of people\nBULLET::::- Johnny Dutch (born 1989), American hurdler\nBULLET::::- Dutch Schultz (1902–1935), American mobster born Arthur Simon Flegenheimer\nBULLET::::- Dutch Mantel, ring name of American retired professional wrestler Wayne Maurice Keown (born 1949)\nBULLET::::- Dutch Savage, ring name of professional wrestler and promoter Frank Stewart (1935–2013)\n\nBULLET::::- Bird's Opening, also known as the Dutch attack, a chess opening\nBULLET::::- Dutch Defence, another chess opening\n\nBULLET::::- Dutch (\"Black Lagoon\"), an African-American character from the Japanese manga and anime \"Black Lagoon\"\nBULLET::::- Alan \"Dutch\" Schaefer, protagonist of the film \"Predator\", played by Arnold Schwarzenegger\nBULLET::::- Dutch van der Linde, a character from the Red Dead series\nBULLET::::- Dutch Wagenbach, on the TV series \"The Shield\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dutch\" (film), a 1991 American comedy film starring Ed O'Neill\nBULLET::::- \"\", a 1999 biography with fictional elements by Edmund Morris\nBULLET::::- \"Dutch, the magazine\", an English-language magazine about the Netherlands and the Dutch\nBULLET::::- Dutching, in gambling, betting on more than one outcome\n\nBULLET::::- Dutch Grand Prix, a former Formula One car race\nBULLET::::- Dutch Open (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Dutch TT, a motorcycle race, part of the MotoGP World Championship\nBULLET::::- Dutch, nickname of college athletic teams of Central College, Pella, Iowa\nBULLET::::- Dutch, the mascot of the Union Dutchmen, the athletic teams of Union College\n\nBULLET::::- Deutsch (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Double Dutch (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Dutch Boy (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Dutch Hill (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Dutch oven (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Going Dutch or Dutch treat, an arrangement whereby each person in a group pays for him/herself\nBULLET::::- Netherlands (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "8102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8102", "title": "Dysprosium", "text": "Dysprosium\n\nDysprosium is a chemical element with the symbol Dy and atomic number 66. It is a rare earth element with a metallic silver luster. Dysprosium is never found in nature as a free element, though it is found in various minerals, such as xenotime. Naturally occurring dysprosium is composed of seven isotopes, the most abundant of which is Dy.\n\nDysprosium was first identified in 1886 by Paul Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran, but it was not isolated in pure form until the development of ion exchange techniques in the 1950s. Dysprosium has relatively few applications where it cannot be replaced by other chemical elements. It is used for its high thermal neutron absorption cross-section in making control rods in nuclear reactors, for its high magnetic susceptibility in data storage applications, and as a component of Terfenol-D (a magnetostrictive material). Soluble dysprosium salts are mildly toxic, while the insoluble salts are considered non-toxic.\n\nDysprosium is a rare earth element that has a metallic, bright silver luster. It is quite soft, and can be machined without sparking if overheating is avoided. Dysprosium's physical characteristics can be greatly affected by even small amounts of impurities.\n\nDysprosium and holmium have the highest magnetic strengths of the elements, especially at low temperatures. Dysprosium has a simple ferromagnetic ordering at temperatures below . Above , it turns into a helical antiferromagnetic state in which all of the atomic moments in a particular basal plane layer are parallel, and oriented at a fixed angle to the moments of adjacent layers. This unusual antiferromagnetism transforms into a disordered (paramagnetic) state at .\n\nDysprosium metal tarnishes slowly in air and burns readily to form dysprosium(III) oxide:\n\nDysprosium is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water (and quite quickly with hot water) to form dysprosium hydroxide:\n\nDysprosium metal vigorously reacts with all the halogens at above 200 °C:\n\nDysprosium dissolves readily in dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the yellow Dy(III) ions, which exist as a [Dy(OH)] complex:\n\nThe resulting compound, dysprosium(III) sulfate, is noticeably paramagnetic.\n\nDysprosium halides, such as DyF and DyBr, tend to take on a yellow color. Dysprosium oxide, also known as dysprosia, is a white powder that is highly magnetic, more so than iron oxide.\n\nDysprosium combines with various non-metals at high temperatures to form binary compounds with varying composition and oxidation states +3 and sometimes +2, such as DyN, DyP, DyH and DyH; DyS, DyS, DyS and DyS; DyB, DyB, DyB and DyB, as well as DyC and DyC.\n\nDysprosium carbonate, Dy(CO), and dysprosium sulfate, Dy(SO), result from similar reactions. Most dysprosium compounds are soluble in water, though dysprosium carbonate tetrahydrate (Dy(CO)·4HO) and dysprosium oxalate decahydrate (Dy(CO)·10HO) are both insoluble in water. Two of the most abundant dysprosium carbonates, tengerite-(Dy) (Dy(CO)·2–3HO) and kozoite-(Dy) (DyCO(OH)) are known to form via a poorly ordered (amorphous) precursor phase with a formula of Dy(CO)·4HO. This amorphous precursor consists of highly hydrated spherical nanoparticles of 10–20 nm diameter that are exceptionally stable under dry treatment at ambient and high temperatures.\n\nNaturally occurring dysprosium is composed of seven isotopes: Dy, Dy, Dy, Dy, Dy, Dy, and Dy. These are all considered stable, although Dy can theoretically undergo alpha decay with a half-life of over 1×10 years. Of the naturally occurring isotopes, Dy is the most abundant at 28%, followed by Dy at 26%. The least abundant is Dy at 0.06%.\n\nTwenty-nine radioisotopes have also been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 138 to 173. The most stable of these is Dy, with a half-life of approximately 3 years, followed by Dy with a half-life of 144.4 days. The least stable is Dy, with a half-life of 200 ms. As a general rule, isotopes that are lighter than the stable isotopes tend to decay primarily by β decay, while those that are heavier tend to decay by β decay. However, Dy decays primarily by alpha decay, and Dy and Dy decay primarily by electron capture. Dysprosium also has at least 11 metastable isomers, ranging in atomic mass from 140 to 165. The most stable of these is Dy, which has a half-life of 1.257 minutes. Dy has two metastable isomers, the second of which, Dy, has a half-life of 28 ns.\n\nIn 1878, erbium ores were found to contain the oxides of holmium and thulium. French chemist Paul Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran, while working with holmium oxide, separated dysprosium oxide from it in Paris in 1886. His procedure for isolating the dysprosium involved dissolving dysprosium oxide in acid, then adding ammonia to precipitate the hydroxide. He was only able to isolate dysprosium from its oxide after more than 30 attempts at his procedure. On succeeding, he named the element \"dysprosium\" from the Greek \"dysprositos\" (δυσπρόσιτος), meaning \"hard to get\". The element was not isolated in relatively pure form until after the development of ion exchange techniques by Frank Spedding at Iowa State University in the early 1950s.\n\nDue to its role in permanent magnets used for wind turbines, it has been argued that dysprosium will be one of the main objects of geopolitical competition in a world running on renewable energy. But this perspective has been criticised for failing to recognise that most wind turbines do not use permanent magnets and for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production.\n\nWhile dysprosium is never encountered as a free element, it is found in many minerals, including xenotime, fergusonite, gadolinite, euxenite, polycrase, blomstrandine, monazite and bastnäsite, often with erbium and holmium or other rare earth elements. No dysprosium-dominant mineral (that is, with dysprosium prevailing over other rare earths in the composition) has yet been found.\n\nIn the high-yttrium version of these, dysprosium happens to be the most abundant of the heavy lanthanides, comprising up to 7–8% of the concentrate (as compared to about 65% for yttrium). The concentration of Dy in the Earth's crust is about 5.2 mg/kg and in sea water 0.9 ng/L.\n\nDysprosium is obtained primarily from monazite sand, a mixture of various phosphates. The metal is obtained as a by-product in the commercial extraction of yttrium. In isolating dysprosium, most of the unwanted metals can be removed magnetically or by a flotation process. Dysprosium can then be separated from other rare earth metals by an ion exchange displacement process. The resulting dysprosium ions can then react with either fluorine or chlorine to form dysprosium fluoride, DyF, or dysprosium chloride, DyCl. These compounds can be reduced using either calcium or lithium metals in the following reactions:\n\nThe components are placed in a tantalum crucible and fired in a helium atmosphere. As the reaction progresses, the resulting halide compounds and molten dysprosium separate due to differences in density. When the mixture cools, the dysprosium can be cut away from the impurities.\n\nAbout 100 tonnes of dysprosium are produced worldwide each year, with 99% of that total produced in China. Dysprosium prices have climbed nearly twentyfold, from $7 per pound in 2003, to $130 a pound in late 2010. The price increased to $1,400/kg in 2011 but fell to $240 in 2015, largely due to illegal production in China which circumvented government restrictions.\n\nCurrently, most dysprosium is being obtained from the ion-adsorption clay ores of southern China. the Browns Range Project pilot plant, 160 km south east of Halls Creek, Western Australia is producing per annum.\n\nAccording to the United States Department of Energy, the wide range of its current and projected uses, together with the lack of any immediately suitable replacement, makes dysprosium the single most critical element for emerging clean energy technologies - even their most conservative projections predict a shortfall of dysprosium before 2015. As of late 2015, there is a nascent rare earth (including dysprosium) extraction industry in Australia.\n\nDysprosium is used, in conjunction with vanadium and other elements, in making laser materials and commercial lighting. Because of dysprosium's high thermal-neutron absorption cross-section, dysprosium-oxide–nickel cermets are used in neutron-absorbing control rods in nuclear reactors. Dysprosium–cadmium chalcogenides are sources of infrared radiation, which is useful for studying chemical reactions. Because dysprosium and its compounds are highly susceptible to magnetization, they are employed in various data-storage applications, such as in hard disks. Dysprosium is increasingly in demand for the permanent magnets used in electric car motors and wind turbine generators.\n\nNeodymium–iron–boron magnets can have up to 6% of the neodymium substituted by dysprosium to raise the coercivity for demanding applications, such as drive motors for electric vehicles and generators for wind turbines. This substitution would require up to 100 grams of dysprosium per electric car produced. Based on Toyota's projected 2 million units per year, the use of dysprosium in applications such as this would quickly exhaust its available supply. The dysprosium substitution may also be useful in other applications because it improves the corrosion resistance of the magnets.\n\nDysprosium is one of the components of Terfenol-D, along with iron and terbium. Terfenol-D has the highest room-temperature magnetostriction of any known material; which is employed in transducers, wide-band mechanical resonators, and high-precision liquid-fuel injectors.\n\nDysprosium is used in dosimeters for measuring ionizing radiation. Crystals of calcium sulfate or calcium fluoride are doped with dysprosium. When these crystals are exposed to radiation, the dysprosium atoms become excited and luminescent. The luminescence can be measured to determine the degree of exposure to which the dosimeter has been subjected.\n\nNanofibers of dysprosium compounds have high strength and a large surface area. Therefore, they can be used to reinforce other materials and act as a catalyst. Fibers of dysprosium oxide fluoride can be produced by heating an aqueous solution of DyBr and NaF to 450 °C at 450 bars for 17 hours. This material is remarkably robust, surviving over 100 hours in various aqueous solutions at temperatures exceeding 400 °C without redissolving or aggregating.\n\nDysprosium iodide and dysprosium bromide are used in high-intensity metal-halide lamps. These compounds dissociate near the hot center of the lamp, releasing isolated dysprosium atoms. The latter re-emit light in the green and red part of the spectrum, thereby effectively producing bright light.\n\nSeveral paramagnetic crystal salts of dysprosium (Dysprosium Gallium Garnet, DGG; Dysprosium Aluminum Garnet, DAG; Dysprosium Iron Garnet, DyIG) are used in adiabatic demagnetization refrigerators.\n\nThe trivalent dysprosium ion (Dy) has been studied due its downshifting luminescence properties. Dy-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (YAG:Dy) excited in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum results in the emission of photons of longer wavelength in the visible region. This idea is the basis for a new generation of UV-pumped white light emitting diodes.\n\nLike many powders, dysprosium powder may present an explosion hazard when mixed with air and when an ignition source is present. Thin foils of the substance can also be ignited by sparks or by static electricity. Dysprosium fires cannot be put out by water. It can react with water to produce flammable hydrogen gas. Dysprosium chloride fires, however, can be extinguished with water, while dysprosium fluoride and dysprosium oxide are non-flammable. Dysprosium nitrate, Dy(NO), is a strong oxidizing agent and will readily ignite on contact with organic substances.\n\nSoluble dysprosium salts, such as dysprosium chloride and dysprosium nitrate, are mildly toxic when ingested. Based on the toxicity of dysprosium chloride to mice, it is estimated that the ingestion of 500 grams or more could be fatal to a human. The insoluble salts, however, are non-toxic.\n\nBULLET::::- It's Elemental – Dysprosium\n"}
{"id": "8103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8103", "title": "Deforestation", "text": "Deforestation\n\nDeforestation, clearance, clearcutting or clearing is the removal of a forest or stand of trees from land which is then converted to a non-forest use. Deforestation can involve conversion of forest land to farms, ranches, or urban use. The most concentrated deforestation occurs in tropical rainforests. About 31% of Earth's land surface is covered by forests. \n\nDeforestation has many causes: trees can be cut down to be used for building or sold as fuel (sometimes in the form of charcoal or timber), while cleared land can be used as pasture for livestock and plantation. Disregard of ascribed value, lax forest management, and deficient environmental laws are some of the factors that lead to large-scale deforestation. In many countries, deforestation—both naturally occurring and human-induced—is an ongoing issue. Between 2000 and 2012, of forests around the world were cut down. As of 2005, net deforestation rates had ceased to increase in countries with a per capita GDP of at least US$4,600. \n\nThe removal of trees without sufficient reforestation has resulted in habitat damage, biodiversity loss, and aridity. Deforestation causes extinction, changes to climatic conditions, desertification, and displacement of populations, as observed by current conditions and in the past through the fossil record. Deforestation also has adverse impacts on biosequestration of atmospheric carbon dioxide, increasing negative feedback cycles contributing to global warming. Global warming also puts increased pressure on communities who seek food security by clearing forests for agricultural use and reducing arable land more generally. Deforested regions typically incur significant other environmental effects such as adverse soil erosion and degradation into wasteland. \n\nDeforestation is more extreme in tropical and subtropical forests in emerging economies. More than half of all plant and land animal species in the world live in tropical forests. As a result of deforestation, only remain of the original of tropical rainforest that formerly covered the Earth. An area the size of a football pitch is cleared from the Amazon rainforest every minute, with of rainforest cleared for animal agriculture overall. More than 3.6 million hectares of virgin tropical forest was lost in 2018.\n\nAccording to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) secretariat, the overwhelming direct cause of deforestation is agriculture. Subsistence farming is responsible for 48% of deforestation; commercial agriculture is responsible for 32%; logging is responsible for 14%, and fuel wood removals make up 5%.\n\nExperts do not agree on whether industrial logging is an important contributor to global deforestation. Some argue that poor people are more likely to clear forest because they have no alternatives, others that the poor lack the ability to pay for the materials and labour needed to clear forest. One study found that population increases due to high fertility rates were a primary driver of tropical deforestation in only 8% of cases.\n\nOther causes of contemporary deforestation may include corruption of government institutions, the inequitable distribution of wealth and power, population growth and overpopulation, and urbanization. Globalization is often viewed as another root cause of deforestation, though there are cases in which the impacts of globalization (new flows of labor, capital, commodities, and ideas) have promoted localized forest recovery.\n\nAnother cause of deforestation is climate change. 23% of tree cover losses result from wildfires and climate change increase their frequency and power. The rising temperatures cause massive wildfires especially in the Boreal forests. One possible effect is the change of the forest composition.\nIn 2000 the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) found that \"the role of population dynamics in a local setting may vary from decisive to negligible\", and that deforestation can result from \"a combination of population pressure and stagnating economic, social and technological conditions\".\n\nThe degradation of forest ecosystems has also been traced to economic incentives that make forest conversion appear more profitable than forest conservation. Many important forest functions have no markets, and hence, no economic value that is readily apparent to the forests' owners or the communities that rely on forests for their well-being. From the perspective of the developing world, the benefits of forest as carbon sinks or biodiversity reserves go primarily to richer developed nations and there is insufficient compensation for these services. Developing countries feel that some countries in the developed world, such as the United States of America, cut down their forests centuries ago and benefited economically from this deforestation, and that it is hypocritical to deny developing countries the same opportunities, i.e. that the poor should not have to bear the cost of preservation when the rich created the problem.\n\nSome commentators have noted a shift in the drivers of deforestation over the past 30 years. Whereas deforestation was primarily driven by subsistence activities and government-sponsored development projects like transmigration in countries like Indonesia and colonization in Latin America, India, Java, and so on, during the late 19th century and the earlier half of the 20th century, by the 1990s the majority of deforestation was caused by industrial factors, including extractive industries, large-scale cattle ranching, and extensive agriculture. Since 2001, commodity-driven deforestation, which is more likely to be permanent, has accounted for about a quarter of all forest disturbance, and this loss has been concentrated in South America and Southeast Asia.\n\nDeforestation is ongoing and is shaping climate and geography.\n\nDeforestation is a contributor to global warming, and is often cited as one of the major causes of the enhanced greenhouse effect. Tropical deforestation is responsible for approximately 20% of world greenhouse gas emissions. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change deforestation, mainly in tropical areas, could account for up to one-third of total anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. But recent calculations suggest that carbon dioxide emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (excluding peatland emissions) contribute about 12% of total anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions with a range from 6% to 17%. Deforestation causes carbon dioxide to linger in the atmosphere. As carbon dioxide accrues, it produces a layer in the atmosphere that traps radiation from the sun. The radiation converts to heat which causes global warming, which is better known as the greenhouse effect. Plants remove carbon in the form of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during the process of photosynthesis, but release some carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere during normal respiration. Only when actively growing can a tree or forest remove carbon, by storing it in plant tissues. Both the decay and the burning of wood release much of this stored carbon back into the atmosphere. Although an accumulation of wood is generally necessary for carbon sequestration, in some forests the network of symbiotic fungi that surround the trees' roots can store a significant amount of carbon, storing it underground even if the tree which supplied it dies and decays, or is harvested and burned. Another way carbon can be sequestered by forests is for the wood to be harvested and turned into long-lived products, with new young trees replacing them. Deforestation may also cause carbon stores held in soil to be released. Forests can be either sinks or sources depending upon environmental circumstances. Mature forests alternate between being net sinks and net sources of carbon dioxide (see carbon dioxide sink and carbon cycle).\n\nIn deforested areas, the land heats up faster and reaches a higher temperature, leading to localized upward motions that enhance the formation of clouds and ultimately produce more rainfall. However, according to the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, the models used to investigate remote responses to tropical deforestation showed a broad but mild temperature increase all through the tropical atmosphere. The model predicted <0.2 °C warming for upper air at 700 mb and 500 mb. However, the model shows no significant changes in other areas besides the Tropics. Though the model showed no significant changes to the climate in areas other than the Tropics, this may not be the case since the model has possible errors and the results are never absolutely definite. Deforestation affects wind flows,\nwater vapour flows and absorption of solar energy thus clearly influencing local and global climate. \n\nReducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) in developing countries has emerged as a new potential to complement ongoing climate policies. The idea consists in providing financial compensations for the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from deforestation and forest degradation\". REDD can be seen as an alternative to the emissions trading system as in the latter, polluters must pay for permits for the right to emit certain pollutants (i.e. CO2).\n\nRainforests are widely believed by laymen to contribute a significant amount of the world's oxygen, although it is now accepted by scientists that rainforests contribute little net oxygen to the atmosphere and deforestation has only a minor effect on atmospheric oxygen levels. However, the incineration and burning of forest plants to clear land releases large amounts of CO, which contributes to global warming. Scientists also state that tropical deforestation releases 1.5 billion tons of carbon each year into the atmosphere.\n\nThe water cycle is also affected by deforestation. Trees extract groundwater through their roots and release it into the atmosphere. When part of a forest is removed, the trees no longer transpire this water, resulting in a much drier climate. Deforestation reduces the content of water in the soil and groundwater as well as atmospheric moisture. The dry soil leads to lower water intake for the trees to extract. Deforestation reduces soil cohesion, so that erosion, flooding and landslides ensue.\n\nShrinking forest cover lessens the landscape's capacity to intercept, retain and transpire precipitation. Instead of trapping precipitation, which then percolates to groundwater systems, deforested areas become sources of surface water runoff, which moves much faster than subsurface flows. Forests return most of the water that falls as precipitation to the atmosphere by transpiration. In contrast, when an area is deforested, almost all precipitation is lost as run-off. That quicker transport of surface water can translate into flash flooding and more localized floods than would occur with the forest cover. Deforestation also contributes to decreased evapotranspiration, which lessens atmospheric moisture which in some cases affects precipitation levels downwind from the deforested area, as water is not recycled to downwind forests, but is lost in runoff and returns directly to the oceans. According to one study, in deforested north and northwest China, the average annual precipitation decreased by one third between the 1950s and the 1980s.\nTrees, and plants in general, affect the water cycle significantly:\nBULLET::::- their canopies intercept a proportion of precipitation, which is then evaporated back to the atmosphere (canopy interception);\nBULLET::::- their litter, stems and trunks slow down surface runoff;\nBULLET::::- their roots create macropores – large conduits – in the soil that increase infiltration of water;\nBULLET::::- they contribute to terrestrial evaporation and reduce soil moisture via transpiration;\nBULLET::::- their litter and other organic residue change soil properties that affect the capacity of soil to store water.\nBULLET::::- their leaves control the humidity of the atmosphere by transpiring. 99% of the water absorbed by the roots moves up to the leaves and is transpired.\nAs a result, the presence or absence of trees can change the quantity of water on the surface, in the soil or groundwater, or in the atmosphere. This in turn changes erosion rates and the availability of water for either ecosystem functions or human services. Deforestation on lowland plains moves cloud formation and rainfall to higher elevations.\n\nThe forest may have little impact on flooding in the case of large rainfall events, which overwhelm the storage capacity of forest soil if the soils are at or close to saturation.\n\nTropical rainforests produce about 30% of our planet's fresh water.\n\nDeforestation disrupts normal weather patterns creating hotter and drier weather thus increasing drought, desertification, crop failures, melting of the polar ice caps, coastal flooding and displacement of major vegetation regimes.\n\nDue to surface plant litter, forests that are undisturbed have a minimal rate of erosion. The rate of erosion occurs from deforestation, because it decreases the amount of litter cover, which provides protection from surface runoff. The rate of erosion is around 2 metric tons per square kilometre. This can be an advantage in excessively leached tropical rain forest soils. Forestry operations themselves also increase erosion through the development of (forest) roads and the use of mechanized equipment.\n\nDeforestation in China's Loess Plateau many years ago has led to soil erosion; this erosion has led to valleys opening up. The increase of soil in the runoff causes the Yellow River to flood and makes it yellow colored.\n\nGreater erosion is not always a consequence of deforestation, as observed in the southwestern regions of the US. In these areas, the loss of grass due to the presence of trees and other shrubbery leads to more erosion than when trees are removed.\n\nSoils are reinforced by the presence of trees, which secure the soil by binding their roots to soil bedrock. Due to deforestation, the removal of trees causes sloped lands to be more susceptible to landslides.\n\nDeforestation on a human scale results in decline in biodiversity, and on a natural global scale is known to cause the extinction of many species. The removal or destruction of areas of forest cover has resulted in a degraded environment with reduced biodiversity. Forests support biodiversity, providing habitat for wildlife; moreover, forests foster medicinal conservation. With forest biotopes being irreplaceable source of new drugs (such as taxol), deforestation can destroy genetic variations (such as crop resistance) irretrievably.\n\nSince the tropical rainforests are the most diverse ecosystems on Earth and about 80% of the world's known biodiversity could be found in tropical rainforests, removal or destruction of significant areas of forest cover has resulted in a degraded environment with reduced biodiversity. A study in Rondônia, Brazil, has shown that deforestation also removes the microbial community which is involved in the recycling of nutrients, the production of clean water and the removal of pollutants.\n\nIt has been estimated that we are losing 137 plant, animal and insect species every single day due to rainforest deforestation, which equates to 50,000 species a year. Others state that tropical rainforest deforestation is contributing to the ongoing Holocene mass extinction. The known extinction rates from deforestation rates are very low, approximately 1 species per year from mammals and birds which extrapolates to approximately 23,000 species per year for all species. Predictions have been made that more than 40% of the animal and plant species in Southeast Asia could be wiped out in the 21st century. Such predictions were called into question by 1995 data that show that within regions of Southeast Asia much of the original forest has been converted to monospecific plantations, but that potentially endangered species are few and tree flora remains widespread and stable.\n\nScientific understanding of the process of extinction is insufficient to accurately make predictions about the impact of deforestation on biodiversity. Most predictions of forestry related biodiversity loss are based on species-area models, with an underlying assumption that as the forest declines species diversity will decline similarly. However, many such models have been proven to be wrong and loss of habitat does not necessarily lead to large scale loss of species. Species-area models are known to overpredict the number of species known to be threatened in areas where actual deforestation is ongoing, and greatly overpredict the number of threatened species that are widespread.\n\nA recent study of the Brazilian Amazon predicts that despite a lack of extinctions thus far, up to 90 percent of predicted extinctions will finally occur in the next 40 years.\n\nDamage to forests and other aspects of nature could halve living standards for the world's poor and reduce global GDP by about 7% by 2050, a report concluded at the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) meeting in Bonn in 2008. Historically, utilization of forest products, including timber and fuel wood, has played a key role in human societies, comparable to the roles of water and cultivable land. Today, developed countries continue to utilize timber for building houses, and wood pulp for paper. In developing countries, almost three billion people rely on wood for heating and cooking.\n\nThe forest products industry is a large part of the economy in both developed and developing countries. Short-term economic gains made by conversion of forest to agriculture, or over-exploitation of wood products, typically leads to a loss of long-term income and long-term biological productivity. West Africa, Madagascar, Southeast Asia and many other regions have experienced lower revenue because of declining timber harvests. Illegal logging causes billions of dollars of losses to national economies annually.\n\nThe new procedures to get amounts of wood are causing more harm to the economy and overpower the amount of money spent by people employed in logging. According to a study, \"in most areas studied, the various ventures that prompted deforestation rarely generated more than US$5 for every ton of carbon they released and frequently returned far less than US$1\". The price on the European market for an offset tied to a one-ton reduction in carbon is 23 euro (about US$35).\n\nRapidly growing economies also have an effect on deforestation. Most pressure will come from the world's developing countries, which have the fastest-growing populations and most rapid economic (industrial) growth. In 1995, economic growth in developing countries reached nearly 6%, compared with the 2% growth rate for developed countries. As our human population grows, new homes, communities, and expansions of cities will occur. Connecting all of the new expansions will be roads, a very important part in our daily life. Rural roads promote economic development but also facilitate deforestation. About 90% of the deforestation has occurred within 100 km of roads in most parts of the Amazon.\n\nThe European Union is one of the largest importer of products made from illegal deforestation.\n\nThe forest area change may follow a pattern suggested by the forest transition (FT) theory, whereby at early stages in its development a country is characterized by high forest cover and low deforestation rates (HFLD countries).\n\nThen deforestation rates accelerate (HFHD, high forest cover – high deforestation rate), and forest cover is reduced (LFHD, low forest cover – high deforestation rate), before the deforestation rate slows (LFLD, low forest cover – low deforestation rate), after which forest cover stabilizes and eventually starts recovering. FT is not a \"law of nature\", and the pattern is influenced by national context (for example, human population density, stage of development, structure of the economy), global economic forces, and government policies. A country may reach very low levels of forest cover before it stabilizes, or it might through good policies be able to “bridge” the forest transition.\n\nFT depicts a broad trend, and an extrapolation of historical rates therefore tends to underestimate future BAU deforestation for counties at the early stages in the transition (HFLD), while it tends to overestimate BAU deforestation for countries at the later stages (LFHD and LFLD).\n\nCountries with high forest cover can be expected to be at early stages of the FT. GDP per capita captures the stage in a country's economic development, which is linked to the pattern of natural resource use, including forests. The choice of forest cover and GDP per capita also fits well with the two key scenarios in the FT:\n\n(i) a forest scarcity path, where forest scarcity triggers forces (for example, higher prices of forest products) that lead to forest cover stabilization; and\n\n(ii) an economic development path, where new and better off-farm employment opportunities associated with economic growth (= increasing GDP per capita) reduce the profitability of frontier agriculture and slows deforestation.\n\nThe Carboniferous Rainforest Collapse was an event that occurred 300 million years ago. Climate change devastated tropical rainforests causing the extinction of many plant and animal species. The change was abrupt, specifically, at this time climate became cooler and drier, conditions that are not favorable to the growth of rainforests and much of the biodiversity within them. Rainforests were fragmented forming shrinking 'islands' further and further apart. Populations such as the sub class Lissamphibia were devastated, whereas Reptilia survived the collapse. The surviving organisms were better adapted to the drier environment left behind and served as legacies in succession after the collapse.\nRainforests once covered 14% of the earth's land surface; now they cover a mere 6% and experts estimate that the last remaining rainforests could be consumed in less than 40 years.\nSmall scale deforestation was practiced by some societies for tens of thousands of years before the beginnings of civilization. The first evidence of deforestation appears in the Mesolithic period. It was probably used to convert closed forests into more open ecosystems favourable to game animals. With the advent of agriculture, larger areas began to be deforested, and fire became the prime tool to clear land for crops. In Europe there is little solid evidence before 7000 BC. Mesolithic foragers used fire to create openings for red deer and wild boar. In Great Britain, shade-tolerant species such as oak and ash are replaced in the pollen record by hazels, brambles, grasses and nettles. Removal of the forests led to decreased transpiration, resulting in the formation of upland peat bogs. Widespread decrease in elm pollen across Europe between 8400–8300 BC and 7200–7000 BC, starting in southern Europe and gradually moving north to Great Britain, may represent land clearing by fire at the onset of Neolithic agriculture.\n\nThe Neolithic period saw extensive deforestation for farming land. Stone axes were being made from about 3000 BC not just from flint, but from a wide variety of hard rocks from across Britain and North America as well. They include the noted Langdale axe industry in the English Lake District, quarries developed at Penmaenmawr in North Wales and numerous other locations. Rough-outs were made locally near the quarries, and some were polished locally to give a fine finish. This step not only increased the mechanical strength of the axe, but also made penetration of wood easier. Flint was still used from sources such as Grimes Graves but from many other mines across Europe.\n\nEvidence of deforestation has been found in Minoan Crete; for example the environs of the Palace of Knossos were severely deforested in the Bronze Age.\n\nThroughout prehistory, humans were hunter gatherers who hunted within forests. In most areas, such as the Amazon, the tropics, Central America, and the Caribbean, only after shortages of wood and other forest products occur are policies implemented to ensure forest resources are used in a sustainable manner.\n\nThree regional studies of historic erosion and alluviation in ancient Greece found that, wherever adequate evidence exists, a major phase of erosion follows the introduction of farming in the various regions of Greece by about 500-1,000 years, ranging from the later Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age. The thousand years following the mid-first millennium BC saw serious, intermittent pulses of soil erosion in numerous places. The historic silting of ports along the southern coasts of Asia Minor (\"e.g.\" Clarus, and the examples of Ephesus, Priene and Miletus, where harbors had to be abandoned because of the silt deposited by the Meander) and in coastal Syria during the last centuries BC.\n\nEaster Island has suffered from heavy soil erosion in recent centuries, aggravated by agriculture and deforestation. Jared Diamond gives an extensive look into the collapse of the ancient Easter Islanders in his book \"Collapse\". The disappearance of the island's trees seems to coincide with a decline of its civilization around the 17th and 18th century. He attributed the collapse to deforestation and over-exploitation of all resources.\n\nThe famous silting up of the harbor for Bruges, which moved port commerce to Antwerp, also followed a period of increased settlement growth (and apparently of deforestation) in the upper river basins. In early medieval Riez in upper Provence, alluvial silt from two small rivers raised the riverbeds and widened the floodplain, which slowly buried the Roman settlement in alluvium and gradually moved new construction to higher ground; concurrently the headwater valleys above Riez were being opened to pasturage.\n\nA typical progress trap was that cities were often built in a forested area, which would provide wood for some industry (for example, construction, shipbuilding, pottery). When deforestation occurs without proper replanting, however; local wood supplies become difficult to obtain near enough to remain competitive, leading to the city's abandonment, as happened repeatedly in Ancient Asia Minor. Because of fuel needs, mining and metallurgy often led to deforestation and city abandonment.\n\nWith most of the population remaining active in (or indirectly dependent on) the agricultural sector, the main pressure in most areas remained land clearing for crop and cattle farming. Enough wild green was usually left standing (and partially used, for example, to collect firewood, timber and fruits, or to graze pigs) for wildlife to remain viable. The elite's (nobility and higher clergy) protection of their own hunting privileges and game often protected significant woodland.\n\nMajor parts in the spread (and thus more durable growth) of the population were played by monastical 'pioneering' (especially by the Benedictine and Commercial orders) and some feudal lords' recruiting farmers to settle (and become tax payers) by offering relatively good legal and fiscal conditions. Even when speculators sought to encourage towns, settlers needed an agricultural belt around or sometimes within defensive walls. When populations were quickly decreased by causes such as the Black Death, the colonization of the Americas, or devastating warfare (for example, Genghis Khan's Mongol hordes in eastern and central Europe, Thirty Years' War in Germany), this could lead to settlements being abandoned. The land was reclaimed by nature, but the secondary forests usually lacked the original biodiversity. The Mongol invasions and conquests alone resulted in the reduction of 700 million tons of carbon from the atmosphere by enabling the re-growth of carbon-absorbing forests on depopulated lands over a significant period of time.\n\nFrom 1100 to 1500 AD, significant deforestation took place in Western Europe as a result of the expanding human population. The large-scale building of wooden sailing ships by European (coastal) naval owners since the 15th century for exploration, colonisation, slave trade–and other trade on the high seas consumed many forest resources. Piracy also contributed to the over harvesting of forests, as in Spain. This led to a weakening of the domestic economy after Columbus' discovery of America, as the economy became dependent on colonial activities (plundering, mining, cattle, plantations, trade, etc.)\n\nIn \"Changes In the Land\" (1983), William Cronon analyzed and documented 17th-century English colonists' reports of increased seasonal flooding in New England during the period when new settlers initially cleared the forests for agriculture. They believed flooding was linked to widespread forest clearing upstream.\n\nThe massive use of charcoal on an industrial scale in Early Modern Europe was a new type of consumption of western forests; even in Stuart England, the relatively primitive production of charcoal has already reached an impressive level. Stuart England was so widely deforested that it depended on the Baltic trade for ship timbers, and looked to the untapped forests of New England to supply the need. Each of Nelson's Royal Navy war ships at Trafalgar (1805) required 6,000 mature oaks for its construction. In France, Colbert planted oak forests to supply the French navy in the future. When the oak plantations matured in the mid-19th century, the masts were no longer required because shipping had changed.\n\nNorman F. Cantor's summary of the effects of late medieval deforestation applies equally well to Early Modern Europe:\nIn the 19th century, introduction of steamboats in the United States was the cause of deforestation of banks of major rivers, such as the Mississippi River, with increased and more severe flooding one of the environmental results. The steamboat crews cut wood every day from the riverbanks to fuel the steam engines. Between St. Louis and the confluence with the Ohio River to the south, the Mississippi became more wide and shallow, and changed its channel laterally. Attempts to improve navigation by the use of snag pullers often resulted in crews' clearing large trees 100 to back from the banks. Several French colonial towns of the Illinois Country, such as Kaskaskia, Cahokia and St. Philippe, Illinois, were flooded and abandoned in the late 19th century, with a loss to the cultural record of their archeology.\n\nThe wholescale clearance of woodland to create agricultural land can be seen in many parts of the world, such as the Central forest-grasslands transition and other areas of the Great Plains of the United States. Specific parallels are seen in the 20th-century deforestation occurring in many developing nations.\n\nGlobal deforestation sharply accelerated around 1852. It has been estimated that about half of the Earth's mature tropical forests—between 7.5 million and 8 million km (2.9 million to 3 million sq mi) of the original 15 million to 16 million km (5.8 million to 6.2 million sq mi) that until 1947 covered the planet—have now been destroyed. Some scientists have predicted that unless significant measures (such as seeking out and protecting old growth forests that have not been disturbed) are taken on a worldwide basis, by 2030 there will only be 10% remaining, with another 10% in a degraded condition. 80% will have been lost, and with them hundreds of thousands of irreplaceable species. Some cartographers have attempted to illustrate the sheer scale of deforestation by country using a cartogram.\n\nEstimates vary widely as to the extent of tropical deforestation. Over a 50-year period, percentage of land cover by tropical rainforests has decreased by 50%. Where total land coverage by tropical rainforests decreased from 14% to 6%. A large contribution to this loss can be identified between 1960 and 1990, when 20% of all tropical rainforests were destroyed. At this rate, extinction of such forests is projected to occur by the mid 21st century.\n\nA 2002 analysis of satellite imagery suggested that the rate of deforestation in the humid tropics (approximately 5.8 million hectares per year) was roughly 23% lower than the most commonly quoted rates. Conversely, a newer analysis of satellite images reveals that deforestation of the Amazon rainforest is twice as fast as scientists previously estimated. Deforestation in Brazil increased by 88% for the month of June 2019, as compared with the previous year. Some 80% of the deforestation of the Amazon can be attributed to cattle ranching, as Brazil is the largest exporter of beef in the world. The Amazon region has become one of the largest cattle ranching territories in the world. \n\nSome have argued that deforestation trends may follow a Kuznets curve, which if true would nonetheless fail to eliminate the risk of irreversible loss of non-economic forest values (for example, the extinction of species).\n\nA 2005 report by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimated that although the Earth's total forest area continued to decrease at about 13 million hectares per year, the global rate of deforestation has recently been slowing. The 2016 report by the FAO reports from 2010 to 2015 there was a worldwide decrease in forest area of 3.3 million ha per year. During this five-year period, the biggest forest area loss occurred in the tropics, particularly in South America and Africa. Per capita forest area decline was also greatest in the tropics and subtropics but is occurring in every climatic domain (except in the temperate) as populations increase.\n\nOthers claim that rainforests are being destroyed at an ever-quickening pace. The London-based Rainforest Foundation notes that \"the UN figure is based on a definition of forest as being an area with as little as 10% actual tree cover, which would therefore include areas that are actually savannah-like ecosystems and badly damaged forests\". Other critics of the FAO data point out that they do not distinguish between forest types, and that they are based largely on reporting from forestry departments of individual countries, which do not take into account unofficial activities like illegal logging.\n\nDespite these uncertainties, there is agreement that destruction of rainforests remains a significant environmental problem. Up to 90% of West Africa's coastal rainforests have disappeared since 1900.\nIn South Asia, about 88% of the rainforests have been lost. Much of what remains of the world's rainforests is in the Amazon basin, where the Amazon Rainforest covers approximately 4 million square kilometres. The regions with the highest tropical deforestation rate between 2000 and 2005 were Central America—which lost 1.3% of its forests each year—and tropical Asia. In Central America, two-thirds of lowland tropical forests have been turned into pasture since 1950 and 40% of all the rainforests have been lost in the last 40 years. Brazil has lost 90–95% of its Mata Atlântica forest. \nParaguay was losing its natural semi humid forests in the country's western regions at a rate of 15.000 hectares at a randomly studied 2-month period in 2010, Paraguay's parliament refused in 2009 to pass a law that would have stopped cutting of natural forests altogether.\nMadagascar has lost 90% of its eastern rainforests. As of 2007, less than 50% of Haiti's forests remained. Mexico, India, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, Bangladesh, China, Sri Lanka, Laos, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Guinea, Ghana and the Ivory Coast, have lost large areas of their rainforest. Several countries, notably Brazil, have declared their deforestation a national emergency. The World Wildlife Fund's ecoregion project catalogues habitat types throughout the world, including habitat loss such as deforestation, showing for example that even in the rich forests of parts of Canada such as the Mid-Continental Canadian forests of the prairie provinces half of the forest cover has been lost or altered.\n\nRates of deforestation vary around the world.\n\nIn 2011 Conservation International listed the top 10 most endangered forests, characterized by having all lost 90% or more of their original habitat, and each harboring at least 1500 endemic plant species (species found nowhere else in the world).\n\n+ style=\"text-align:center; background:DarkGreen; color:white;\"Top 10 Most Endangered Forests 2011\n! style=\"background:LightGreen; color:Black\"Endangered forest\n! style=\"background:LightGreen; color:Black\"Region\n! style=\"background:LightGreen; color:Black\"Remaining habitat\n! style=\"background:LightGreen; color:Black\"Predominate vegetation type\n! style=\"background:LightGreen; color:Black\"Notes\n\nMain international organizations including the United Nations and the World Bank, have begun to develop programs aimed at curbing deforestation. The blanket term Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) describes these sorts of programs, which use direct monetary or other incentives to encourage developing countries to limit and/or roll back deforestation. Funding has been an issue, but at the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conference of the Parties-15 (COP-15) in Copenhagen in December 2009, an accord was reached with a collective commitment by developed countries for new and additional resources, including forestry and investments through international institutions, that will approach US$30 billion for the period 2010–2012. Significant work is underway on tools for use in monitoring developing country adherence to their agreed REDD targets. These tools, which rely on remote forest monitoring using satellite imagery and other data sources, include the Center for Global Development's FORMA (Forest Monitoring for Action) initiative and the Group on Earth Observations' Forest Carbon Tracking Portal. Methodological guidance for forest monitoring was also emphasized at COP-15. The environmental organization Avoided Deforestation Partners leads the campaign for development of REDD through funding from the U.S. government. In 2014, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and partners launched Open Foris – a set of open-source software tools that assist countries in gathering, producing and disseminating information on the state of forest resources. The tools support the inventory lifecycle, from needs assessment, design, planning, field data collection and management, estimation analysis, and dissemination. Remote sensing image processing tools are included, as well as tools for international reporting for Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) and MRV (Measurement, Reporting and Verification) and FAO's Global Forest Resource Assessments.\n\nIn evaluating implications of overall emissions reductions, countries of greatest concern are those categorized as High Forest Cover with High Rates of Deforestation (HFHD) and Low Forest Cover with High Rates of Deforestation (LFHD). Afghanistan, Benin, Botswana, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe are listed as having Low Forest Cover with High Rates of Deforestation (LFHD). Brazil, Cambodia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Malaysia, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Venezuela, Zambia are listed as High Forest Cover with High Rates of Deforestation (HFHD).\n\nControl can be made by the companies. In 2018 the biggest palm oil traider, Wilmar, decided to control his suppliers for avoid deforestation. This is an important precedent\n\nIn Bolivia, deforestation in upper river basins has caused environmental problems, including soil erosion and declining water quality. An innovative project to try and remedy this situation involves landholders in upstream areas being paid by downstream water users to conserve forests. The landholders receive US$20 to conserve the trees, avoid polluting livestock practices, and enhance the biodiversity and forest carbon on their land. They also receive US$30, which purchases a beehive, to compensate for conservation for two hectares of water-sustaining forest for five years. Honey revenue per hectare of forest is US$5 per year, so within five years, the landholder has sold US$50 of honey. The project is being conducted by Fundación Natura Bolivia and Rare Conservation, with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network.\n\nTransferring rights over land from public domain to its indigenous inhabitants is argued to be a cost effective strategy to conserve forests. This includes the protection of such rights entitled in existing laws, such as India's Forest Rights Act. The transferring of such rights in China, perhaps the largest land reform in modern times, has been argued to have increased forest cover. In Brazil, forested areas given tenure to indigenous groups have even lower rates of clearing than national parks.\n\nNew methods are being developed to farm more intensively, such as high-yield hybrid crops, greenhouse, autonomous building gardens, and hydroponics. These methods are often dependent on chemical inputs to maintain necessary yields. In cyclic agriculture, cattle are grazed on farm land that is resting and rejuvenating. Cyclic agriculture actually increases the fertility of the soil. Intensive farming can also decrease soil nutrients by consuming at an accelerated rate the trace minerals needed for crop growth. The most promising approach, however, is the concept of food forests in permaculture, which consists of agroforestal systems carefully designed to mimic natural forests, with an emphasis on plant and animal species of interest for food, timber and other uses. These systems have low dependence on fossil fuels and agro-chemicals, are highly self-maintaining, highly productive, and with strong positive impact on soil and water quality, and biodiversity.\n\nThere are multiple methods that are appropriate and reliable for reducing and monitoring deforestation. One method is the “visual interpretation of aerial photos or satellite imagery that is labor-intensive but does not require high-level training in computer image processing or extensive computational resources”. Another method includes hot-spot analysis (that is, locations of rapid change) using expert opinion or coarse resolution satellite data to identify locations for detailed digital analysis with high resolution satellite images. Deforestation is typically assessed by quantifying the amount of area deforested, measured at the present time.\nFrom an environmental point of view, quantifying the damage and its possible consequences is a more important task, while conservation efforts are more focused on forested land protection and development of land-use alternatives to avoid continued deforestation. Deforestation rate and total area deforested, have been widely used for monitoring deforestation in many regions, including the Brazilian Amazon deforestation monitoring by INPE. A global satellite view is available.\n\nEfforts to stop or slow deforestation have been attempted for many centuries because it has long been known that deforestation can cause environmental damage sufficient in some cases to cause societies to collapse. In Tonga, paramount rulers developed policies designed to prevent conflicts between short-term gains from converting forest to farmland and long-term problems forest loss would cause, while during the 17th and 18th centuries in Tokugawa, Japan, the shōguns developed a highly sophisticated system of long-term planning to stop and even reverse deforestation of the preceding centuries through substituting timber by other products and more efficient use of land that had been farmed for many centuries. In 16th-century Germany, landowners also developed silviculture to deal with the problem of deforestation. However, these policies tend to be limited to environments with \"good rainfall\", \"no dry season\" and \"very young soils\" (through volcanism or glaciation). This is because on older and less fertile soils trees grow too slowly for silviculture to be economic, whilst in areas with a strong dry season there is always a risk of forest fires destroying a tree crop before it matures.\n\nIn the areas where \"slash-and-burn\" is practiced, switching to \"slash-and-char\" would prevent the rapid deforestation and subsequent degradation of soils. The biochar thus created, given back to the soil, is not only a durable carbon sequestration method, but it also is an extremely beneficial amendment to the soil. Mixed with biomass it brings the creation of terra preta, one of the richest soils on the planet and the only one known to regenerate itself.\n\nCertification, as provided by global certification systems such as Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification and Forest Stewardship Council, contributes to tackling deforestation by creating market demand for timber from sustainably managed forests. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), \"A major condition for the adoption of sustainable forest management is a demand for products that are produced sustainably and consumer willingness to pay for the higher costs entailed. Certification represents a shift from regulatory approaches to market incentives to promote sustainable forest management. By promoting the positive attributes of forest products from sustainably managed forests, certification focuses on the demand side of environmental conservation.\" Rainforest Rescue argues that the standards of organizations like FSC are too closely connected to timber industry interests and therefore do not guarantee environmentally and socially responsible forest management. In reality, monitoring systems are inadequate and various cases of fraud have been documented worldwide.\n\nSome nations have taken steps to help increase the number of trees on Earth. In 1981, China created National Tree Planting Day Forest and forest coverage had now reached 16.55% of China's land mass, as against only 12% two decades ago.\n\nUsing fuel from bamboo rather than wood results in cleaner burning, and since bamboo matures much faster than wood, deforestation is reduced as supply can be replenished faster.\n\nIn many parts of the world, especially in East Asian countries, reforestation and afforestation are increasing the area of forested lands. The amount of woodland has increased in 22 of the world's 50 most forested nations. Asia as a whole gained 1 million hectares of forest between 2000 and 2005. Tropical forest in El Salvador expanded more than 20% between 1992 and 2001. Based on these trends, one study projects that global forestation will increase by 10%—an area the size of India—by 2050.\n\nIn the People's Republic of China, where large scale destruction of forests has occurred, the government has in the past required that every able-bodied citizen between the ages of 11 and 60 plant three to five trees per year or do the equivalent amount of work in other forest services. The government claims that at least 1 billion trees have been planted in China every year since 1982. This is no longer required today, but 12 March of every year in China is the Planting Holiday. Also, it has introduced the Green Wall of China project, which aims to halt the expansion of the Gobi desert through the planting of trees. However, due to the large percentage of trees dying off after planting (up to 75%), the project is not very successful. There has been a 47-million-hectare increase in forest area in China since the 1970s. The total number of trees amounted to be about 35 billion and 4.55% of China's land mass increased in forest coverage. The forest coverage was 12% two decades ago and now is 16.55%.\n\nAn ambitious proposal for China is the Aerially Delivered Re-forestation and Erosion Control System and the proposed Sahara Forest Project coupled with the Seawater Greenhouse.\n\nIn Western countries, increasing consumer demand for wood products that have been produced and harvested in a sustainable manner is causing forest landowners and forest industries to become increasingly accountable for their forest management and timber harvesting practices.\n\nThe Arbor Day Foundation's Rain Forest Rescue program is a charity that helps to prevent deforestation. The charity uses donated money to buy up and preserve rainforest land before the lumber companies can buy it. The Arbor Day Foundation then protects the land from deforestation. This also locks in the way of life of the primitive tribes living on the forest land. Organizations such as Community Forestry International, Cool Earth, The Nature Conservancy, World Wide Fund for Nature, Conservation International, African Conservation Foundation and Greenpeace also focus on preserving forest habitats. Greenpeace in particular has also mapped out the forests that are still intact and published this information on the internet. World Resources Institute in turn has made a simpler thematic map showing the amount of forests present just before the age of man (8000 years ago) and the current (reduced) levels of forest. These maps mark the amount of afforestation required to repair the damage caused by people.\n\nIn order to acquire the world's demand for wood, it is suggested that high yielding forest plantations are suitable according to forest writers Botkins and Sedjo. Plantations that yield 10 cubic meters per hectare a year would supply enough wood for trading of 5% of the world's existing forestland. By contrast, natural forests produce about 1–2 cubic meters per hectare; therefore, 5–10 times more forestland would be required to meet demand. Forester Chad Oliver has suggested a forest mosaic with high-yield forest lands interspersed with conservation land.\n\nGlobally, planted forests increased from 4.1% to 7.0% of the total forest area between 1990 and 2015. Plantation forests made up 280 million ha in 2015, an increase of about 40 million ha in the last ten years. Globally, planted forests consist of about 18% exotic or introduced species while the rest are species native to the country where they are planted. In South America, Oceania, and East and Southern Africa, planted forests are dominated by introduced species: 88%, 75% and 65%, respectively. In North America, West and Central Asia, and Europe the proportions of introduced species in plantations are much lower at 1%, 3% and 8% of the total area planted, respectively.\n\nIn the country of Senegal, on the western coast of Africa, a movement headed by youths has helped to plant over 6 million mangrove trees. The trees will protect local villages from storm damages and will provide a habitat for local wildlife. The project started in 2008, and already the Senegalese government has been asked to establish rules and regulations that would protect the new mangrove forests.\n\nWhile demands for agricultural and urban use for the human population cause the preponderance of deforestation, military causes can also intrude. One example of deliberate deforestation played out in the U.S. zone of occupation in Germany after World War II ended in 1945. Before the onset of the Cold War, defeated Germany was still considered a potential future threat rather than a potential future ally. To address this threat, the victorious Allies made attempts to lower German industrial potential, of which forests were deemed an element. Sources in the U.S. government admitted that the purpose of this was that the \"ultimate destruction of the war potential of German forests\". As a consequence of the practice of clear-felling, deforestation resulted which could \"be replaced only by long forestry development over perhaps a century\".\n\nOperations in war can also cause deforestation. For example, in the 1945 Battle of Okinawa, bombardment and other combat operations reduced a lush tropical landscape into \"a vast field of mud, lead, decay and maggots\".\n\nDeforestation can also result from the intentional tactics of military forces. Clearing forest became an element in the Russian Empire's successful conquest of the Caucasus in the mid-19th century.\nThe British (during the Malayan Emergency) and the United States (in the Korean War and in the Vietnam War) used defoliants (like Agent Orange or others).\n\nDeforestation eliminates a great number of species of plants and animals which also often results in an increase in disease. Loss of native species allows new species to come to dominance. Often the destruction of predatory species can result in an increase in rodent populations which can carry plague. Additionally, erosion can produce pools of stagnant water that are perfect breeding grounds for mosquitos, well known vectors of malaria, yellow fever, nipah virus, and more. Deforestation can also create a path for non-native species to flourish such as certain types of snails, which have been correlated with an increase in schistosomiasis cases.\n\nDeforestation is occurring all over the world and has been coupled with an increase in the occurrence of disease outbreaks. In Malaysia, thousands of acres of forest have been cleared for pig farms. This has resulted in an increase in the zoonosis the Nipah virus. In Kenya, deforestation has led to an increase in malaria cases which is now the leading cause of morbidity and mortality the country. A 2017 study in the \"American Economic Review\" found that deforestation substantially increased the incidence of malaria in Nigeria.\n\nAnother pathway through which deforestation affects disease is the relocation and dispersion of disease-carrying hosts. This disease emergence pathway can be called \"range expansion\", whereby the host's range (and thereby the range of pathogens) expands to new geographic areas. Through deforestation, hosts and reservoir species are forced into neighboring habitats. Accompanying the reservoir species are pathogens that have the ability to find new hosts in previously unexposed regions. As these pathogens and species come into closer contact with humans, they are infected both directly and indirectly.\n\nA catastrophic example of range expansion is the 1998 outbreak of Nipah virus in Malaysia. For a number of years, deforestation, drought, and subsequent fires led to a dramatic geographic shift and density of fruit bats, a reservoir for Nipah virus. Deforestation reduced the available fruiting trees in the bats’ habitat, and they encroached on surrounding orchards which also happened to be the location of a large number of pigsties. The bats, through proximity spread the Nipah to pigs. While the virus infected the pigs, mortality was much lower than among humans, making the pigs a virulent host leading to the transmission of the virus to humans. This resulted in 265 reported cases of encephalitis, of which 105 resulted in death. This example provides an important lesson for the impact deforestation can have on human health.\n\nAnother example of range expansion due to deforestation and other anthropogenic habitat impacts includes the Capybara rodent in Paraguay. This rodent is the host of a number of zoonotic diseases and, while there has not yet been a human-borne outbreak due to the movement of this rodent into new regions, it offers an example of how habitat destruction through deforestation and subsequent movements of species is occurring regularly.\n\nA now well-developed theory is that the spread of HIV it is at least partially due deforestation. Rising populations created a food demand and with deforestation opening up new areas of the forest the hunters harvested a great deal of primate bushmeat, which is believed to be the origin of HIV.\n\nBULLET::::- Afforestation\nBULLET::::- Agricultural expansion\nBULLET::::- Assarting\nBULLET::::- Biochar\nBULLET::::- Clearcutting\nBULLET::::- Clearing (geography)\nBULLET::::- Defaunation\nBULLET::::- Deforestation and climate change\nBULLET::::- Deforestation by region\nBULLET::::- Deforestation during the Roman period\nBULLET::::- Desertification\nBULLET::::- Ecoforestry\nBULLET::::- Economic impact analysis\nBULLET::::- Environmental issues with paper\nBULLET::::- Environmental philosophy\nBULLET::::- Extinction\nBULLET::::- CDM & JI A/R projects\nBULLET::::- Forestry\nBULLET::::- Overpopulation\nBULLET::::- Illegal logging\nBULLET::::- Intact forest landscape\nBULLET::::- International Year of Forests\nBULLET::::- Land degradation\nBULLET::::- Land use, land-use change and forestry\nBULLET::::- Lumberjack\nBULLET::::- Moisture recycling\nBULLET::::- Mountaintop removal\nBULLET::::- Natural landscape\nBULLET::::- Neolithic\nBULLET::::- Proforestation\nBULLET::::- Rainforest\nBULLET::::- Richard St. Barbe Baker\nBULLET::::- Satoyama\nBULLET::::- Slash-and-burn\nBULLET::::- Slash-and-char\nBULLET::::- Terra preta\nBULLET::::- Wilderness\nBULLET::::- World Forestry Congress\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\nBULLET::::- General references\n\nBULLET::::- BBC 2005 TV series on the history of geological factors shaping human history (name?)\nBULLET::::- \"A Natural History of Europe\" – 2005 co-production including BBC and ZDF\nBULLET::::- Runyan, C.W., and D'Odorico, P. (2016) \"Global Deforestation\", Cambridge University Press, New York.\nBULLET::::- Whitney, Gordon G. (1996). \"From Coastal Wilderness to Fruited Plain : A History of Environmental Change in Temperate North America from 1500 to the Present\". Cambridge University Press.\nBULLET::::- Williams, Michael. (2003). \"Deforesting the Earth\". University of Chicago Press, Chicago.\nBULLET::::- Wunder, Sven. (2000). \"The Economics of Deforestation: The Example of Ecuador\". Macmillan Press, London.\nBULLET::::- FAO&CIFOR report: Forests and Floods: Drowning in Fiction or Thriving on Facts?\n\nBULLET::::- Ethiopia deforestation references\n\nBULLET::::- Parry, J. (2003). Tree choppers become tree planters. Appropriate Technology, 30(4), 38–39. Retrieved 22 November 2006, from ABI/INFORM Global database. (Document ID: 538367341).\nBULLET::::- Hillstrom, K & Hillstrom, C. (2003). Africa and the Middle east. A continental Overview of Environmental Issues. Santabarbara, CA: ABC CLIO.\nBULLET::::- Williams, M. (2006). Deforesting the earth: From prehistory to global crisis: An Abridgment. Chicago: The university of Chicago Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Global map of deforestation based on Landsat data\nBULLET::::- JICA-JAXA Forest Early Warning System in the Tropics: JJ-FAST (FOREST GOVERNANCE INITIATIVE)- JICA-JAXA\nBULLET::::- Old-growth forest zones within the remaining world forests\nBULLET::::- EIA forest reports: Investigations into illegal logging.\nBULLET::::- EIA in the USA Reports and info.\nBULLET::::- Cocaine destroys 4 m2 of rainforest per gram The Guardian\nBULLET::::- \"Avoided Deforestation\" Plan Gains Support – Worldwatch Institute\nBULLET::::- OneWorld Tropical Forests Guide\nBULLET::::- Some Background Info to Deforestation and REDD+\nBULLET::::- General info on deforestation effects\nBULLET::::- Deforestation and Climate Change\n\nBULLET::::- In the media\nBULLET::::- 14 March 2007, \"Independent Online\": Destruction of forests in developing world 'out of control'\nBULLET::::- 31 August 2017, \"Independent Online\": New Amazonian species discovered every two days while the rainforest is trashed by 'relentless deforestation'\nBULLET::::- 2 July 2019, \"The Guardian\": Revealed: rampant deforestation of Amazon driven by global greed for meat.\n\nBULLET::::- Films online\nBULLET::::- Watch the National Film Board of Canada documentaries \"Battle for the Trees\" & \"Forest in Crisis\"\nBULLET::::- Video on Illegal Deforestation In Paraguay\n"}
{"id": "8104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8104", "title": "Desertification", "text": "Desertification\n\nDesertification is a type of land degradation in drylands involving loss of biological productivity caused by natural processes or induced by human activities. It is caused by a variety of factors, such as through climate change (particularly the current global warming) and through the overexploitation of soil through human activity. When deserts appear automatically over the natural course of a planet's life cycle, then it can be called a natural phenomenon; however, when deserts emerge due to the rampant and unchecked depletion of nutrients in soil that are essential for it to remain arable, then a virtual \"soil death\" can be spoken of, which traces its cause back to human overexploitation. Desertification is a significant global ecological and environmental problem with far reaching consequences on socio-economic and political conditions.\n\nAs recently as 2005, considerable controversy existed over the proper definition of the term \"desertification\". Helmut Geist (2005) identified more than 100 formal definitions. The most widely accepted of these was that of the Princeton University Dictionary which defined it as \"the process of fertile land \"transforming into desert\" typically as a result of deforestation, drought or improper/inappropriate agriculture\". \nHowever, this original understanding that desertification involved the physical expansion of deserts has been rejected as the concept has evolved. Desertification has been neatly defined in the text of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) as \"land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid regions resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities.\"\n\nAnother major contribution to the controversy comes from the sub-grouping of types of desertification, spanning from the very vague yet shortsighted view as the \"man-made-desert\" to the broader yet less focused type as the \"non-pattern-desert\".\n\nThe world's most noted deserts have been formed by natural processes interacting over long intervals of time. During most of these times, deserts have grown and shrunk independent of human activities. Paleodeserts are large sand seas now inactive because they are stabilized by vegetation, some extending beyond the present margins of core deserts, such as the Sahara, the largest hot desert.\n\nHistorical evidence shows that the serious and extensive land deterioration occurring several centuries ago in arid regions had three epicenters: the Mediterranean, the Mesopotamian Valley, and the Loess Plateau of China, where population was dense.\n\nThe earliest known discussion of the topic arose soon after the French colonization of West Africa, when the Comité d'Etudes commissioned a study on \"desséchement progressif\" to explore the prehistoric expansion of the Sahara Desert.\n\nDrylands occupy approximately 40–41% of Earth’s land area and are home to more than 2 billion people. It has been estimated that some 10–20% of drylands are already degraded, the total area affected by desertification being between 6 and 12 million square kilometres, that about 1–6% of the inhabitants of drylands live in desertified areas, and that a billion people are under threat from further desertification.\n\nAs of 1998, the then-current degree of southward expansion of the Sahara was not well known, due to a lack of recent, measurable expansion of the desert into the Sahel at the time.\n\nThe impact of global warming and human activities are presented in the Sahel. In this area, the level of desertification is very high compared to other areas in the world. All areas situated in the eastern part of Africa (i.e. in the Sahel region) are characterized by a dry climate, hot temperatures, and low rainfall (300–750 mm rainfall per year). So, droughts are the rule in the Sahel region. Some studies have shown that Africa has lost approximately 650,000 km² of its productive agricultural land over the past 50 years. The propagation of desertification in this area is considerable.\n\nSome statistics have shown that since 1900 the Sahara has expanded by 250 km to the south over a stretch of land from west to east 6,000 km long. The survey, done by the research institute for development, had demonstrated that this means dryness is spreading fast in the Sahelian countries. 70% of the arid area has deteriorated and water resources have disappeared, leading to soil degradation. The loss of topsoil means that plants cannot take root firmly and can be uprooted by torrential water or strong winds.\n\nThe United Nations Convention (UNC) says that about six million Sahelian citizens would have to give up the desertified zones of sub-Saharan Africa for North Africa and Europe between 1997 and 2020.\n\nLake Chad, located in the Sahel region, has been hit particularly hard by this phenomenon. The cause of the lake drying up is due to irrigation withdrawal and the annual rainfall dropping.The lake has shrunk by over 90% since the 1987, displacing millions of inhabitants. Recent efforts have managed to make some progress toward its restoration, but it is still considered to be at risk of disappearing entirely.\n\nAnother major area that is being impacted by desertification is the Gobi Desert. Currently, the Gobi desert is the fastest moving desert on Earth; according to some researchers, the Gobi Desert swallows up over 1,300 square miles (3,370 km²) of land annually. This has destroyed many villages in its path. Currently, photos show that the Gobi Desert has expanded to the point the entire nation of Croatia could fit inside its area.\nThis is causing a major problem for the people of China. They will soon have to deal with the desert as it creeps closer. Although the Gobi Desert itself is still a distance away from Beijing, reports from field studies state there are large sand dunes forming only 70 km (43.5 mi) outside the city.\n\nSouth America is another area affected by desertification, as 25% of the land is classified as drylands. In Argentina specifically, drylands represent more than half of the total land area, and desertification has the potential to disrupt the nation's food supply.\n\nMongolia is an area affected by desertification due to overgrazing. In the 1990's after the fall of communism in the country, the people were motivated to become herders,the amount of herders doubled, and herders have overgrazed the Mongolian grasslands. Now 90% of the Mongolian grasslands is fragile dry land. The overpopulation in Mongolia is also what caused herders to overgraze and many struggle to provide food for their family now.\n\nThere has been a 25% increase in global annual dust emissions between the late nineteenth century to present day. The increase of desertification has also increased the amount of loose sand and dust that the wind can pick up ultimately resulting in a storm. For example, Dust storms in the Middle East “are becoming more frequent and intense in recent years” because “long-term reductions in rainfall promot[ing] lower soil moisture and vegetative cover”. \n\nDust storms can contribute to certain respiratory disorders such as pneumonia, skin irritations, asthma and many more. They can pollute open water, reduce the effectiveness of clean energy efforts, and halt most forms of transportation. \n\nDust and sand storms can have a negative effect on the climate which can make desertification worse. Dust particles in the air scatter incoming radiation from the sun. The dust can provide momentary coverage for the ground temperature but the atmospheric temperature will increase. This can disform and shorten the life time of clouds which can result in less rainfall.\n\nGlobal food security is being threatened by desertification and overpopulation. The more the population grows, the more food that has to be grown. The agricultural business is being displaced from one country to another. For example, Europe on average imports over 50% of its food. Meanwhile 44% of agricultural land is located in dry lands and it supplies 60% of the world’s food production. Desertification is decreasing the amount of sustainable land for agricultural uses but demands are continuously growing. In the near future, the demands will overcome the supply.\n\nAs the desertification takes place, the landscape may progress through different stages and continuously transform in appearance. On gradually sloped terrain, desertification can create increasingly larger empty spaces over a large strip of land, a phenomenon known as \"brousse tigrée\". A mathematical model of this phenomenon proposed by C. Klausmeier attributes this patterning to dynamics in plant-water interaction. One outcome of this observation suggests an optimal planting strategy for agriculture in arid environments.\n\nThe immediate cause is the loss of most vegetation. This is driven by a number of factors, alone or in combination, such as drought, climatic shifts, tillage for agriculture, overgrazing and deforestation for fuel or construction materials. Vegetation plays a major role in determining the biological composition of the soil. Studies have shown that, in many environments, the rate of erosion and runoff decreases exponentially with increased vegetation cover. Unprotected, dry soil surfaces blow away with the wind or are washed away by flash floods, leaving infertile lower soil layers that bake in the sun and become an unproductive hardpan.\n\nMany scientists think that one of the most common causes is overgrazing, too much consumption of vegetation by cattle.\nScientists agree that the existence of a desert in the place where the Sahara desert is now located is due to a natural climate cycle; this cycle often causes a lack of water in the area from time to time. There is a suggestion that the last time that the Sahara was converted from savanna to desert it was partially due to overgrazing by the cattle of the local population.\n\nOverpopulation is one of the most dangerous factors contributing to desertification. Human populations are increasing at exponential rates, which leads to overgrazing, over-farming and deforestation, as previously acceptable techniques are becoming less sustainable.\n\nClimate change is likely a major contributing factor in the desertification process, as simulations suggest the greenhouse effect may increase the spread of deserts by as much as 20%.\n\nThere are multiple reasons farmers use intensive farming as opposed to extensive farming but the main reason is to maximize yields. By increasing productivity, they require a lot more fertilizer, pesticides, and labor to upkeep machinery. This continuous use of the land rapidly depletes the nutrients of the soil causing desertification to spread.\n\nAt least 90% of the inhabitants of drylands live in developing countries, where they also suffer from poor economic and social conditions. This situation is exacerbated by land degradation because of the reduction in productivity, the precariousness of living conditions and the difficulty of access to resources and opportunities.\n\nA downward spiral is created in many underdeveloped countries by overgrazing, land exhaustion and overdrafting of groundwater in many of the marginally productive world regions due to overpopulation pressures to exploit marginal drylands for farming. Decision-makers are understandably averse to invest in arid zones with low potential. This absence of investment contributes to the marginalisation of these zones. When unfavourable agro-climatic conditions are combined with an absence of infrastructure and access to markets, as well as poorly adapted production techniques and an underfed and undereducated population, most such zones are excluded from development.\n\nDesertification often causes rural lands to become unable to support the same sized populations that previously lived there. This results in mass migrations out of rural areas and into urban areas, particularly in Africa. These migrations into the cities often cause large numbers of unemployed people, who end up living in slums.\n\nIn Mongolia the land is 90% fragile dry land, which causes many herders to migrate to the city for work. With very limited resources the herders that stay in the dry land graze very carefully in order to preserve the land. With the increasing population of Mongolia it is very difficult to stay a herder for long.\n\nThe number of these environmental refugees grows every year, with projections for sub-Saharan Africa showing a probable increase from 14 million in 2010 to nearly 200 million by 2050. This presents a future crisis for the region, as neighboring nations do not always have the ability to support large populations of refugees.\n\nAgriculture is a main source of income for many desert communities. The increase in desertification in theses regions has degraded the land enough where people can no longer productively farm and make a profit. This has negatively impacted the economy and increased poverty rates.\n\nTechniques and countermeasures exist for mitigating or reversing the effects of desertification, and some possess varying levels of difficulty. For some, there are numerous barriers to their implementation. Yet for others, the solution simply requires the exercise of human reason.\n\nOne proposed barrier is that the costs of adopting sustainable agricultural practices sometimes exceed the benefits for individual farmers, even while they are socially and environmentally beneficial. Another issue is a lack of political will, and lack of funding to support land reclamation and anti-desertification programs.\n\nDesertification is recognized as a major threat to biodiversity. Some countries have developed biodiversity action plans to counter its effects, particularly in relation to the protection of endangered flora and fauna.\n\nReforestation gets at one of the root causes of desertification and is not just a treatment of the symptoms. Environmental organizations work in places where deforestation and desertification are contributing to extreme poverty. There they focus primarily on educating the local population about the dangers of deforestation and sometimes employ them to grow seedlings, which they transfer to severely deforested areas during the rainy season. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations launched the FAO Drylands Restoration Initiative in 2012 to draw together knowledge and experience on dryland restoration. In 2015, FAO published global guidelines for the restoration of degraded forests and landscapes in drylands, in collaboration with the Turkish Ministry of Forestry and Water Affairs and the Turkish Cooperation and Coordination Agency.\n\nThe \"Green Wall of China\" is a high-profile example of one method that has been finding success in this battle with desertification.. This wall is a much larger-scale version of what American farmers did in the 1930s to stop the great Midwest dust bowl. This plan was proposed in the late 1970s, and has become a major ecological engineering project that is not predicted to end until the year 2055. According to Chinese reports, there have been nearly 66 billion trees planted in China's great green wall.\nThe green wall of China has decreased desert land in China by an annual average of 1,980 square km. The frequency of sandstorms nationwide have fallen 20% due to the green wall.Due to the success that China has been finding in stopping the spread of desertification, plans are currently be made in Africa to start a \"wall\" along the borders of the Sahara desert as well to be financed by the United Nations Global Environment Facility trust.\n\nin 2007 the African Union started the great green wall of Africa project in order to combat desertification in 20 countries. the wall is 8000 km wide stretching across the entire width of the continent and has 8 billion dollars in support of the project. The great green wall of Africa has restored 36 million hectares of land to the countries and has created many job opportunities for those who dwell near it. The great green wall has created over 20,000 jobs in Nigeria alone.\n\nTechniques focus on two aspects: provisioning of water, and fixation and hyper-fertilizing soil. Fixating the soil is often done through the use of shelter belts, woodlots and windbreaks. Windbreaks are made from trees and bushes and are used to reduce soil erosion and evapotranspiration. They were widely encouraged by development agencies from the middle of the 1980s in the Sahel area of Africa.\n\nSome soils (for example, clay), due to lack of water can become consolidated rather than porous (as in the case of sandy soils). Some techniques as zaï or tillage are then used to still allow the planting of crops. Waffle gardens can also help as they can provide protection of the plants against wind/sandblasting, and increase the hours of shade falling on the plant.\n\nAnother technique that is useful is contour trenching. This involves the digging of 150 m long, 1 m deep trenches in the soil. The trenches are made parallel to the height lines of the landscape, preventing the water from flowing within the trenches and causing erosion. Stone walls are placed around the trenches to prevent the trenches from closing up again. The method was invented by Peter Westerveld.\n\nEnriching of the soil and restoration of its fertility is often done by plants. Of these, leguminous plants which extract nitrogen from the air and fix it in the soil, and food crops/trees as grains, barley, beans and dates are the most important. Sand fences can also be used to control drifting of soil and sand erosion.\n\nAnother way to restore soil fertility is through the use of nitrogen-rich fertilizer. Due to the higher cost of this fertilizer, many smallholder farmers are reluctant to use it, especially in areas where subsistence farming is common. Several nations, including India, Zambia, and Malawi have responded to this by implementing subsidies to help encourage adoption of this technique.\n\nSome research centra (such as Bel-Air Research Center IRD/ISRA/UCAD) are also experimenting with the inoculation of tree species with mycorrhiza in arid zones. The mycorrhiza are basically fungi attaching themselves to the roots of the plants. They hereby create a symbiotic relation with the trees, increasing the surface area of the tree's roots greatly (allowing the tree to gather much more nutrient from the soil).\n\nAs there are many different types of deserts, there are also different types of desert reclamation methodologies. An example for this is the salt flats in the Rub' al Khali desert in Saudi Arabia. These salt flats are one of the most promising desert areas for seawater agriculture and could be revitalized without the use of freshwater or much energy.\n\nFarmer-managed natural regeneration (FMNR) is another technique that has produced successful results for desert reclamation. Since 1980, this method to reforest degraded landscape has been applied with some success in Niger. This simple and low-cost method has enabled farmers to regenerate some 30,000 square kilometers in Niger. The process involves enabling native sprouting tree growth through selective pruning of shrub shoots. The residue from pruned trees can be used to provide mulching for fields thus increasing soil water retention and reducing evaporation. Additionally, properly spaced and pruned trees can increase crop yields. The Humbo Assisted Regeneration Project which uses FMNR techniques in Ethiopia has received money from The World Bank’s BioCarbon Fund, which supports projects that sequester or conserve carbon in forests or agricultural ecosystems.\n\nRestoring grasslands store CO from the air as plant material. Grazing livestock, usually not left to wander, would eat the grass and would minimize any grass growth while grass left alone would eventually grow to cover its own growing buds, preventing them from photosynthesizing and killing the plant. A method proposed to restore grasslands uses fences with many small paddocks and moving herds from one paddock to another after a day or two in order to mimic natural grazers and allowing the grass to grow optimally. It is estimated that increasing the carbon content of the soils in the world’s 3.5 billion hectares of agricultural grassland would offset nearly 12 years of CO emissions. \n\nAllan Savory, as part of holistic management, claims that keeping livestock tightly packed on smaller plots of land, meanwhile rotating them to other small plots of land will reverse desertification; range scientists have however not been able to experimentally confirm his claims.\n\nBULLET::::- Aridification\nBULLET::::- Deforestation\nBULLET::::- Soil retrogression and degradation\nBULLET::::- Water crisis\n\nMitigation:\nBULLET::::- Desert greening\nBULLET::::- Ecological engineering\nBULLET::::- Oasification\n\nOther related portals:\nBULLET::::- Barbault R., Cornet A., Jouzel J., Mégie G., Sachs I., Weber J. (2002). Johannesburg. World Summit on Sustainable Development. 2002. What is at stake? The contribution of scientists to the debate. Ministère des Affaires étrangères/adpf.\nBULLET::::- Batterbury, S.P.J. & A.Warren (2001) Desertification. in N. Smelser & P. Baltes (eds.) International Encyclopædia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier Press. pp. 3526–3529\nBULLET::::- D’Odorico P., A. Bhattachan, K.F. Davis, S. Ravi, C.W. Runyan, (2013). \"Global desertification: Drivers and feedbacks\", Adv. Water Res., 51, 326-344.\nBULLET::::- Holtz, Uwe (2007). \"Implementing the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification from a parliamentary point of view – Critical assessment and challenges ahead\". Online at\nBULLET::::- Holtz, Uwe (2013). \"Role of parliamentarians in the implementation process of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification. A guide to Parliamentary Action\", ed. Secretariat of the UNCCD, Bonn . Online at\nBULLET::::- Lucke, Bernhard (2007): Demise of the Decapolis. Past and Present Desertification in the Context of Soil Development, Land Use, and Climate. Online at\nBULLET::::- Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005) \"Desertification Synthesis Report\"\nBULLET::::- Moseley, W.G. and E. Jerme 2010. “Desertification.” In: Warf, B. (ed). Encyclopedia of Geography. Sage Publications. Volume 2, pp. 715–719.\nBULLET::::- Reynolds, James F., and D. Mark Stafford Smith (ed.) (2002) \"Global Desertification – Do Humans Cause Deserts?\" Dahlem Workshop Report 88, Berlin: Dahlem University Press\nBULLET::::- Stelt, Sjors van der (2012) \"Rise and Fall of Periodic Patterns for a Generalized Klausmeier-Gray-Scott Model\", PhD Thesis University of Amsterdam\nBULLET::::- UNCCD (1994) United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification\nBULLET::::- The End of Eden a 90-minute documentary by South African filmmaker Rick Lomba in 1984 on African desertification\nBULLET::::- Attribution\n\nBULLET::::- Official website of the Secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)\nBULLET::::- Procedural history and related documents on the UNCCD, from the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law\nBULLET::::- Official website of Action Against Desertification, a United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization initiative of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States\nBULLET::::- \"Global Deserts Outlook\" (2006), thematic assessment report in the Global Environment Outlook (GEO) series of the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP).\nBULLET::::- French Scientific Committee on Desertification (CSFD)\n"}
{"id": "8117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8117", "title": "Dumbarton Bridge (California)", "text": "Dumbarton Bridge (California)\n\nThe Dumbarton Bridge is the southernmost of the highway bridges across San Francisco Bay in California. Carrying over 70,000 vehicles and about 118 pedestrian and bicycle crossings daily, it is the shortest bridge across San Francisco Bay at . Its eastern end is in Fremont, near Newark in the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge, and its western end is in Menlo Park. Bridging State Route 84 across the bay, it has three lanes each way and a separated bike/pedestrian lane along its south side. Like the San Mateo Bridge to the north, power lines parallel the bridge.\n\nThe bridge has never been officially named, but its commonly used name comes from Dumbarton Point, named in 1876 after Dumbarton, Scotland. Built originally to provide a shortcut for traffic originating in San Mateo and Santa Clara counties, the bridge served industrial and residential areas on both sides. The earlier bridge opened on January 17, 1927, and was the first vehicular bridge to cross San Francisco Bay. A portion of this old drawbridge remains as a fishing pier on the east side of the Bay. The original bridge was built with private capital and then purchased by the state for $2.5 million in 1951.\n\nIts age and the two-lane undivided roadway and lift-span led to a replacement bridge being built to the north. This bridge opened in October 1982 as a four-lane, high-level structure. The structure was re-striped to accommodate six lanes on October 18, 1989, in response to the temporary closing of the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge due to the Loma Prieta earthquake, and the permanent widening of the approaches was completed by July 2003. The cost of the complete replacement project was $200 million. The current bridge includes a two-way bicycle and separate pedestrian path on the south-facing side. A center span provides of vertical clearance for shipping. The approach spans on both sides of the Bay are of pre-stressed lightweight concrete girders supporting a lightweight concrete deck. The center spans are twin steel trapezoidal girders which also support a lightweight concrete deck.\n\nThe center span of the original bridge was demolished in a controlled explosion in September 1984.\nThe bridge is part of State Route 84, and is directly connected to Interstate 880 by a freeway segment north of the Fremont end.\nThere is no freeway connection between U.S. 101 and the southwest end of the Dumbarton Bridge. Motorists must traverse one of three at-grade routes to connect from the Bayshore Freeway to the bridge. These are (from northwest to southeast):\nBULLET::::1. the Bayfront Expressway, a limited-access road linking to U.S. 101 at Marsh Road, Atherton (the official routing of SR 84)\nBULLET::::2. Willow Road (SR 114), an approximately one-mile expressway through east Menlo Park to U.S. 101\nBULLET::::3. University Avenue (SR 109), an arterial road and the main commercial street of East Palo Alto.\n\nThe Willow Road and University Avenue junctions with Bayfront Expressway are at-grade intersections controlled by traffic lights; there are two additional controlled intersections at Chilco Road and Marsh Road, and the Marsh Road interchange on U.S. 101 is a parclo. The result is that Bayfront Expressway is frequently congested, and when not congested is often the site of high-speed car crashes. In 2007, prominent author David Halberstam was killed in one such crash at the Willow Road intersection.\n\nAccess to I-280 is available via State Route 84 to Woodside Road (as signed) or other arterial routes. There are no cross-Peninsula freeway connections between State Routes 92 and 85. In addition, there are no direct cross-Peninsula arterial routes between State Route 84 and Page Mill Road, a five-mile gap.\n\nAlthough the present situation has resulted in severe traffic problems on the bridge itself and in Menlo Park and East Palo Alto, Caltrans has been unable to upgrade the relevant portion of Highway 84 to freeway standards for several decades, due to opposition from the cities of Menlo Park, Atherton and Palo Alto. Freeway opponents fear that upgrading Highway 84 will encourage more people to live in southern Alameda County (where housing is more affordable) and commute to jobs in the mid-Peninsula area (where businesses wish to be located in order to be close to Silicon Valley), thus increasing traffic in their neighborhoods to the south and west of U.S. 101 and even along State Routes 85 and 237.\n\nBus service across the bridge is provided by the Dumbarton Express, run by a consortium of local transit agencies (SamTrans, AC Transit, VTA and others) which connects to BART at Union City and Caltrain at Palo Alto and California Avenue. AC Transit also runs Transbay buses U (Fremont BART and Amtrak to Stanford) and DA (Ardenwood to Oracle and Facebook headquarters) across the bridge. The free Stanford Marguerite Shuttle also runs buses AE-F and EB across the bridge.\n\nWhen the current bridge was planned in the 1970s, Caltrans conducted extensive environmental research on the aquatic and terrestrial environment. Principal concerns of the public were air pollution and noise pollution impacts, particularly in some residential areas of Menlo Park and East Palo Alto. Studies were conducted to produce contour maps of projected sound levels and carbon monoxide concentrations throughout the western approaches, for each alternative connection scheme.\n\nThe area around the bridge is an important ecological area, hosting many species of birds, fish and mammals. The endangered species California clapper rail is known to be present in the western bridge terminus area.\n\nNear the bridge on the Peninsula are Menlo Park's Bayfront Park, East Palo Alto's Ravenswood Open Space Preserve, and the Palo Alto Baylands Nature Preserve. An accessible portion of the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge lies immediately north of the western bridge terminus, where the Ravenswood trail runs.\n\nOn both sides of the east end of the bridge are large salt ponds and levee trails belonging to the Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. The headquarters and visitor center for the refuge is on a hill south of the bridge approach. North of the east end of the bridge is Coyote Hills Regional Park, with its network of trails running over tall hills. North of that is the Alameda Creek Regional Trail from the Bay to Niles Canyon. East of Coyote Hills is Ardenwood Historic Farm, a restored working farm that preserves and displays turn-of-the-century farming methods\n\nTolls are only collected from westbound traffic at the toll plaza on the east side of the bay. Drivers may either pay by cash or use the FasTrak electronic toll collection device. There are seven toll lanes at the plaza. During peak traffic hours, the leftmost lane is designated a FasTrak-only HOV lane, allowing carpool vehicles carrying two or more people or motorcycles to pass for a toll of $2.50. The next two leftmost lanes are FasTrak-only lanes for all vehicles, and all other lanes accept both cash and FasTrak. During non-peak hours the HOV lane is open to vehicles carrying only one person, but remains FasTrak-only.\n\nPrior to 1969, tolls on the Dumbarton Bridge were collected in both directions. When it opened, the original 1927 span had a toll of $0.40 per car plus $0.05 per passenger. In 1959, tolls were set to $0.35 per car. It was raised to $0.70 in 1969, then $0.75 in 1976. The toll per car remained at $0.75 when the replacement bridge opened in the 1980s.\n\nThe basic toll (for automobiles) on the seven state-owned bridges, including the Dumbarton Bridge, was raised to $1 by Regional Measure 1, approved by Bay Area voters in 1988. A $1 seismic retrofit surcharge was added in 1998 by the state legislature, originally for eight years, but since then extended to December 2037 (AB1171, October 2001). On March 2, 2004, voters approved Regional Measure 2, raising the toll by another dollar to a total of $3. An additional dollar was added to the toll starting January 1, 2007, to cover cost overruns concerning the replacement of the eastern span.\n\nThe Metropolitan Transportation Commission, a regional transportation agency, in its capacity as the Bay Area Toll Authority, administers RM1 and RM2 funds, a significant portion of which are allocated to public transit capital improvements and operating subsidies in the transportation corridors served by the bridges. Caltrans administers the \"second dollar\" seismic surcharge, and receives some of the MTC-administered funds to perform other maintenance work on the bridges. The Bay Area Toll Authority is made up of appointed officials put in place by various city and county governments, and is not subject to direct voter oversight.\n\nDue to further funding shortages for seismic retrofit projects, the Bay Area Toll Authority again raised tolls on all seven of the state-owned bridges in July 2010. The toll rate for autos on the Dumbarton Bridge was thus increased to $5.\n\nIn June 2018, Bay Area voters approved Regional Measure 3 to further raise the tolls on all seven of the state-owned bridges to fund $4.5 billion worth of transportation improvements in the area. Under the passed measure, the toll rate for autos on the Dumbarton Bridge will be increased to $6 on January 1, 2019; to $7 on January 1, 2022; and then to $8 on January 1, 2025.\n\nJust to the south of the car bridge lies the Dumbarton Rail Bridge. Built in 1910, the rail bridge has been unused since 1982 and its western approach collapsed in a fire in 1998. When the bridge was in use, boaters would signal the operator, who would start a diesel engine and rotate the bridge to the open position on a large gear. The bridge is now left in the open position as shown. There are plans for a new rail bridge and rehabilitation of the rail line to serve a commuter rail service to connect Union City, Fremont, and Newark to various Peninsula destinations. A successful March 2004 regional transportation ballot measure included funding to rehabilitate the rail bridge for the commuter rail service, but in October 2008 the Metropolitan Transportation Commission transferred $91 million from this project to the BART Warm Springs Extension Project in Fremont.\n\nBetween the Dumbarton Bridge and the Dumbarton Rail Bridge is the Bay crossing of the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct. The aqueduct rises above ground in Newark at the east side of the Bay, falls below the water's surface at a pump station in Fremont, re-emerges in the middle of the Bay and then continues above water until it reaches the west side of the Bay at Menlo Park.\n\nA scene of the 1970 movie \"Harold and Maude\" was filmed at the original toll plaza and showed Maude speeding and disobeying a police officer.\n\nBULLET::::- California Dept. of Transportation: Dumbarton Bridge\nBULLET::::- Bay Trail: Dumbarton Bridge\n"}
{"id": "8118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8118", "title": "Dock", "text": "Dock\n\nDock may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Cross dock, moving material directly, one truck to another.\nBULLET::::- Dock (maritime), either the area of water taken by a vessel when tied to a man-made structure (pier, wharf, float, etc.) or group of structures involved in the handling of boats or ships, usually on or close to a shore, or the structures themselves.\nBULLET::::- Dry dock, Float-in, drain, repair, fill, float-out: facility for ships.\nBULLET::::- Floating dock (disambiguation), any dock that permits ships to unload and load at a set water level irrespective of tide\nBULLET::::- Loading dock, an area for trucks to deliver or receive cargo.\nBULLET::::- Docking and berthing of spacecraft, a spaceflight operation used to transfer personnel or materials from a spacecraft to another or for using one of the two spacecraft as a booster\n\nBULLET::::- Dock or tailhead, where the tail joins the Rump\nBULLET::::- Dock, the plant genus \"Rumex\"\nBULLET::::- DOCK (protein), a family of proteins involved in cell signalling\nBULLET::::- DOCK (UCSF), the docking program\n\nBULLET::::- Dock (computing), a graphical user interface feature\nBULLET::::- Dock (macOS), a toolbar-like application launcher in the macOS operating system\nBULLET::::- Docking station, a laptop accessory\n\nBULLET::::- The Dock, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada\nBULLET::::- The Dock, Washington, D.C., United States\nBULLET::::- The Dock Gymnasium, Louisiana State University Shreveport, United States\nBULLET::::- Docks (nightclub) in Hamburg, Germany\nBULLET::::- The Docks Waterfront Entertainment Complex in Toronto, Ontario, Canada\nBULLET::::- The former name of Devonport, Devon, now a part of the city of Plymouth\nBULLET::::- Execution Dock in London\n\nBULLET::::- Dock (Hayden Scott-Barren) (born 1980), English manga illustrator\nBULLET::::- Dock Boggs (1898–1971), American folk singer and banjoist\nBULLET::::- Dock Ellis (1945–2008), American baseball pitcher\nBULLET::::- Dock J. Jordan (1866–1943), American lawyer and educator\nBULLET::::- Dock Walsh (1901–1967), American banjoist\n\nBULLET::::- To pierce dough during its handling to prevent the formation of large air pockets, such as with a roller docker\nBULLET::::- The area of a courtroom where an accused party sits during proceedings\n\nBULLET::::- Docking (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Docker (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Docklands (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Dox (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- DOC (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Docs (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Hohe Dock, one of the highest peaks in the Glockner Group of the Austrian Alps\n"}
{"id": "8121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8121", "title": "Dallas Cowboys", "text": "Dallas Cowboys\n\nThe Dallas Cowboys are a professional American football team based in the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex. The Cowboys compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member club of the league's National Football Conference (NFC) East division. The team is headquartered in Frisco, Texas, and plays its home games at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas, which opened for the 2009 season. The stadium took its current name prior to the 2013 season. The Cowboys joined the NFL as an expansion team in . The team's national following might best be represented by its NFL record of consecutive sell-outs. The Cowboys' streak of 190 consecutive sold-out regular and post-season games (home and away) began in 2002. The franchise has made it to the Super Bowl eight times, tied with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Denver Broncos for second most Super Bowl appearances in history, just behind the New England Patriots record eleven Super Bowl appearances. This has also corresponded to eight NFC championships, most in the NFC. The Cowboys have won five of those Super Bowl appearances, tying them with their NFC rivals, the San Francisco 49ers; both are second to Pittsburgh's and New England's record six Super Bowl championships. The Cowboys are the only NFL team to record 20 straight winning seasons (1966–85), in which they missed the playoffs only twice (1974 and 1984).\n\nIn 2015, the Dallas Cowboys became the first sports team to be valued at $4 billion, making it the most valuable sports team in the world, according to \"Forbes\". The Cowboys also generated $620 million in revenue in 2014, a record for a U.S. sports team. In 2018 they also became the first NFL franchise to be valued at $5 billion and making Forbes' list as the most valued NFL team for the 12th straight year.\n\nPrior to the formation of the Dallas Cowboys, there had not been an NFL team south of Washington, D.C. since the Dallas Texans folded in 1952. Oilman Clint Murchison Jr. had been trying to get an NFL expansion team in Dallas (as was Lamar Hunt – who ended up with an AFL franchise), but George Preston Marshall, owner of the Washington Redskins, had a monopoly in the South.\n\nMurchison had tried to purchase the Washington Redskins from Marshall in 1958. An agreement was struck, but as the deal was about to be finalized, Marshall called for a change in terms. This infuriated Murchison and he called off the deal. Marshall then opposed any franchise for Murchison in Dallas. Since NFL expansion needed unanimous approval from team owners at that time, Marshall's position would prevent Murchison from joining the league.\n\nMarshall had a falling out with the Redskins band leader Barnee Breeskin. Breeskin had written the music to the Redskins fight song \"Hail to the Redskins\" and Marshall's wife had penned the lyrics. Breeskin owned the rights to the song and was aware of Murchison's plight to get an NFL franchise. Angry with Marshall, Breeskin approached Murchison's attorney to sell him the rights to the song before the expansion vote in 1959. Murchison purchased \"Hail to the Redskins\" for $2,500. Before the vote to award franchises in 1959, Murchison revealed to Marshall that he owned the song and Marshall could not play it during games. After a few Marshall expletives, Murchison gave the rights to \"Hail to the Redskins\" to Marshall for his vote, the lone one against Murchison getting a franchise at that time, and a rivalry was born.\n\nFrom 1970 through 1979, the Cowboys won 105 regular season games, more than any other NFL franchise during that span. In addition, they appeared in 5 and won two Super Bowls, at the end of the 1971 and 1977 regular seasons.\n\nDanny White became the Cowboys' starting quarterback in 1980 after quarterback Roger Staubach retired. Despite going 12–4 in 1980, the Cowboys came into the playoffs as a Wild Card team. In the opening round of the 1980–81 NFL playoffs they avenged their elimination from the prior year's playoffs by defeating the Rams. In the Divisional Round they squeaked by the Atlanta Falcons 30–27. For the NFC Championship they were pitted against division rival Philadelphia, the team that won the division during the regular season. The Eagles captured their first conference championship and Super Bowl berth by winning 20–7.\n\n1981 brought another division championship for the Cowboys. They entered the 1981-82 NFL playoffs as the number 2 seed. Their first game of the postseason saw them blow out Tampa Bay in a 38–0 shutout. For the Conference Title game they were pitted against the San Francisco 49ers, the number 1 seed. Despite having a late 4th quarter 27–21 lead, they would lose to the 49ers 28–27. 49ers quarterback Joe Montana led his team on an 89-yard game-winning touchdown drive, connecting with Dwight Clark in a play known as The Catch.\nThe 1982 season was shortened after a player strike. With a 6–3 record Dallas made it to the playoffs for the 8th consecutive season. As the number 2 seed for the 1982–83 NFL playoffs they eliminated the Buccaneers 30–17 in the Wild Card round and dispatched the Packers 37–26 in the Divisional round to advance to their 3rd consecutive Conference championship game. 3rd time was not the charm for the Cowboys as they fell 31–17 to their division rival and eventual Super Bowl XVII champions, the Washington Redskins.\n\nFor the 1983 season the Cowboys went 12–4 and made it once again to the playoffs but were defeated at home in the Wild Card by the Rams 24–17. Prior to the 1984 season, H.R. \"Bum\" Bright purchased the Dallas Cowboys from Clint Murchison, Jr. Dallas posted a 9–7 record that season but missed the playoffs for the first time in 10 seasons. After going 10–6 in 1985 and winning a division title, the Cowboys were shut out 20-0 by the Rams in the Divisional round at home.\n\nHard times came for the organization as they went 7–9 in 1986, 7–8 in 1987, and 3–13 in 1988. During this time period Bright became disenchanted with the team. During the savings and loan crisis, the team and Mr. Bright's savings and loan were taken over by the FSLIC. During an embarrassing home loss to Atlanta in 1987, Bright told the media that he was \"horrified\" at coach Tom Landry's play calling. The FSLIC forced Mr. Bright to sell the Cowboys to Jerry Jones on February 25, 1989.\n\nJones immediately fired Tom Landry, the only head coach in franchise history, replacing him with University of Miami head coach Jimmy Johnson, who was also Jerry Jones' teammate at the University of Arkansas as a fellow defensive lineman and Michael Irvin was under his tutelage in college. With the first pick in the draft, the Cowboys selected UCLA quarterback Troy Aikman. Later that same year, they would trade veteran running back Herschel Walker to the Minnesota Vikings for five veteran players and eight draft choices. Although the Cowboys finished the 1989 season with a 1–15 record, their worst in almost 30 years, \"The Trade\" later allowed Dallas to draft a number of impact players to rebuild the team.\n\nJohnson quickly returned the Cowboys to the NFL's elite. Skillful drafts added fullback Daryl Johnston and center Mark Stepnoski in 1989, running back Emmitt Smith in 1990, defensive tackle Russell Maryland and offensive tackle Erik Williams in 1991, and safety Darren Woodson in 1992. The young talent joined holdovers from the Landry era such as wide receiver Michael Irvin, guard Nate Newton, linebacker Ken Norton Jr., and offensive lineman Mark Tuinei, defensive lineman Jim Jeffcoat, and veteran pickups such as tight end Jay Novacek and defensive end Charles Haley. \n\nThings started to look up for the franchise in 1990. On Week 1 Dallas won their first home game since September 1988 when they defeated the San Diego Chargers 17–14. They went 2–7 in their next 9 games but won 4 of their last 6 games to finish the season with a 4th place 7–9 record.\n\nComing into 1991 the Cowboys replaced offensive coordinator Dave Shula with Norv Turner; the Cowboys raced to a 6–5 start, then defeated the previously-unbeaten Redskins despite injury to Troy Aikman. Backup Steve Beuerlein took over and the Cowboys finished 11–5. In the Wild Card round they defeated the Bears 17–13 for the Cowboys first playoff win since 1982. In the Divisional round their season ended in a 38–6 playoff rout by the Lions.\n\nIn 1992 Dallas set a team record for regular season wins with a 13–3 mark. They started off the season by defeating the defending Super Bowl champion Redskins 23–10. Going into the playoffs as the number 2 seed they had a first round bye before facing division rival the Philadelphia Eagles. The Cowboys won that game 34–10 to advance to the NFC Conference Championship game for the first time in 10 years. They were pitted against the San Francisco 49ers, the number 1 seed. On January 17, 1993 the Cowboys went to Candlestick Park and defeated the 49ers 30–20 to clinch their first Super Bowl berth since 1978. Dallas defeated the Buffalo Bills 52–17 in Super Bowl XXVII, during which they forced a record nine turnovers. Johnson became the first coach to claim a national championship in college football and a Super Bowl victory in professional football.\n\nDespite starting the 1993 season 0–2, they again defeated the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVIII, 30–13 (becoming the first team in NFL history to win a Super Bowl after starting 0–2). Dallas finished the regular season 12–4 as the number 1 seed of the NFC. They defeated the Green Bay Packers 27–17 in the divisional round. In the NFC Conference Championship, Dallas beat the 49ers in Dallas, 38–21. Dallas sent a then-NFL record 11 players to the Pro Bowl in 1993: Aikman, safety Thomas Everett, Irvin, Johnston, Maryland, Newton, Norton, Novacek, Smith, Stepnoski, and Williams.\nOnly weeks after Super Bowl XXVIII, however, friction between Johnson and Jones culminated in Johnson stunning the football world by announcing his resignation. Jones then hired former University of Oklahoma head coach Barry Switzer to replace Johnson. The Cowboys finished 12–4 in 1994. They once again clinched a first round bye and defeated Green Bay 35–9 in the Divisional Round. They missed the Super Bowl, however, after losing to the 49ers in the NFC Championship Game, 38–28.\n\nPrior to the start of 1995 season Jerry Jones lured All-Pro cornerback Deion Sanders away from San Francisco. Dallas started the season 4–0 including shutting out their division rival New York Giants 35–0 at Giants Stadium to open their season. Emmitt Smith set an NFL record with 25 rushing touchdowns that season. They ended the season 12–4 and went into the playoffs as the number 1 seed. In the Divisional round they dispatched their division rival Eagles 30–11 to advance to their 4th consecutive NFC Conference Championship Game, in which they defeated Green Bay, 38–27. In Super Bowl XXX the Cowboys defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 27–17 at Sun Devil Stadium for their fifth Super Bowl championship. Switzer joined Johnson as the only coaches to win a college football national championship and a Super Bowl.\n\nThe glory days of the Cowboys were again beginning to dim as free agency, age, and injuries began taking their toll. Star receiver Michael Irvin was suspended by the league for the first five games of 1996 following a drug-related arrest; he came back after the Cowboys started the season 2–3. They finished the regular season with a 10–6 record, won the NFC East title, and entered the playoffs as the number 3 seed in the NFC. They defeated Minnesota 40–15 in the Wild Card round but were eliminated in the Divisional round of the playoffs 26–17 by the Carolina Panthers.\n\nThe Cowboys went 6–10 in 1997 (including losing their last 6 games of the season), with discipline and off-field problems becoming major distractions. As a result, Switzer resigned as head coach in January 1998 and former Steelers offensive coordinator Chan Gailey was hired to take his place.\n\nGailey led the team to two playoff appearances with a 10–6 record in 1998 and an NFC East championship, but the Cowboys were defeated in the playoffs by the Arizona Cardinals 20–7.\n\nIn 1999 Dallas went 8–8 (during which Irvin suffered a career-ending spinal injury in a loss to the Philadelphia Eagles) ending in another playoff loss (this time to the Minnesota Vikings 27–10). Gailey was fired and became the first Cowboys coach who did not take the team to a Super Bowl.\n\nDefensive coordinator Dave Campo was promoted to head coach for the 2000 season. Prior to the season starting cornerback Deion Sanders was released after 5 seasons with the team. He later signed with division rival Washington. In Week 1, they were blown out 41–14 by Philadelphia. That game was very costly when veteran quarterback Troy Aikman suffered a serious concussion which ultimately ended his career. Longtime NFL QB Randall Cunningham filled in for Aikman for the rest of the season at QB. The Cowboys finished the season in 4th place with a 5–11 record. The only highlights of 2000 were Emmitt Smith having his 10th consecutive 1,000 yard rushing season and a season sweep over the Redskins.\n\n2001 was another hard year in Dallas. Prior to the season starting Aikman was released from the team and he retired due to the concussions he had received. Jerry Jones signed Tony Banks as a QB. Banks had been a starter for half of the season the previous year for the Super Bowl Champion Baltimore Ravens before being benched. Jones also drafted QB Quincy Carter in the second round of that year's draft, and Banks was released during the preseason. Ryan Leaf, Anthony Wright, and Clint Stoerner all competed for the quarterback position that season. Dallas again finished at 5–11, last place in the NFC East, but they swept the Redskins for the 4th consecutive season.\n\nPrior to the 2002 season Dallas drafted safety Roy Williams with the 8th overall pick. The season started out low as the Cowboys lost to the expansion Houston Texans 19–10 on Week 1. By far the highlight of 2002 was on October 28, when during a home game against the Seattle Seahawks, Emmitt Smith broke the all-time NFL rushing record previously held by Walter Payton. Their Thanksgiving Day win over the Redskins was their 10th consecutive win against Washington. However, that was their final win of 2002: Dallas lost their next 4 games to finish with another last place 5–11 record. The losing streak was punctuated with a Week 17 20–14 loss against Washington. That game was Smith's last game as a Cowboys player: he was released during the offseason. Campo was immediately fired as head coach at the conclusion of the season.\n\nJones then lured Bill Parcells out of retirement to coach the Cowboys. The Cowboys became the surprise team of the 2003 season getting off to a hot 7–2 record, but went 3–4 for the rest of the season. They were able to win the division with the 10–6 record but lost in the Wild Card round to eventual conference champion Carolina Panthers, 29–10.\n\nIn 2004 Dallas was unable to replicate their 2003 success, and ended 6–10. Quincy Carter was released during the preseason and was replaced at QB by Vinny Testaverde.\n\nDallas got off to a hot 7–3 start for the 2005 season but ended up in 3rd place with a 9–7 record. Prior to the beginning of that season, they signed veteran Drew Bledsoe as starting quarterback.\n\n2006 was an interesting year for the Cowboys. Prior to the season they signed free agent wide receiver Terrell Owens who was talented yet controversial. The Cowboys started the season 3–2. During a week 7 matchup against the Giants, Bledsoe, who had been struggling since the start of the season, was pulled from the game and was replaced by backup Tony Romo. Romo was unable to salvage that game and Dallas lost 38–22. However, Romo was named the starter for the team and went 5–1 in his first 6 games. Dallas ended the season with a 9–7 2nd-place finish. They were able to clinch the number 5 playoff seed. They traveled to play Seattle where the Seahawks won 21–20. After the season Parcells retired and was replaced by Wade Phillips.\n\nDallas started the 2007 season with a bang, winning their first five games. They won 12 of their first 13 games, with their only loss during that span being to New England, who went undefeated that season. Despite dropping two of their last three regular season games, the Cowboys clinched their first number 1 NFC seed in 12 years, which also granted them a first round bye and home field advantage throughout the playoffs. They lost in the divisional round 21–17 to the eventual Super Bowl champion New York Giants.\n\nIn the tumultuous 2008 season, the Cowboys started off strong, going 3–0 for the second straight year, en route to a 4–1 start. However, things soon went downhill from there, after quarterback Tony Romo suffered a broken pinkie in an overtime loss to the Arizona Cardinals. With Brad Johnson and Brooks Bollinger playing as backups, Dallas went 1–2 during a three-game stretch. Romo's return showed promise, as Dallas went 3–0. However, injuries mounted during the season, with the team losing several starters for the year, such as Kyle Kosier, Felix Jones, safety Roy Williams, punter Mat McBriar, and several other starters playing with injuries. Entering December, the 8–4 Cowboys underperformed, finishing 1–3. They failed to make the playoffs after losing at Philadelphia in the final regular season game which saw the Eagles reach the playoffs instead.\n\nOn May 2, 2009, the Dallas Cowboys' practice facility collapsed during a wind storm. The collapse left twelve Cowboys players and coaches injured. The most serious injuries were special teams coach Joe DeCamillis, who suffered fractured cervical vertebrae and had surgery to stabilize fractured vertebrae in his neck, and Rich Behm, the team's 33-year-old scouting assistant, who was permanently paralyzed from the waist down after his spine was severed.\n\nThe 2009 season started positively with a road win against Tampa Bay, but fortunes quickly changed as Dallas fell to a 2–2 start. In week five, with starting wide receiver Roy Williams sidelined by injury, receiver Miles Austin got his first start of the season and had a record setting day (250 yards receiving and 2 touchdowns) to help lead Dallas to an overtime win over Kansas City. Following their bye week, they went on a three-game winning streak including wins over Atlanta and NFC East division rival Philadelphia. Despite entering December with a record of 8–3, they lost their slim grip on 1st place in the division with losses to the New York Giants and San Diego. Talks of past December collapses resurfaced, and another collapse in 2009 seemed validated. However, the team surged in the final three weeks of the season with a 24–17 victory at the Superdome, ending New Orleans' previously unbeaten season in week 15. For the first time in franchise history, they posted back-to-back shutouts when they beat division rivals Washington (17–0) and Philadelphia (24–0) to end the season. In the process, the Cowboys clinched their second NFC East title in three years as well as the third seed in the NFC Playoffs. Six days later, in the wild-card round of the playoffs, Dallas played the Eagles in a rematch of week 17. The Cowboys defeated the Eagles for the first Cowboys' post-season win since the 1996 season, ending a streak of six consecutive NFL post-season losses. Dallas ended their playoff run after a hard divisional playoff loss to the Minnesota Vikings.\n\nAfter beginning the 2010 season at 1–7, Phillips was fired as head coach and was replaced by offensive coordinator Jason Garrett as the interim head coach. The Cowboys finished the season 6–10.\n\nWith the 9th pick of the 1st round of the 2011 draft, the Cowboys selected USC tackle Tyron Smith.\n\nTo start the 2011 season the Cowboys played the Jets on a Sunday night primetime game in New York, on September 11. The Cowboys held the lead through most of the game, until a fumble, blocked punt, and interception led to the Jets coming back to win the game. In week 2 the Cowboys traveled to San Francisco to play the 49ers. In the middle of the 2nd quarter, while the Cowboys trailed 10–7, Tony Romo suffered a rib injury and was replaced by Jon Kitna. Kitna threw 1 touchdown and 2 interceptions until Romo returned in the 3rd quarter as Dallas trailed 17–7. Romo then threw 3 touchdown passes to Miles Austin as the Cowboys rallied to send the game into overtime. On their opening possession after a 49ers punt, Romo found wide receiver Jesse Holley on a 78-yard pass, which set up the game-winning field goal by rookie kicker Dan Bailey.\n\nThe Cowboys ended the season 8–8. They were in a position to win the NFC East but lost to the Giants in a Week 17 primetime Sunday Night game on NBC which allowed the Giants to win the division. The Giants would go on to win Super Bowl XLVI.\n\nThe Cowboys started off the 2012 season on a high note by defeating the defending Super Bowl champion New York Giants 24–17 on the opening night of the season. They would hover around the .500 mark for the majority of the season. They lost a close Week 6 game to eventual Super Bowl XLVII champion Baltimore Ravens 31–29 at M&T Bank Stadium in Baltimore.\n\nGoing into Week 17 they found themselves once again one win away from winning the division. Standing in their way were the Washington Redskins, who had beaten them on Thanksgiving at AT&T Stadium and whom were one win away from their first division title since 1999. Led by Robert Griffin III the Redskins defeated the Cowboys at home 28-18. Dallas once again finished the season 8–8.\n\nIn the 2013 season the Cowboys started off by defeating the New York Giants for the second straight year; this time 36–31. It was the first time since AT&T Stadium had opened back in 2009 that the Cowboys were able to defeat the Giants at home. The win was punctuated by Brandon Carr intercepting an Eli Manning pass for a touchdown late in the 4th quarter.\n\nFor the third straight year Dallas once again found themselves stuck in the .500 area. In Week 5, they lost a shootout to the eventual AFC Champion Denver Broncos 51–48. They battled it out with the Philadelphia Eagles for control of the division throughout the season. In December however they lost 2 crucial back to back games to Chicago and Green Bay. They were very successful in division games having a 5–0 division record heading into another Week 17 showdown for the NFC East crown against the Eagles. That included beating Washington 24–23 on Week 16 thanks to late game heroics of Tony Romo. However Romo received a severe back injury in that game which prematurely ended his season. The Cowboys called upon backup quarterback Kyle Orton to lead them into battle on the final week of the season. Orton was unsuccessful who threw a game ending interception to the Eagles which allowed the Eagles to win 24–22. Dallas ended the year at 8–8 for the third year in a row. The only difference of this 8–8 ending compared to the others was that Dallas ended the season in second place compared to the 2 previous 3rd-place finishes.\n\nTo start off the 2014 season Dallas began by losing to San Francisco 28–17. After that they went on a 6-game winning streak. The highlight of this streak was defeating the Seahawks at CenturyLink Field 30–23. In Week 8, the Redskins won in overtime 20–17, and Romo injured his back again. He missed next week, a home loss to the Arizona Cardinals 28–17 with backup QB Brandon Weeden. Romo returned in Week 9 to lead a 31–17 victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars, which was played at Wembley Stadium in London, England as part of the NFL International Series.\n\nDallas played their traditional Thanksgiving home game against division rival Philadelphia. Both teams were vying for first place in the division with identical 8–3 records. The Eagles got off to a fast start and the Cowboys were unable to catch up, losing 33–10. They would rebound the next week when they defeated Chicago 41–28. Week 15 was a rematch against 1st place Philadelphia. This time it was the Cowboys who got off to a fast start going up 21–0. Then the Eagles put up 24 points but Dallas came back to win 38–27 to go into first place for the first time in the season and improve to 10–4. Going into their Week 16 matchup at home against Indianapolis, Dallas was in a position to clinch their first division title since 2009 by defeating the Colts 42-7 and the Eagles losing that week to the Redskins. They became the 2014 NFC East Champions, eliminating the Eagles from the playoffs. Dallas ended the regular season with a 12–4 record and an 8–0 away record when they won on the road against Washington 44–17.\n\nOn January 4, 2015, the Cowboys, as the number 3 seed, hosted the number 6 seed Detroit Lions in the wild card round of the NFL playoffs. In the game, the Lions got off to a hot start, going up 14–0 in the first quarter. Dallas initially struggled on both sides of the ball. However, towards the end of the second quarter Romo threw a 76-yard touchdown pass to Terrance Williams. Matt Prater of the Lions would kick a field goal before halftime to go up 17–7. Dallas came out swinging to start the second half by picking off Detroit quarterback Matthew Stafford on the first play of the third quarter. However, the Cowboys failed to capitalize on the turnover, as Dan Bailey missed a field goal during Dallas's ensuing drive. Detroit then kicked another field goal to make the score 20–7. A DeMarco Murray touchdown later in that quarter closed the gap to 20–14. A 51-yard Bailey field goal almost 3 minutes into the fourth quarter trimmed the Cowboys' deficit to 3. The Lions got the ball back and started driving down the field. On 3rd down-and-1 of that Lions drive, Stafford threw a 17-yard pass intended for Lions tight end Brandon Pettigrew, but the ball hit Cowboys linebacker Anthony Hitchens in the back a fraction of a second before he ran into Pettigrew. The play was initially flagged as defensive pass interference against Hitchens. However, the penalty was then nullified by the officiating crew. The Cowboys got the ball back on their 41-yard line and had a successful 59-yard drive which was capped off by an 8-yard touchdown pass from Romo to Williams to give the Cowboys their first lead of the game at 24–20. The Lions got the ball back with less than 2:30 to play in regulation. Stafford fumbled the ball at the 2 minute mark. The fumble was recovered by Cowboys defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence, who then fumbled the ball which was recovered by the Lions. Lawrence would redeem himself by sacking Stafford on a 4th down-and-3 play. The sack led to Stafford fumbling the ball again, which Lawrence recovered to seal the game for the Cowboys, who won 24–20. This was the first time in franchise playoff history that Dallas had been down by 10 or more points at halftime and rallied to win the game.\n\nThe following week, the Cowboys traveled to Lambeau Field in Green Bay, Wisconsin to play the Packers in the divisional round. Despite having a 14–7 halftime lead, the Cowboys fell to the Packers 26–21, thus ending their season. The season ended on an overturned call of a completed catch by Dez Bryant. The catch was challenged by the Packers, and the referees overturned the call because of the \"Calvin Johnson rule.\"\n\nDuring the 2015 offseason the Cowboys allowed running back DeMarco Murray to become a free agent. Murray signed with the division rival Philadelphia Eagles. On July 15 wide receiver Dez Bryant signed a 5-year, $70 million contract.\n\nAt home against the New York Giants, Dallas won 27–26. Dez Bryant left the game early with a fractured bone in his foot. On the road against the Philadelphia Eagles, Romo suffered a broken left collarbone, the same one he injured in 2010, and Brandon Weeden replaced him. Dallas won 20–10 to begin the season 2–0, but then went on a seven-game losing streak. They finished the season 4–12 and last in their division.\n\nAfter a preseason injury to Tony Romo, rookie quarterback Dak Prescott was slated as the starting quarterback, as Romo was expected to be out 6–8 weeks. In game 1 against the New York Giants, Dallas lost 20–19. After this loss, Dallas would go on an eleven-game winning streak. After much speculation leading to a potential quarterback controversy, Romo made an announcement that Prescott had earned the right to take over as the Cowboys starting quarterback.\n\nIn game 10, Romo suited up for the first time in the season and was the backup quarterback. Dallas defeated the Baltimore Ravens to win their 9th straight game, breaking a franchise record of 8 straight games set in 1977. It also marked rookie running back Ezekiel Elliott breaking Tony Dorsett's single season rushing record for a Cowboys rookie. Prescott also tied an NFL rookie record held by Russell Wilson and Dan Marino by throwing multiple touchdowns in 5 straight games. Dallas finished 13–3, tying their best 16-game regular season record. While Dallas defeated Green Bay at Lambeau Field in week 6, the Packers would win at AT&T Stadium in the divisional round of the NFL playoffs on a last-second field goal, ending the Cowboys’ season.\n\nDak Prescott was named NFL Rookie of the Year in the NFL honors on February 4, 2017, and Ezekiel Elliott led the league in rushing yards. Both Prescott and Elliott made the 2017 Pro Bowl. This is the first time the Cowboys sent two rookies to the Pro Bowl.\n\n2017 was the first season since 2002 without quarterback Tony Romo, who retired on April 4 after 14 seasons with the Cowboys. The season also featured second-year running back Ezekiel Elliott being suspended for 6 games after violating the league's conduct policy. The suspension was to begin at the start of the year but was pushed back to November. The Cowboys finished the year at 9-7 without making the playoffs. Following the season, Dez Bryant was released after eight seasons in Dallas and tight end Jason Witten, who holds several franchise receiving records, retired after 15 seasons, ending an era.\n\nThe Dallas Cowboys' 2017 season was the subject of the third season of Amazon's sports documentary series \"All or Nothing\". The series is produced by NFL Films.\n\nIn 1966, six years after their founding, the Cowboys adopted the practice of hosting Thanksgiving games. It is widely rumored that the Cowboys sought a guarantee that they would regularly host Thanksgiving games as a condition of their very first one (since games on days other than Sunday were uncommon at the time and thus high attendance was not a certainty). This is only partly true; Dallas had in fact decided to host games on Thanksgiving by their own decision because there was nothing else to do or watch on that day. In 1975 and 1977, at the behest of then-Commissioner Pete Rozelle, the then-St. Louis Cardinals replaced Dallas as a host team (Dallas then hosted St. Louis in 1976). Although the Cardinals, at the time known as the \"Cardiac Cards\" due to their propensity for winning very close games, were a modest success at the time, they were nowhere near as popular nationwide as the Cowboys, who were regular Super Bowl contenders during this era. This, combined with St. Louis's consistently weak attendance, a series of ugly Cardinals losses in the three-game stretch, and opposition from the Kirkwood–Webster Groves Turkey Day Game (a local high school football contest) led to Dallas resuming regular hosting duties in 1978; it was then, after Rozelle asked Dallas to resume hosting Thanksgiving games, that the Cowboys requested (and received) an agreement guaranteeing the Cowboys a spot on Thanksgiving Day forever.\n\nThe Dallas Cowboys' blue star logo, which represents Texas as \"The Lone Star State,\" is one of the most well-known team logos in professional sports. The blue star originally was a solid shape until a white line and blue border was added in 1964. The logo has remained the same since. Today, the blue star has been extended to not only the Dallas Cowboys, but owner Jerry Jones' AFL team, the Dallas Desperados that have a similar logo based on that of the Cowboys. The blue star also is used on other entries like an imaging facility and storage facility.\n\nThe Dallas Cowboys' white home jersey has royal blue (PMS 287 C) solid socks, numbers, lettering, and two stripes on the sleeves outlined in black. The home pants are a common metallic silver-green color (PMS 8280 C) that helps bring out the blue in the uniform. The navy (PMS 289 C) road jerseys (nicknamed the \"Stars and Stripes\" jersey) have white lettering and numbers with navy pinstripes. A white/gray/white stripe are on each sleeve as well as the collared V-neck, and a Cowboys star logo is placed upon the stripes. A \"Cowboys\" chest crest is directly under the NFL shield. The away pants are a pearlish metallic-silver color (PMS 8180 C) and like the home pants, enhance the navy in the uniforms. The team uses a serifed font for the lettered player surnames on the jersey nameplates.\n\nThe team's helmets are also a unique silver with a tint of blue known as \"Metallic Silver Blue\" (PMS 8240 C) and have a blue/white/blue vertical stripe placed upon the center of the crown. The Cowboys also include a unique, if subtle, feature on the back of the helmet: a blue strip of Dymo tape with the player's name embossed, placed on the white portion of the stripe at the back of the helmet.\nWhen the Dallas Cowboys franchise debuted in 1960, the team's uniform included a white helmet adorned with a simple blue star and a blue-white-blue stripe down the center crown. The team donned blue jerseys with white sleeves and a small blue star on each shoulder for home games and the negative opposite for away games. Their socks also had two horizontal white stripes overlapping the blue.\n\nIn 1964 the Cowboys opted for a simpler look (adopting essentially the team's current uniform) by changing their jersey/socks to one solid color with three horizontal stripes on the sleeves; the white jersey featured royal blue stripes with a narrow black border, the royal blue jersey white stripes with the same black outline. The star-shouldered jerseys were eliminated; \"TV\" numbers appeared just above the jersey stripes. The new helmet was silverblue, with a blue-white-blue tri-stripe down the center (the middle white stripe was thicker). The blue \"lone star\" logo was retained, but with a white border setting it off from the silver/blue. The new pants were silver/blue, with a blue-white-blue tri-stripe. In 1964 the NFL allowed teams to wear white jerseys at home; several teams did so, and the Cowboys have worn white at home ever since, except on certain \"throwback\" days.\n\nIn 1966, the team modified the jerseys, which now featured only two sleeve stripes, slightly wider; the socks followed the same pattern. In 1967 the \"lone star\" helmet decal added a blue outline to the white-bordered star, giving the logo a bigger, bolder look. The logo and this version of the uniform has seen little change to the present day.\n\nThe only notable changes in the last 40 years were:\nBULLET::::- from 1970–1973 when the \"TV\" numbers were moved from the shoulders to the sleeves above the stripes\nBULLET::::- from 1982–1988 the pants featured a white uniform number in an elliptical blue circle worn near the hip.\nBULLET::::- the removal of the indented serifs on the front and back jersey numbers in the early 1980s (seen currently on the throwback jersey)\nBULLET::::- In 1980 the blue jersey was rendered in a slightly darker shade than the 1964–79 version; from 1981–1994 the dark jerseys sported numbers that were gray with white borders and a blue pinstripe. The stripes on the sleeves and socks also used the same gray with white border scheme (sans navy pinstripe).\nBULLET::::- Player names on jersey backs, which appeared in 1970, were originally in block-letter style; from 1982 onward the names were slightly smaller and in footed, \"serif\" style.\nBULLET::::- the 1996 addition of the word \"Cowboys\" in the center of the neckline which lasted until 1998 on the white jersey but currently remains on the blue jersey.\n\nDuring the 1976 season, the blue-white-blue stripe on the crown of the helmets were temporarily changed to red-white-blue to commemorate the United States' bicentennial anniversary.\n\nIn 1994, the NFL celebrated their 75th Anniversary, and the Dallas Cowboys celebrated their back-to-back Super Bowl titles by unveiling a white \"Double-Star\" jersey on Thanksgiving Day. This jersey was used for special occasions and was worn throughout the 1994–1995 playoffs. During the same season, the Cowboys also wore their 1960–63 road jersey with a silver helmet for one game as part of a league-wide \"throwback\" policy.\n\nDuring the 1995 season, the team wore the navy \"Double-Star\" jersey for games at Washington and Philadelphia and permanently switched to solid color socks (royal blue for the white uniform, and navy blue for the dark uniform). The navy \"Double-Star\" jersey was not seen again until the NFL's \"Classic Throwback Weekend\" on Thanksgiving Day 2001–2003.\n\nIn 2004, the Cowboys resurrected their original 1960–1963 uniform on Thanksgiving Day. This uniform became the team's alternate or \"third jersey\" and was usually worn at least once a year, primarily Thanksgiving Day. Two exceptions were when the Cowboys wore their normal white uniforms on Thanksgiving in 2007 and 2008. While the team didn't wear the throwback uniform exactly on Thanksgiving Day in those two years, Dallas wore them on a date around Thanksgiving for those two years. In 2007 Dallas wore the throwback uniform on November 29, 2007 against the Green Bay Packers. In 2008 Dallas wore the throwback uniform on November 23, 2008 against the San Francisco 49ers. The team went back to wearing this uniform at home on Thanksgiving Day in 2009 while their opponent was the Oakland Raiders who wore their AFL Legacy Weekend throwbacks. Dallas wore this alternate uniform on October 11, 2009 as part of one of the NFL's AFL Legacy Weekends when they traveled to Kansas City to play the Chiefs who were sporting their AFL Dallas Texans' uniforms. This created a rare game in which neither team wore a white jersey and the first time the Cowboys wore the alternative uniform as a visiting team. The 1960–1963 uniform may also be used on other special occasion. Other instances include the 2005 Monday Night game against the Washington Redskins when the team inducted Troy Aikman, Emmitt Smith, and Michael Irving into the Cowboys Ring of Honor, and the 2006 Christmas Day game against the Philadelphia Eagles.\n\nIn 2013, the NFL issued a new helmet rule stating that players will no longer be allowed to use alternate helmets due to the league's enhanced concussion awareness. This caused the Cowboys' white 1960s throwback helmets to become non-compliant. The team instead decided to wear their normal blue jerseys at home for Thanksgiving, which has since become an annual tradition. In 2017, the team initially announced that they will wear blue jerseys at home on a more regular basis, only to rescind soon after.\n\nIn 2015, the Cowboys released their Color Rush uniform, featuring a variation of the 1990s \"Double Star\" alternates with white pants and socks. The uniform was first used in a Thanksgiving game against the Carolina Panthers and in subsequent \"Thursday Night Football\" games since 2016.\n\nThe Cowboys also unveiled a navy uniform-white pants combination which was first used on December 10, 2017 against the Giants.\n\nIn 1964, Tex Schramm started the tradition of the Cowboys wearing their white jersey at home, contrary to an unofficial rule that teams should wear colored jerseys at home. Schramm did this because he wanted fans to see a variety of opponents' colors at home games. Since then, a number of other teams have worn their white uniforms at home, including the Miami Dolphins. According to Mike McCord, the Cowboys' equipment director, one of the reasons why the Cowboys started wearing white at home was because of the intense heat during Cowboys' home games at Texas Stadium.\n\nThroughout the years, the Cowboys' blue jersey has been popularly viewed to be \"jinxed\" because the team often seemed to lose when they wore them. This purported curse drew attention after the team lost Super Bowl V with the blue jerseys. However, the roots of the curse likely date back earlier to the 1968 divisional playoffs, when the blue-shirted Cowboys were upset by the Cleveland Browns in what turned out to be Don Meredith's final game with the Cowboys. Dallas's lone victory in a conference championship or Super Bowl wearing the blue jerseys was in the 1978 NFC Championship game against the Los Angeles Rams.\n\nSince the 1970 NFL-AFL merger, league rules were changed to allow the Super Bowl home team to pick their choice of jersey. Most of the time, Dallas will wear their blue jerseys when they visit Washington, Philadelphia (sometimes), Miami, or one of the handful of other teams that traditionally wear their white jerseys at home during the first half of the season due to the hot climates in their respective cities or other means. Occasionally opposing teams will wear their white jerseys at home to try to invoke the curse, such as when the Philadelphia Eagles hosted the Cowboys in the 1980 NFC Championship Game, as well as their November 4, 2007 meeting. Various other teams followed suit in the 1980s.\n\nAlthough Dallas has made several tweaks to their blue jerseys over the years, Schramm said he did not believe in the curse. Since the league began allowing teams to use an alternate jersey, the Cowboys' alternates have been primarily blue versions of past jerseys and the Cowboys have generally had success when wearing these blue alternates. With the implementation of the 2013 NFL helmet rule for alternate jerseys, the team decided instead to wear their regular blue jerseys for their Thanksgiving game, something they have not done at home since Schramm started the white-jersey-at-home tradition.\n\nWith the Cowboys traditionally hosting Thanksgiving Day games, separate practice uniforms have been used for these games in recent years. Through the 2000 season, the Cowboys continued the usual practice of wearing white at home. In 2001, the Cowboys wore blue at home for the first time in years with was an older design of the blue jersey. Dallas would lose the game, but again wore the older blue jersey at home on Thanksgiving the next year and won. With the 2002 victory, it seems an exception to the theory of the blue jersey jinx is invoked on Thanksgiving.\n\nThus, the Cowboys continued wearing blue at home on Thanksgiving from 2003–2006, however it was always an older-styled alternate blue jersey. In 2007 and 2008, the Cowboys returned to wearing white at home for their Thanksgiving game. From 2009 to 2017, the Cowboys returned to wearing blue at home on Thanksgiving only. (From 2009–2012, the team again decided to go with an older-styled blue uniform as they had in previous years on Thanksgiving, and since 2013 have worn the newer-styled blue jersey.) The Cowboys wore white jerseys on Thanksgiving in 2018.\n\nIn the 2015 season, the Cowboys wore their Color Rush variation of the 1990s \"Double Star\" jerseys for a Thanksgiving game against the Carolina Panthers.\n\nThe Cotton Bowl is a stadium which opened in 1932 and became known as \"The House That Doak Built\" due to the immense crowds that former SMU running back Doak Walker drew to the stadium during his college career in the late 1940s. Originally known as the Fair Park Bowl, it is located in Fair Park, site of the State Fair of Texas. Concerts or other events using a stage allow the playing field to be used for additional spectators. The Cotton Bowl was the longtime home of the annual Cotton Bowl Classic college football bowl game, for which the stadium is named. (Beginning with the January 2010 game, the Cotton Bowl Classic has been played at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington.) The Dallas Cowboys called the Cotton Bowl home for 11 years, from the team's formation in 1960 until 1971, when the Cowboys moved to Texas Stadium. It is the only Cowboys stadium within the Dallas city limits. The Cowboys hosted the Green Bay Packers for the 1966 NFL Championship at the Cotton Bowl.\n\nFor the majority of the franchise's history the Cowboys played their home games at Texas Stadium. Just outside the city of Dallas, the stadium was located in Irving. The stadium opened on October 24, 1971, at a cost of $35 million and with a seating capacity of 65,675. The stadium was famous for its hole-in-the-roof dome. The roof's worn paint had become so unsightly in the early 2000s that it was repainted in the summer of 2006 by the City of Irving. It was the first time the famed roof was repainted since Texas Stadium opened. The roof was structurally independent from the stadium it covered. The Cowboys lost their final game at Texas Stadium to the Baltimore Ravens, 33–24, on December 20, 2008. After Cowboys Stadium was opened in 2009, the Cowboys turned over the facility to the City of Irving.\n\nIn 2009, it was replaced as home of the Cowboys by Cowboys Stadium, which officially opened on May 27, 2009 in Arlington. Texas Stadium was demolished by implosion on April 11, 2010.\n\nAT&T Stadium, previously named Cowboys Stadium, is a domed stadium with a retractable roof in Arlington. After failed negotiations to build a new stadium on the site of the Cotton Bowl, Jerry Jones, along with the city of Arlington, Texas, a suburb of Fort Worth, funded the stadium at a cost of $1.3 billion. The stadium is located in Tarrant County, the first time the Cowboys will call a stadium home outside of Dallas County. It was completed on May 29, 2009 and seats 80,000, but is expandable to seat up to 100,000. AT&T Stadium is the largest domed stadium in the world.\n\nA highlight of AT&T Stadium is its gigantic, center-hung high-definition television screen, the largest in the world. The , scoreboard surpasses the screen that opened in 2009 at the renovated Kauffman Stadium in Kansas City as the world's largest.\n\nAt the debut pre-season game of Cowboys Stadium, a punt by Tennessee Titans kicker, A. J. Trapasso, hit the 2,100 in. screen above the field. The punt deflected and was ruled in-play until Titans coach Jeff Fisher informed the officials that the punt struck the scoreboard. (Many believe Trapasso was trying to hit the suspended scoreboard, based on replays and the angle of the kick.) The scoreboard is, however, within the regulation of the NFL guidelines — hanging approximately five feet above the minimum height. No punts hit the scoreboard during the entire 2009 regular season during an actual game. Also, on August 22, 2009, the day after AJ Trapasso hit the screen, many fans touring the facility noted that half of the field was removed with large cranes re-positioning the screen. According to some fans, a tour guide explained that Jerry Jones invited a few professional soccer players to drop kick soccer balls to try to hit the screen. Once he observed them hitting it consistently he had the screen moved up another 10 feet.\n\nThe first regular season home game of the 2009 season was against the New York Giants. A league record-setting 105,121 fans showed up to fill Cowboys Stadium for the game before which the traditional \"blue star\" at the 50-yard line was unveiled for the first time; however, the Cowboys lost in the final seconds, 33–31.\n\nThe Cowboys got their first regular season home win on September 28, 2009. They beat the Carolina Panthers 21–7 with 90,588 in attendance. The game was televised on ESPN's \"Monday Night Football\" and marked a record 42nd win for the Cowboys on \"Monday Night Football\".\n\nOn July 25, 2013, the Cowboys announced that AT&T would be taking over the rights to the name of the stadium.\n\nDallas Cowboys training camp locations:\nBULLET::::- 1960: Pacific University, Forest Grove, Oregon\nBULLET::::- 1961: St. Olaf College, Northfield, Minnesota\nBULLET::::- 1962: Northern Michigan College, Marquette, Michigan\nBULLET::::- 1963–1989: California Lutheran College, Thousand Oaks, California\nBULLET::::- 1990–1997: St. Edward's University, Austin, Texas\nBULLET::::- 1998–2002: Midwestern State University, Wichita Falls, Texas\nBULLET::::- 2001, 2004–2006, 2008, 2012–2015: River Ridge Sports Complex, Oxnard, California\nBULLET::::- 2002–2003, 2007, 2009: The Alamodome, San Antonio, Texas\nBULLET::::- 2010–2011: The Alamodome, San Antonio, Texas and River Ridge Sports Complex, Oxnard, California\nBULLET::::- 2016–present: The Ford Center at The Star, Frisco, Texas\n\nThe NFC East, composed of the Cowboys, Philadelphia Eagles, Washington Redskins and New York Giants, is one of the least-changed divisions of the original six formed in the wake of the NFL-AFL merger (its only major changes being the relocation of the Cardinals franchise from St. Louis to Arizona and its subsequent move to the NFC West in the league's 2002 realignment). Three of the four teams have been division rivals since the Cowboys' entry into the NFL. As such, the Cowboys have some of the longest and fiercest rivalries in the sport.\n\nThe Redskins and Dallas Cowboys enjoy what has been called by \"Sports Illustrated\" the top NFL rivalry of all time and \"one of the greatest in sports.\" Some sources trace the enmity to before the Cowboys were even formed, due to a longstanding disagreement between Redskins owner George Preston Marshall and Cowboys founder Clint Murchison, Jr. over the creation of a new football team in the South, due to Marshall's TV monopoly in that region. The two teams' storied on-field rivalry goes back to 1960 when the two clubs first played each other, resulting in a 26–14 Washington victory. Since that time, the two teams have met in 116 regular season contests and two NFC Championships. Dallas leads the regular season all-time series 70–42–2, and the Redskins lead the all-time playoff series 2–0. The Cowboys currently have a 14–7 advantage over the Redskins at FedEx Field. Some notable moments in the rivalry include Washington's victory over Dallas in the 1982 NFC Championship and the latter's 1989 win over the Redskins for their only victory that season. The last Cowboys game with Tom Landry as coach was a win over Washington on December 11, 1988. In the 2010s, the Redskins have struggled to consistently compete for the Division title, but still play the Cowboys particularly tough, posting an impressive upset victory against Dallas in 2014, despite being outclassed by the Cowboys in the overall standings.\n\nThe competition with Philadelphia has been particularly intense since the late 1970s, when the long-moribund Eagles returned to contention. In January 1981, the two teams faced off in the NFC Championship, with Philadelphia winning 20–7. A series of other factors heightened tensions during the 1980s and 1990s, including several provocative actions by Philadelphia fans and Eagles head coach Buddy Ryan. Among these were the 1989 \"Bounty Bowls\", in which Ryan allegedly placed a bounty on Dallas kicker Luis Zendejas and Veterans Stadium fans pelted the Cowboys with snowballs and other debris. A 1999 game at Philadelphia saw Eagles fans cheering as Michael Irvin lay motionless and possibly paralyzed on the field. In 2008 the rivalry became more intense when in the last game of the year in which both teams could clinch a playoff spot with a victory, the Philadelphia Eagles defeated the Cowboys 44–6. The following season, the Cowboys avenged that defeat by beating the Eagles three times: twice during the regular season to claim the title as NFC East champions and once more in a wild-card playoff game by a combined score of 78–30, including a 24–0 shutout in week 17. That three-game sweep was Dallas' first over any opponent and the longest winning streak against the Eagles since 1992–1995 when Dallas won seven straight matches against Philadelphia. During the 2013 season Dallas won the first meeting 17–3 at Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia. They would meet again in Week 17 at AT&T Stadium with the winner clinching the 2013 NFC East title. The Cowboys came into the game at a disadvantage with starting quarterback Tony Romo out with a season ending back injury which put backup Kyle Orton as the starter. It was a tight game with the Eagles up 24–22 with less than 2 minutes to go in regulation. Orton got the ball and started driving down the field when he was intercepted by the Eagles defense, which ended the game and the Cowboys season. In 2014, the Cowboys and Eagles both won against each other on the road, with Philadelphia posting a dominant 33–10 win on Thanksgiving Day in Dallas, and Dallas returning the favor two weeks later by defeating the Eagles 38–27 in Philadelphia. The second game between these rivals clenched a playoff spot for Dallas and led to formerly first place Philadelphia missing out on the post-season. Dallas leads the regular season all-time series 63–50.\n\nThe first game ever played between the Giants and Cowboys was a 31–31 tie on December 4, 1960. Dallas logged its first win in the series on October 29, 1961 and New York's first was on November 11, 1962. Among the more notable moments in the rivalry was the Giants' defeat of Dallas in the 2007 playoffs en route to their victory in Super Bowl XLII and winning the first regular season game played at Cowboys Stadium in 2009. Dallas currently leads the all-time series 65–46–2.\n\nThe two teams met in the first regular season game the Cowboys ever played in 1960 (a 35–28 loss to the Steelers), the first-ever regular season victory for the expansion Cowboys in 1961, and would later meet in three Super Bowls, all of them closely contested events. The Steelers-Cowboys is to date the Super Bowl matchup with the most contests. The Steelers won Super Bowl X and Super Bowl XIII; both games were decided in the final seconds, first on a last-second throw by Roger Staubach, then as a fourth-quarter rally by Dallas fell short on an onside kick. The Cowboys won Super Bowl XXX in January 1996. It is said that the rivalry was fueled in the 1970s due to the stark contrast of the teams: the Cowboys, being more of a \"flashy\" team with Roger Staubach's aerial attack and the \"flex\" Doomsday Defense; while the Steelers were more of a \"blue-collar\" team with a strong running game and the 1970s-esque Steel Curtain defense, a contrast that still exists today. In addition, both teams have national fan bases rivaled by few NFL teams, and both come from areas with a strong following for football at all levels. Dallas leads the all-time series 16–13 including the playoffs.\n\nThe bitter rivalry between the Dallas Cowboys and San Francisco 49ers has been going on since the 1970s. The NFL Top 10 ranked this rivalry to be the tenth best in the history of the NFL. San Francisco has played Dallas in seven postseason games. The Cowboys defeated the 49ers in the 1970 and 1971 NFC Championship games, and again in the 1972 Divisional Playoff Game. The 1981 NFC Championship Game in San Francisco, which saw the 49ers' Joe Montana complete a game-winning pass to Dwight Clark in the final minute (now known as The Catch) is one of the most famous games in NFL history. The rivalry became even more intense during the 1992–1994 seasons. San Francisco and Dallas faced each other in the NFC Championship Game three separate times. Dallas won the first two match-ups, and San Francisco won the third. In each of these pivotal match-ups, the game's victor went on to win the Super Bowl. Both the Cowboys and the 49ers are tied for third all-time in Super Bowl victories to the Pittsburgh Steelers and New England Patriots, with five each. The 49ers-Cowboys rivalry is also part of the larger cultural rivalry between California and Texas. The Cowboys lead the all-time series with a record of 18-17-1.\n\nThe Cowboys–Packers rivalry is a rivalry between the Dallas Cowboys and the Green Bay Packers. It is one of the best known intra-conference rivalries in the NFL. The two teams do not play every year; instead, they play once every three years due to the NFL's rotating division schedules, or if the two teams finish in the same place in their respective divisions, they would play the ensuing post-season. The rivalry has also resulted in notable playoff games.\n\nThe all time regular seasons series record is 15–13 in favor of the Packers, and the postseason series is tied 4–4.\n\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\"\"Dallas Cowboys Hall of Famers\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\"\"Players\n! No.\n! Name\n! Position\n! Seasons \n! Inducted\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\"\"Coaches and Contributors\n! colspan=2Name\n! Position\n! Seasons \n! Inducted\n\n colspan=\"3\" style=\";\"Super Bowl MVP Winners\n! style=\";\"Super Bowl\n! style=\";\"Player\n! style=\";\"Position\n\nUnlike many NFL teams, the Cowboys do not retire jersey numbers of past standouts as a matter of policy. Instead, the team has a \"Ring of Honor\", which is on permanent display encircling the field. Originally at Texas Stadium, the ring is now on display at AT&T Stadium in Arlington. The first inductee was Bob Lilly in 1975 and by 2005, the ring contained 17 names, all former Dallas players except for one head coach and one general manager/president. Although the team does not officially retire jersey numbers, some are kept \"unofficially inactive\". As of 2019, these following numbers have been kept out of circulation: Troy Aikman's No. 8, Tony Romo's No. 9, Roger Staubach's No. 12, Bob Hayes' and Emmitt Smith's No. 22, Bob Lilly's No. 74, and No. 88, worn by Drew Pearson, Michael Irvin, and Dez Bryant.\n\nThe Ring of Honor has been a source of controversy over the years. Tex Schramm was believed to be a \"one-man committee\" in choosing inductees and many former Cowboys players and fans felt that Schramm deliberately excluded linebacker Lee Roy Jordan because of a bitter contract dispute the two had during Jordan's playing days. When Jerry Jones bought the team he inherited Schramm's Ring of Honor \"power\" and immediately inducted Jordan.\n\nJones also has sparked controversy regarding his decisions in handling the \"Ring of Honor\". For four years he was unsuccessful in convincing Tom Landry to accept induction. Meanwhile, he refused to induct Tex Schramm (even after Schramm's induction to the Pro Football Hall of Fame). In 1993, thanks in part to the efforts of Roger Staubach as an intermediary, Landry accepted induction and had a ceremony on the day of that year's Cowboys-Giants game (Landry had played and coached for the Giants). In 2003, Jones finally chose to induct Tex Schramm. Schramm and Jones held a joint press conference at Texas Stadium announcing the induction. Unfortunately, Schramm did not live to see his ceremonial induction at the Cowboys-Eagles game that fall.\n\nSome of the more recent inductees were Troy Aikman, all-time NFL leading rusher Emmitt Smith, and Michael Irvin, known as \"The Triplets\". The Cowboys waited until Smith had retired as a player before inducting Aikman and Irvin, so all three could be inducted together, which occurred during halftime at a Monday Night Football home game against the arch-rival Washington Redskins on September 19, 2005.\n\nThe 5 most recent inductees are defensive end Charles Haley, offensive lineman Larry Allen, and wide receiver Drew Pearson, who were inducted into the Ring of Honor during halftime of the Cowboys' game vs. the Seattle Seahawks on November 6, 2011, safety Darren Woodson, who was inducted on November 1, 2015, and executive Gil Brandt, who was inducted on November 29, 2018.\n\n, the Cowboys' flagship radio station is KRLD-FM. Brad Sham is the team's longtime play-by-play voice. Working alongside him is former Cowboy quarterback Babe Laufenberg, who returned in 2007 after a one-year absence to replace former safety Charlie Waters. The Cowboys, who retain rights to all announcers, chose not to renew Laufenberg's contract in 2006 and brought in Waters. However, Laufenberg did work as the analyst on the \"Blue Star Network\", which televises Cowboys preseason games not shown on national networks. The anchor station is KTVT, the CBS owned and operated station in Dallas. Previous stations which aired Cowboys games included KVIL-FM, KRLD, and KLUV-FM. Kristi Scales is the sideline reporter on the radio broadcasts.\n\nDuring his tenure as Cowboys coach, Tom Landry co-hosted his own coach's show with late veteran sportscaster Frank Glieber and later with Brad Sham. Landry's show was famous for his analysis of raw game footage and for him and his co-host making their NFL \"predictions\" at the end of each show. Glieber is one of the original voices of the Cowboys Radio Network, along with Bill Mercer, famous for calling the \"Ice Bowl\" of 1967 and both Super Bowl V and VI. Mercer is perhaps best known as the ringside commentator of World Class Championship Wrestling in the 1980s. Upon Mercer's departure, Verne Lundquist joined the network, and became their play-by-play announcer by 1977, serving eight years in that capacity before handing those chores permanently over to Brad Sham, who joined the network in 1977 as the color analyst and occasional fill-in for Lundquist.\n\nLongtime WFAA-TV sports anchor Dale Hansen was the Cowboys color analyst with Brad Sham as the play-by-play announcer from 1985–1996.\n\nDave Garrett served as the Cowboys' play-by-play announcer from 1995–97, when Brad Sham left the team and joined the Texas Rangers' radio network team as well as broadcast Sunday Night Football on Westwood One.\n\nSeeking to expand its radio broadcasting scope nationally, the Cowboys began a five-year partnership with Compass Media Networks on February 2, 2011. The result was the America's Team Radio Network, a supplement to the franchise's regional one. Beginning with the 2011 season, Kevin Burkhardt and Danny White handled the broadcasts, with Jerry Recco as the studio host.\n\nThe Dallas Cowboys fight song, \"Cowboys Stampede March\" by Tom Merriman Big Band was the official fight song of the Dallas Cowboys. The Cowboys used at Texas Stadium 1961 until about the early-mid '90s.\n\n\"This little platter came from the personal collection of Tex Schramm, and it seems to be from the dawn of the Dallas Cowboys when he was casting about for a song to associate with the team. Eventually, the song \"Cowboy Stampede March\" would become THE song associated with the team thru their broadcasts in the '60s thru the '80s.\" George Gimarc\n\nThe Cowboys now play We Dem Boyz by Wiz Khalifa for starting defensive line, because of the saying \"How Bout Dem Cowboys.\" For every touchdown scored by the Cowboys at a home game the song \"Cowboys and Cut Cigars\" by The Burning of Rome is played after a train horn.\n\nBULLET::::- Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders\nBULLET::::- List of Dallas Cowboys seasons\nBULLET::::- List of Dallas Cowboys players\nBULLET::::- America's Team\nBULLET::::- Doomsday Defense\n\nBULLET::::- NFL 2002 Record & Fact Book\n\nBULLET::::- NFL.com – Dallas Cowboys\n"}
{"id": "8122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8122", "title": "Denver Broncos", "text": "Denver Broncos\n\nThe Denver Broncos are a professional American football franchise based in Denver, Colorado. The Broncos compete as a member club of the National Football League (NFL)'s American Football Conference (AFC) West division. The team began play in 1960 as a charter member of the American Football League (AFL) and joined the NFL as part of the merger in 1970. The Broncos are owned by the Pat Bowlen trust and currently play home games at Empower Field at Mile High (formerly known as Invesco Field at Mile High from 2001–2010, Sports Authority Field at Mile High from 2011–2017, and Broncos Stadium at Mile High from 2018–2019). Prior to that, they played at Mile High Stadium from 1960 to 2000.\n\nThe Broncos were barely competitive during their 10-year run in the AFL and their first seven years in the NFL. They did not complete a winning season until 1973. In 1977, four years later, they qualified for the playoffs for the first time in franchise history and advanced to Super Bowl XII. Since 1975, the Broncos have become one of the NFL's most successful teams, having suffered only seven losing seasons. They have won eight AFC Championships (, , , , , , , ), and three Super Bowl championships ( (XXXII), (XXXIII), (50)), and share the NFL record for most Super Bowl losses (5 — tied with the New England Patriots). Twelve players who have played for Denver are enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame: John Elway, Floyd Little, Shannon Sharpe, Gary Zimmerman, Willie Brown, Tony Dorsett, Jerry Rice, Andre Reed, Terrell Davis, Brian Dawkins, Ty Law and Champ Bailey, along with late club owner Pat Bowlen.\n\nThe Denver Broncos were founded on August 14, 1959, when Minor League Baseball owner Bob Howsam was awarded an American Football League (AFL) charter franchise. The Broncos won the first-ever AFL game over the Boston Patriots 13–10, on September 9, 1960. On August 5, 1967, they became the first-ever AFL team to defeat an NFL team, with a 13–7 win over the Detroit Lions in a preseason game. However, the Broncos were not successful in the 1960s, compiling a record of 39–97–4 during their ten-season run in the AFL.\n\nDenver came close to losing its franchise in 1965, until a local ownership group took control and rebuilt the team. The team's first superstar, \"Franchise\" Floyd Little, was instrumental in keeping the team in Denver, due to his signing in 1967 as well as his Pro Bowl efforts on and off the field. The Broncos were the only original AFL team that never played in the title game, as well as the only original AFL team never to have a winning season while a member of the AFL during the upstart league's 10-year history.\n\nIn 1972, the Broncos hired former Stanford University coach John Ralston as their head coach. In 1973, he was the UPI's AFC Coach of the Year, after Denver achieved its first winning season at 7–5–2. In five seasons with the Broncos, Ralston guided the team to winning seasons three times. Though Ralston finished the 1976 season with a 9–5 record, the team, as was the case in Ralston's previous winning seasons, still missed the playoffs. Following the season, several prominent players publicly voiced their discontent with Ralston, which soon led to his resignation.\nRed Miller, a long-time assistant coach was hired and along with the Orange Crush Defense (a nickname originated in 1977, also the brand of the popular orange-flavored soft drink) and aging quarterback Craig Morton, took the Broncos to what was then a record-setting 12–2 regular season record and their first playoff appearance in 1977, and ultimately first Super Bowl XII, in which they were defeated by the Dallas Cowboys (Morton's former team), 27–10.\n\nIn 1981, Broncos' owner Gerald Phipps, who had purchased the team in May 1961 from the original owner Bob Howsam, sold the team to Canadian financier Edgar Kaiser Jr., grandson of shipbuilding industrialist Henry J. Kaiser. In 1984, the team was purchased by Pat Bowlen, who placed team ownership into a family trust sometime before 2004 and remained in day-to-day control until his battle with Alzheimer's disease forced him to cede the team to Joe Ellis in 2014.\n\nDan Reeves became the youngest head coach in the NFL when he joined the Broncos in 1981 as vice president and head coach. Quarterback John Elway, who played college football at Stanford, arrived in 1983 via a trade. Originally drafted by the Baltimore Colts as the first pick of the draft, Elway proclaimed that he would shun football in favor of baseball (he was drafted by the New York Yankees to play center field and was also a pitching prospect), unless he was traded to a selected list of other teams, which included the Broncos. Prior to Elway, the Broncos had over 24 different starting quarterbacks in its 23 seasons to that point.\n\nReeves and Elway guided the Broncos to six post-season appearances, five AFC West divisional titles, three AFC championships and three Super Bowl appearances (Super Bowl XXI, XXII and XXIV) during their 12-year span together. The Broncos lost Super Bowl XXI to the New York Giants, 39–20; Super Bowl XXII to the Washington Redskins, 42–10; and Super Bowl XXIV to the San Francisco 49ers, 55–10; the latter score remains the most lopsided scoring differential in Super Bowl history. The last year of the Reeves-Elway era were marked by feuding, due to Reeves taking on play-calling duties after ousting Elway's favorite offensive coordinator Mike Shanahan after the 1991 season, as well as Reeves drafting quarterback Tommy Maddox out of UCLA instead of going with a wide receiver to help Elway. Reeves was fired after the 1992 season and replaced by his protégé and friend Wade Phillips, who had been serving as the Broncos' defensive coordinator. Phillips was fired after a mediocre 1994 season, in which management felt he lost control of the team.\n\nIn 1995, Mike Shanahan, who had formerly served under Reeves as the Broncos' offensive coordinator, returned as head coach. Shanahan drafted rookie running back Terrell Davis. In 1996, the Broncos were the top seed in the AFC with a 13–3 record, dominating most of the teams that year. The fifth-seeded Jacksonville Jaguars, however, upset the Broncos 30–27 in the divisional round of the playoffs, ending the Broncos' 1996 run.\n\nDuring the 1997 season, Elway and Davis helped guide the Broncos to their first Super Bowl victory, a 31–24 win over the defending champion Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl XXXII. Though Elway completed only 13 of 22 passes, throwing one interception and no touchdowns (he did, however, have a rushing touchdown), Davis rushed for 157 yards and a Super Bowl–record three touchdowns to earn the Super Bowl Most Valuable Player Award—this while overcoming a severe migraine headache that caused him blurred vision. The Broncos repeated as Super Bowl champions the following season, defeating the Atlanta Falcons (led by Elway's longtime head coach Dan Reeves) in Super Bowl XXXIII, 34–19. Elway was named Super Bowl MVP, completing 18 of 29 passes for 336 yards, with an 80-yard touchdown to wide receiver Rod Smith and one interception.\n\nJohn Elway retired following the 1998 season, and Brian Griese started at quarterback for the next four seasons. After a 6–10 record in 1999, the Broncos recovered in 2000, earning a Wild Card playoff berth, but losing to the eventual Super Bowl champion Baltimore Ravens. After missing the playoffs the following two seasons, former Arizona Cardinals' quarterback Jake Plummer replaced Griese in 2003, and led the Broncos to two straight 10–6 seasons, earning Wild Card playoff berths both years. However, the Broncos went on the road to face the Indianapolis Colts in back-to-back seasons and were blown out by more than 20 points in each game, allowing a combined 90 points.\n\nPlummer led the Broncos to a 13–3 record in 2005 and their first AFC West division title since 1998. After a first-round bye, the Broncos defeated the defending Super Bowl champion New England Patriots, 27–13, denying New England from becoming the first NFL team ever to win three consecutive Super Bowl championships. The Broncos' playoff run came to an end the next week, after losing at home to the Pittsburgh Steelers in the AFC Championship game, 34–17. The Steelers went on to win Super Bowl XL.\n\nThe Broncos' defense began the first five games of the 2006 season allowing only one touchdown—an NFL record, but struggled down the season stretch. Plummer led the team to a 7–2 record, only to struggle and be replaced by rookie quarterback Jay Cutler. Cutler went 2–3 as a starter, and the Broncos finished with a 9–7 record, losing the tiebreaker to the Kansas City Chiefs for the final playoff spot. Cutler's first full season as a starter in 2007 became the Broncos' first losing season since 1999, with a 7–9 record.\n\nThe 2008 season ended in a 52–21 loss at the San Diego Chargers, giving the Broncos an 8–8 record and their third straight season out of the playoffs. Mike Shanahan, the longest-tenured and most successful head coach in Broncos' franchise history, was fired after 14 seasons.\n\nOn January 11, 2009, two weeks after Shanahan was fired, the Broncos hired former New England Patriots' offensive coordinator Josh McDaniels as the team's new head coach. Three months later, the team acquired quarterback Kyle Orton as part of a trade that sent Jay Cutler to the Chicago Bears.\nUnder McDaniels and Orton, the Broncos jumped out to a surprising 6–0 start in 2009. However, the team lost eight of their next ten games, finishing 8–8 for a second consecutive season and missing the playoffs. The next season (2010), the Broncos set a new franchise record for losses in a single season, with a 4–12 record. McDaniels was fired before the end of the 2010 season following a combination of the team's poor record and the fallout from a highly publicized videotaping scandal. Running backs coach Eric Studesville was named interim coach for the final four games of the 2010 season. He chose to start rookie first-round draft choice Tim Tebow at quarterback for the final three games.\n\nFollowing the 2010 season, Joe Ellis was promoted from Chief Operating Officer to team president, while John Elway returned to the organization as the team's Executive Vice President of Football Operations. In addition, the Broncos hired John Fox as the team's 14th head coach. Fox previously served as the Carolina Panthers' head coach from 2002 to 2010.\n\nFollowing a 1–4 start to the 2011 season, Tim Tebow replaced Kyle Orton as the Broncos' starting quarterback, and led the Broncos to an 8–8 record and the team's first playoff berth and division title since 2005. The Broncos defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers in the Wild Card round on a memorable 80-yard touchdown pass from Tebow to wide receiver Demaryius Thomas on the first play of overtime, setting a record for the fastest overtime in NFL history. However, the Broncos were blown out by the New England Patriots in the Divisional round.\n\nIn March 2012, the Broncos reached an agreement on a five-year, $96 million contract with former longtime Indianapolis Colts' quarterback Peyton Manning, who had recently missed the entire season following multiple neck surgeries. This resulted in the Broncos subsequently trading incumbent quarterback Tim Tebow to the New York Jets. The Broncos finished with a 13–3 record and the AFC's No. 1 seed in the 2012 playoffs, but were defeated by the Baltimore Ravens in the Divisional round.\n\nLike 2012, the Broncos finished with a 13–3 record and the AFC's No. 1 seed in 2013. In the 2013 playoffs, the Broncos defeated the San Diego Chargers in the Divisional round and the New England Patriots in the AFC Championship. However, the Broncos were soundly defeated by the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII by a score of 43–8, the Broncos' first Super Bowl berth since winning back-to-back Super Bowls in 1997 and 1998.\n\nPrior to the start of the 2014 season, the Broncos announced that Pat Bowlen, the team's owner since 1984, relinquished control of the team due to his battle with Alzheimer's disease, resulting in team president Joe Ellis and general manager John Elway assuming control of the team. The Broncos finished the 2014 season with a 12–4 record and the AFC's No. 2 seed. However, the Broncos were defeated by the Indianapolis Colts in the Divisional round of the 2014 playoffs, marking the third time in four seasons that the Broncos lost in the Divisional round of the playoffs. Quarterback Peyton Manning had been playing with strained quadriceps for the final month of the 2014 season.\n\nOn January 12, 2015, one day after the aforementioned Divisional playoff loss to the Colts, the Broncos and head coach John Fox mutually agreed to part ways. Fox left the Broncos with a .719 winning percentage in his four seasons as the Broncos' head coach—the highest in franchise history. One week later, the Broncos hired Gary Kubiak as the team's 15th head coach. Kubiak served as a backup quarterback to executive vice president/general manager John Elway from 1983 to 1991, as well as the Broncos' offensive coordinator from 1995 to 2005. Shortly after Kubiak became head coach, the Broncos underwent numerous changes to their coaching staff, including the hiring of defensive coordinator Wade Phillips, under whom the Broncos' defense ranked No. 1 in the NFL during the 2015 season. The Broncos finished with a 12–4 record and the AFC's No. 1 seed, despite Peyton Manning having his worst statistical season since his rookie year with the Indianapolis Colts in and backup quarterback Brock Osweiler starting the last six games of the regular season due to Manning suffering from a foot injury. Manning led the Broncos throughout the playoffs. The Broncos defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 23–16 in the Divisional Round, the New England Patriots 20–18 in the AFC Championship, and defeated the Carolina Panthers 24–10 in Super Bowl 50—the Broncos' third Super Bowl title.\n\nOn March 7, 2016, quarterback Peyton Manning retired after 18 NFL seasons during a press conference at the team's Dove Valley headquarters. Following Manning's retirement, the Broncos have undergone changes at the quarterback position, including the free agent departure of backup quarterback Brock Osweiler to the Houston Texans, the trade acquisition of Mark Sanchez from the Philadelphia Eagles and the selection of Paxton Lynch during the 2016 draft. Sanchez, Lynch and second-year quarterback Trevor Siemian competed for the starting quarterback spot during the off-season and preseason; however, Sanchez was released and Siemian was named the starter prior to the start of the season. The Broncos finished the season 9–7 and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2010. On January 2, 2017, coach Gary Kubiak announced his retirement, citing health as the main reason for retiring. The Broncos later hired Vance Joseph as head coach on January 11, 2017. The Broncos finished 5–11 in 2017 due to a poor offense, and signed quarterback Case Keenum in 2018. After getting off to a strong start, their 2018 season was mostly up and down, eventually finishing with a 6-10 record and third place in the AFC West. Coupled with the 5-11 season in 2017, the Broncos had back-to-back losing seasons for the first time since 1971-1972. Shortly after finishing the regular season, head coach Vance Joseph was fired after having only an 11-21 record in two seasons.\n\nOn January 10, 2019, the Denver Broncos came to terms with Chicago Bears defensive coordinator Vic Fangio to become the 17th head coach in franchise history. Fangio was chosen over Mike Munchak, who is the Bronco's current offensive line coach, and received a four year contract with a team option for an additional season. On February 13, 2019, it was announced that Joe Flacco would be the new starting quarterback for the Denver Broncos. On October 6, 2019, the Broncos defeated the Los Angeles Chargers for their 500th win, with a record of 500-432 at that point.\n\n! style=\";\"Year\n! style=\";\"Coach\n! style=\";\"Super Bowl\n! style=\";\"Location\n! style=\";\"Opponent\n! style=\";\"Score\n! style=\";\"Record\n\n! style=\";\"Year\n! style=\";\"Coach\n! style=\";\"Location\n! style=\";\"Opponent\n! style=\";\"Score\n! style=\";\"Record\n\nThe Denver Broncos have three AFC West rivals—the Kansas City Chiefs, Los Angeles Chargers and Oakland Raiders. All teams, along with the Broncos, were charter members of the American Football League (AFL), with each team placed in the AFL Western Division. The Broncos were barely competitive during the AFL years (1960–69), going a combined 10–49–1 against the Chiefs, Chargers and Raiders.\n\nThe Broncos have had several memorable matchups with the Chiefs, particularly during the years in which John Elway was the Broncos' starting quarterback (1983–98). The Broncos defeated the Chiefs at Arrowhead Stadium in the divisional round of the 1997 NFL playoffs, en route to their first Super Bowl victory. The Chiefs currently hold a 65–55 series lead over the Broncos, including the aforementioned 1997 divisional playoff game.\n\nThe rivalry with the Raiders was ignited in , when the Broncos advanced to their first Super Bowl by defeating the defending champion Raiders in the 1977 AFC Championship. The rivalry intensified in the mid-1990s, when Mike Shanahan was hired as the Broncos' head coach in 1995. Shanahan coached the Raiders in before being fired four games into the season. The Raiders currently hold a 65–53–2 series lead over the Broncos, including 1–1 in the playoffs.\n\nUnlike their records against the Chiefs and Raiders, the Broncos currently have a winning record against the Chargers, with a 68–52–1 series lead, including 1–0 in the playoffs. The Broncos pulled off one of the largest comebacks in Monday Night Football history, when Peyton Manning led the Broncos from a 24–0 halftime deficit to a 35–24 win at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium during the season. The two teams met in the playoffs for the first time on January 12, 2014, at Denver's Sports Authority Field at Mile High, with the Broncos winning 24–17.\n\nThe Broncos had an old rivalry with the Seattle Seahawks, who were members of the AFC West from 1977 to 2001, prior to the Seahawks' move to the NFC West as part of the NFL's re-alignment. During the 25 years in which the Seahawks resided in the AFC West, the Broncos went 32–18 against the Seahawks, including a loss at Seattle in the 1983 NFL playoffs. Since 2002, the Broncos have won three of five interconference meetings, and the two teams met in Super Bowl XLVIII on February 2, 2014, with the Seahawks winning by a score of 43–8.\n\nAside from the aforementioned AFC West teams, the Broncos have had intra-conference rivalries over the years with the Cleveland Browns, Pittsburgh Steelers and New England Patriots.\n\nThe Broncos had a brief rivalry with the Browns that arose from three AFC championship matches in 1986, 1987 and 1989. In the , quarterback John Elway led \"The Drive\" to secure a tie in the waning moments at Cleveland Municipal Stadium; the Broncos went on to win in 23–20 in overtime. One year later, the two teams met again in the at Mile High Stadium. Denver took a 21–3 lead, but Browns' quarterback Bernie Kosar threw four touchdown passes to tie the game at 31–31 halfway through the 4th quarter. After a long drive, John Elway threw a 20-yard touchdown pass to running back Sammy Winder to give Denver a 38–31 lead. Cleveland advanced to Denver's 8-yard line with 1:12 left, but Broncos' safety Jeremiah Castille stripped Browns' running back Earnest Byner of the football at the 2-yard line—a play that has been called \"The Fumble\" by Browns' fans. The Broncos recovered it, gave Cleveland an intentional safety, and went on to win 38–33. The two teams met yet again in the at Mile High Stadium, which the Broncos easily won by a score of 37–21. The Broncos did not win the Super Bowl after any of the championship games where they defeated the Browns, losing by an aggregate of 136–40.\n\nAs of the end of the season, the Broncos and Steelers have met in postseason play eight times, tied with four other pairings for the second–most frequent playoff matchups in NFL playoff history. The Broncos currently own a 5–3 playoff record vs. the Steelers. Perhaps the most memorable postseason matchup occurred in the , in which the Broncos defeated the Steelers 24–21 at Three Rivers Stadium, en route to their first Super Bowl victory. Eight years later, the Steelers returned the favor at INVESCO Field at Mile High, defeating the Broncos 34–17 in the , and subsequently won Super Bowl XL. In the Wild Card round of the 2011 playoffs, in a game dubbed \"The 3:16 game\", the Broncos stunned the Steelers 29–23 on the first play of overtime, when quarterback Tim Tebow connected with wide receiver Demaryius Thomas on an 80-yard game-winning touchdown pass. The teams met again in the Divisional round of the 2015 playoffs at Denver, where the Broncos defeated the Steelers 23–16 on their way to a victory in Super Bowl 50.\n\nThe Broncos and Patriots met twice annually during the American Football League (AFL) years from 1960 to 1969, and played in the first-ever AFL game on September 9, 1960. Since , the two teams have met frequently during the regular season, including nine consecutive seasons from 1995 to 2003. As of the end of the season, the two teams have met in the playoffs five times, with the Broncos owning a 4–1 record. The teams' first playoff match on January 4, 1987 was John Elway's first career playoff win, while the teams' second playoff match on January 14, 2006 game was the Broncos' first playoff win since Elway's retirement after the 1998 season. The game was also notable for Champ Bailey's 100-yard interception that resulted in a touchdown-saving tackle by Benjamin Watson at the 1-yard line. On October 11, 2009, the two teams met with former Patriots' offensive coordinator, Josh McDaniels as the Broncos' head coach. Both teams wore their AFL 50th anniversary jerseys. The game featured a 98-yard drive in the fourth quarter, with a game-tying touchdown pass from Kyle Orton to Brandon Marshall, followed by an overtime drive led by Orton that resulted in a 41-yard game-winning field goal by Matt Prater. The two teams met in the Divisional round of the 2011 playoffs, with the Patriots blowing out Tim Tebow and the Broncos by a score of 45–10. The Broncos' rivalry with the Patriots later intensified when longtime Indianapolis Colts' quarterback Peyton Manning became the Broncos' starting quarterback from 2012 to 2015. Manning and Patriots' quarterback Tom Brady maintained a legendary rivalry from until Manning's retirement after the season. Though Brady dominated Manning in regular season play, winning nine of twelve meetings, Manning won three of five playoff meetings, including the Broncos' 26-16 win in the 2013 AFC Championship and the Broncos' 20–18 win in the 2015 AFC Championship.\n\nWhen the Broncos debuted in , their original uniforms drew as much attention as their play on the field. They featured white and mustard yellow jerseys, with contrasting brown helmets, brown pants and vertically striped socks. Two years later, the team unveiled a new logo featuring a bucking horse, and changed their team colors to orange, royal blue and white. The uniform consisted of white pants, orange helmets, and either orange or white jerseys.\n\nIn , the Broncos debuted a design that became known as the \"Orange Crush.\" Their logo was redesigned so that the horse was coming out of a \"D.\" Additionally, the helmets were changed to royal blue, with thin stripes placed onto the sleeves, and other minor modifications were added. From 1969 to 1971, and again from 1978 to 1979, the team wore orange pants with their white jerseys. The facemasks became white (from grey) in 1975.\n\nThe Broncos wore their white jerseys at home throughout the season, as well as for home games vs. the San Diego Chargers and Dallas Cowboys, the latter in hopes to bring out the \"blue jersey jinx\" which has followed the Cowboys for decades (it worked, the Broncos won 41–20). The Broncos wore their white jerseys for home games vs. the Philadelphia Eagles, Los Angeles Raiders and Cincinnati Bengals, but did not wear white at home again for two decades — \"see next section\".\n\nIn , in honor of the 75th anniversary season of the NFL, the Broncos wore their throwback uniforms for two games—a Week 3 home game against the Raiders, as well a road game at the Buffalo Bills the following week.\n\nThe Broncos radically changed their logo and uniforms in , a design that the team continues to use to this day. The new logos and uniforms were unveiled on February 4, 1997. Navy blue replaced royal blue on the team's color scheme. The current logo is a profile of a horse's head, with an orange mane and navy blue outlines. The Broncos' popular live animal mascot Thunder was the inspiration to incorporate a horse-head profile as part of the logo on the team's helmets. During a February 4, 1997 press conference introducing the new logo, the team president and the art director for Nike, who were the creators of the new design, described it as \"a powerful horse with a fiery eye and mane.\"\n\nThe Broncos began wearing navy blue jerseys, replacing their longtime orange jerseys that had been the team's predominant home jersey color since 1962. This new uniform design features a new word mark, numbering font and a streak that runs up and down the sides of both the jerseys and the pants. On the navy blue jerseys, the streak is orange, with an orange collar and white numerals trimmed in orange, while on the road white jerseys, the streak is navy blue, with a thin orange accent strip on both sides, a navy collar and navy numerals trimmed in orange; the helmet facemasks became navy blue. When they debuted, these uniforms were vilified by the press and fans, until the Broncos won their first ever Super Bowl in the new design that same season. The navy blue jerseys served as the team's primary home jersey until the end of the season — \"see next section\".\n\nIn , the Broncos introduced an alternate orange jersey that is a mirror image of the aforementioned navy blue jerseys, but with orange and navy trading places. Like the road white jerseys, the white pants with the navy blue streaks running down the sides are worn with this uniform. This jersey was used only once in the 2002 and seasons, and were used twice per season from 2008 to 2011. Mike Shanahan, the team's head coach from 1995 to 2008, was not a big fan of the alternate orange jerseys. The Broncos previously wore orange jerseys as a throwback uniform in a Thanksgiving Day game at the Dallas Cowboys in .\n\nThe team also introduced navy blue pants in , with orange side streaks to match with the navy blue jerseys. Though they were part of the uniform change in 1997 (in fact, they were worn for a couple of 1997 preseason games) and most players wanted to wear them, the only player who vetoed wearing them was John Elway, thereby delaying their eventual introduction. From 2003 to 2011, these pants were primarily used for select prime-time and late-season home games (excluding the season), and since , are used exclusively with the now-alternate navy blue jerseys — \"see next section\".\n\nOn November 16, 2003, the Broncos wore their white jerseys at home for the first time since , in a game vs. the San Diego Chargers. This was compensation for a uniform mix-up, after the teams' first meeting at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium in Week 2 earlier that season, when the Chargers were the team that was supposed to declare their uniform color. The Chargers were planning to wear their white jerseys, but the visiting Broncos came to the stadium in white, and were fined $25,000 by the NFL as a result. When the two teams met at INVESCO Field at Mile High later that season (Week 11), the NFL allowed the visiting Chargers to choose their uniform color in advance, and they chose navy blue, forcing the Broncos to wear their white jerseys at home.\n\nIn , in honor of their 50th anniversary season as one of the eight original American Football League teams, the Broncos wore their 1960 throwback uniforms (brown helmets, mustard yellow and brown jerseys) for games against two fellow AFL rivals—a Week 5 home game vs. the New England Patriots, as well as the following week at the San Diego Chargers.\n\nBeginning in , the orange jerseys that served as the alternate colored jerseys from 2002 to 2011 became the primary home jersey, while the navy blue jerseys that served as the primary home jersey from 1997 to 2011 switched to alternate designation. The change was made due to overwhelming popularity with the fans, who pressured the Broncos to return to orange as the team's primary home jersey color. Since the 2012 uniform change, the team has worn the alternate navy blue jerseys for at least one home game per season, with the exception of , in which the Broncos wore their alternate navy blue uniforms for an October 6, 2013 road game at the Dallas Cowboys, which the Broncos won in a shootout, 51-48. The team will either wear the navy blue or the white pants — with the orange side stripes — to match with the alternate navy blue jerseys. The team initially did not wear the white pants with the orange side stripes, until a November 1, 2015 game vs. the Green Bay Packers, in which the Broncos wore said design in order to match the uniform ensemble that was used during the team's Super Bowl XXXII win over the Packers.\n\nAs the designated home team in Super Bowl 50, the Broncos — who have an 0–4 Super Bowl record when using their standard orange jerseys — chose to wear their white jerseys as the designated \"home\" team.\n\nIn , the Broncos' unveiled a new \"Color Rush\" uniform, which the team wore for a \"Thursday Night\" game at the San Diego Chargers on October 13, 2016. The uniform kit contained the following features: orange pants, which the team wore for the first time since 1979, orange socks and shoes, along with block-style numerals trimmed in navy blue that mirrored the team's 1968–1996 uniform style. Due to the NFL's one-helmet rule implemented in 2013, the helmets remained the same, with the team temporarily replacing the modern primary logo with the throwback \"D-horse\" logo. The same uniform was used for a Thursday night game against the Indianapolis Colts during the season and again during a 2018 game against the Pittsburgh Steelers.\n\n! Super Bowl\n! Date\n! Opponent\n! Favorite\n! Jersey Color\n! Result\n\nFor most of their history, the Denver Broncos played in Mile High Stadium. The AFL Broncos played at the University of Denver's Hilltop Stadium from time to time, including the first-ever victory of an AFL team over an NFL team: The Broncos beat the Detroit Lions on August 5, 1967, in a preseason game. The team has sold out every home game (including post-season games) since the AFL–NFL merger in , with the exception of two replacement games during the strike (but both were sold out before the strike).\n\nDuring home games, the attendance is announced to the crowd, along with the number of no-shows (the fans subsequently boo the no-shows). The fans are also known to chant \"IN-COM-PLETE!\" every time the visiting team throws an incomplete pass. The stadium's legendary home-field advantage is regarded as one of the best in the NFL, especially during the playoffs. The Broncos had the best home record in pro football over a 32-year span from 1974 to 2006 (191–65–1). Mile High Stadium was one of the NFL's loudest stadiums, with steel flooring instead of concrete, which may have given the Broncos an advantage over opponents, plus the advantage of altitude conditioning for the Broncos. In , the team moved into then-named Invesco Field at Mile High, built next to the former site of the since-demolished Mile High Stadium. Sportswriter Woody Paige, along with many of Denver's fans, however, often refused to call the stadium by its full name, preferring to use \"Mile High Stadium\" because of its storied history and sentimental import. Additionally, \"The Denver Post\" had an official policy of referring to the stadium as simply \"Mile High Stadium\" in protest, but dropped this policy in 2004.\nPrior to the 2011 season, Englewood-based sporting goods retailer Sports Authority claimed the naming rights of Invesco Field, which became known as Sports Authority Field at Mile High. However, in the summer of 2016, Sports Authority went bankrupt, the stadium was renamed Broncos Stadium at Mile High, and the Broncos sought out a naming rights sponsor until September 2019 when they agreed to rename the stadium Empower Field at Mile High.\n\nThe altitude has also been attributed as part of the team's home success. The stadium displays multiple references to the stadium's location of above sea level, including a prominent mural just outside the visiting team's locker room. The team training facility, the UCHealth Training Center (formerly known as the Paul D. Bowlen Memorial Broncos Centre), is a state-of-the-art facility located in Dove Valley. With 13.5 acres of property, the facility hosts three full-size fields, a complete weight and training facility, and a cafeteria.\n\nIn their more than half-century of existence, the Broncos have never been shut out at home, a streak of over 400 games as of the season.\n\nIn late 2012, the Broncos announced that the stadium would receive $30 million upgrades including a new video board in the south end zone three times larger than the previous display. The renovations were finished before kickoff of the 2013 season.\n\nThe Denver Broncos announced the club's 50th anniversary team on September 15, 2009. The anniversary team was voted on by users at DenverBroncos.com from June 6 – September 4, 2009.\n\n colspan=\"5\" style=\";\"Denver Broncos retired numbers\n! style=\";\"No.\n! style=\";\"Player\n! style=\";\"Position\n! style=\";\"Career\n! style=\";\"Retired\n† Note: No. 18 was re-issued for Peyton Manning after Tripucka gave his approval; it was used by Manning from the 2012 season until his retirement after the 2015 season. Manning's name was added to the retired number's banner as an honorable mention.\n\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\";\"Denver Broncos Hall of Famers\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\";\"Players\n! No.\n! Name\n! Position(s)\n! Season(s)\n! Inducted\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\";\"Coaches and Contributors\n! colspan=\"2\"Name\n! Position(s)\n! Season(s)\n! Inducted\n\nThe Broncos have a Ring of Fame on the Level 5 facade of Empower Field at Mile High, which honors the following:\n! colspan=\"5\" style=\"\"Denver Broncos Ring of Fame\n! style=\";\"No.\n! style=\";\"Name\n! style=\";\"Position(s)\n! style=\";\"Seasons\n! style=\";\"Inducted\n\n colspan=\"3\" style=\";\"Super Bowl MVP Winners\n! style=\";\"Super Bowl\n! style=\";\"Player\n! style=\";\"Position\n\nThe current head coach of the Broncos is Vic Fangio.\n\nThe Broncos' flagship radio station is currently KOA, 850AM, a 50,000-watt station owned by iHeartMedia. Dave Logan is the play-by-play announcer, with former Broncos' wide receiver Ed McCaffrey serving as the color commentator beginning in 2012, replacing Brian Griese. Ed McCaffrey was replaced by Rick lewis. Until 2010, preseason games not selected for airing on national television were shown on KCNC, channel 4, which is a CBS owned-and-operated station, as well as other CBS affiliates around the Rocky Mountain region. On May 26, 2011, the Broncos announced that KUSA channel 9, an NBC affiliate also known as 9NEWS in the Rocky Mountain region, will be the team's new television partner for preseason games.\n\nIn 2011, the Broncos began a partnership with KJMN, 92.1 FM, a leading Spanish language radio station owned by Entravision Communications (EVC). The partnership also includes broadcasting rights for a half-hour weekly TV show on KCEC, the local Univision affiliate operated by Entravision Communications.\n\nBULLET::::- Tim McKernan, a.k.a. Barrel Man, began wearing a barrel in 1977 after making a $10 (equivalent to $ in ) bet with his brother, Scott, that by wearing one he could get on television. McKernan won the bet, and the barrel he had painted to look like an Orange Crush soda can became his signature costume, and resulted in him becoming one of the Broncos' most recognized fans and a popular mascot. McKernan died on December 5, 2009.\nBULLET::::- The animated television show \"South Park\", set in Park County, often mentions the Denver Broncos; show creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone both grew up in Colorado as devout Broncos fans.\nBULLET::::- In \"The Simpsons\" 1996 episode \"You Only Move Twice\", Hank Scorpio gives Homer Simpson the Denver Broncos as a thank-you gift for helping him. Homer complains that he wanted to own the Dallas Cowboys, as the Broncos team that just arrived are playing very sloppy football on his front lawn (a reference to the team losing four Super Bowl appearances, three by significant margins including Super Bowl XII against Dallas). Incidentally, the Broncos were 13–3 in the 1996 season, and won the Super Bowl the next two seasons. Only two seasons later in the Super Bowl-centric episode \"Sunday, Cruddy Sunday\", Homer chooses Denver as his Super Bowl XXXIII pick over Moe's choice of the Atlanta Falcons. In the episode, \"The Bonfire of the Manatees\", Homer picks the Broncos to win the Super Bowl over the Seattle Seahawks. The two teams later did play against each other in Super Bowl XLVIII which aired on Fox, the U.S. home of \"The Simpsons\".\nBULLET::::- In the 1979 \"Mork & Mindy\" episode \"Hold That Mork\", Mork's character, played by Robin Williams, became the first male cheerleader in Broncos' history. As a member of the \"Pony Express\", he trotted out on the field at Mile High Stadium during an actual Broncos' game vs. the New England Patriots on November 11, 1979. The episode aired exactly two weeks later.\nBULLET::::- Many former Broncos are now in broadcasting, including Shannon Sharpe, Mark Schlereth, Alfred Williams, Tom Jackson, Ed McCaffrey, Brian Griese, David Diaz-Infante, Terrell Davis and Brandon Stokley. Some former Broncos work in radio, KKFN and KDFD in Denver, Colorado.\nBULLET::::- Former tight end and wide receiver Nate Jackson has written and published two nonfiction books, \"Slow Getting Up\" and \"Fantasy Man\". His writing about the NFL has appeared in \"Slate\", \"Deadspin\", \"The Daily Beast\", \"The New York Times\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", and \"BuzzFeed\", among others. Jackson also co-hosts the \"Caveman Poet Society\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Denver Broncos: The Complete Illustrated History\" (2009), by Jim Saccomano & John Elway, MBI Publishing Company,\nBULLET::::- \"Then Morton Said to Elway...: The Best Denver Broncos Stories Ever Told\" (2008), by Craig Morton & Adrian Dater, Triumph Books,\nBULLET::::- \"Game of My Life: Denver Broncos: Memorable Stories of Broncos Football\" (2007), by Jim Saccomano, Sports Publishing LLC,\nBULLET::::- \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly Denver Broncos: Heart-Pounding, Jaw-Dropping, and Gut-Wrenching Moments from Denver Broncos History\" (2007), By Adrian Dater – Triumph Books,\nBULLET::::- \"John Elway and the Denver Broncos: Super Bowl XXXIII\" (2007), by Michael Sandler, Bearport Pub Company,\nBULLET::::- \"The Denver Broncos\" (2006), by Mark Stewart – Norwood House Press,\nBULLET::::- \"Denver Broncos: Colorful Tales of the Orange and Blue\" (2004), by Larry Zimmer, Globe Pequot Press,\nBULLET::::- \"77: Denver, The Broncos, and A Coming of Age\" (2009), by Terry Frei, Taylor Trade Publishing,\n"}
{"id": "8123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8123", "title": "D", "text": "D\n\nD or d is the fourth letter of the modern English alphabet and the ISO basic Latin alphabet. Its name in English is \"dee\" (pronounced ), plural \"dees\".\n\n style=\"background-color:#EEEEEE; text-align:center;\"\n! Egyptian hieroglyph <br>door, fish\n! Phoenician \"daleth\"\n! Greek \"Delta\"\n! Etruscan D\n! Roman D\nO31K1K2\n\nThe Semitic letter Dāleth may have developed from the logogram for a fish or a door. There are many different Egyptian hieroglyphs that might have inspired this. In Semitic, Ancient Greek and Latin, the letter represented ; in the Etruscan alphabet the letter was superfluous but still retained (see letter B). The equivalent Greek letter is Delta, Δ.\n\nThe minuscule (lower-case) form of 'd' consists of a loop and a tall vertical stroke. It developed by gradual variations on the majuscule (capital) form. In handwriting, it was common to start the arc to the left of the vertical stroke, resulting in a serif at the top of the arc. This serif was extended while the rest of the letter was reduced, resulting in an angled stroke and loop. The angled stroke slowly developed into a vertical stroke.\n\nIn most languages that use the Latin alphabet, and in the International Phonetic Alphabet, generally represents the voiced alveolar or voiced dental plosive . However, in the Vietnamese alphabet, it represents the sound in northern dialects or in southern dialects. (See D with stroke and Dz (digraph).) In Fijian it represents a prenasalized stop . In some languages where voiceless unaspirated stops contrast with voiceless aspirated stops, represents an unaspirated , while represents an aspirated . Examples of such languages include Icelandic, Scottish Gaelic, Navajo and the Pinyin transliteration of Mandarin.\n\nBULLET::::- The Roman numeral Ⅾ represents the number 500.\nBULLET::::- D is the grade below C but above E in the school grading system.\n\nBULLET::::- Ɖ ɖ : African D\nBULLET::::- Ð ð : Latin letter Eth\nBULLET::::- D with diacritics: Đ đ Ɗ ɗ Ḋ ḋ Ḍ ḍ Ḑ ḑ Ḓ ḓ Ď ď Ḏ ḏ ᵭ ᶁ ᶑ\nBULLET::::- IPA-specific symbols related to D:\nBULLET::::- Ꝺ ꝺ : Insular D is used in various phonetic contexts\nBULLET::::- ᴅ ᴰ ᵈ : Small capital D and various modifier letters are used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet.\nBULLET::::- ȡ : D with curl is used in Sino-Tibetanist linguistics\nBULLET::::- Ƌ ƌ : D with topbar\n\nBULLET::::- 𐤃 : Semitic letter Dalet, from which the following symbols originally derive\nBULLET::::- Δ δ : Greek letter Delta, from which the following symbols originally derive\nBULLET::::- : Coptic letter Delta\nBULLET::::- Д д : Cyrillic letter De\nBULLET::::- 𐌃 : Old Italic D, the ancestor of modern Latin D\nBULLET::::- : Runic letter dagaz, which is possibly a descendant of Old Italic D\nBULLET::::- Runic letter thurisaz, another possible descendant of Old Italic D\nBULLET::::- : Gothic letter daaz, which derives from Greek Delta\n\nBULLET::::- ₫ : Đồng sign\nBULLET::::- ∂ : the partial derivative symbol, formula_1\n\nIn British Sign Language (BSL), the letter 'd' is indicated by signing with the right hand held with the index and thumb extended and slightly curved, and the tip of the thumb and finger held against the extended index of the left hand.\n\n"}
{"id": "8124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8124", "title": "Delta (letter)", "text": "Delta (letter)\n\nDelta (uppercase Δ, lowercase δ or 𝛿; \"délta\", ) is the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals it has a value of 4. It was derived from the Phoenician letter dalet 𐤃, Letters that come from delta include Latin D and Cyrillic Д.\n\nA river delta (originally, the Nile River delta) is so named because its shape approximates the triangular uppercase letter delta. Despite a popular legend, this use of the word \"delta\" was not coined by Herodotus.\n\nIn Ancient Greek, delta represented a voiced dental plosive . In Modern Greek, it represents a voiced dental fricative , like the \"th\" in \"that\" or \"this\". It is romanized as \"d\" or \"dh\".\n\nThe uppercase letter Δ can be used to denote:\nBULLET::::- Change of any changeable quantity, in mathematics and the sciences (more specifically, the difference operator); for example, in:\nBULLET::::- The Laplace operator:\nBULLET::::- The discriminant of a polynomial equation, especially the quadratic equation:\nBULLET::::- The area of a triangle\nBULLET::::- The symmetric difference of two sets\nBULLET::::- A macroscopic change in the value of a variable in mathematics or science\nBULLET::::- Uncertainty in a physical variable as seen in the uncertainty principle\nBULLET::::- An interval of possible values for a given quantity\nBULLET::::- Any of the delta particles in particle physics\nBULLET::::- The determinant of the matrix of coefficients of a set of linear equations (see Cramer's rule)\nBULLET::::- That an associated locant number represents the location of a covalent bond in an organic compound, the position of which is variant between isomeric forms\nBULLET::::- A simplex, simplicial complex, or convex hull\nBULLET::::- In chemistry, the addition of heat in a reaction\nBULLET::::- In legal shorthand, it represents a defendant\nBULLET::::- In the financial markets, one of the Greeks, describing the rate of change of an option price for a given change in the underlying benchmark\nBULLET::::- A major seventh chord in jazz music notation\nBULLET::::- In genetics, it can stand for a gene deletion (e.g. the CCR5-Δ32, a 32 nucleotide/bp deletion within CCR5)\nBULLET::::- The American Dental Association cites it (together with omicron for \"odont\") as the symbol of dentistry.\nBULLET::::- The anonymous signature of James David Forbes.\nBULLET::::- Determinacy (having a definite truth-value) in philosophical logic.\n\nThe lowercase letter δ (or 𝛿) can be used to denote:\nBULLET::::- A change in the value of a variable in calculus\nBULLET::::- A Functional derivative in Functional calculus\nBULLET::::- An auxiliary function in calculus, used to rigorously define the limit or continuity of a given function\nBULLET::::- The Kronecker delta in mathematics\nBULLET::::- The degree of a vertex (graph theory)\nBULLET::::- The Dirac delta function in mathematics\nBULLET::::- The transition function in automata\nBULLET::::- Deflection in engineering mechanics\nBULLET::::- The force of interest in actuarial science\nBULLET::::- The chemical shift of nuclear magnetic resonance in chemistry\nBULLET::::- The relative electronegativity of different atoms in a molecule, δ being more electronegative than δ\nBULLET::::- Text requiring deletion in proofreading; the usage is said to date back to classical times\nBULLET::::- In some of the manuscripts written by Dr. John Dee, the character of delta is used to represent Dee\nBULLET::::- A subunit of the F1 sector of the F-ATPase\nBULLET::::- The declination of an object in the equatorial coordinate system of astronomy\nBULLET::::- The dividend yield in the Black–Scholes option pricing formula\nBULLET::::- Ratios of environmental isotopes, such as O/O and D/H from water are displayed using delta notation – δO and δD, respectively\nBULLET::::- The rate of depreciation of the aggregate capital stock of an economy in an exogenous growth model in macroeconomics\nBULLET::::- In a system that exhibits electrical reactance, the angle between voltage and current\nBULLET::::- Partial charge in chemistry\nBULLET::::- The maximum birrefringence of a crystal in optical mineralogy.\n\nBULLET::::- Greek Delta / Coptic Dalda\nBULLET::::- Latin Delta\nBULLET::::- Technical and Mathematical symbols\nBULLET::::- Mathematical Delta\n\nThese characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.\n\nBULLET::::- ∆ (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- D, d\nBULLET::::- Д, д\nBULLET::::- ẟ - Latin delta\nBULLET::::- ∂ - the partial derivative symbol, sometimes mistaken for a lowercase Greek letter Delta.\nBULLET::::- ð - the small eth appears similar to a small delta, and also represents a \"d\" sound in some contexts\nBULLET::::- Th (digraph)\nBULLET::::- Greek letters used in mathematics, science, and engineering\nBULLET::::- ∇ - Nabla symbol\n"}
{"id": "8125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8125", "title": "Digamma", "text": "Digamma\n\nDigamma, waw, or wau (uppercase: Ϝ, lowercase: ϝ, numeral: ϛ) is an archaic letter of the Greek alphabet. It originally stood for the sound but it has remained in use principally as a Greek numeral for 6. Whereas it was originally called \"waw\" or \"wau\", its most common appellation in classical Greek is \"digamma\"; as a numeral, it was called \"episēmon\" during the Byzantine era and is now known as \"stigma\" after the Byzantine ligature combining σ-τ as ϛ.\n\nDigamma or wau was part of the original archaic Greek alphabet as initially adopted from Phoenician. Like its model, Phoenician waw, it represented the voiced labial-velar approximant and stood in the 6th position in the alphabet between epsilon and zeta. It is the consonantal doublet of the vowel letter upsilon (), which was also derived from waw but was placed near the end of the Greek alphabet. Digamma or wau is in turn the ancestor of the Latin letter F. As an alphabetic letter, it is attested in archaic and dialectal ancient Greek inscriptions until the classical period.\n\nThe shape of the letter went through a development from through , , , to or , which at that point was conflated with the σ-τ ligature . In modern print, a distinction is made between the letter in its original alphabetic role as a consonant sign, which is rendered as \"Ϝ\" or its modern lowercase variant \"ϝ\", and the numeric symbol, which is represented by \"ϛ\". In modern Greek, this is often replaced by the digraph .\n\nThe sound existed in Mycenean Greek, as attested in Linear B and archaic Greek inscriptions using digamma. It is also confirmed by the Hittite name of Troy, \"Wilusa\", corresponding to the Greek name *\"Wilion\".\n\nThe sound was lost at various times in various dialects, mostly before the classical period.\n\nIn Ionic, had probably disappeared before Homer's epics were written down (7th century BC), but its former presence can be detected in many cases because its omission left the meter defective. For example, the word ἄναξ (\"(tribal) king, lord, (military) leader\"), found in the Iliad, would have originally been (and is attested in this form in Mycenaean Greek), and the word (\"wine\"), are sometimes used in the meter where a word starting with a consonant would be expected. Further evidence coupled with cognate-analysis shows that was earlier (cf. Cretan Doric \"ibêna\", cf. Latin \"vīnum\" and English \"wine\"). There have been editions of the Homeric epics where the wau was re-added, particularly in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but these have largely fallen out of favour.\n\nAeolian was the dialect that kept the sound longest. In discussions by ancient Greek grammarians of the Hellenistic era, the letter is therefore often described as a characteristic Aeolian feature.\n\nLoanwords that entered Greek before the loss of lost that sound when Greek did. For instance, Oscan \"Viteliu\" (\"land of the male calves\", compare \"yearling, male calf\") gave rise to the Greek word \"Italia\". The Adriatic tribe of the Veneti was called in . In loanwords that entered the Greek language after the drop of , the phoneme was once again registered, compare for example the spelling of for \"vates\".\n\nIn some local (\"epichoric\") alphabets, a variant glyph of the letter digamma existed that resembled modern Cyrillic И. In one local alphabet, that of Pamphylia, this variant form existed side by side with standard digamma as two distinct letters. It has been surmised that in this dialect the sound may have changed to labiodental in some environments. The F-shaped letter may have stood for the new sound, while the special И-shaped form signified those positions where the old sound was preserved.\n\nDigamma/wau remained in use in the system of Greek numerals attributed to Miletus, where it stood for the number 6, reflecting its original place in the sequence of the alphabet. It was one of three letters that were kept in this way in addition to the 24 letters of the classical alphabet, the other two being koppa (ϙ) for 90, and sampi (ϡ) for 900. During their history in handwriting in late antiquity and the Byzantine era, all three of these symbols underwent several changes in shape, with digamma ultimately taking the form of \"ϛ\". It has remained in use as a numeral in Greek to the present day, in contexts such as enumerating chapters in a book or other items in a set.\n\nDigamma was derived from Phoenician waw, which was shaped roughly like an Y (). Of the two Greek reflexes of waw, digamma retained the alphabetic position, but had its shape modified to , while the upsilon retained the original shape but was placed in a new alphabetic position. Early Crete had an archaic form of digamma somewhat closer to the original Phoenician, , or a variant with the stem bent sidewards (). The shape , during the archaic period, underwent a development parallel to that of epsilon (which changed from to \"E\", with the arms becoming orthogonal and the lower end of the stem being shed off). For digamma, this led to the two main variants of classical \"F\" and square .\n\nThe latter of these two shapes became dominant when used as a numeral, with \"F\" only very rarely employed in this function. However, in Athens, both of these were avoided in favour of a number of alternative numeral shapes (, , , , , ).\n\nIn cursive handwriting, the square-C form developed further into a rounded form resembling a \"C\" (found in papyrus manuscripts as , on coins sometimes as ). It then developed a downward tail at the end (, ) and finally adopted a shape like a Latin \"s\" () These cursive forms are also found in stone inscriptions in late antiquity.\n\nIn the ninth and tenth centuries, the cursive shape digamma was visually conflated with a ligature of sigma (in its historical \"lunate\" form) and tau ( + = , ). The στ-ligature had become common in minuscule handwriting from the 9th century onwards. Both closed () and open () forms were subsequently used without distinction both for the ligature and for the numeral. The ligature took on the name of \"\"stigma\"\" or \"\"sti\"\", and the name stigma is today applied to it both in its textual and in the numeral function. The association between its two functions as a numeral and as a sign for \"st\" became so strong that in modern typographic practice in Greece, whenever the ϛʹ sign itself is not available, the letter sequences στʹ or ΣΤʹ are used instead for the number 6.\n\nIn western typesetting during the modern era, the numeral symbol was routinely represented by the same character as the \"stigma\" ligature (ϛ). In normal text, this ligature together with numerous others continued to be used widely until the early nineteenth century, following the style of earlier minuscule handwriting, but ligatures then gradually dropped out of use. The \"stigma\" ligature was among those that survived longest, but it too became obsolete in print after the mid-19th century. Today it is used only to represent the numeric digamma, and never to represent the sequence στ in text.\n\nAlong with the other special numeric symbols koppa and sampi, numeric digamma/stigma normally has no distinction between uppercase and lowercase forms, (while other alphabetic letters can be used as numerals in both cases). Distinct uppercase versions were occasionally used in the 19th century. Several different shapes of uppercase stigma can be found, with the lower end either styled as a small curved S-like hook (), or as a straight stem, the latter either with a serif () or without one (). An alternative uppercase stylization in some twentieth-century fonts is , visually a ligature of Roman-style uppercase C and T.\n\nThe characters used for numeric digamma/stigma are distinguished in modern print from the character used to represent the ancient alphabetic digamma, the letter for the [w] sound. This is rendered in print by a Latin \"F\", or sometimes a variant of it specially designed to fit in typographically with Greek (Ϝ). It has a modern lowercase form (ϝ) that typically differs from Latin \"f\" by having two parallel horizontal strokes like the uppercase character, with the vertical stem often being somewhat slanted to the right or curved, and usually descending below the baseline. This character is used in Greek epigraphy to transcribe the text of ancient inscriptions that contain \"Ϝ\", and in linguistics and historical grammar when describing reconstructed proto-forms of Greek words that contained the sound /w/.\n\nThroughout much of its history, the shape of digamma/stigma has often been very similar to that of other symbols, with which it can easily be confused. In ancient papyri, the cursive C-shaped form of numeric digamma is often indistinguishable from the C-shaped (\"lunate\") form that was then the common form of sigma. The similarity is still found today, since both the modern stigma (ϛ) and modern final sigma (ς) look identical or almost identical in most fonts; both are historically continuations of their ancient C-shaped forms with the addition of the same downward flourish. If the two characters are distinguished in print, the top loop of stigma tends to be somewhat larger and to extend farther to the right than that of final sigma. The two characters are, however, always distinguishable from the context in modern usage, both in numeric notation and in text: the final form of sigma never occurs in numerals (the number 200 being always written with the medial sigma, σ), and in normal Greek text the sequence \"στ\" can never occur word-finally.\n\nThe medieval s-like shape of digamma () has the same shape as a contemporary abbreviation for (\"and\").\n\nYet another case of glyph confusion exists in the printed uppercase forms, this time between stigma and the other numeral, koppa (90). In ancient and medieval handwriting, koppa developed from through , , to . The uppercase forms and can represent either koppa or stigma. Frequent confusion between these two values in contemporary printing was already noted by some commentators in the eighteenth century. The ambiguity continues in modern fonts, many of which continue to have glyph similar to for either koppa or stigma.\n\nThe symbol has been called by a variety of different names, referring either to its alphabetic or its numeral function or both.\n\n\"Wau\" (variously rendered as \"vau\", \"waw\" or similarly in English) is the original name of the alphabetic letter for in ancient Greek. It is often cited in its reconstructed acrophonic spelling \"\". This form itself is not historically attested in Greek inscriptions, but the existence of the name can be inferred from descriptions by contemporary Latin grammarians, who render it as \"vav\". In later Greek, where both the letter and the sound it represented had become inaccessible, the name is rendered as or . In the 19th century, the anglicized form \"vau\" was a common name for the symbol ϛ in its numerical function, used by authors who distinguished it both from the alphabetic \"digamma\" and from ϛ as a στ ligature.\n\nThe name \"digamma\" was used in ancient Greek and is the most common name for the letter in its alphabetic function today. It literally means \"double gamma\" and is descriptive of the original letter's shape.\n\nThe name \"episēmon\" was used for the numeral symbol during the Byzantine era and is still sometimes used today, either as a name specifically for digamma/stigma, or as a generic term for the whole group of extra-alphabetic numeral signs (digamma, koppa and sampi). The Greek word \"\", from (\"epi-\", \"on\") and (\"sēma\", \"sign\"), literally means \"a distinguishing mark\", \"a badge\", but is also the neuter form of the related adjective \"\" (\"distinguished\", \"remarkable\"). This word was connected to the number \"six\" through early Christian mystical numerology. According to an account of the teachings of the heretic Marcus given by the church father Irenaeus, the number six was regarded as a symbol of Christ, and was hence called \"\" (\"the outstanding number\"); likewise, the name (\"Jesus\"), having six letters, was \"\" (\"the outstanding name\"), and so on. The sixth-century treatise \"About the Mystery of the Letters\", which also links the six to Christ, calls the number sign \"to Episēmon\" throughout. The same name is still found in a fifteenth-century arithmetical manual by the Greek mathematician Nikolaos Rabdas. It is also found in a number of western European accounts of the Greek alphabet written in Latin during the early Middle Ages. One of them is the work \"De loquela per gestum digitorum\", a didactic text about arithmetics attributed to the Venerable Bede, where the three Greek numerals for 6, 90 and 900 are called \"episimon\", \"cophe\" and \"enneacosis\" respectively. From Beda, the term was adopted by the seventeenth century humanist Joseph Justus Scaliger. However, misinterpreting Beda's reference, Scaliger applied the term \"episēmon\" not as a name proper for digamma/6 alone, but as a cover term for all three numeral letters. From Scaliger, the term found its way into modern academic usage in this new meaning, of referring to complementary numeral symbols standing outside the alphabetic sequence proper, in Greek and other similar scripts.\n\nIn one remark in the context of a biblical commentary, the 4th century scholar Ammonius of Alexandria is reported to have mentioned that the numeral symbol for 6 was called \"gabex\" by his contemporaries. The same reference in Ammonius has alternatively been read as \"gam(m)ex\" by some modern authors. Ammonius as well as later theologians discuss the symbol in the context of explaining the apparent contradiction and variant readings between the gospels in assigning the death of Jesus either to the \"third hour\" or \"sixth hour\", arguing that the one numeral symbol could easily have been substituted for the other through a scribal error.\n\nThe name \"stigma\" () was originally a common Greek noun meaning \"a mark, dot, puncture\" or generally \"a sign\", from the verb στίζω (\"to puncture\"). It had an earlier writing-related special meaning, being the name for a dot as a punctuation mark, used for instance to mark shortness of a syllable in the notation of rhythm. It was then co-opted as a name specifically for the στ ligature, evidently because of the acrophonic value of its initial \"st-\" as well as the analogy with the name of sigma. Other names coined according to the same analogical principle are \"sti\" or \"stau\".\n\nBULLET::::- Greek Digamma / Stigma\n\nBULLET::::- Coptic Digamma\n\nBULLET::::- Peter T. Daniels – William Bright (edd.), \"The World's Writing Systems\", New York, Oxford University Press, 1996.\nBULLET::::- Jean Humbert, \"Histoire de la langue grecque\", Paris, 1972.\nBULLET::::- Michel Lejeune, \"Phonétique historique du mycénien et du grec ancien\", Klincksieck, Paris, 1967.\nBULLET::::- \"In Search of The Trojan War\", pp. 142–143,187 by Michael Wood, 1985, published by BBC.\n\nBULLET::::- Perseus Project: lexicon search for words starting with or containing digamma\n"}
{"id": "8126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8126", "title": "Dose", "text": "Dose\n\nDose means quantity (in units of energy/mass) in the fields of nutrition, medicine, and toxicology. Dosage is the rate of application of a dose, although in common and imprecise usage, the words are sometimes used synonyously.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dose\" (Gov't Mule album), 1998\nBULLET::::- \"Dose\" (Latin Playboys album)\nBULLET::::- \"Dosage\" (album), by the band Collective Soul\nBULLET::::- \"Dose\" (Ciara song), 2018\nBULLET::::- \"Dose\", song by Filter from the album \"Short Bus\"\n\nBULLET::::- Dose (biochemistry), a measured quantity of a medicine, nutrient, or pathogen which is delivered as a unit.\nBULLET::::- Dosage form, a mixture of active and inactive components used to administer a medication\nBULLET::::- Dosing, feeding chemicals or medicines when used in small quantities\nBULLET::::- Effective dose (pharmacology), a dose or concentration of a drug that produces a biological response\nBULLET::::- Equivalent dose, a measure of radiation dosage to tissue\nBULLET::::- Median lethal dose, a measure of the lethal dose of a toxin, radiation, or pathogen\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dose\" (magazine), a free daily Canadian magazine\nBULLET::::- Döse, town in Lower Saxony, Germany\nBULLET::::- Gerd Dose (1942–2010), professor of English literature at the University of Hamburg\nBULLET::::- Paul Dose (1921–2003), officer in the German aerial warfare force during World War II\n\nBULLET::::- Double Dose (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Effective dose (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Overdose (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "8127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8127", "title": "Dilbert", "text": "Dilbert\n\nDilbert is an American comic strip written and illustrated by Scott Adams, first published on April 16, 1989. The strip is known for its satirical office humor about a white-collar, micromanaged office featuring engineer Dilbert as the title character. The strip has spawned dozens of books, an animated television series, a video game, and hundreds of Dilbert-themed merchandise items. \"Dilbert Future\" and \"The Joy of Work\" are among the most read books in the series. Adams received the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award in 1997 and the Newspaper Comic Strip Award in the same year for his work on the strip. \"Dilbert\" appears online and in 2,000 newspapers worldwide in 65 countries and 25 languages.\n\n\"Dilbert\" was picked up for syndication by United Feature Syndicate (a division of United Media) in 1989.\n\nOn June 3, 2010, United Media sold their licensing arm, along with the rights to \"Dilbert\", to Iconix Brand Group. This led to \"Dilbert\" leaving United Media: in late December 2010, it was announced that Dilbert would move to Universal Uclick (a division of Andrews McMeel Universal) beginning in June 2011. \"Dilbert\" has been with Universal Uclick — now known as Andrews McMeel Syndication — ever since.\n\nThe comic strip originally revolved around Dilbert and his \"pet\" dog Dogbert in their home. Many early plots revolved around Dilbert's engineer nature or his bizarre inventions. Also prominent were plots based on Dogbert's megalomaniacal ambitions. Later, the location of most of the action moved to Dilbert's workplace and the strip started to satirize technology, workplace, and company issues. The comic strip's popular success is attributable to its workplace setting and themes, which are familiar to a large and appreciative audience; Adams has said that switching the setting from Dilbert's home to his office was \"when the strip really started to take off\". The workplace location is Silicon Valley.\n\n\"Dilbert\" portrays corporate culture as a Kafkaesque world of bureaucracy for its own sake and office politics that stand in the way of productivity, where employees' skills and efforts are not rewarded, and busy work is praised. Much of the humor emerges as the audience sees the characters making obviously ridiculous decisions that are natural reactions to mismanagement.\n\nThe main character in the strip, Dilbert is a stereotypical technically-minded single male. Until October 2014, he was usually depicted wearing a white dress shirt, black trousers and a red-and-black striped tie that inexplicably curves upward; after October 13, 2014, his standard apparel changed to a red polo shirt with a name badge on a lanyard around his neck. Dilbert is a skilled engineer but has a poor social and romantic life.\n\nThe unnamed, oblivious manager of the engineering division of Dilbert's company. Scott Adams states that he never named him so that people can imagine him to be their boss. In earlier strips he was depicted as a stereotypical late-middle-aged balding middle manager with jowls; it was not until later that he developed his signature \"pointy hair\" and the jowls disappeared. He is hopelessly incompetent at management, and often tries to compensate for his lack of skills with countless group therapy sessions and business strategies that rarely bear fruit. He does not understand technical issues, but always tries to disguise this, usually by using buzzwords he also does not understand. The Boss treats his employees alternately with enthusiasm or neglect; he often uses them to his own ends regardless of the consequences to them. Adams himself wrote that \"He's not sadistic, just uncaring\". His level of intelligence varies from near-vegetative to perceptive and clever, depending on the strip's comic needs. His utter lack of consistent business ethics, however, is perfectly consistent. His brother is a demon named \"Phil, the Prince of Insufficient Light\", and according to Adams, the pointy hair is intended to remind one of devils' horns.\n\nOne of the longest serving engineers, Wally was originally a worker trying to get fired to get a severance package. He hates work and avoids it whenever he can. He often carries a cup of coffee, calmly sipping from it even in the midst of chaos or office-shaking revelations. Wally is extremely cynical. He is even more socially inept than Dilbert (though far less self-aware of the fact), and references to his lack of personal hygiene are not uncommon. Like the Pointy-haired Boss, Wally is utterly lacking in ethics and will take advantage of any situation to maximize his personal gain while doing the least possible amount of honest work. Until the change to \"business dorky\" wear of a polo shirt, Wally was invariably portrayed wearing a short sleeved dress shirt and tie. Adams has stated that Wally was based on a Pacific Bell coworker of his who was interested in a generous employee buy-out program—for the company's worst employees. This had the effect of causing this man—whom Adams describes as \"one of the more brilliant people I've met\"—to work hard at being incompetent, rude, and generally poor at his job to qualify for the buy-out program. Adams has said that this inspired the basic laziness and amorality of Wally's character. Despite these personality traits Wally is accepted as part of Dilbert, Ted, Alice, and Asok's clique. Although his relationship with Alice is often antagonistic and Dilbert occasionally denies being his friend, their actions show at least a certain acceptance of him.\n\nOne of the more competent and highest paid engineers. She is often frustrated at her work, because she does not get proper recognition, which she believes is because she is female, though in reality it is likely because she has a quick, often violent temper, sometimes putting her \"Fist of Death\" to use, even with the Pointy-haired Boss. Alice is based on a woman that Scott Adams worked with named Anita, who is described as sharing Alice's \"pink suit, fluffy hair, technical proficiency, coffee obsession, and take-no-crap attitude.\"\n\nDilbert's anthropomorphic pet dog is the smartest dog on Earth. Dogbert is a megalomaniac intellectual dog, planning to one day conquer the world. He once succeeded, but became bored with the ensuing peace, and quit. Often seen in high-ranking consultant or technical support jobs, he constantly abuses his power and fools the management of Dilbert's company, though considering the intelligence of the company's management in general and Dilbert's boss in particular, this is not very hard to do. He also enjoys pulling scams on unsuspecting and usually dull customers to steal their money. However, despite Dogbert's cynical exterior, he has been known to pull his master out of some tight jams. Dogbert's nature as a pet was more emphasized during the earlier years of the strip; as the strip progressed, references to his acting like a dog became less common, although he still wags his tail when he perpetrates his scams. When an older Dilbert arrives while time-traveling from the future, he refers to Dogbert as \"majesty\", indicating that Dogbert will one day indeed rule the world ... again, and make worshipping him retroactive so he could boss around time travelers.\n\nCatbert is the \"evil director of human resources\" in the \"Dilbert\" comic strip. He was supposed to be a one-time character but resonated with readers so well that Adams brought him back as the HR director. Catbert's origins with the company are that he was hired by Dogbert. Dogbert hired him because he wanted an H.R. Director that appeared cute while secretly downsizing you.\n\nA young intern, he works very hard but does not always get proper recognition. Asok is intensely intelligent but naive about corporate life; the shattering of his optimistic illusions becomes frequent comic fodder. He is Indian, and has graduated from the Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT). The other workers, especially the boss, often unwittingly trample on his cultural beliefs. On the occasions when Asok mentions this, he is normally ignored. His test scores (a perfect 1600 on the old SAT) and his IQ of 240 show that he is the smartest member of the engineering team. Nonetheless he is often called upon by the Boss to do odd jobs, and in meetings his ideas are usually left hanging. He is also seen regularly at the lunch table with Wally and Dilbert, experiencing jarring realizations of the nature of corporate life. There are a few jokes about his psychic powers, which he learned at the IIT. Yet despite his intelligence, ethics and mystical powers, Asok sometimes takes advice from Wally in the arts of laziness, and from Dilbert in surviving the office. As of February 7, 2014, Asok is officially gay, which never affects any storylines, but merely commemorates a decision by the Indian Supreme Court to uphold an anti-gay law., a decision which was overturned on September 6, 2018\n\nAn engineer who is often seen hanging out with Wally. He is referenced by name more often in older comics, but he is still seen occasionally. He has been accepted into Dilbert's clique. He has been fired and killed numerous times (for example, being pushed down a flight of stairs and becoming possessed), in which case a new Ted is apparently hired. In addition to this, he is often promoted and given benefits over the other employees. Ted has a wife and children who are referenced multiple times and seen on at least one occasion. Adams refers to him as \"Ted the Generic White Guy\", because whenever he needs to fire or kill someone he uses Ted, but slowly over time Ted has become his own character.\n\nElbonia is a non-specific under-developed country used when Adams wants \"to involve a foreign country without hurting overseas sales\". He says \"People think I have some specific country in mind when I write about Elbonia, but I don't. It represents the view that Americans have of any country that doesn't have cable television — we think they all wear fur hats and wallow around waist-deep in mud\". The entire country wears the same clothing and hats, and all men have full beards. They are occasionally bitter towards their wealthier western neighbors, but are quite happy to trade with them. The whole country is covered in mud, and has limited technology.\n\nElbonia is located somewhere in the former Soviet bloc: A strip dated April 2, 1990, refers to the \"Tiny East European country of Elbonia.\" It is an extremely poor, fourth-world country that has abandoned Communism. The national bird of Elbonia is the Frisbee. However, in a storyline from November 21-26, 2016, Dilbert visits Elbonia and it seems to be more advanced; no waist deep mud, more advanced technology, and the rental car scene looks almost like it's in America or a more advanced European country.\n\nHis full title is Phil, the Prince of Insufficient Light & Supreme Ruler of Heck. The Pointy-Haired Boss's brother Phil, has the job of being one step down from Satan. His job is to punish those who commit minor sins, and his 'Pitch-Spoon' is feared by those who do. He is known to 'Darn to Heck' people who do things like using cell phones in the bathroom, steal office supplies, or those who simply do something annoying. In one strip, it was mentioned that being in Heck is not as bad as being in a cubicle.\n\nThe popularity of the comic strip within the corporate sector has led to the Dilbert character being used in many business magazines and publications, including several appearances on the cover of \"Fortune Magazine\". Many newspapers run the comic in their business section rather than in the regular comics section (similar to the way that \"Doonesbury\" is often featured in the editorial section, due to its pointed commentary).\n\nMedia analyst Norman Solomon and cartoonist Tom Tomorrow claim that Adams's caricatures of corporate culture seem to project empathy for white-collar workers, but the satire ultimately plays into the hands of upper corporate management itself. Solomon describes the characters of \"Dilbert\" as dysfunctional time-wasters, none of whom occupies a position higher than middle management, and whose inefficiencies detract from corporate values such as 'productivity' and 'growth'. Dilbert and his office-mates often find themselves baffled or victimized by the whims of managerial behavior, but they never seem to question it openly. Solomon cites the Xerox corporation's use of \"Dilbert\" strips and characters in internally distributed 'inspirational' pamphlets:\n\nAdams responded in the February 2, 1998 strip and in his book \"The Joy of Work\", by simply restating Solomon's argument, apparently suggesting that it was absurd and required no rebuttal.\n\nIn 1997, Tom Vanderbilt wrote in a similar vein in \"The Baffler\" magazine:\n\nIn 1998, Bill Griffith, creator of \"Zippy the Pinhead\", chided Dilbert for crude drawings and simplistic humor. He wrote, \nAdams lashed back with two comic strips called \"Pippy the Ziphead\", in which Dogbert creates a comic by \"cramming as much artwork in as possible so no one will notice there's only one joke ... [and it's] on the reader.\" Dilbert notes that the strip is \"nothing but a clown with a small head who says random things\", and Dogbert responds that he is \"maintaining his artistic integrity by creating a comic that no one will enjoy.\" In September of the same year, Griffith mocked Adams' \"Pippy the Ziphead\" with a strip of the same name drawn in a simplistic, stiff, \"Dilbert\"-like style set in an office setting and featuring the characters Zippy and Griffy retorting, \"I sense a joke was delivered. [...] Yes. It was. My one joke. Ha.\"\n\nIn the late 1990s, an amateur cartoonist named Karl Hörnell began submitting a comic strip to \"Savage Dragon\" creator Erik Larsen that parodied both \"Dilbert\" and the Image Comics series \"The Savage Dragon\". This soon became a regular feature in the \"Savage Dragon\" comic book, titled \"The Savage Dragonbert and Hitler's Brainbert\" (\"Hitler's Brainbert\" being a loose parody of both Dogbert and the \"Savage Dragon\" villain identified as Adolf Hitler's disembodied, superpowered brain). The strip began as a specific parody of the comic book itself, set loosely within the office structure of \"Dilbert\", with Hörnell doing an emulation of Adams's cartooning style.\nAdams has invited readers to invent words that have become popular among fans in describing their own office environments, such as \"\"Induhvidual\"\". This term is based on the American English slang expression \"duh!\" The conscious misspelling of \"individual\" as \"induhvidual\" is a pejorative term for people who are not in Dogbert's New Ruling Class (DNRC). Its coining is explained in \"Dilbert Newsletter\" #6. The strip has also popularized the usage of the terms \"cow-orker\" and PHB.\n\nIn 1997, Scott Adams masqueraded as a management consultant to Logitech executives (as Ray Mebert), with the cooperation of the company's vice-chairman. He acted in much the way that he portrays management consultants in the comic strip, with an arrogant manner and bizarre suggestions, such as comparing mission statements to broccoli soup. He convinced the executives to change their existing mission statement for their New Ventures Group from \"provide Logitech with profitable growth and related new business areas\" to \"scout profitable growth opportunities in relationships, both internally and externally, in emerging, mission-inclusive markets, and explore new paradigms and then filter and communicate and evangelize the findings\".\n\nTo demonstrate what can be achieved with the most mundane objects if planned correctly and imaginatively, Adams has worked with companies to develop \"dream\" products for Dilbert and company. In 2001, he collaborated with design company IDEO to come up with the \"perfect cubicle\", a fitting creation since many of the \"Dilbert\" strips make fun of the standard cubicle desk and the environment that it creates. The result was both whimsical and practical.\n\nThis project was followed in 2004 with designs for Dilbert's Ultimate House (abbreviated as DUH). An energy-efficient building was the result, designed to prevent many of the little problems that seem to creep into a normal building. For instance, to save time spent buying and decorating a Christmas tree every year, the house has a large (yet unapparent) closet adjacent to the living room where the tree can be stored from year to year.\n\nIn 1995, \"Dilbert\" was the first syndicated comic strip to be published for free on the Internet. Putting his email address in each \"Dilbert\" strip, Adams created a \"direct channel to [his] customers,\" allowing him to modify the strip based on their feedback. Joe Zabel stated that \"Dilbert\" had a large influence on many of the webcomics that followed it, establishing the \"nerdcore\" genre as it found its audience.\n\nIn April 2008, Scott Adams announced that United Media would be instituting an interactive feature on Dilbert.com, allowing fans to write speech bubbles and, in the near future, interact with Adams about the content of the strips. Adams has spoken positively about the change, saying, \"This makes cartooning a competitive sport.\"\n\nIn addition to the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Awards won by Adams, the \"Dilbert\" strip has received a variety of other awards. Adams was named best international comic strip artist of 1995 in the Adamson Awards given by the Swedish Academy of Comic Art.\n\n\"Dilbert\" was named the best syndicated strip of 1997 in the Harvey Awards and won the Max & Moritz Prize as best international comic strip for 1998.\n\n! Title !! Strips collected !! Date published !! Pages !! ISBN !! Notes\n\n! Title !! Date published !! Pages !! ISBN !! Notes\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Dilbert Principle\"\nBULLET::::- \"Dogbert's Top Secret Management Handbook\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Dilbert Future\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Joy of Work\"\nBULLET::::- \"Dilbert and the Way of the Weasel\"\nBULLET::::- \"Slapped Together: The Dilbert Business Anthology\" (\"The Dilbert Principle\", \"The Dilbert Future\", and \"The Joy of Work\", published together in one book)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Telling It Like It Isn't\" — 1996;\nBULLET::::- \"You Don't Need Experience If You've Got Attitude\" — 1996;\nBULLET::::- \"Access Denied: Dilbert's Quest for Love in the Nineties\" — 1996;\nBULLET::::- \"Conversations With Dogbert\" — 1996;\nBULLET::::- \"Work is a Contact Sport\" — 1997;\nBULLET::::- \"The Boss: Nameless, Blameless and Shameless\" — 1997;\nBULLET::::- \"The Dilbert Bunch\" — 1997;\nBULLET::::- \"No You'd Better Watch Out\" — 1997\nBULLET::::- \"Please Don't Feed The Egos\" — 1997;\nBULLET::::- \"Random Acts of Catness\" — 1998;\nBULLET::::- \"You Can't Schedule Stupidity\" — 1998;\nBULLET::::- \"Dilbert Meeting Book Exceeding Tech Limits\" — 1998;\nBULLET::::- \"Trapped In A Dilbert World – Book Of Days\" — 1998;\nBULLET::::- \"Work—The Wally Way\" — 1999;\nBULLET::::- \"Alice in Blunderland\" — 1999;\nBULLET::::- \"All Dressed Down And Nowhere To Go\" — 2002;\nBULLET::::- \"Dilbert's Guide to the Rest of Your Life: Dispatches from Cubicleland\" — 2007;\nBULLET::::- \"Dilbert Sudoku Comic Digest: 200 Puzzles Plus 50 Classic Dilbert Cartoons\" — 2008;\nBULLET::::- \"\" — 2008; 576 pages, ≈6500 strips, and Scott Adams's notes from 1989 to 2008.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Young Dilbert in Hi-Tech Hijinks\" — 1997; A Dilbert-branded computer game aimed at teaching young children about technology.\nBULLET::::- \"Corporate Shuffle\" by Richard Garfield — 1997; A Dilbert-branded card game similar to Wizard of the Coast's \"The Great Dalmuti\" and the drinking game President.\nBULLET::::- The Dilberito, a vegan microwave burrito offered in four flavors: Barbecue with barbecue sauce, Garlic & Herb with sauce, Indian with mango chutney, and Mexican with salsa.\nBULLET::::- \"Totally Nuts\" — 1998; A limited edition Ben & Jerry's ice cream flavor whose description was listed as: \"Butter almond ice cream with roasted hazelnuts, praline pecans & white fudge coated almonds\".\nBULLET::::- A line of Dilbert mints that possessed the names Accomplish-mints, Appease-mints, Appoint-mints, Harass-mints, Improve-mints, Manage-mints, Pay-mints, Perfor-mints, and Postpone-mints.\nBULLET::::- Dilbert: the Board Game — 2006; by Hyperion Games; A Dilbert-branded board game that was named one of \"Games\" magazine's Top 100 Games\nBULLET::::- Day-by-Day calendars featuring the comic strip are available every year.\nBULLET::::- \"Dilbert: Escape From Cubeville\" — 2010; A Dilbert-branded board game released in the Dilbert store section of dilbert.com.\nBULLET::::- \"Dilbert's Desktop Games\", a video game designed for the PC.\n\n\"Dilbert\" was adapted into a UPN animated television series starring Daniel Stern as Dilbert, Chris Elliott as Dogbert, and Kathy Griffin as Alice. The series ran for two seasons from January 25, 1999 to July 25, 2000. The first season centered around the creation of a new product called the \"Gruntmaster 6000\". It was critically acclaimed and won a Golden Globe award, leading to its renewal for a second season. The second season did away with the serial format and was composed entirely of standalone episodes, many of which shifted focus away from the workplace and involved absurdist plots such as Wally being mistaken for a religious leader (\"The Shroud of Wally\") and Dilbert being accused of mass murder (\"The Trial\"). Critical and fan reception was resoundingly negative to the change in format and storytelling, and the series was not renewed for a third season. The second season two-episode finale included Dilbert getting pregnant with the child of a cow, a hillbilly, robot DNA, \"several dozen engineers\", an elderly billionaire, and an alien, eventually ending up in a custody battle with Stone Cold Steve Austin as the Judge.\n\nOn April 7, 2008, dilbert.com presented its first Dilbert animation. The new Dilbert animations are animated versions of original comic strips produced by RingTales and animated by Powerhouse Animation Studios. The animation videos run for around 30 seconds each and are added every weekday. On December 10, 2009 the RingTales produced animations were made available as a calendar application for mobile devices.\n\nIn October 2007, the Catfish Bend Casino in Burlington, Iowa notified its staff that the casino was closing and they were going to be laid off. David Steward, an employee of seven years, then posted on an office bulletin board the \"Dilbert\" strip of October 26, 2007 that compared management decisions to those of \"drunken lemurs\". The casino called this \"very offensive\"; they identified him from a surveillance tape, fired him, and tried to prevent him from receiving unemployment benefits. However, an administrative law judge ruled in December 2007 that he would receive benefits, as his action was not intentional misbehavior. Scott Adams said that it might be the first confirmed case of an employee being fired for posting a \"Dilbert\" cartoon. On February 20, 2008, the first of a series of \"Dilbert\" strips showed Wally being caught posting a comic strip that \"compares managers to drunken lemurs\". Adams later said that fans should stick to posting \"Garfield\" strips, as no one gets fired for that.\n\nOn February 29, 2016, Adams posted on his blog that he would be taking a six-week vacation. During that time, strips would be written by him but drawn by guest artists who work for Universal Uclick. Jake Tapper drew the strip on the week on May 23. The other guest artists were John Glynn, Eric Scott, Josh Shipley, Joel Friday, Donna Oatney and Brenna Thummler. Jake Tapper also drew the cartoon strip the weeks of May 23, 2016 and September 23-28, 2019.\n\nBULLET::::- Dilbert principle\nBULLET::::- Peter principle, the opposite (and original basis) of the Dilbert principle\nBULLET::::- \"\", another comic series by Scott Adams\n\nBULLET::::- Dilbert home page\nBULLET::::- The Dilbert Blog\nBULLET::::- National Cartoonists Society awards page\nBULLET::::- Dilbert Creator Scott Adams Presents His 10 Favorite Strips\n"}
{"id": "8128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8128", "title": "Dialect", "text": "Dialect\n\nThe term dialect (from Latin , , from the Ancient Greek word , , \"discourse\", from , , \"through\" and , , \"I speak\") is used in two distinct ways to refer to two different types of linguistic phenomena:\n\nBULLET::::- One usage refers to a variety of a language that is a characteristic of a particular group of the language's speakers. Under this definition, the dialects or varieties of a particular language are closely related and, despite their differences, are most often largely mutually intelligible, especially if close to one another on the dialect continuum. The term is applied most often to regional speech patterns, but a dialect may also be defined by other factors, such as social class or ethnicity. A dialect that is associated with a particular social class can be termed a sociolect, a dialect that is associated with a particular ethnic group can be termed an ethnolect, and a geographical/regional dialect may be termed a regiolect (alternative terms include 'regionalect', 'geolect', and 'topolect'). According to this definition, any variety of a given language can be classified as \"a dialect\", including any standardized varieties. In this case, the distinction between the \"standard language\" (i.e. the \"standard\" dialect of a particular language) and the \"nonstandard\" (vernacular) dialects of the same language is often arbitrary and based on social, political, cultural, or historical considerations. In a similar way, the definitions of the terms \"language\" and \"dialect\" may overlap and are often subject to debate, with the differentiation between the two classifications often grounded in arbitrary and/or sociopolitical motives. The term \"dialect\" is however sometimes restricted to mean \"non-standard variety\", particularly in non-specialist settings and non-English linguistic traditions.\n\nBULLET::::- The other usage of the term \"dialect\", specific to colloquial settings in a few countries like Italy, France (see \"\") and the Philippines, carries a pejorative undertone and underlines the politically and socially subordinated status of a language to another language, often historically cognate or genetically related to the dominant language, but not actually derived from it. In other words, it is not an actual variety of the politically dominant language, but rather a separate, independently evolved but often related language. In this sense, unlike in the first usage, the standardized language would not itself be considered a \"dialect\", as it is the dominant language in a particular state or region, be it in terms of linguistic prestige, social or political (e.g. official) status, predominance or prevalence, or all of the above. Meanwhile, under this usage, the \"dialects\" are generally not variations of the dominant language but rather separate (albeit often loosely related) languages in and of themselves. Thus, these \"dialects\" are not dialects or varieties of a particular language in the same sense as in the first usage; though they may share roots in the same subfamily as the dominant language and may even, to a varying degree, share some mutual intelligibility with the standardized language, they often did not evolve closely with the standard language or within the same linguistic subgroup or speech community as the standardized language and instead may better fit various parties’ criteria for a separate language. The term \"dialect\" used this way implies a political connotation, being mostly used to refer to low-prestige languages (regardless of their actual degree of distance from the national language), languages lacking institutional support, or those perceived as unsuitable for writing. The designation \"dialect\" is also used popularly to refer to the unwritten or non-codified languages of developing countries or isolated areas, where the term \"vernacular language\" would be preferred by linguists.\n\nA dialect is distinguished by its vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation (phonology, including prosody). Where a distinction can be made only in terms of pronunciation (including prosody, or just prosody itself), the term \"accent\" may be preferred over \"dialect\". Other types of speech varieties include jargons, which are characterized by differences in lexicon (vocabulary); slang; patois; pidgins; and argots. The particular speech patterns used by an individual are termed an idiolect.\n\nA \"standard dialect\" (also known as a \"standardized dialect\" or \"standard language\") is a dialect that is supported by institutions. Such institutional support may include government recognition or designation; presentation as being the \"correct\" form of a language in schools; published grammars, dictionaries, and textbooks that set forth a normative spoken and written form; and an extensive formal literature that employs that variety (prose, poetry, non-fiction, etc.). There may be multiple standard dialects associated with a single language. For example, Standard American English, Standard British English, Standard Canadian English, Standard Indian English, Standard Australian English, and Standard Philippine English may all be said to be standard dialects of the English language.\n\nA nonstandard dialect, like a standard dialect, has a complete grammar and vocabulary, but is usually not the beneficiary of institutional support. Examples of a nonstandard English dialect are Southern American English, Western Australian English, New York English, New England English, Mid-Atlantic American or Philadelphia / Baltimore English, Scouse, Brummie, Cockney, and Tyke. The Dialect Test was designed by Joseph Wright to compare different English dialects with each other.\n\nThere is no universally accepted criterion for distinguishing two different languages from two dialects (i.e. varieties) of the same language. A number of rough measures exist, sometimes leading to contradictory results. The western in its origins distinction (dichotomy) between dialect and language is therefore subjective (arbitrary) and depends upon the user's preferred frame of reference. For example, there has been discussion about whether or not the Limón Creole English should be considered \"a kind\" of English or a different language. This creole is spoken in the Caribbean coast of Costa Rica (Central America) by descendants of Jamaican people. The position that Costa Rican linguists support depends upon which University they represent.\n\nOne criterion, which is often considered to be purely linguistic, is that of mutual intelligibility: two varieties are said to be dialects of the same language if being a speaker of one variety confers sufficient knowledge to understand and be understood by a speaker of the other; otherwise, they are said to be different languages. However, this definition cannot consistently delimit languages in the case of a dialect continuum (or dialect chain), containing a sequence of varieties, each mutually intelligible with the next, but where widely separated varieties may not be mutually intelligible.\nFurther problems with this criterion are that mutual intelligibility occurs in varying degrees, and that it is difficult to distinguish from prior familiarity with the other variety. Reported mutual intelligibility may also be affected by speakers' attitudes to the other speech community.\n\nAnother occasionally used criterion for discriminating dialects from languages is the sociolinguistic notion of linguistic authority. According to this definition, two varieties are considered dialects of the same language if (under at least some circumstances) they would defer to the same authority regarding some questions about their language. For instance, to learn the name of a new invention, or an obscure foreign species of plant, speakers of Westphalian and East Franconian German might each consult a German dictionary or ask a German-speaking expert in the subject.\nThus these varieties are said to be dependent on, or heteronomous with respect to, Standard German, which is said to be autonomous.\nIn contrast, speakers in the Netherlands of Low Saxon varieties similar to Westphalian would instead consult a dictionary of Standard Dutch.\nSimilarly, although Yiddish is classified by linguists as a language in the Middle High German group of languages, a Yiddish speaker would consult a different dictionary in such a case.\n\nWithin this framework, W. A. Stewart defined a \"language\" as an autonomous variety together with all the varieties that are heteronomous with respect to it, noting that an essentially equivalent definition had been stated by Charles A. Ferguson and John J. Gumperz in 1960.\nSimilarly, a heteronomous variety may be considered a \"dialect\" of a language defined in this way.\nIn these terms, Danish and Norwegian, though mutually intelligible to a large degree, are considered separate languages.\nIn the framework of Heinz Kloss, these are described as languages by \"ausbau\" (development) rather than by \"abstand\" (separation).\n\nIn other situations, a closely related group of varieties possess considerable (though incomplete) mutual intelligibility, but none dominates the others.\nTo describe this situation, the editors of the \"Handbook of African Languages\" introduced the term \"dialect cluster\" as a classificatory unit at the same level as a language.\nA similar situation, but with a greater degree of mutual unintelligibility, has been termed a \"language cluster\".\n\nIn many societies, however, a particular dialect, often the sociolect of the elite class, comes to be identified as the \"standard\" or \"proper\" version of a language by those seeking to make a social distinction and is contrasted with other varieties. As a result of this, in some contexts, the term \"dialect\" refers specifically to varieties with low social status. In this secondary sense of \"dialect\", language varieties are often called \"dialects\" rather than \"languages\":\nBULLET::::- if they have no standard or codified form,\nBULLET::::- if they are rarely or never used in writing (outside reported speech),\nBULLET::::- if the speakers of the given language do not have a state of their own,\nBULLET::::- if they lack prestige with respect to some other, often standardised, variety.\n\nThe status of \"language\" is not solely determined by linguistic criteria, but it is also the result of a historical and political development. Romansh came to be a written language, and therefore it is recognized as a language, even though it is very close to the Lombardic alpine dialects. An opposite example is the case of Chinese, whose variations such as Mandarin and Cantonese are often called dialects and not languages in China, despite their mutual unintelligibility.\n\nModern nationalism, as developed especially since the French Revolution, has made the distinction between \"language\" and \"dialect\" an issue of great political importance. A group speaking a separate \"language\" is often seen as having a greater claim to being a separate \"people\", and thus to be more deserving of its own independent state, while a group speaking a \"dialect\" tends to be seen not as \"a people\" in its own right, but as a sub-group, part of a bigger people, which must content itself with regional autonomy. The distinction between language and dialect is thus inevitably made at least as much on a political basis as on a linguistic one, and can lead to great political controversy or even armed conflict.\n\nThe Yiddish linguist Max Weinreich published the expression, \"A shprakh iz a dialekt mit an armey un flot\" (: \"A language is a dialect with an army and navy\") in \"YIVO Bleter\" 25.1, 1945, p. 13. The significance of the political factors in any attempt at answering the question \"what is a language?\" is great enough to cast doubt on whether any strictly linguistic definition, without a socio-cultural approach, is possible. This is illustrated by the frequency with which the army-navy aphorism is cited.\n\nBy the definition most commonly used by linguists, any linguistic variety can be considered a \"dialect\" of \"some\" language—\"everybody speaks a dialect\". According to that interpretation, the criteria above merely serve to distinguish whether two varieties are dialects of the \"same\" language or dialects of \"different\" languages.\n\nThe terms \"language\" and \"dialect\" are not necessarily mutually exclusive, although it is often perceived to be. Thus there is nothing contradictory in the statement \"the \"language\" of the Pennsylvania Dutch is a dialect of German\".\n\nThere are various terms that linguists may use to avoid taking a position on whether the speech of a community is an independent language in its own right or a dialect of another language. Perhaps the most common is \"variety\"; \"lect\" is another. A more general term is \"languoid\", which does not distinguish between dialects, languages, and groups of languages, whether genealogically related or not.\n\nJohn Lyons writes that \"Many linguists [...] subsume differences of accent under differences of dialect.\" In general, \"accent\" refers to variations in pronunciation, while \"dialect\" also encompasses specific variations in grammar and vocabulary.\n\nWhen talking about the German language, the term German dialects is only used for the traditional regional varieties. That allows them to be distinguished from the regional varieties of modern standard German.\n\nThe German dialects show a wide spectrum of variation. Some of them are not mutually intelligible. German dialectology traditionally names the major dialect groups after Germanic tribes from which they were assumed to have descended.\n\nThe extent to which the dialects are spoken varies according to a number of factors: In Northern Germany, dialects are less common than in the South. In cities, dialects are less common than in the countryside. In a public environment, dialects are less common than in a familiar environment.\n\nThe situation in Switzerland and Liechtenstein is different from the rest of the German-speaking countries. The Swiss German dialects are the default everyday language in virtually every situation, whereas standard German is only spoken in education, partially in media, and with foreigners not possessing knowledge of Swiss German. Most Swiss German speakers perceive standard German to be a foreign language.\n\nThe Low German varieties spoken in Germany are often counted among the German dialects. This reflects the modern situation where they are roofed by standard German. This is different from the situation in the Middle Ages when Low German had strong tendencies towards an ausbau language.\n\nThe Frisian languages spoken in Germany are excluded from the German dialects.\n\nItaly is an often quoted example of a country where the second definition of the word \"dialect\" (\"dialetto\") is most prevalent. Italy is in fact home to a vast array of languages, most of which are Latin-based, lack mutual intelligibility with one another, and have their own local varieties; twelve of them (Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovene, Croatian, French, Franco-Provençal, Friulian, Ladin, Occitan and Sardinian) underwent Italianization to a varying degree (ranging from the critically endangered state displayed by Sardinian and Greek to the vigorous promotion of South Tyrolean), but are officially recognized as minority languages (\"minoranze linguistiche storiche\") nowadays, in light of their distinctive historical development. Yet, most of the regional languages spoken across the peninsula are often colloquially referred to in non-linguistic circles as Italian \"dialetti\", since even the prestigious Neapolitan, Sicilian and Venetian have had the Tuscan-based standard Italian as their reference language since the Middle Ages. However, only a few of them are actually derived from modern standard Italian, the majority being rather evolved from Vulgar Latin separately and individually from one another and independently of standard Italian, long prior to the popular diffusion of the latter throughout what is now Italy.\n\nThe most widely spoken languages of Italy fall within a family of which even standard Italian is part, the Italo-Dalmatian group. This wide category includes:\nBULLET::::- the complex of the Tuscan and Central Italian dialects, such as Romanesco in Rome, with the addition of some distantly Corsican-derived varieties (Gallurese and Sassarese) spoken in Northern Sardinia;\nBULLET::::- the Neapolitan group (also known as \"Intermediate Meridional Italian\"), which encompasses not only Naples' and Campania's speech but also a variety of related neighboring varieties like the Irpinian dialect, Abruzzese and Southern Marchegiano, Molisan, Northern Calabrian or Cosentino, and the Bari dialect. The Cilentan dialect of Salerno, in Campania, is considered significantly influenced by the Neapolitan and the below-mentioned language groups;\nBULLET::::- the Sicilian group (also known as \"Extreme Meridional Italian\"), including Salentino and centro-southern Calabrian.\n\nModern standard Italian is heavily based on the Florentine dialect of Tuscan. The Tuscan-based language that would eventually become modern standard Italian had been used in poetry and literature since at least the 12th century, and it first spread throughout Italy among the educated upper class through the works of the so-called \"tre corone\" (\"three crowns\"): Dante Alighieri, Petrarch, and Giovanni Boccaccio. Florentine thus gradually rose to prominence as the \"volgare\" (colloquial speech) of the literate and upper class in Italy, and it spread throughout the peninsula and Sicily as the \"lingua franca\" among the Italian educated class as well as Italian traveling merchants. The economic prowess and cultural and artistic importance of Tuscany in the Late Middle Ages and the Renaissance further encouraged the diffusion of the Florentine-Tuscan Italian throughout Italy and among the educated and powerful, though local and regional languages remained the main languages of the common people.\n\nAside from the Italo-Dalmatian languages, the second most widespread family in Italy is the Gallo-Italic group, spanning throghout much of Northern Italy's languages and dialects (such as Piedmontese, Emilian-Romagnol, Ligurian, Lombard, Venetian, Sicily's and Basilicata's Gallo-Italic in southern Italy, etc.).\n\nFinally, other languages from a number of different families follow the last two major groups: the Gallo-Romance languages (French, Occitan and its Vivaro-Alpine dialect, Franco-Provençal); the Rhaeto-Romance languages (Friulian and Ladin); the Ibero-Romance languages (Sardinia's Algherese); the Germanic Cimbrian, Southern Bavarian, Walser German and the Mòcheno language; the Albanian Arbëresh language; the Hellenic Griko language and Calabrian Greek; the Serbo-Croatian Slavomolisano dialect; and the various Slovene languages, including the Gail Valley dialect and Istrian dialect. The language indigenous to Sardinia, while being Romance in nature, is considered to be a specific linguistic family of its own, separate from all the other Neo-Latin groups; it is often subdivided into the Centro-Southern and Centro-Northern dialects.\n\nThough mostly mutually unintelligible, the exact degree to which all the Italian languages are mutually unintelligible varies, often correlating with geographical distance or geographical barriers between the languages; some regional Italian languages that are closer in geographical proximity to each other or closer to each other on the dialect continuum are more or less mutually intelligible. For instance, a speaker of purely Eastern Lombard, a language in Northern Italy's Lombardy region that includes the Bergamasque dialect, would have severely limited mutual intelligibility with a purely standard Italian speaker and would be nearly completely unintelligible to a Sicilian-speaking individual. Due to Eastern Lombard's status as a Gallo-Italic language, an Eastern Lombard speaker may, in fact, have more mutual intelligibility with an Occitan, Catalan, or French speaker than with a standard Italian or Sicilian speaker. Meanwhile, a Sicilian-speaking person would have a greater degree of mutual intelligibility with a speaker of the more closely related Neapolitan language, but far less mutual intelligibility with a person speaking Sicilian Gallo-Italic, a language that developed in isolated Lombard emigrant communities on the same island as the Sicilian language.\n\nDuring the Risorgimento, proponents of Italian republicanism and Italian nationalism, like the Lombard Alessandro Manzoni, stressed the importance of establishing a uniform national language in order to better create an Italian national identity. With the unification of Italy in the 1860s, standard Italian became the official national language of the new Italian state, while the other ones became to be institutionally regarded as subordinate dialects to Italian, and negatively associated with lack of education or provincialism. However, at the time of the Italian Unification, standard Italian still existed mainly as a literary language, and only 2.5% of Italy's population could speak standard Italian.\n\nIn the early 20th century, the vast conscription of Italian men from all throughout Italy during World War I is credited with facilitating the diffusion of standard Italian among less educated Italian men, as these men from various regions with various regional languages were forced to communicate with each other in a common tongue while serving in the Italian military. With the popular spread of standard Italian out of the intellectual circles, because of the mass-media and the establishment of public education, Italians from all regions were increasingly exposed to standard Italian. While \"dialect\" levelling has increased the number of standard Italian speakers and decreased the number of speakers of other languages native to Italy, Italians in different regions have developed variations of standard Italian particular to their region. These variations on standard Italian, known as regional Italian, would thus more appropriately be called \"dialects\" in accordance with the first linguistic definition of \"dialect\", as they are in fact derived partially or mostly from standard Italian, with some degree of influence from the local or regional native languages and accents.\n\nToday, the majority of Italians are able to speak standard Italian, though many Italians still speak their regional language regularly or as their primary day-to-day language, especially at home with family or when communicating with Italians from the same town or region.\n\nThe classification of speech varieties as dialects or languages and their relationship to other varieties of speech can be controversial and the verdicts inconsistent. Serbo-Croatian illustrates this point. Serbo-Croatian has two major formal variants (Serbian and Croatian). Both are based on the \"Shtokavian\" dialect and therefore mutually intelligible with differences found mostly in their respective local vocabularies and minor grammatical differences. Certain dialects of Serbia (\"Torlakian\") and Croatia (\"Kajkavian\" and \"Chakavian\"), however, are not mutually intelligible even though they are usually subsumed under Serbo-Croatian. How these dialects should be classified in relation to Shtokavian remains a matter of dispute.\n\nMacedonian, although largely mutually intelligible with Bulgarian and certain dialects of Serbo-Croatian (Torlakian), is considered by Bulgarian linguists to be a Bulgarian dialect, in contrast with the contemporary international view and the view in North Macedonia, which regards it as a language in its own right. Nevertheless, before the establishment of a literary standard of Macedonian in 1944, in most sources in and out of Bulgaria before the Second World War, the southern Slavonic dialect continuum covering the area of today's North Macedonia were referred to as Bulgarian dialects.\n\nIn Lebanon, a part of the Christian population considers \"Lebanese\" to be in some sense a distinct language from Arabic and not merely a dialect. During the civil war Christians often used Lebanese Arabic officially, and sporadically used the Latin script to write Lebanese, thus further distinguishing it from Arabic. All Lebanese laws are written in the standard literary form of Arabic, though parliamentary debate may be conducted in Lebanese Arabic.\n\nIn Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco, the Darijas (spoken North African languages) are sometimes considered more different from other Arabic dialects. Officially, North African countries prefer to give preference to the Literary Arabic and conduct much of their political and religious life in it (adherence to Islam), and refrain from declaring each country's specific variety to be a separate language, because Literary Arabic is the liturgical language of Islam and the language of the Islamic sacred book, the Qur'an. Although, especially since the 1960s, the Darijas are occupying an increasing use and influence in the cultural life of these countries. Examples of cultural elements where Darijas' use became dominant include: theatre, film, music, television, advertisement, social media, folk-tale books and companies' names.\n\nThe Modern Ukrainian language has been in common use since the late 17th century, associated with the establishment of the Cossack Hetmanate. In the 19th century, the Tsarist Government of the Russian Empire claimed that Ukrainian was merely a dialect of Russian and not a language on its own. According to these claims, the differences were few and caused by the conquest of western Ukraine by the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. However, in reality the dialects in Ukraine were developing independently from the dialects in the modern Russia for several centuries, and as a result they differed substantially.\n\nFollowing the signing of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, the German Empire briefly gained control over Ukraine during World War I, but was eventually defeated by the Entente, with major involvement by Russian Bolsheviks. After Bolsheviks managed to conquer the rest of Ukraine from the Ukrainian People's Republic and the Whites, Ukraine became part of the USSR, whence a process of Ukrainization was begun, with encouragement from Moscow. However, in the late 1920s - early 1930s, the process started to reverse. Witnessing the Ukrainian cultural revival spurred by the Ukrainization in the early 1920s, and fearing that it might lead to an independence movement, Moscow started to remove from power and in some cases physically eliminate the public proponents of Ukrainization. The appointment of Pavel Postyshev as the secretary of the Communist Party of Ukraine marked the end of Ukrainization, and the opposite process of Russification started. After World War II, citing Ukrainian collaboration with Nazi Germany in an attempt to gain independence as the reason, Moscow changed its policy towards increasing repression of the Ukrainian language.\n\nToday the boundaries of the Ukrainian language to the Russian language are still not drawn clearly, with an intermediate dialect between them, called Surzhyk, developing in Ukraine, also known as balachka in Ukrainian ethnic territories controlled by Russia.\n\nThere have been cases of a variety of speech being deliberately reclassified to serve political purposes. One example is Moldovan. In 1996, the Moldovan parliament, citing fears of \"Romanian expansionism\", rejected a proposal from President Mircea Snegur to change the name of the language to Romanian, and in 2003 a Moldovan–Romanian dictionary was published, purporting to show that the two countries speak different languages. Linguists of the Romanian Academy reacted by declaring that all the Moldovan words were also Romanian words; while in Moldova, the head of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova, Ion Bărbuţă, described the dictionary as a politically motivated \"absurdity\".\n\nUnlike languages that use alphabets to indicate their pronunciation, Chinese characters have developed from logograms that do not always give hints to their pronunciation. Although the written characters have remained relatively consistent for the last two thousand years, the pronunciation and grammar in different regions have developed to an extent that the varieties of the spoken language are often mutually unintelligible. As a series of migration to the south throughout the history, the regional languages of the south, including Gan, Xiang, Wu, Min, Yue and Hakka often show traces of Old Chinese or Middle Chinese. From the Ming dynasty onward, Beijing has been the capital of China and the dialect spoken in Beijing has had the most prestige among other varieties. With the founding of the Republic of China, Standard Mandarin was designated as the official language, based on the spoken language of Beijing. Since then, other spoken varieties are regarded as \"fangyan\" (regional speech). Cantonese is still the most commonly-used language in Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Macau and among some overseas Chinese communities, whereas Hokkien has been accepted in Taiwan as an important local language alongside Mandarin.\n\nOne language, Interlingua, was developed so that the languages of Western civilization would act as its dialects. Drawing from such concepts as the international scientific vocabulary and Standard Average European, linguists developed a theory that the modern Western languages were actually dialects of a hidden or latent language. Researchers at the International Auxiliary Language Association extracted words and affixes that they considered to be part of Interlingua's vocabulary. In theory, speakers of the Western languages would understand written or spoken Interlingua immediately, without prior study, since their own languages were its dialects. This has often turned out to be true, especially, but not solely, for speakers of the Romance languages and educated speakers of English. Interlingua has also been found to assist in the learning of other languages. In one study, Swedish high school students learning Interlingua were able to translate passages from Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian that students of those languages found too difficult to understand. The vocabulary of Interlingua extends beyond the Western language families.\n\nBULLET::::- Varieties of Arabic\nBULLET::::- Bengali dialects\nBULLET::::- Catalan dialects\nBULLET::::- Varieties of Chinese\nBULLET::::- Cypriot Greek\nBULLET::::- Cypriot Turkish\nBULLET::::- Danish dialects\nBULLET::::- Dutch dialects\nBULLET::::- English dialects\nBULLET::::- Finnish dialects\nBULLET::::- Varieties of French\nBULLET::::- Georgian dialects\nBULLET::::- German dialects\nBULLET::::- Malayalam languages\nBULLET::::- Varieties of Malay\nBULLET::::- Connacht Irish, Munster Irish, Ulster Irish\nBULLET::::- Italian dialects\nBULLET::::- Japanese dialects\nBULLET::::- Korean dialects\nBULLET::::- Norwegian dialects\nBULLET::::- Dialects of Polish\nBULLET::::- Portuguese dialects\nBULLET::::- Romanian dialects\nBULLET::::- Russian dialects\nBULLET::::- Slavic microlanguages\nBULLET::::- Slovenian dialects\nBULLET::::- Spanish dialects\nBULLET::::- Swedish dialects\nBULLET::::- Sri Lankan Tamil dialects\nBULLET::::- Yiddish dialects\nBULLET::::- Accent perception\nBULLET::::- Chronolect\nBULLET::::- Colloquialism\nBULLET::::- Creole language\nBULLET::::- Dialect levelling\nBULLET::::- Dialectology\nBULLET::::- Dialectometry\nBULLET::::- Ethnolect\nBULLET::::- Eye dialect\nBULLET::::- Idiolect\nBULLET::::- Isogloss\nBULLET::::- Koiné language\nBULLET::::- Register (sociolinguistics)\nBULLET::::- Literary language\nBULLET::::- Nation language\nBULLET::::- Regional language\nBULLET::::- Sprachbund\n\nBULLET::::- Sounds Familiar? – Listen to regional accents and dialects of the UK on the British Library's 'Sounds Familiar' website\nBULLET::::- International Dialects of English Archive Since 1997\nBULLET::::- whoohoo.co.uk British Dialect Translator\nBULLET::::- thedialectdictionary.com – Compilation of Dialects from around the globe\nBULLET::::- A site for announcements and downloading the SEAL System\n"}
{"id": "8129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8129", "title": "Digitalis", "text": "Digitalis\n\nDigitalis ( or ) is a genus of about 20 species of herbaceous perennials, shrubs, and biennials commonly called foxgloves.\n\nThis genus was traditionally placed in the figwort family Scrophulariaceae, but recent phylogenetic research has placed it in the much enlarged family Plantaginaceae. This genus is native to western and southwestern Europe, western and central Asia and northwestern Africa. The scientific name means \"finger-like\" and refers to the ease with which a flower of \"Digitalis purpurea\" can be fitted over a human fingertip. The flowers are produced on a tall spike, are tubular, and vary in colour with species, from purple to pink, white, and yellow. The best-known species is the common foxglove, \"Digitalis purpurea\". This biennial plant is often grown as an ornamental plant due to its vivid flowers which range in colour from various purple tints through pink, and purely white. The flowers can also possess various marks and spottings. The first year of growth produces only the stem with its long, basal leaves. During the second year of the plant's life, a long, leafy stem from 50 to 255 centimetres tall grows atop the roots of healthy plants.\n\nOther garden-worthy species include \"D. ferruginea\", \"D. grandiflora\", \"D. lutea\" and \"D. parviflora\".\n\nLarvae of the foxglove pug, a moth, consume the flowers of the common foxglove for food. Other species of Lepidoptera eat the leaves, including the lesser yellow underwing.\n\nThe term \"digitalis\" is also used for drug preparations that contain cardiac glycosides, particularly one called digoxin, extracted from various plants of this genus.\n\nThe name \"foxglove\" was first recorded in the year 1542 by Leonhard Fuchs, whose family name, Fuchs, is the German word for \"fox\" (the plant genus \"Fuchsia\" is also named for him). The genus \"digitalis\" is from the Latin \"digitus\" (finger), perhaps referencing the shape of the flowers, which accommodate a finger when fully formed.\n\nThus the name is recorded in Old English as \"foxes glofe/glofa\" or \"fox's glove.\" Over time, folk myths obscured the literal origins of the name, insinuating that foxes wore the flowers on their paws to silence their movements as they stealthily hunted their prey. The woody hillsides where the foxes made their dens were often covered with the toxic flowers. Some of the more menacing names, such as \"witch's glove,\" reference the toxicity of the plant.\n\nHenry Fox Talbot (1847) proposed \"folks' glove\", where \"folk\" means fairy. Similarly, R. C. A. Prior (1863) suggested an etymology of \"foxes-glew\", meaning 'fairy music'. However, neither of these suggestions account for the Old English form \"foxes glofa\".\n\n\"Digitalis\" species thrive in acidic soils, in partial sunlight to deep shade, in a range of habitats, including open woods, woodland clearings, moorland and heath margins, sea-cliffs, rocky mountain slopes and hedge banks. It is commonly found on sites where the ground has been disturbed, such as recently cleared woodland, or where the vegetation has been burnt.\n\nA group of medicines extracted from foxglove plants are called digitalin. The use of \"D. purpurea\" extract containing cardiac glycosides for the treatment of heart conditions was first described in the English-speaking medical literature by William Withering, in 1785, which is considered the beginning of modern therapeutics. It is used to increase cardiac contractility (it is a positive inotrope) and as an antiarrhythmic agent to control the heart rate, particularly in the irregular (and often fast) atrial fibrillation. Digitalis is hence often prescribed for patients in atrial fibrillation, especially if they have been diagnosed with congestive heart failure. Digoxin was approved for heart failure in 1998 under current regulations by the Food and Drug Administration on the basis of prospective, randomized study and clinical trials. It was also approved for the control of ventricular response rate for patients with atrial fibrillation. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend digoxin for symptomatic chronic heart failure for patients with reduced systolic function, preservation of systolic function, and/or rate control for atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response. Heart Failure Society of America guidelines for heart failure provide similar recommendations. Despite its relatively recent approval by the Food and Drug Administration and the guideline recommendations, the therapeutic use of digoxin is declining in patients with heart failure—likely the result of several factors. Safety concerns regarding a proposed link between digoxin therapy and increased mortality in women may be contributing to the decline in therapeutic use of digoxin.\n\nA group of pharmacologically active compounds are extracted mostly from the leaves of the second year's growth, and in pure form are referred to by common chemical names, such as digitoxin or digoxin, or by brand names such as Crystodigin and Lanoxin, respectively. The two drugs differ in that digoxin has an additional hydroxyl group at the C-3 position on the B-ring (adjacent to the pentane). Both molecules include a lactone and a triple-repeating sugar called a glycoside.\n\nDigitalis works by inhibiting sodium-potassium ATPase. This results in an increased intracellular concentration of sodium ions and thus a decreased concentration gradient across the cell membrane. This increase in intracellular sodium causes the Na/CA exchanger to reverse potential, i.e., transition from pumping sodium into the cell in exchange for pumping calcium out of the cell, to pumping sodium out of the cell in exchange for pumping calcium into the cell. This leads to an increase in cytoplasmic calcium concentration, which improves cardiac contractility. Under normal physiological conditions, the cytoplasmic calcium used in cardiac contractions originates from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, an intracellular organelle that specializes in the storage of calcium. Human newborns, some animals, and patients with chronic heart failure lack well developed and fully functioning sarcoplasmic reticula and must rely on the Na/Ca exchanger to provide all or a majority of the cytoplasmic calcium required for cardiac contraction. For this to occur, cytoplasmic sodium must exceed its typical concentration to favor a reversal in potential, which naturally occurs in human newborns and some animals primarily through an elevated heart rate; in patients with chronic heart failure it occurs through the administration of digitalis. As a result of increased contractility, stroke volume is increased. Ultimately, digitalis increases cardiac output (Cardiac Output=Stroke Volume x Heart Rate). This is the mechanism that makes this drug a popular treatment for congestive heart failure, which is characterized by low cardiac output.\nDigitalis also has a vagal effect on the parasympathetic nervous system, and as such is used in re-entrant cardiac arrhythmias and to slow the ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation. The dependence on the vagal effect means digitalis is not effective when a patient has a high sympathetic nervous system drive, which is the case with acutely ill persons, and also during exercise.\n\nDigitalis toxicity (also known as digitalis intoxication and digitalism) results from an overdose of digitalis and causes nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, as well as sometimes resulting in xanthopsia (jaundiced or yellow vision) and the appearance of blurred outlines (halos), drooling, abnormal heart rate, cardiac arrhythmias, weakness, collapse, dilated pupils, tremors, seizures, and even death. Bradycardia also occurs. Because a frequent side effect of digitalis is reduction of appetite, some individuals have used the drug as a weight-loss aid.\n\nDigitalis is an example of a drug derived from a plant that was formerly used by folklorists and herbalists; herbalists have largely abandoned its use because of its narrow therapeutic index and the difficulty of determining the amount of active drug in herbal preparations. Once the usefulness of digitalis in regulating the human pulse was understood, it was employed for a variety of purposes, including the treatment of epilepsy and other seizure disorders, which are now considered to be inappropriate treatments.\n\nDepending on the species, the digitalis plant may contain several deadly physiological and chemically related cardiac and steroidal glycosides. Thus, the digitalis plants have earned several, more sinister, names: dead man's bells and witch's gloves.\n\nThe entire plant is toxic (including the roots and seeds). Mortality is rare, but case reports do exist. Most plant exposures occur in children younger than six years and are usually unintentional and without associated significant toxicity. More serious toxicity occurs with intentional ingestions by adolescents and adults. Early symptoms of ingestion include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, wild hallucinations, delirium, and severe headache. Depending on the severity of the toxicosis, the victim may later suffer irregular and slow pulse, tremors, various cerebral disturbances, especially of a visual nature (unusual colour visions (see xanthopsia) with objects appearing yellowish to green, and blue halos around lights), convulsions, and deadly disturbances of the heart. For a case description, see the paper by Lacassie. Vincent van Gogh's \"Yellow Period\" may have been influenced by digitalis therapy which, at the time, was thought to control seizures. As noted above, other oculotoxic effects of digitalis include generalized blurry vision, as well as seeing a \"halo\" around each point of light.\n\nIn some instances, people have confused digitalis with the relatively harmless comfrey (\"Symphytum\") plant, which is often brewed into a tea, with fatal consequences. Other fatal accidents involve children drinking the water in a vase containing digitalis plants. Drying does not reduce the toxicity of the plant. The plant is toxic to animals, including all classes of livestock and poultry, as well as felines and canines.\n\nDigitalis poisoning can cause heart block and either bradycardia (decreased heart rate) or tachycardia (increased heart rate), depending on the dose and the condition of one's heart. Notably, the electric cardioversion (to \"shock\" the heart) is generally not indicated in ventricular fibrillation in digitalis toxicity, as it can increase the dysrhythmia. Also, the classic drug of choice for ventricular fibrillation in emergency setting, amiodarone, can worsen the dysrhythmia caused by digitalis, therefore, the second-choice drug lidocaine is more commonly used.\n\nDigoxigenin (DIG) is a steroid found exclusively in the flowers and leaves of the plants \"D. purpurea\" and \"D. lanata\". It is used as a molecular probe to detect DNA or RNA. It can easily be attached to nucleotides by chemical modifications. DIG molecules are often linked to uridine nucleotides; DIG-labelled uridine (DIG-U) can then be incorporated into RNA probes via \"in vitro\" transcription. Once hybridisation occurs \"in situ\", RNA probes with the incorporated DIG-U can be detected with anti-DIG antibodies that are conjugated to alkaline phosphatase. To reveal the hybridised transcripts, alkaline phosphatase can be reacted with a chromogen to produce a coloured precipitate.\n\nBULLET::::- Flora Europaea: \"Digitalis\" species list\nBULLET::::- Molecule of the Month - Digitalis\nBULLET::::- eMedicine link\n"}
{"id": "8131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8131", "title": "Dendrite", "text": "Dendrite\n\nDendrites (from Greek δένδρον \"déndron\", \"tree\"), also dendrons, are branched protoplasmic extensions of a nerve cell that propagate the electrochemical stimulation received from other neural cells to the cell body, or soma, of the neuron from which the dendrites project. Electrical stimulation is transmitted onto dendrites by upstream neurons (usually via their axons) via synapses which are located at various points throughout the dendritic tree. Dendrites play a critical role in integrating these synaptic inputs and in determining the extent to which action potentials are produced by the neuron. Dendritic arborization, also known as dendritic branching, is a multi-step biological process by which neurons form new dendritic trees and branches to create new synapses. The morphology of dendrites such as branch density and grouping patterns are highly correlated to the function of the neuron. Malformation of dendrites is also tightly correlated to impaired nervous system function. Some disorders that are associated with the malformation of dendrites are autism, depression, schizophrenia, Down syndrome and anxiety.\n\nCertain classes of dendrites contain small projections referred to as dendritic spines that increase receptive properties of dendrites to isolate signal specificity. Increased neural activity and the establishment of long-term potentiation at dendritic spines change the sizes, shape, and conduction. This ability for dendritic growth is thought to play a role in learning and memory formation. There can be as many as 15,000 spines per cell, each of which serves as a postsynaptic process for individual presynaptic axons. Dendritic branching can be extensive and in some cases is sufficient to receive as many as 100,000 inputs to a single neuron.\n\nDendrites are one of two types of protoplasmic protrusions that extrude from the cell body of a neuron, the other type being an axon. Axons can be distinguished from dendrites by several features including shape, length, and function. Dendrites often taper off in shape and are shorter, while axons tend to maintain a constant radius and be relatively long. Typically, axons transmit electrochemical signals and dendrites receive the electrochemical signals, although some types of neurons in certain species lack axons and simply transmit signals via their dendrites. Dendrites provide an enlarged surface area to receive signals from the terminal buttons of other axons, and the axon also commonly divides at its far end into many branches (telodendria) each of which ends in a nerve terminal, allowing a chemical signal to pass simultaneously to many target cells. Typically, when an electrochemical signal stimulates a neuron, it occurs at a dendrite and causes changes in the electrical potential across the neuron's plasma membrane. This change in the membrane potential will passively spread across the dendrite but becomes weaker with distance without an action potential. An action potential propagates the electrical activity along the membrane of the neuron's dendrites to the cell body and then afferently down the length of the axon to the axon terminal, where it triggers the release of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. However, synapses involving dendrites can also be axodendritic, involving an axon signaling to a dendrite, or dendrodendritic, involving signaling between dendrites. An autapse is a synapse in which the axon of one neuron transmits signals to its own dendrites.\n\nThere are three main types of neurons; multipolar, bipolar, and unipolar. Multipolar neurons, such as the one shown in the image, are composed of one axon and many dendritic trees. Pyramidal cells are multipolar cortical neurons with pyramid shaped cell bodies and large dendrites called apical dendrites that extend to the surface of the cortex. Bipolar neurons have one axon and one dendritic tree at opposing ends of the cell body. Unipolar neurons have a stalk that extends from the cell body that separates into two branches with one containing the dendrites and the other with the terminal buttons. Unipolar dendrites are used to detect sensory stimuli such as touch or temperature.\n\nThe term \"dendrites\" was first used in 1889 by Wilhelm His to describe the number of smaller \"protoplasmic processes\" that were attached to a nerve cell. German anatomist Otto Friedrich Karl Deiters is generally credited with the discovery of the axon by distinguishing it from the dendrites.\n\nSome of the first intracellular recordings in a nervous system were made in the late 1930s by Kenneth S. Cole and Howard J. Curtis. Swiss Rüdolf Albert von Kölliker and German Robert Remak were the first to identify and characterize the axon initial segment. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley also employed the squid giant axon (1939) and by 1952 they had obtained a full quantitative description of the ionic basis of the action potential, leading the formulation of the Hodgkin–Huxley model. Hodgkin and Huxley were awarded jointly the Nobel Prize for this work in 1963. The formulas detailing axonal conductance were extended to vertebrates in the Frankenhaeuser–Huxley equations. Louis-Antoine Ranvier was the first to describe the gaps or nodes found on axons and for this contribution these axonal features are now commonly referred to as the Nodes of Ranvier. Santiago Ramón y Cajal, a Spanish anatomist, proposed that axons were the output components of neurons. He also proposed that neurons were discrete cells that communicated with each other via specialized junctions, or spaces, between cells, now known as a synapse. Ramón y Cajal improved a silver staining process known as Golgi's method, which had been developed by his rival, Camillo Golgi.\n\nDuring the development of dendrites, several factors can influence differentiation. These include modulation of sensory input, environmental pollutants, body temperature, and drug use. For example, rats raised in dark environments were found to have a reduced number of spines in pyramidal cells located in the primary visual cortex and a marked change in distribution of dendrite branching in layer 4 stellate cells. Experiments done in vitro and in vivo have shown that the presence of afferents and input activity per se can modulate the patterns in which dendrites differentiate.\n\nLittle is known about the process by which dendrites orient themselves in vivo and are compelled to create the intricate branching pattern unique to each specific neuronal class. One theory on the mechanism of dendritic arbor development is the Synaptotropic Hypothesis. The synaptotropic hypothesis proposes that input from a presynaptic to a postsynaptic cell (and maturation of excitatory synaptic inputs) eventually can change the course of synapse formation at dendritic and axonal arbors. This synapse formation is required for the development of neuronal structure in the functioning brain. A balance between metabolic costs of dendritic elaboration and the need to cover receptive field presumably determine the size and shape of dendrites. A complex array of extracellular and intracellular cues modulates dendrite development including transcription factors, receptor-ligand interactions, various signaling pathways, local translational machinery, cytoskeletal elements, Golgi outposts and endosomes. These contribute to the organization of the dendrites on individual cell bodies and the placement of these dendrites in the neuronal circuitry. For example, it was shown that β-actin zipcode binding protein 1 (ZBP1) contributes to proper dendritic branching. Other important transcription factors involved in the morphology of dendrites include CUT, Abrupt, Collier, Spineless, ACJ6/drifter, CREST, NEUROD1, CREB, NEUROG2 etc. Secreted proteins and cell surface receptors includes neurotrophins and tyrosine kinase receptors, BMP7, Wnt/dishevelled, EPHB 1-3, Semaphorin/plexin-neuropilin, slit-robo, netrin-frazzled, reelin. Rac, CDC42 and RhoA serve as cytoskeletal regulators and the motor protein includes KIF5, dynein, LIS1. Important secretory and endocytic pathways controlling the dendritic development include DAR3 /SAR1, DAR2/Sec23, DAR6/Rab1 etc. All these molecules interplay with each other in controlling dendritic morphogenesis including the acquisition of type specific dendritic arborization, the regulation of dendrite size and the organization of dendrites emanating from different neurons.\n\nThe structure and branching of a neuron's dendrites, as well as the availability and variation of voltage-gated ion conductance, strongly influences how the neuron integrates the input from other neurons. This integration is both temporal, involving the summation of stimuli that arrive in rapid succession, as well as spatial, entailing the aggregation of excitatory and inhibitory inputs from separate branches.\n\nDendrites were once thought to merely convey electrical stimulation passively. This passive transmission means that voltage changes measured at the cell body are the result of activation of distal synapses propagating the electric signal towards the cell body without the aid of voltage-gated ion channels. Passive cable theory describes how voltage changes at a particular location on a dendrite transmit this electrical signal through a system of converging dendrite segments of different diameters, lengths, and electrical properties. Based on passive cable theory one can track how changes in a neuron's dendritic morphology impacts the membrane voltage at the cell body, and thus how variation in dendrite architectures affects the overall output characteristics of the neuron.\n\nElectrochemical signals are propagated by action potentials that utilize intermembrane voltage-gated ion channels to transport sodium ions, calcium ions, and potassium ions. Each ion species has its own corresponding protein channel located in the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane. The cell membrane of neurons covers the axons, cell body, dendrites, etc. The protein channels can differ between chemical species in the amount of required activation voltage and the activation duration.\n\nAction potentials in animal cells are generated by either sodium-gated or calcium-gated ion channels in the plasma membrane. These channels are closed when the membrane potential is near to, or at, the resting potential of the cell. The channels will start to open if the membrane potential increases, allowing sodium or calcium ions to flow into the cell. As more ions enter the cell, the membrane potential continues to rise. The process continues until all of the ion channels are open, causing a rapid increase in the membrane potential that then triggers the decrease in the membrane potential. The depolarizing is caused by the closing of the ion channels that prevent sodium ions from entering the neuron, and they are then actively transported out of the cell. Potassium channels are then activated, and there is an outward flow of potassium ions, returning the electrochemical gradient to the resting potential. After an action potential has occurred, there is a transient negative shift, called the afterhyperpolarization or refractory period, due to additional potassium currents. This is the mechanism that prevents an action potential from traveling back the way it just came.\n\nAnother important feature of dendrites, endowed by their active voltage gated conductance, is their ability to send action potentials back into the dendritic arbor. Known as back-propagating action potentials, these signals depolarize the dendritic arbor and provide a crucial component toward synapse modulation and long-term potentiation. Furthermore, a train of back-propagating action potentials artificially generated at the soma can induce a calcium action potential (a dendritic spike) at the dendritic initiation zone in certain types of neurons.\n\nDendrites themselves appear to be capable of plastic changes during the adult life of animals, including invertebrates. Neuronal dendrites have various compartments known as functional units that are able to compute incoming stimuli. These functional units are involved in processing input and are composed of the subdomains of dendrites such as spines, branches, or groupings of branches. Therefore, plasticity that leads to changes in the dendrite structure will affect communication and processing in the cell. During development, dendrite morphology is shaped by intrinsic programs within the cell's genome and extrinsic factors such as signals from other cells. But in adult life, extrinsic signals become more influential and cause more significant changes in dendrite structure compared to intrinsic signals during development. In females, the dendritic structure can change as a result of physiological conditions induced by hormones during periods such as pregnancy, lactation, and following the estrous cycle. This is particularly visible in pyramidal cells of the CA1 region of the hippocampus, where the density of dendrites can vary up to 30%.\n\nBULLET::::- - \"Slide 3 Spinal cord\"\nBULLET::::- Dendritic Tree - Cell Centered Database\nBULLET::::- Stereo images of dendritic trees in \"Kryptopterus\" electroreceptor organs\n"}
{"id": "8133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8133", "title": "Dalai Lama", "text": "Dalai Lama\n\nDalai Lama (, ; Standard Tibetan: , , ) is a title given by the Tibetan people for the foremost spiritual leader of the Gelug or \"Yellow Hat\" school of Tibetan Buddhism, the newest of the classical schools of Tibetan Buddhism. The 14th and current Dalai Lama is Tenzin Gyatso, who lives as a refugee in India.\n\nThe Dalai Lama is also considered to be the successor in a line of tulkus who are believed to be incarnations of Avalokiteśvara, a Bodhisattva of Compassion. The name is a combination of the Mongolic word meaning \"ocean\" or \"big\" (coming from Mongolian title or , translated as \"Gyatso\" in Tibetan) and the Tibetan word () meaning \"master, guru\".\n\nSince the time of the 5th Dalai Lama in the 17th century, his personage has always been a symbol of unification of the state of Tibet, where he has represented Buddhist values and traditions. The Dalai Lama was an important figure of the Geluk tradition, which was politically and numerically dominant in Central Tibet, but his religious authority went beyond sectarian boundaries. While he had no formal or institutional role in any of the religious traditions, which were headed by their own high lamas, he was a unifying symbol of the Tibetan state, representing Buddhist values and traditions above any specific school. The traditional function of the Dalai Lama as an ecumenical figure, holding together disparate religious and regional groups, has been taken up by the present fourteenth Dalai Lama. He has worked to overcome sectarian and other divisions in the exiled community and has become a symbol of Tibetan nationhood for Tibetans both in Tibet and in exile.\n\nFrom 1642 until 1705 and from 1750 to the 1950s, the Dalai Lamas or their regents headed the Tibetan government (or Ganden Phodrang) in Lhasa which governed all or most of the Tibetan Plateau with varying degrees of autonomy under the Qing Dynasty of China, in which Tibet had been under non-Tibetan suzerainty, and a period of disputed \"defacto independence\" between 1913 and 1951. This Tibetan government also enjoyed the patronage and protection of firstly Mongol kings of the Khoshut and Dzungar Khanates (1642–1720) and then of the emperors of the Manchu-led Qing dynasty (1720–1912). In 1913, several Tibetan representatives including Agvan Dorzhiev signed a treaty between Tibet and Mongolia, proclaiming mutual recognition and their independence from China, however the legitimacy of the treaty and declared independence of Tibet was rejected by both the Republic of China and the current People's Republic of China. The Dalai Lamas headed the Tibetan government afterwards despite that, until 1951.\n\nIn Central Asian Buddhist countries, it has been widely believed for the last millennium that Avalokiteśvara, the bodhisattva of compassion, has a special relationship with the people of Tibet and intervenes in their fate by incarnating as benevolent rulers and teachers such as the Dalai Lamas. This is according to \"The Book of Kadam\", the main text of the Kadampa school, to which the 1st Dalai Lama, Gendun Drup, first belonged.\nIn fact, this text is said to have laid the foundation for the Tibetans' later identification of the Dalai Lamas as incarnations of Avalokiteśvara.\n\nIt traces the legend of the bodhisattva's incarnations as early Tibetan kings and emperors such as Songtsen Gampo and later as Dromtönpa (1004–1064).\n\nThis lineage has been extrapolated by Tibetans up to and including the Dalai Lamas.\n\nThus, according to such sources, an informal line of succession of the present Dalai Lamas as incarnations of Avalokiteśvara stretches back much further than Gendun Drub. \"The Book of Kadam\", the compilation of Kadampa teachings largely composed around discussions between the Indian sage Atiśa (980–1054) and his Tibetan host and chief disciple Dromtönpa and \"‘Tales of the Previous Incarnations of Arya Avalokiteśvara’\", nominate as many as sixty persons prior to Gendun Drub who are enumerated as earlier incarnations of Avalokiteśvara and predecessors in the same lineage leading up to him. In brief, these include a mythology of 36 Indian personalities plus 10 early Tibetan kings and emperors, all said to be previous incarnations of Dromtönpa, and fourteen further Nepalese and Tibetan yogis and sages in between him and the 1st Dalai Lama. In fact, according to the \"Birth to Exile\" article on the 14th Dalai Lama's website, he is \"the seventy-fourth in a lineage that can be traced back to a Brahmin boy who lived in the time of Buddha Shakyamuni.\"\n\nAccording to the 14th Dalai Lama, long ago Avalokiteśvara had promised the Buddha to guide and protect the Tibetan people and in the late Middle Ages, his master plan to fulfill this promise was the stage-by-stage establishment of the Dalai Lama theocracy in Tibet.\n\nFirst, Tsongkhapa established three great monasteries around Lhasa in the province of Ü before he died in 1419. The 1st Dalai Lama soon became Abbot of the greatest one, Drepung, and developed a large popular power base in Ü. He later extended this to cover Tsang, where he constructed a fourth great monastery, Tashi Lhunpo, at Shigatse. The 2nd studied there before returning to Lhasa, where he became Abbot of Drepung. Having reactivated the 1st's large popular followings in Tsang and Ü, the 2nd then moved on to southern Tibet and gathered more followers there who helped him construct a new monastery, Chokorgyel. He also established the method by which later Dalai Lama incarnations would be discovered through visions at the \"oracle lake\", Lhamo Lhatso. The 3rd built on his predecessors' fame by becoming Abbot of the two great monasteries of Drepung and Sera. The stage was set for the great Mongol King Altan Khan, hearing of his reputation, to invite the 3rd to Mongolia where he converted the King and his followers to Buddhism, as well as other Mongol princes and their followers covering a vast tract of central Asia. Thus most of Mongolia was added to the Dalai Lama's sphere of influence, founding a spiritual empire which largely survives to the modern age. After being given the Mongolian name 'Dalai', he returned to Tibet to found the great monasteries of Lithang in Kham, eastern Tibet and Kumbum in Amdo, north-eastern Tibet. The 4th was then born in Mongolia as the great grandson of Altan Khan, thus cementing strong ties between Central Asia, the Dalai Lamas, the Gelugpa and Tibet. Finally, in fulfilment of Avalokiteśvara's master plan, the 5th in the succession used the vast popular power base of devoted followers built up by his four predecessors. By 1642, a strategy that was planned and carried out by his resourceful \"chagdzo\" or manager Sonam Rapten with the military assistance of his devoted disciple Gushri Khan, Chieftain of the Khoshut Mongols, enabled the 'Great 5th' to found the Dalai Lamas' religious and political reign over more or less the whole of Tibet that survived for over 300 years.\n\nThus the Dalai Lamas became pre-eminent spiritual leaders in Tibet and 25 Himalayan and Central Asian kingdoms and countries bordering Tibet and their prolific literary works have \"for centuries acted as major sources of spiritual and philosophical inspiration to more than fifty million people of these lands\". Overall, they have played \"a monumental role in Asian literary, philosophical and religious history\".\n\nGendun Drup (1391–1474), a disciple of the founder Je Tsongkapa, was the ordination name of the monk who came to be known as the 'First Dalai Lama', but only from 104 years after he died.\nThere had been resistance, since first he was ordained a monk in the Kadampa tradition and for various reasons, for hundreds of years the Kadampa school had eschewed the adoption of the \"tulku\" system to which the older schools adhered. Tsongkhapa largely modelled his new, reformed Gelugpa school on the Kadampa tradition and refrained from starting a tulku system. Therefore, although Gendun Drup grew to be a very important Gelugpa lama, after he died in 1474 there was no question of any search being made to identify his incarnation.\n\nDespite this, when the Tashilhunpo monks started hearing what seemed credible accounts that an incarnation of Gendun Drup had appeared nearby and repeatedly announced himself from the age of two, their curiosity was aroused. It was some 55 years after Tsongkhapa's death. When eventually the monastic authorities saw compelling evidence which convinced them that the child in question was indeed the incarnation of their founder, they felt obliged to break with their own tradition. In 1487, the boy was renamed Gendun Gyatso and installed at Tashilhunpo as Gendun Drup's tulku, albeit informally.\n\nGendun Gyatso died in 1542 and the lineage of Dalai Lama tulkus finally became firmly established when the third incarnation, Sonam Gyatso (1543–1588), came forth. He made himself known as the \"tulku\" of Gendun Gyatso and was formally recognised and enthroned at Drepung in 1546. When he was given the titular name \"Dalai Lama\" by the Tümed Altan Khan in 1578, it was also accorded to his last two predecessors and he became known as the third in the lineage.\n\nThe Dalai Lama lineage started from humble beginnings. 'Pema Dorje' (1391–1474), the boy who was to become the first in the line, was born in a cattle pen in Shabtod, Tsang in 1391. His nomad parents kept sheep and goats and lived in tents. When his father died in 1398 his mother was unable to support the young goatherd so she entrusted him to his uncle, a monk at Narthang, a major Kadampa monastery near Shigatse, for education as a Buddhist monk. Narthang ran the largest printing press in Tibet and its celebrated library attracted scholars and adepts from far and wide, so Pema Dorje received an education beyond the norm at the time as well as exposure to diverse spiritual schools and ideas. He studied Buddhist philosophy extensively and in 1405, ordained by Narthang's abbot, he took the name of Gendun Drup. Soon recognised as an exceptionally gifted pupil, the abbot tutored him personally and took special interest in his progress. In 12 years he passed the 12 grades of monkhood and took the highest vows. After completing his intensive studies at Narthang he left to continue at specialist monasteries in Central Tibet, his grounding at Narthang was revered among many he encountered.\n\nIn 1415 Gendun Drup met Tsongkhapa, founder of the Gelugpa school, and became his student; their meeting was of decisive historical and political significance as he was later to be known as the 1st Dalai Lama. When eventually Tsongkhapa's successor Khedrup Je, the Panchen Lama died, Gendun Drup became the leader of the Gelugpa. He rose to become Abbot of Drepung, the greatest Gelugpa monastery, outside Lhasa.\n\nIt was mainly due to Gendun Drup's energy and ability that Tsongkhapa's new school grew into an expanding order capable of competing with others on an equal footing. Taking advantage of good relations with the nobility and a lack of determined opposition from rival orders, on the very edge of Karma Kagyu-dominated territory he founded Tashilhunpo Monastery at Shigatse. He was based there, as its Abbot, from its founding in 1447 until his death. Tashilhunpo, 'Mountain of Blessings', became the fourth great Gelugpa monastery in Tibet, after Ganden, Drepung and Sera had all been founded in Tsongkhapa's time. It later became the seat of the Panchen Lamas.\nBy establishing it at Shigatse in the middle of Tsang, he expanded the Gelugpa sphere of influence, and his own, from the Lhasa region of Ü to this province, which was the stronghold of the Karma Kagyu school and their patrons, the rising Tsangpa dynasty. Tashilhunpo was destined to become 'Southern Tibet's greatest monastic university' with a complement of 3,000 monks.\n\nGendun Drup was said to be the greatest scholar-saint ever produced by Narthang Monastery and became 'the single most important lama in Tibet'. Through hard work he became a leading lama, known as 'Perfecter of the Monkhood', 'with a host of disciples'. Famed for his Buddhist scholarship he was also referred to as \"Panchen Gendun Drup\", 'Panchen' being an honorary title designating 'great scholar'. By the great Jonangpa master Bodong Chokley Namgyal he was accorded the honorary title \"Tamchey Khyenpa\" meaning \"The Omniscient One\", an appellation that was later assigned to all Dalai Lama incarnations.\n\nAt the age of 50, he entered meditation retreat at Narthang. As he grew older, Karma Kagyu adherents, finding their sect was losing too many recruits to the monkhood to burgeoning Gelugpa monasteries, tried to contain Gelug expansion by launching military expeditions against them in the region. This led to decades of military and political power struggles between Tsangpa dynasty forces and others across central Tibet. In an attempt to ameliorate these clashes, from his retreat Gendun Drup issued a poem of advice to his followers advising restraint from responding to violence with more violence and to practice compassion and patience instead. The poem, entitled \"Shar Gang Rima\", \"The Song of the Eastern Snow Mountains\", became one of his most enduring popular literary works.\n\nAlthough he was born in a cattle pen to be a simple goatherd, Gendun Drup rose to become one of the most celebrated and respected teachers in Tibet and Central Asia. His spiritual accomplishments brought him lavish donations from devotees which he used to build and furnish new monasteries, to print and distribute Buddhist texts and to maintain monks and meditators. At last, at the age of 84, older than any of his 13 successors, in 1474 he went on foot to visit Narthang Monastery on a final teaching tour. Returning to Tashilhunpo he died 'in a blaze of glory, recognised as having attained Buddhahood'.\n\nHis mortal remains were interred in a bejewelled silver stupa at Tashilhunpo, which survived the Cultural Revolution and can still be seen.\n\nLike the Kadampa, the Gelugpa eschewed the \"tulku\" system. After Gendun Drup died, however, a boy called Sangyey Pel born to Nyngma adepts at Yolkar in Tsang, declared himself at 3 to be \"Gendun Drup\" and asked to be 'taken home' to Tashilhunpo. He spoke in mystical verses, quoted classical texts out of the blue and said he was Dromtönpa, an earlier incarnation of the Dalai Lamas. When he saw monks from Tashilhunpo he greeted the disciples of the late Gendun Drup by name. The Gelugpa elders had to break with tradition and recognised him as Gendun Drup's \"tulku\".\n\nHe was then 8, but until his 12th year his father took him on his teachings and retreats, training him in all the family Nyingma lineages. At 12 he was installed at Tashilhunpo as Gendun Drup's incarnation, ordained, enthroned and renamed Gendun Gyatso Palzangpo (1475–1542).\n\nTutored personally by the abbot he made rapid progress and from 1492 at 17 he was requested to teach all over Tsang, where thousands gathered to listen and give obeisance, including senior scholars and abbots. In 1494, at 19, he met some opposition from the Tashilhunpo establishment when tensions arose over conflicts between advocates of the two types of succession, the traditional abbatial election through merit, and incarnation. Although he had served for some years as Tashilhunpo's abbot, he therefore moved to central Tibet, where he was invited to Drepung and where his reputation as a brilliant young teacher quickly grew. He was accorded all the loyalty and devotion that Gendun Drup had earned and the Gelug school remained as united as ever. This move had the effect of shifting central Gelug authority back to Lhasa. Under his leadership, the sect went on growing in size and influence and with its appeal of simplicity, devotion and austerity its lamas were asked to mediate in disputes between other rivals.\n\nGendun Gyatso's popularity in Ü-Tsang grew as he went on pilgrimage, travelling, teaching and studying from masters such as the adept Khedrup Norzang Gyatso in the Olklha mountains. He also stayed in Kongpo and Dagpo and became known all over Tibet. He spent his winters in Lhasa, writing commentaries and the rest of the year travelling and teaching many thousands of monks and lay people.\n\nIn 1509 he moved to southern Tibet to build Chokorgyel Monastery near the 'Oracle Lake', Lhamo Latso, completing it by 1511. That year he saw visions in the lake and 'empowered' it to impart clues to help identify incarnate lamas. All Dalai Lamas from the 3rd on were found with the help of such visions granted to regents. By now widely regarded as one of Tibet's greatest saints and scholars he was invited back to Tashilhunpo. On his return in 1512, he was given the residence built for Gendun Drup, to be occupied later by the Panchen Lamas. He was made abbot of Tashilhunpo and stayed there teaching in Tsang for 9 months.\n\nGendun Gyatso continued to travel widely and teach while based at Tibet's largest monastery, Drepung and became known as 'Drepung Lama', his fame and influence spreading all over Central Asia as the best students from hundreds of lesser monasteries in Asia were sent to Drepung for education.\n\nThroughout Gendun Gyatso's life, the Gelugpa were opposed and suppressed by older rivals, particularly the Karma Kagyu and their Ringpung clan patrons from Tsang, who felt threatened by their loss of influence. In 1498 the Ringpung army captured Lhasa and banned the Gelugpa annual New Year Monlam Prayer Festival started by Tsongkhapa for world peace and prosperity. Gendun Gyatso was promoted to abbot of Drepung in 1517 and that year Ringpung forces were forced to withdraw from Lhasa. Gendun Gyatso then went to the \"Gongma\" (King) Drakpa Jungne to obtain permission for the festival to be held again. The next New Year, the \"Gongma\" was so impressed by Gendun Gyatso's performance leading the Festival that he sponsored construction of a large new residence for him at Drepung, 'a monastery within a monastery'. It was called the Ganden Phodrang, a name later adopted by the Tibetan Government, and it served as home for Dalai Lamas until the Fifth moved to the Potala Palace in 1645.\n\nIn 1525, already abbot of Chokhorgyel, Drepung and Tashilhunpo, he was made abbot of Sera monastery as well, and seeing the number of monks was low he worked to increase it.\nBased at Drepung in winter and Chokorgyel in summer, he spent his remaining years in composing commentaries, regional teaching tours, visiting Tashilhunpo from time to time and acting as abbot of these four great monasteries. As abbot, he made Drepung the largest monastery in the whole of Tibet. He attracted many students and disciples 'from Kashmir to China' as well as major patrons and disciples such as \"Gongma\" Nangso Donyopa of Droda who built a monastery at Zhekar Dzong in his honour and invited him to name it and be its spiritual guide.\n\n\"Gongma\" Gyaltsen Palzangpo of Khyomorlung at Tolung and his Queen Sangyey Paldzomma also became his favourite devoted lay patrons and disciples in the 1530s and he visited their area to carry out rituals as 'he chose it for his next place of rebirth'. He died in meditation at Drepung in 1547 at 67 and his reliquary stupa was constructed at Khyomorlung. It was said that, by the time he died, through his disciples and their students, his personal influence covered the whole of Buddhist Central Asia where 'there was nobody of any consequence who did not know of him'.\n\nThe Third Dalai Lama, Sonam Gyatso (1543–1588) was born in Tolung, near Lhasa,\nas predicted by his predecessor. Claiming he was Gendun Gyatso and readily recalling events from his previous life, he was recognised as the incarnation, named 'Sonam Gyatso' and installed at Drepung, where 'he quickly excelled his teachers in knowledge and wisdom and developed extraordinary powers'. Unlike his predecessors, he came from a noble family, connected with the Sakya and the Phagmo Drupa (Karma Kagyu affiliated) dynasties, and it is to him that the effective conversion of Mongolia to Buddhism is due.\n\nA brilliant scholar and teacher, he had the spiritual maturity to be made Abbot of Drepung, taking responsibility for the material and spiritual well-being of Tibet's largest monastery at the age of nine. At 10 he led the Monlam Prayer Festival, giving daily discourses to the assembly of all Gelugpa monks. His influence grew so quickly that soon the monks at Sera Monastery also made him their Abbot and his mediation was being sought to prevent fighting between political power factions. At 16, in 1559, he was invited to Nedong by King Ngawang Tashi Drakpa, a Karma Kagyu supporter, and became his personal teacher. At 17, when fighting broke out in Lhasa between Gelug and Kagyu parties and efforts by local lamas to mediate failed, Sonam Gyatso negotiated a peaceful settlement. At 19, when the Kyichu River burst its banks and flooded Lhasa, he led his followers to rescue victims and repair the dykes. He then instituted a custom whereby on the last day of Monlam, all the monks would work on strengthening the flood defences. Gradually, he was shaping himself into a national leader. His popularity and renown became such that in 1564 when the Nedong King died, it was Sonam Gyatso at the age of 21 who was requested to lead his funeral rites, rather than his own Kagyu lamas.\n\nRequired to travel and teach without respite after taking full ordination in 1565, he still maintained extensive meditation practices in the hours before dawn and again at the end of the day. In 1569, at age 26, he went to Tashilhunpo to study the layout and administration of the monastery built by his predecessor Gendun Drup. Invited to become the Abbot he declined, already being Abbot of Drepung and Sera, but left his deputy there in his stead. From there he visited Narthang, the first monastery of Gendun Drup and gave numerous discourses and offerings to the monks in gratitude.\n\nMeanwhile, Altan Khan, chief of all the Mongol tribes near China's borders, had heard of Sonam Gyatso's spiritual prowess and repeatedly invited him to Mongolia. By 1571, when Altan Khan received a title of Shunyi Wang (King) from the Ming dynasty of China and swore allegiance to Ming, although he remained de facto quite independent, he had fulfilled his political destiny and a nephew advised him to seek spiritual salvation, saying that \"in Tibet dwells Avalokiteshvara\", referring to Sonam Gyatso, then 28 years old. China was also happy to help Altan Khan by providing necessary translations of holy scripture, and also lamas. At the second invitation, in 1577–78 Sonam Gyatso travelled 1,500 miles to Mongolia to see him. They met in an atmosphere of intense reverence and devotion and their meeting resulted in the re-establishment of strong Tibet-Mongolia relations after a gap of 200 years.\nTo Altan Khan, Sonam Gyatso identified himself as the incarnation of Drogön Chögyal Phagpa, and Altan Khan as that of Kubilai Khan, thus placing the Khan as heir to the Chingizid lineage whilst securing his patronage.\nAltan Khan and his followers quickly adopted Buddhism as their state religion, replacing the prohibited traditional Shamanism.\nMongol law was reformed to accord with Tibetan Buddhist law. From this time Buddhism spread rapidly across Mongolia and soon the Gelugpa had won the spiritual allegiance of most of the Mongolian tribes.\nAs proposed by Sonam Gyatso, Altan Khan sponsored the building of Thegchen Chonkhor Monastery at the site of Sonam Gyatso's open-air teachings given to the whole Mongol population. He also called Sonam Gyatso \"Dalai\", Mongolian for 'Gyatso' (Ocean).\n\nThe name \"Dalai Lama\", by which the lineage later became known throughout the non-Tibetan world, was thus established and it was applied to the first two incarnations retrospectively.\n\nReturning eventually to Tibet by a roundabout route and invited to stay and teach all along the way, in 1580 Sonam Gyatso was in Hohhot [or Ningxia], not far from Beijing, when the Chinese Emperor invited him to his court.\nBy then he had established a religious empire of such proportions that it was unsurprising the Emperor wanted to invite him and grant him a diploma.\nAt the request of the Ningxia Governor he had been teaching large gatherings of people from East Turkestan, Mongolia and nearby areas of China, with interpreters provided by the governor for each language. While there, a Ming court envoy came with gifts and a request to visit the Wanli Emperor but he declined having already agreed to visit Eastern Tibet next. Once there, in Kham, he founded two more great Gelugpa monasteries, the first in 1580 at Lithang where he left his representative before going on to Chamdo Monastery where he resided and was made Abbot. Through Altan Khan, the 3rd Dalai Lama requested to pay tribute to the Emperor of China in order to raise his State Tutor ranking, the Ming imperial court of China agreed with the request. In 1582, he heard Altan Khan had died and invited by his son Dhüring Khan he decided to return to Mongolia. Passing through Amdo, he founded a second great monastery, Kumbum, at the birthplace of Tsongkhapa near Kokonor. Further on, he was asked to adjudicate on border disputes between Mongolia and China. It was the first time a Dalai Lama had exercised such political authority.\nArriving in Mongolia in 1585, he stayed 2 years with Dhüring Khan, teaching Buddhism to his people and converting more Mongol princes and their tribes. Receiving a second invitation from the Emperor in Beijing he accepted, but died en route in 1588.\n\nFor a lifetime of only 45 years, his accomplishments were impressive and some of the most important ones were due to his relationship with Altan Khan. As he was dying, his Mongolian converts urged him not to leave them, as they needed his continuing religious leadership. He promised them he would be incarnated next in Mongolia, as a Mongolian.\n\nThe Fourth Dalai Lama, Yonten Gyatso (1589–1617) was a Mongolian, the great-grandson of Altan Khan who was a descendant of Kublai Khan and King of the Tümed Mongols who had already been converted to Buddhism by the Third Dalai Lama, Sonam Gyatso (1543–1588). This strong connection caused the Mongols to zealously support the Gelugpa sect in Tibet, strengthening their status and position but also arousing intensified opposition from the Gelugpa's rivals, particularly the Tsang Karma Kagyu in Shigatse and their Mongolian patrons and the Bönpo in Kham and their allies. Being the newest school, unlike the older schools the Gelugpa lacked an established network of Tibetan clan patronage and were thus more reliant on foreign patrons. At the age of 10 with a large Mongol escort he travelled to Lhasa where he was enthroned. He studied at Drepung and became its abbot but being a non-Tibetan he met with opposition from some Tibetans, especially the Karma Kagyu who felt their position was threatened by these emerging events; there were several attempts to remove him from power. Yonten Gyatso died at the age of 27 under suspicious circumstances and his chief attendant Sonam Rapten went on to discover the 5th Dalai Lama, became his \"chagdzo\" or manager and after 1642 he went on to be his regent, the Desi.\n\nThe death of the Fourth Dalai Lama in 1617 led to open conflict breaking out between various parties. Firstly, the Tsangpa dynasty, rulers of Central Tibet from Shigatse, supporters of the Karmapa school and rivals to the Gelugpa, forbade the search for his incarnation. However, in 1618 Sonam Rabten, the former attendant of the 4th Dalai Lama who had become the Ganden Phodrang treasurer, secretly identified the child, who had been born to the noble Zahor family at Tagtse castle, south of Lhasa. Then, the Panchen Lama, in Shigatse, negotiated the lifting of the ban, enabling the boy to be recognised as Lobsang Gyatso, the 5th Dalai Lama.\n\nAlso in 1618, the Tsangpa King, Karma Puntsok Namgyal, whose Mongol patron was Choghtu Khong Tayiji of the Khalkha Mongols, attacked the Gelugpa in Lhasa to avenge an earlier snub and established two military bases there to control the monasteries and the city. This caused Sonam Rabten who became the 5th Dalai Lama's \"changdzo\" or manager, to seek more active Mongol patronage and military assistance for the Gelugpa while the Fifth was still a boy. So, in 1620, Mongol troops allied to the Gelugpa who had camped outside Lhasa suddenly attacked and destroyed the two Tsangpa camps and drove them out of Lhasa, enabling the Dalai Lama to be brought out of hiding and publicly enthroned there in 1622.\n\nIn fact, throughout the 5th's minority, it was the influential and forceful Sonam Rabten who inspired the Dzungar Mongols to defend the Gelugpa by attacking their enemies. These enemies included other Mongol tribes who supported the Tsangpas, the Tsangpa themselves and their Bönpo allies in Kham who had also opposed and persecuted Gelugpas. Ultimately, this strategy led to the destruction of the Tsangpa dynasty, the defeat of the Karmapas and their other allies and the Bönpos, by armed forces from the Lhasa valley aided by their Mongol allies, paving the way for Gelugpa political and religious hegemony in Central Tibet. Apparently by general consensus, by virtue of his position as the Dalai Lama's \"changdzo\" (chief attendant, minister), after the Dalai Lama became absolute ruler of Tibet in 1642 Sonam Rabten became the \"\"Desi\"\" or \"Viceroy\", in fact, the \"de facto\" regent or day-to-day ruler of Tibet's governmental affairs. During these years and for the rest of his life (he died in 1658), \"there was little doubt that politically Sonam Chophel [Rabten] was more powerful than the Dalai Lama\". As a young man, being 22 years his junior, the Dalai Lama addressed him reverentially as \"\"Zhalngo\"\", meaning \"the Presence\".\n\nDuring the 1630s Tibet was deeply entangled in rivalry, evolving power struggles and conflicts, not only between the Tibetan religious sects but also between the rising Manchus and the various rival Mongol and Oirat factions, who were also vying for supremacy amongst themselves and on behalf of the religious sects they patronised. For example, Ligdan Khan of the Chahars, a Mongol subgroup who supported the Tsang Karmapas, after retreating from advancing Manchu armies headed for Kokonor intending destroy the Gelug. He died on the way, in 1634 but his vassal Choghtu Khong Tayiji, continued to advance against the Gelugpas, even having his own son Arslan killed after Arslan changed sides, submitted to the Dalai Lama and become a Gelugpa monk. By the mid-1630s, thanks again to the efforts of Sonam Rabten, the 5th Dalai Lama had found a powerful new patron in Güshi Khan of the Khoshut Mongols, a subgroup of the Dzungars, who had recently migrated to the Kokonor area from Dzungaria. He attacked Choghtu Khong Tayiji at Kokonor in 1637 and defeated and killed him, thus eliminating the Tsangpa and the Karmapa's main Mongol patron and protector.\n\nNext, Donyo Dorje, the Bönpo king of Beri in Kham was found writing to the Tsangpa king in Shigatse to propose a co-ordinated 'pincer attack' on the Lhasa Gelugpa monasteries from east and west, seeking to utterly destroy them once and for all. The intercepted letter was sent to Güshi Khan who used it as a pretext to invade central Tibet in 1639 to attack them both, the Bönpo and the Tsangpa. By 1641 he had defeated Donyo Dorje and his allies in Kham and then he marched on Shigatse where after laying siege to their strongholds he defeated Karma Tenkyong, broke the power of the Tsang Karma Kagyu in 1642 and ended the Tsangpa dynasty.\n\nGüshi Khan's attack on the Tsangpa was made on the orders of Sonam Rapten while being publicly and robustly opposed by the Dalai Lama, who, as a matter of conscience, out of compassion and his vision of tolerance for other religious schools, refused to give permission for more warfare in his name after the defeat of the Beri king. Sonam Rabten deviously went behind his master's back to encourage Güshi Khan, to facilitate his plans and to ensure the attacks took place; for this defiance of his master's wishes, Rabten was severely rebuked by the 5th Dalai Lama.\n\nAfter Desi Sonam Rapten died in 1658, the following year the 5th Dalai Lama appointed his younger brother Depa Norbu (aka Nangso Norbu) as his successor. However, after a few months, Norbu betrayed him and led a rebellion against the Ganden Phodrang Government. With his accomplices he seized Samdruptse fort at Shigatse and tried to raise a rebel army from Tsang and Bhutan, but the Dalai Lama skilfully foiled his plans without any fighting taking place and Norbu had to flee. Four other Desis were appointed after Depa Norbu: Trinle Gyatso, Lozang Tutop, Lozang Jinpa and Sangye Gyatso.\n\nHaving thus defeated all the Gelugpa's rivals and resolved all regional and sectarian conflicts Güshi Khan became the undisputed patron of a unified Tibet and acted as a \"Protector of the Gelug\", establishing the Khoshut Khanate which covered almost the entire Tibetan plateau, an area corresponding roughly to 'Greater Tibet' including Kham and Amdo, as claimed by exiled groups (see maps). At an enthronement ceremony in Shigatse he conferred full sovereignty over Tibet on the Fifth Dalai Lama, unified for the first time since the collapse of the Tibetan Empire exactly eight centuries earlier. Güshi Khan then retired to Kokonor with his armies and [according to Smith] ruled Amdo himself directly thus creating a precedent for the later separation of Amdo from the rest of Tibet.\n\nIn this way, Güshi Khan established the Fifth Dalai Lama as the highest spiritual and political authority in Tibet. 'The Great Fifth' became the temporal ruler of Tibet in 1642 and from then on the rule of the Dalai Lama lineage over some, all or most of Tibet lasted with few breaks for the next 317 years, until 1959, when the 14th Dalai Lama fled to India. In 1645, the Great Fifth began the construction of the Potala Palace in Lhasa.\n\nGüshi Khan died in 1655 and was succeeded by his descendants Dayan, Tenzin Dalai Khan and Tenzin Wangchuk Khan. However, Güshi Khan's other eight sons had settled in Amdo but fought amongst themselves over territory so the Fifth Dalai Lama sent governors to rule them in 1656 and 1659, thereby bringing Amdo and thus the whole of Greater Tibet under his personal rule and Gelugpa control. The Mongols in Amdo became absorbed and Tibetanised.\n\nIn 1636 the Manchus proclaimed their dynasty as the Qing dynasty and by 1644 they had completed their conquest of China under the prince regent Dorgon. The following year their forces approached Amdo on northern Tibet, causing the Oirat and Khoshut Mongols there to submit in 1647 and send tribute. In 1648, after quelling a rebellion of Tibetans of Kansu-Xining, the Qing invited the Fifth Dalai Lama to visit their court at Beijing since they wished to engender Tibetan influence in their dealings with the Mongols. The Qing were aware the Dalai Lama had extraordinary influence with the Mongols and saw relations with the Dalai Lama as a means to facilitate submission of the Khalka Mongols, traditional patrons of the Karma Kagyu sect. Similarly, since the Tibetan Gelugpa were keen to revive a priest-patron relationship with the dominant power in China and Inner Asia, the Qing invitation was accepted. After five years of complex diplomatic negotiations about whether the emperor or his representatives should meet the Dalai Lama inside or outside the Great Wall, when the meeting would be astrologically favourable, how it would be conducted and so on, it eventually took place in Beijing in 1653. The Shunzhi Emperor was then 16 years old, having in the meantime ascended the throne in 1650 after the death of Dorgon. For the Qing, although the Dalai Lama was not required to kowtow to the emperor, who rose from his throne and advanced 30 feet to meet him, the significance of the visit was that of nominal political submission by the Dalai Lama since Inner Asian heads of state did not travel to meet each other but sent envoys. For Tibetan Buddhist historians however it was interpreted as the start of an era of independent rule of the Dalai Lamas, and of Qing patronage alongside that of the Mongols.\n\nWhen the 5th Dalai Lama returned, he was granted by the emperor of China a golden seal of authority and golden sheets with texts written in Manchu, Tibetan and Chinese languages. The 5th Dalai Lama wanted to use the golden seal of authority right away. However, Lobzang Gyatsho noted that \"The Tibetan version of the inscription of the seal was translated by a Mongolian translator but was not a good translation\". After correction, it read: \"The one who resides in the Western peaceful and virtuous paradise is unalterable Vajradhara, Ocen Lama, unifier of the doctrines of the Buddha for all beings under the sky\". The words of the diploma ran: \"Proclamation, to let all the people of the western hemisphere know\". Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain points out that based on the texts written on golden sheets, Dalai Lama was only a subordinate of the Emperor of China.\n\nHowever, despite such patronising attempts by Chinese officials and historians to symbolically show for the record that they held political influence over Tibet, the Tibetans themselves did not accept any such symbols imposed on them by the Chinese with this kind of motive. For example, concerning the above-mentioned 'golden seal', the Fifth Dalai Lama comments in \"Dukula\", his autobiography, on leaving China after this courtesy visit to the emperor in 1653, that \"the emperor made his men bring a golden seal for me that had three vertical lines in three parallel scripts: Chinese, Mongolian and Tibetan\". He also criticised the words carved on this gift as being faultily translated into Tibetan, writing that \"The Tibetan version of the inscription of the seal was translated by a Mongol translator but was not a good translation\". Furthermore, when he arrived back in Tibet, he discarded the emperor's famous golden seal and made a new one for important state usage, writing in his autobiography: \"Leaving out the Chinese characters that were on the seal given by the emperor, a new seal was carved for stamping documents that dealt with territorial issues. The first imprint of the seal was offered with prayers to the image of Lokeshvara ...\".\n\nThe 17th-century struggles for domination between the Manchu-led Qing dynasty and the various Mongol groups spilled over to involve Tibet because of the Fifth Dalai Lama's strong influence over the Mongols as a result of their general adoption of Tibetan Buddhism and their consequent deep loyalty to the Dalai Lama as their guru. Until 1674, the Fifth Dalai Lama had mediated in Dzungar Mongol affairs whenever they required him to do so, and the Kangxi Emperor, who had succeeded the Shunzhi Emperor in 1661, would accept and confirm his decisions automatically. For the Kangxi Emperor however, the alliance between the Dzungar Mongols and the Tibetans was unsettling because he feared it had the potential to unite all the other Mongol tribes together against the Qing Empire, including those tribes who had already submitted. Therefore, in 1674, the Kangxi Emperor, annoyed by the Fifth's less than full cooperation in quelling a rebellion against the Qing in Yunnan, ceased deferring to him as regards Mongol affairs and started dealing with them directly.\n\nIn the same year, 1674, the Dalai Lama, then at the height of his powers and conducting a foreign policy independent of the Qing, caused Mongol troops to occupy the border post of Dartsedo between Kham and Sichuan, further annoying the Kangxi Emperor who (according to Smith) already considered Tibet as part of the Qing Empire. It also increased Qing suspicion about Tibetan relations with the Mongol groups and led him to seek strategic opportunities to oppose and undermine Mongol influence in Tibet and eventually, within 50 years, to defeat the Mongols militarily and to establish the Qing as sole 'patrons and protectors' of Tibet in their place.\n\nThe time of the Fifth Dalai Lama, who reigned from 1642 to 1682 and founded the government known as the Ganden Phodrang, was a period of rich cultural development. His reign and that of Desi Sangye Gyatso are noteworthy for the upsurge in literary activity and of cultural and economic life that occurred. The same goes for the great increase in the number of foreign visitors thronging Lhasa during the period as well as for the number of inventions and institutions that are attributed to the 'Great Fifth', as the Tibetans refer to him. The most dynamic and prolific of the early Dalai Lamas, he composed more literary works than all the other Dalai Lamas combined. Writing on a wide variety of subjects he is specially noted for his works on history, classical Indian poetry in Sanskrit and his biographies of notable personalities of his epoch, as well as his own two autobiographies, one spiritual in nature and the other political (see Further Reading). He also taught and travelled extensively, reshaped the politics of Central Asia, unified Tibet, conceived and constructed the Potala Palace and is remembered for establishing systems of national medical care and education.\n\nThe Fifth Dalai Lama died in 1682. Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain points out that the written wills from the fifth Dalai Lama before he died explicitly said his title and authority were from the Emperor of China, and he was subordinate of the Emperor of China\n\nThe Fifth Dalai Lama's death in 1682 was kept secret for fifteen years by his regent Desi Sangye Gyatso. He pretended the Dalai Lama was in retreat and ruled on his behalf, secretly selecting the 6th Dalai Lama and presenting him as someone else. Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain points out that Desi Sangye Gyatso wanted to consolidate his personal status and power by not reporting the death of the fifth Dalai Lama to the Emperor of China, and also collude with the rebellion group of the Qing dynasty, Mongol Dzungar tribe in order to counter influence from another Mongol Khoshut tribe in Tibet. Being afraid of prosecution by the Kangxi Emperor of China, Desi Sangye Gyatso explained with fear and trepidation the reason behind his action to the Emperor. In 1705, Desi Sangye Gyatso was killed by Lha-bzang Khan of the Mongol Khoshut tribe because of his actions including his illegal action of selecting the 6th Dalai Lama. Since the Kangxi Emperor was not happy about Desi Sangye Gyatso's action of not reporting, the Emperor gave Lha-bzang Khan additional title and golden seal. The Kangxi Emperor also ordered Lha-bzang Khan to arrest the 6th Dalai Lama and send him to Beijing, the 6th Dalai Lama died when he was en route to Beijing. Journalist Thomas Laird argues that it was apparently done so that construction of the Potala Palace could be finished, and it was to prevent Tibet's neighbors, the Mongols and the Qing, from taking advantage of an interregnum in the succession of the Dalai Lamas.\n\nThe Sixth Dalai Lama (1683–1706) was born near Tawang, now in India, and picked out in 1685 but not enthroned until 1697 when the death of the Fifth was announced. After 16 years of study as a novice monk, in 1702 in his 20th year he rejected full ordination and gave up his monk's robes and monastic life, preferring the lifestyle of a layman.\n\nIn 1703 Güshi Khan's ruling grandson Tenzin Wangchuk Khan was murdered by his brother Lhazang Khan who usurped the Khoshut's Tibetan throne, but unlike his four predecessors he started interfering directly in Tibetan affairs in Lhasa; he opposed the Fifth Dalai Lama's regent, Desi Sangye Gyatso for his deceptions and in the same year, with the support of the Kangxi Emperor, he forced him out of office. Then in 1705, he used the Sixth's escapades as an excuse to seize full control of Tibet. Most Tibetans, though, still supported their Dalai Lama despite his behaviour and deeply resented Lhazang Khan's interference. When Lhazang was requested by the Tibetans to leave Lhasa politics to them and to retire to Kokonor like his predecessors, he quit the city, but only to gather his armies in order to return, capture Lhasa militarily and assume full political control of Tibet. The regent was then murdered by Lhazang or his wife, and, in 1706 with the compliance of the Kangxi Emperor the Sixth Dalai Lama was deposed and arrested by Lhazang who considered him to be an impostor set up by the regent. Lhazang Khan, now acting as the only outright foreign ruler that Tibet had ever had, then sent him to Beijing under escort to appear before the emperor but he died mysteriously on the way near Lake Qinghai, ostensibly from illness.\n\nHaving discredited and deposed the Sixth Dalai Lama, whom he considered an impostor, and having removed the regent, Lhazang Khan pressed the Lhasa Gelugpa lamas to endorse a new Dalai Lama in Tsangyang Gyatso's place as the true incarnation of the Fifth. They eventually nominated one Pekar Dzinpa, a monk but also rumored to be Lhazang's son, and Lhazang had him installed as the 'real' Sixth Dalai Lama, endorsed by the Panchen Lama and named Yeshe Gyatso in 1707. This choice was in no way accepted by the Tibetan people, however, nor by Lhazang's princely Mongol rivals in Kokonor who resented his usurpation of the Khoshut Tibetan throne as well as his meddling in Tibetan affairs. The Kangxi Emperor concurred with them, after sending investigators, initially declining to recognize Yeshe Gyatso. He did recognize him in 1710, however, after sending a Qing official party to assist Lhazang in 'restoring order'; these were the first Chinese representatives of any sort to officiate in Tibet. At the same time, while this puppet 'Dalai Lama' had no political power, the Kangxi Emperor secured from Lhazang Khan in return for this support the promise of regular payments of tribute; this was the first time tribute had been paid to the Manchu by the Mongols in Tibet and the first overt acknowledgment of Qing supremacy over Mongol rule in Tibet.\n\nIn 1708, in accordance with an indication given by the 6th Dalai Lama when quitting Lhasa a child called Kelzang Gyatso had been born at Lithang in eastern Tibet who was soon claimed by local Tibetans to be his incarnation. After going into hiding out of fear of Lhazang Khan, he was installed in Lithang monastery. Along with some of the Kokonor Mongol princes, rivals of Lhazang, in defiance of the situation in Lhasa the Tibetans of Kham duly recognised him as the Seventh Dalai Lama in 1712, retaining his birth-name of Kelzang Gyatso. For security reasons he was moved to Derge monastery and eventually, in 1716, now also backed and sponsored by the Kangxi Emperor of China. The Tibetans asked Dzungars to bring a true Dalai Lama to Lhasa, but the Manchu Chinese did not want to release Kelsan Gyatso to the Mongol Dzungars. The Regent Taktse Shabdrung and Tibetan officials then wrote a letter to the Manchu Chinese Emperor that they recognized Kelsang Gyatso as the Dalai Lama. The Emperor then granted Kelsang Gyatso a golden seal of authority. The Sixth Dalai Lama was taken to Amdo at the age of 8 to be installed in Kumbum Monastery with great pomp and ceremony.\n\nAccording to Smith, the Kangxi Emperor now arranged to protect the child and keep him at Kumbum monastery in Amdo in reserve just in case his ally Lhasang Khan and his 'real' Sixth Dalai Lama, were overthrown. According to Mullin, however, the emperor's support came from genuine spiritual recognition and respect rather than being politically motivated.\n\nIn any case, the Kangxi Emperor took full advantage of having Kelzang Gyatso under Qing control at Kumbum after other Mongols from the Dzungar tribes led by Tsewang Rabtan who was related to his supposed ally Lhazang Khan, deceived and betrayed the latter by invading Tibet and capturing Lhasa in 1717.\n\nThese Dzungars, who were Buddhist, had supported the Fifth Dalai Lama and his regent. They were secretly petitioned by the Lhasa Gelugpa lamas to invade with their help in order to rid them of their foreign ruler Lhazang Khan and to replace the unpopular Sixth Dalai Lama pretender with the young Kelzang Gyats. This plot suited the devious Dzungar leaders' ambitions and they were only too happy to oblige. Early in 1717, after conspiring to undermine Lhazang Khan through treachery they entered Tibet from the northwest with a large army, sending a smaller force to Kumbum to collect Kelzang Gyatso and escort him to Lhasa. By the end of the year, with Tibetan connivance they had captured Lhasa, killed Lhazang and all his family and deposed Yeshe Gyatso. Their force sent to fetch Kelzang Gyatso however was intercepted and destroyed by Qing armies alerted by Lhazang. In Lhasa, the unruly Dzungar not only failed to produce the boy but also went on the rampage, looting and destroying the holy places, abusing the populace, killing hundreds of Nyingma monks, causing chaos and bloodshed and turning their Tibetan allies against them. The Tibetans were soon appealing to the Kangxi Emperor to rid them of the Dzungars.\n\nWhen the Dzungars had first attacked, the weakened Lhazang sent word to the Qing for support and they quickly dispatched two armies to assist, the first Chinese armies ever to enter Tibet, but they arrived too late. In 1718 they were halted not far from Lhasa to be defeated and then ruthlessly annihilated by the triumphant Dzungars in the Battle of the Salween River.\n\nThis humiliation only determined the Kangxi Emperor to expel the Dzungars from Tibet once and for all and he set about assembling and dispatching a much larger force to march on Lhasa, bringing the emperor's trump card the young Kelzang Gyatso with it. On the imperial army's stately passage from Kumbum to Lhasa with the boy being welcomed adoringly at every stage, Khoshut Mongols and Tibetans were happy (and well paid) to join and swell its ranks. By the autumn of 1720 the marauding Dzungar Mongols had been vanquished from Tibet and the Qing imperial forces had entered Lhasa triumphantly with the 12-year-old, acting as patrons of the Dalai Lama, liberators of Tibet, allies of the Tibetan anti-Dzungar forces led by Kangchenas and Polhanas, and allies of the Khoshut Mongol princes. The delighted Tibetans enthroned him as the Seventh Dalai Lama at the Potala Palace.\n\nA new Tibetan government was established consisting of a Kashag or cabinet of Tibetan ministers headed by Kangchenas. Kelzang Gyatso, too young to participate in politics, studied Buddhism. He played a symbolic role in government, and, being profoundly revered by the Mongols, he exercised much influence with the Qing who now had now taken over Tibet's patronage and protection from them.\n\nHaving vanquished the Dzungars, the Qing army withdrew leaving the Seventh Dalai Lama as a political figurehead and only a Khalkha Mongol as the Qing \"amban\" or representative and a garrison in Lhasa. After the Kangxi Emperor died in 1722 and was succeeded by his son, the Yongzheng Emperor, these were also withdrawn, leaving the Tibetans to rule autonomously and showing the Qing were interested in an alliance, not conquest. In 1723, however, after brutally quelling a major rebellion by zealous Tibetan patriots and disgruntled Khoshut Mongols from Amdo who attacked Xining, the Qing intervened again, splitting Tibet by putting Amdo and Kham under their own more direct control. Continuing Qing interference in Central Tibetan politics and religion incited an anti-Qing faction to quarrel with the Qing-sympathising Tibetan nobles in power in Lhasa, led by Kanchenas who was supported by Polhanas. This led eventually to the murder of Kanchenas in 1727 and a civil war that was resolved in 1728 with the canny Polhanas, who had sent for Qing assistance, the victor. When the Qing forces did arrive they punished the losers and exiled the Seventh Dalai Lama to Kham, under the pretence of sending him to Beijing, because his father had assisted the defeated, anti-Qing faction. He studied and taught Buddhism there for the next seven years.\n\nIn 1735 he was allowed back to Lhasa to study and teach, but still under strict control, being mistrusted by the Qing, while Polhanas ruled Central Tibet under nominal Qing supervision. Meanwhile, the Qing had promoted the Fifth Panchen Lama to be a rival leader and reinstated the \"ambans\" and the Lhasa garrison. Polhanas died in 1747 and was succeeded by his son Gyurme Namgyal, the last dynastic ruler of Tibet, who was far less cooperative with the Qing. On the contrary, he built a Tibetan army and started conspiring with the Dzungars to rid Tibet of Qing influence. In 1750, when the \"ambans\" realised this, they invited him and personally assassinated him and then, despite the Dalai Lama's attempts to calm the angered populace a vengeful Tibetan mob assassinated the \"ambans\" in turn, along with most of their escort.\n\nThe Qing sent yet another force 'to restore order' but when it arrived the situation had already been stabilised under the leadership of the 7th Dalai Lama who was now seen to have demonstrated loyalty to the Qing. Just as Güshi Khan had done with the Fifth Dalai Lama, they therefore helped reconstitute the government with the Dalai Lama presiding over a Kashag of four Tibetans, reinvesting him with temporal power in addition to his already established spiritual leadership. This arrangement, with a Kashag under the Dalai Lama or his regent, outlasted the Qing dynasty which collapsed in 1912. The \"ambans\" and their garrison were also reinstated to observe and to some extent supervise affairs, however, although their influence generally waned with the power of their empire which gradually declined after 1792 along with its influence over Tibet, a decline aided by a succession of corrupt or incompetent \"ambans\". Moreover, there was soon no reason for the Qing to fear the Dzungar; by the time the Seventh Dalai Lama died in 1757 at the age of 49, the entire Dzungar people had been practically exterminated through years of genocidal campaigns by Qing armies, and deadly smallpox epidemics, with the survivors being forcibly transported into China. Their emptied lands were then awarded to other peoples.\n\nAccording to Mullin, despite living through such violent times Kelzang Gyatso was perhaps 'the most spiritually learned and accomplished of any Dalai Lama', his written works comprising several hundred titles including 'some of Tibet's finest spiritual literary achievements'. In addition, despite his apparent lack of zeal in politics, Kelzang Gyatso is credited with establishing in 1751 the reformed government of Tibet headed by the Dalai Lama, which continued over 200 years until the 1950s, and then in exile. Construction of the Norbulingka, the 'Summer Palace' of the Dalai Lamas in Lhasa was also started during Kelzang Gyatso's reign.\n\nThe Eighth Dalai Lama, Jamphel Gyatso was born in Tsang in 1758 and died aged 46 having taken little part in Tibetan politics, mostly leaving temporal matters to his regents and the \"ambans\". The 8th Dalai Lama was approved by the Emperor of China to be exempted from the lot-drawing ceremony of using Chinese Golden Urn. Qianlong Emperor officially accept Gyiangbai as the 8th Dalai Lama when the 6th Panchen Erdeni came to congratulate the Emperor on his 70th birthday in 1780. The 8th Dalai Lama was granted a jade seal of authority and jade sheets of confirmation of authority by the Emperor of China. The jade sheets of confirmation of authority says\n\nThe Dalai Lama, his later generations and the local government cherished both the jade seal of authority, and the jade sheets of authority. They were properly preserved as the root to their ruling power.\n\nAlthough the 8th Dalai Lama lived almost as long as the Seventh he was overshadowed by many contemporary lamas in terms of both religious and political accomplishment. According to Mullin, the 14th Dalai Lama has pointed to certain indications that Jamphel Gyatso might not have been the incarnation of the 7th Dalai Lama but of Jamyang Chojey, a disciple of Tsongkhapa and founder of Drepung monastery who was also reputed to be an incarnation of Avalokiteshvara. In any case, he mainly lived a quiet and unassuming life as a devoted and studious monk, uninvolved in the kind of dramas that had surrounded his predecessors.\n\nNevertheless, Jamphel Gyatso was also said to possess all the signs of being the true incarnation of the Seventh. This was also claimed to have been confirmed by many portents clear to the Tibetans and so, in 1762, at the age of 5, he was duly enthroned as the Eighth Dalai Lama at the Potala Palace. At the age of 23 he was persuaded to assume the throne as ruler of Tibet with a Regent to assist him and after three years of this, when the Regent went to Beijing as ambassador in 1784, he continued to rule solo for a further four years. Feeling unsuited to worldly affairs, however, and unhappy in this role, he then retired from public office to concentrate on religious activities for his remaining 16 years until his death in 1804. He is also credited with the construction of the Norbulingka 'Summer Palace' started by his predecessor in Lhasa and with ordaining some ten thousand monks in his efforts to foster monasticism.\n\nHugh Richardson's summary of the period covering the four short-lived, 19th-century Dalai Lamas:\nThubten Jigme Norbu, the elder brother of the 14th Dalai Lama, described these unfortunate events as follows, although there are few, if any, indications that any of the four were said to be 'Chinese-appointed imposters':\nAccording to Mullin, on the other hand, it is improbable that the Manchus would have murdered any of these four for being 'unmanageable' since it would have been in their best interests to have strong Dalai Lamas ruling in Lhasa, he argues, agreeing with Richardson that it was rather \"the ambition and greed for power of Tibetans\" that might have caused the Lamas' early deaths. Further, if Tibetan nobles murdered any of them, which is quite possible, it would more likely to have been in order to protect or enhance their personal family interests rather than out of suspicion that the Dalai Lamas were seen as Chinese-appointed imposters as suggested by Norbu. They could have also easily died from illnesses, possibly contracted from diseases to which they had no immunity, carried to Lhasa by the multitudes of pilgrims visiting him from nearby countries for personal blessings. Finally, from the Buddhist point of view, Mullin says, \"Simply stated, these four Dalai Lamas died young because the world did not have enough good karma to deserve their presence\".\n\nTibetan historian K. Dhondup, however, in his history \"The Water-Bird and Other Years\", based on the Tibetan minister Surkhang Sawang Chenmo's historical manuscripts, disagrees with Mullin's opinion that having strong Dalai Lamas in power in Tibet would have been in China's best interests. He notes that many historians are compelled to suspect Manchu foul play in these serial early deaths because the Ambans had such latitude to interfere; the Manchu, he says, \"\"to perpetuate their domination over Tibetan affairs, did not desire a Dalai Lama who will ascend the throne and become a strong and capable ruler over his own country and people\"\". The life and deeds of the 13th Dalai Lama [in successfully upholding \"de facto\" Tibetan independence from China from 1912 to 1950] serve as the living proof of this argument, he points out. This account also corresponds with TJ Norbu's observations above.\n\nFinally, while acknowledging the possibility, the 14th Dalai Lama himself doubts they were poisoned. He ascribes the probable cause of these early deaths to negligence, foolishness and lack of proper medical knowledge and attention. \"\"Even today\"\" he is quoted as saying, \"\"when people get sick, some [Tibetans] will say: 'Just do your prayers, you don't need medical treatment.\"'\"\n\nBorn in Kham in 1805/6 amidst the usual miraculous signs the Ninth Dalai Lama, Lungtok Gyatso was appointed by the 7th Panchen Lama's search team at the age of two and enthroned in the Potala in 1808 at an impressive ceremony attended by representatives from China, Mongolia, Nepal and Bhutan. Tibetan historian Nyima Gyaincain and Wang Jiawei point out that the 9th Dalai Lama was allowed to use the seal of authority given to the late 8th Dalai Lama by the Emperor of China\n\nHis second Regent Demo Tulku was the biographer of the 8th and 9th Dalai Lamas and though the 9th died at the age of 9 his biography is as lengthy as those of many of the early Dalai Lamas. In 1793 under Manchu pressure Tibet had closed its borders to foreigners, but in 1811 a British Sinologist, Thomas Manning became the first Englishman to visit Lhasa. Considered to be 'the first Chinese scholar in Europe' he stayed five months and gave enthusiastic accounts in his journal of his regular meetings with the Ninth Dalai Lama whom he found fascinating: “beautiful, elegant, refined, intelligent, and entirely self-possessed, even at the age of six.” Three years later in March 1815 the young Lungtok Gyatso caught a severe cold and, leaving the Potala Palace to preside over the New Year Monlam Prayer Festival he contracted pneumonia from which he soon died.\n\nLike the Seventh Dalai Lama, the Tenth, Tsultrim Gyatso, was born in Lithang, Kham, where the Third Dalai Lama had built a monastery. It was 1816 and Regent Demo Tulku and the Seventh Panchen Lama followed indications from Nechung, the 'state oracle' which led them to appoint him at the age of two. He passed all the tests and was brought to Lhasa but official recognition was delayed until 1822 when he was enthroned and ordained by the Seventh Panchen Lama. There are conflicting reports about whether the Chinese 'Golden Urn' was utilised by drawing lots to choose him. The 10th Dalai Lama mentioned in his biography that he was allowed to use the golden seal of authority based on the convention set up by the late Dalai Lama. At the investiture, decree of the Emperor of China was issued and read out. After 15 years of intensive studies and failing health he died, in 1837, at the age of 20 or 21. He identified with ordinary people rather than the court officials and often sat on his verandah in the sunshine with the office clerks. Intending to empower the common people he planned to institute political and economic reforms to share the nation's wealth more equitably. Over this period his health had deteriorated, the implication being that he may have suffered from slow poisoning by Tibetan aristocrats whose interests these reforms were threatening. He was also dissatisfied with his Regent and the Kashag and scolded them for not alleviating the condition of the common people, who had suffered much in small ongoing regional civil wars waged in Kokonor between Mongols, local Tibetans and the government over territory, and in Kham to extract unpaid taxes from rebellious Tibetan communities.\n\nBorn in Gathar, Kham in 1838 and soon discovered by the official search committee with the help of Nechung Oracle, the Eleventh Dalai Lama was brought to Lhasa in 1841 and recognised, enthroned and named Khedrup Gyatso by the Panchen Lama in 1842, who also ordained him in 1846. After that he was immersed in religious studies under the Panchen Lama, amongst other great masters. Meanwhile, there were court intrigues and ongoing power struggles taking place between the various Lhasa factions, the Regent, the Kashag, the powerful nobles and the abbots and monks of the three great monasteries. The Tsemonling Regent became mistrusted and was forcibly deposed, there were machinations, plots, beatings and kidnappings of ministers and so forth, resulting at last in the Panchen Lama being appointed as interim Regent to keep the peace. Eventually the Third Reting Rinpoche was made Regent, and in 1855, Khedrup Gyatso, appearing to be an extremely promising prospect, was requested to take the reins of power at the age of 17. He was enthroned as ruler of Tibet in 1855 following Xianfeng Emperor's order. He died after just 11 months, no reason for his sudden and premature death being given in these accounts, Shakabpa and Mullin's histories both being based on untranslated Tibetan chronicles. The respected Reting Rinpoche was recalled once again to act as Regent and requested to lead the search for the next incarnation, the twelfth.\n\nIn 1856 a child was born in south central Tibet amidst all the usual extraordinary signs. He came to the notice of the search team, was investigated, passed the traditional tests and was recognised as the 12th Dalai Lama in 1858. The use of the Chinese Golden Urn at the insistence of the Regent, who was later accused of being a Chinese lackey, confirmed this choice to the satisfaction of all. Renamed Trinley Gyatso and enthroned in 1860 the boy underwent 13 years of intensive tutelage and training before stepping up to rule Tibet at the age of 17.\n\nHis minority seems a time of even deeper Lhasan political intrigue and power struggles than his predecessor's. By 1862 this led to a coup by Wangchuk Shetra, a minister whom the Regent had banished for conspiring against him. Shetra contrived to return, deposed the Regent, who fled to China, and seized power, appointing himself 'Desi' or Prime Minister. He then ruled with \"absolute power\" for three years, quelling a major rebellion in northern Kham in 1863 and re-establishing Tibetan control over significant Qing-held territory there. Shetra died in 1864 and the Kashag re-assumed power. The retired 76th Ganden Tripa, Khyenrab Wangchuk, was appointed as 'Regent' but his role was limited to supervising and mentoring Trinley Gyatso.\n\nIn 1868 Shetra's coup organiser, a semi-literate Ganden monk named Palden Dondrup, seized power by another coup and ruled as a cruel despot for three years, putting opponents to death by having them 'sewn into fresh animal skins and thrown in the river'. In 1871, at the request of officials outraged after Dondrup had done just that with one minister and imprisoned several others, he in turn was ousted and committed suicide after a counter-coup coordinated by the supposedly powerless 'Regent' Khyenrab Wangchuk. As a result of this action this venerable old Regent, who died the next year, is fondly remembered by Tibetans as saviour of the Dalai Lama and the nation. The Kashag and the Tsongdu or National Assembly were re-instated, and, presided over by a Dalai Lama or his Regent, ruled without further interruption until 1959.\n\nAccording to Smith, however, during Trinley Gyatso's minority, the Regent was deposed in 1862 for abuse of authority and closeness with China, by an alliance of monks and officials called \"Gandre Drungche\" (Ganden and Drepung Monks Assembly); this body then ruled Tibet for ten years until dissolved, when a National Assembly of monks and officials called the \"Tsongdu\" was created and took over. Smith makes no mention of Shetra or Dondrup acting as usurpers and despots in this period.\n\nIn any case, Trinley Gyatso died within three years of assuming power. In 1873, at the age of 20 \"he suddenly became ill and passed away\". On the cause of his early death, accounts diverge. Mullin relates an interesting theory, based on cited Tibetan sources: out of concern for the monastic tradition, Trinley Gyatso chose to die and reincarnate as the 13th Dalai Lama, rather than taking the option of marrying a woman called Rigma Tsomo from Kokonor and leaving an heir to \"oversee Tibet's future\". Shakabpa on the other hand, without citing sources, notes that Trinley Gyatso was influenced and manipulated by two close acquaintances who were subsequently accused of having a hand in his fatal illness and imprisoned, tortured and exiled as a result.\n\nThe 13th Dalai Lama assumed ruling power from the monasteries, which previously had great influence on the Regent, in 1895. Due to his two periods of exile in 1904–1909 to escape the British invasion of 1904, and from 1910 to 1912 to escape a Chinese invasion, he became well aware of the complexities of international politics and was the first Dalai Lama to become aware of the importance of foreign relations. After his return from exile in India and Sikkim during January 1913, he assumed control of foreign relations and dealt directly with the Maharaja, with the British Political officer in Sikkim and with the king of Nepal – rather than letting the Kashag or parliament do it. \n\nThe Thirteenth issued a Declaration of Independence for his kingdom in Ü-Tsang from China during the summer of 1912 and standardised a Tibetan flag, though no other sovereign state recognized Tibetan independence. He expelled the ambans and all Chinese civilians in the country and instituted many measures to modernise Tibet. These included provisions to curb excessive demands on peasants for provisions by the monasteries and tax evasion by the nobles, setting up an independent police force, the abolition of the death penalty, extension of secular education, and the provision of electricity throughout the city of Lhasa in the 1920s. He died in 1933.\n\nThe 14th Dalai Lama was born on 6 July 1935 on a straw mat in a cowshed to a farmer's family in a remote part of Tibet. According to most Western journalistic sources he was born into a humble family of farmers as one of 16 children. The 14th Dalai Lama had become the joint most popular world leader by 2013, (tied with Barack Obama), according to a poll conducted by Harris Interactive of New York, which sampled public opinion in the US and six major European countries.\n\nThe 14th Dalai Lama was not formally enthroned until 17 November 1950, during the Battle of Chamdo with the People's Republic of China. In 1951, the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government were pressured into accepting the Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet by which it became formally incorporated into the People's Republic of China. Fearing for his life in the wake of a revolt in Tibet in 1959, the 14th Dalai Lama fled to India, from where he led a government in exile.\n\nWith the aim of launching guerrilla operations against the Chinese, the Central Intelligence Agency funded the Dalai Lama's administration with US$1.7 million a year in the 1960s. In 2001 the 14th Dalai Lama ceded his partial power over the government to an elected parliament of selected Tibetan exiles. His original goal was full independence for Tibet, but by the late 1980s he was seeking high-level autonomy instead. He continued to seek greater autonomy from China, but Dolma Gyari, deputy speaker of the parliament-in-exile, stated: \"If the middle path fails in the short term, we will be forced to opt for complete independence or self-determination as per the UN charter\".\n\nIn 2014 and 2016, he stated that Tibet wants to be part of China but China should let Tibet preserve its culture and script.\n\nIn 2018, he stated that \"Europe belongs to the Europeans\" and that Europe has a moral obligation to aid refugees whose lives are in peril. Further he stated that Europe should receive, help and educate refugees but ultimately they should return to develop their home countries.\n\nIn March 2019, the Dalai Lama spoke out about his successor, saying that after his death he is likely to be reincarnated in India. He also warned that any Chinese interference in succession should not be considered valid.\n\nThe 1st Dalai Lama was based at Tashi Lhunpo Monastery, which he founded, the Second to the Fifth Dalai Lamas were mainly based at Drepung Monastery outside Lhasa. In 1645, after the unification of Tibet, the Fifth moved to the ruins of a royal fortress or residence on top of \"Marpori\" ('Red Mountain') in Lhasa and decided to build a palace on the same site. This ruined palace, called Tritse Marpo, was originally built around 636 AD by the founder of the Tibetan Empire, Songtsen Gampo for his Nepalese wife. Amongst the ruins there was just a small temple left where Tsongkhapa had given a teaching when he arrived in Lhasa in the 1380s. The Fifth Dalai Lama began construction of the Potala Palace on this site in 1645, carefully incorporating what was left of his predecessor's palace into its structure. From then on and until today, unless on tour or in exile the Dalai Lamas have always spent their winters at the Potala Palace and their summers at the Norbulingka palace and park. Both palaces are in Lhasa and approximately 3 km apart.\n\nFollowing the failed 1959 Tibetan uprising, the 14th Dalai Lama sought refuge in India. Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru allowed in the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government officials. The Dalai Lama has since lived in exile in McLeod Ganj, in the Kangra district of Himachal Pradesh in northern India, where the Central Tibetan Administration is also established. His residence on the Temple Road in McLeod Ganj is called the Dalai Lama Temple and is visited by people from across the globe. Tibetan refugees have constructed and opened many schools and Buddhist temples in Dharamshala.\n\nBy the Himalayan tradition, \"phowa\" is the discipline that is believed to transfer the mindstream to the intended body. Upon the death of the Dalai Lama and consultation with the Nechung Oracle, a search for the Lama's \"yangsi\", or reincarnation, is conducted. Traditionally, it has been the responsibility of the High Lamas of the Gelugpa tradition and the Tibetan government to find a person accepted as his reincarnation. The process can take around two or three years to identify the Dalai Lama, and for the 14th, Tenzin Gyatso, it was four years before he was found. Historically, the search for the Dalai Lama has usually been limited to Tibet, though the third tulku was born in Mongolia. Tenzin Gyatso, however, has stated that he will not be reborn in the People's Republic of China, though he has also suggested he may not be reborn at all, suggesting the function of the Dalai Lama may be outdated. The government of the People's Republic of China has stated its intention to be the ultimate authority on the selection of the next Dalai Lama.\n\nThe High Lamas used several ways in which they can increase the chances of finding a person they claim to be the reincarnation. High Lamas often visit Lhamo La-tso, a lake in central Tibet, and watch for a sign from the lake itself. This may be either a claimed 'vision' or some 'indication' of the direction in which to search, and this was how Tenzin Gyatso was determined to be the next Dalai Lama.\nIt is said that Palden Lhamo, the female guardian spirit of the sacred lake Lhamo La-tso promised Gendun Drup, the 1st Dalai Lama, in one of his visions \"that she would protect the reincarnation lineage of the Dalai Lamas.\" Ever since the time of Gendun Gyatso, the 2nd Dalai Lama, who formalised the system, the Regents and other monks have gone to the lake to seek guidance on choosing the next reincarnation through visions while meditating there.\n\nThe particular form of Palden Lhamo at Lhamo La-tso is Gyelmo Maksorma, \"The Victorious One who Turns Back Enemies\". The lake is sometimes referred to as \"Pelden Lhamo Kalideva\", which has been taken as a reason to claim that Palden Lhamo is an emanation of the goddess Kali, the shakti of the Hindu God Shiva.\n\nIt was here that in 1935, the Regent Reting Rinpoche claimed to have received a clear vision of three Tibetan letters and of a monastery with a jade-green and gold roof, and a house with turquoise roof tiles, which led to the indication of Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama.\n\nHigh Lamas may also claim to have a vision by a dream or if the Dalai Lama was cremated, they will often monitor the direction of the smoke as an 'indication' of the direction of the expected rebirth.\n\nOnce the High Lamas have found the home and the boy they believe to be the reincarnation, the boy undergoes tests to ceremoniously legitimize the rebirth. They present a number of artifacts, only some of which belonged to the previous Dalai Lama, and if the boy chooses the items which belonged to the previous Dalai Lama, this is seen as a sign, in conjunction with all of the other claimed indications, that the boy is the reincarnation.\n\nIf there is only one boy found, the High Lamas will invite Living Buddhas of the three great monasteries, together with secular clergy and monk officials, to 'confirm their findings' and then report to the Central Government through the Minister of Tibet. Later, a group consisting of the three major servants of Dalai Lama, eminent officials, and troops will collect the boy and his family and travel to Lhasa, where the boy would be taken, usually to Drepung Monastery, to study the Buddhist sutra in preparation for assuming the role of spiritual leader of Tibet.\n\nIf there are several possible claimed reincarnations, however, regents, eminent officials, monks at the Jokhang in Lhasa, and the Minister to Tibet have historically decided on the individual by putting the boys' names inside an urn and drawing one lot in public if it was too difficult to judge the reincarnation initially.\n\nThere have been 14 recognised incarnations of the Dalai Lama:\n! !! Name !! Picture !! Lifespan !! Recognised !! Enthronement !! Tibetan/Wylie !! Tibetan pinyin/Chinese !! Alternative spellings\nalign=\"right\" 1  Gendun Drup   1391–1474  –  N/A  \"dge 'dun 'grub\"  Gêdün Chub根敦朱巴 Gedun DrubGedün Drup\nalign=\"right\" 2  Gendun Gyatso   1475–1542  1483  1487  \"dge 'dun rgya mtsho\"  Gêdün Gyaco根敦嘉措 Gedün GyatsoGendün Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 3  Sonam Gyatso   1543–1588  1546  1578  \"bsod nams rgya mtsho\"  Soinam Gyaco索南嘉措 Sönam Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 4  Yonten Gyatso   1589–1617  1601  1603  \"yon tan rgya mtsho\"  Yoindain Gyaco雲丹嘉措 Yontan Gyatso, Yönden Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 5  Ngawang Lobsang Gyatso   1617–1682  1618  1622  \"blo bzang rgya mtsho\"  Lobsang Gyaco羅桑嘉措 Lobzang GyatsoLopsang Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 6  Tsangyang Gyatso   1683–1706  1688  1697  \"tshang dbyangs rgya mtsho\"  Cangyang Gyaco倉央嘉措 Tsañyang Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 7  Kelzang Gyatso   1707–1757  1712  1720  \"bskal bzang rgya mtsho\"  Gaisang Gyaco格桑嘉措 Kelsang GyatsoKalsang Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 8  Jamphel Gyatso   1758–1804  1760  1762  \"byams spel rgya mtsho\"  Qambê Gyaco強白嘉措 Jampel GyatsoJampal Gyatso\nalign=\"right\" 9  Lungtok Gyatso   1805–1815 1807  1808  \"lung rtogs rgya mtsho\"  Lungdog Gyaco隆朵嘉措 Lungtog Gyatso\nThere has also been one non-recognised Dalai Lama, Ngawang Yeshe Gyatso, declared 28 June 1707, when he was 25 years old, by Lha-bzang Khan as the \"true\" 6th Dalai Lama – however, he was never accepted as such by the majority of the population.\n\nThe government of the People's Republic of China (PRC) has claimed the power to approve the naming of \"high\" reincarnations in Tibet, based on a precedent set by the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty. The Qianlong Emperor instituted a system of selecting the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama by a lottery that used a Golden Urn with names wrapped in clumps of barley. This method was used a few times for both positions during the 19th century, but eventually fell into disuse. In 1995, the Dalai Lama chose to proceed with the selection of the 11th reincarnation of the Panchen Lama without the use of the Golden Urn, while the Chinese government insisted that it must be used. This has led to two rival Panchen Lamas: Gyaincain Norbu as chosen by the Chinese government's process, and Gedhun Choekyi Nyima as chosen by the Dalai Lama.\n\nIn September 2007, the Chinese government said all high monks must be approved by the government, which would include the selection of the 15th Dalai Lama after the death of Tenzin Gyatso. Since by tradition, the Panchen Lama must approve the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, that is another possible method of control. Consequently, the Dalai Lama has alluded to the possibility of a referendum to determine the 15th Dalai Lama.\n\nIn response to this scenario, Tashi Wangdi, the representative of the 14th Dalai Lama, replied that the Chinese government's selection would be meaningless. \"You can't impose an Imam, an Archbishop, saints, any religion...you can't politically impose these things on people\", said Wangdi. \"It has to be a decision of the followers of that tradition. The Chinese can use their political power: force. Again, it's meaningless. Like their Panchen Lama. And they can't keep their Panchen Lama in Tibet. They tried to bring him to his monastery many times but people would not see him. How can you have a religious leader like that?\"\n\nThe 14th Dalai Lama said as early as 1969 that it was for the Tibetans to decide whether the institution of the Dalai Lama \"should continue or not\". He has given reference to a possible vote occurring in the future for all Tibetan Buddhists to decide whether they wish to recognize his rebirth. In response to the possibility that the PRC might attempt to choose his successor, the Dalai Lama said he would not be reborn in a country controlled by the People's Republic of China or any other country which is not free. According to Robert D. Kaplan, this could mean that \"the next Dalai Lama might come from the Tibetan cultural belt that stretches across northern India, Nepal, and Bhutan, presumably making him even more pro-Indian and anti-Chinese\".\n\nThe 14th Dalai Lama supported the possibility that his next incarnation could be a woman. As an \"engaged Buddhist\" the Dalai Lama has an appeal straddling cultures and political systems making him one of the most recognized and respected moral voices today. \"Despite the complex historical, religious and political factors surrounding the selection of incarnate masters in the exiled Tibetan tradition, the Dalai Lama is open to change\", author Michaela Haas writes. \"Why not? What's the big deal?\"\n\nBULLET::::- CIA Tibetan program\nBULLET::::- Index of Buddhism-related articles\nBULLET::::- Tibetan Buddhism\nBULLET::::- Gelug\nBULLET::::- List of Dalai Lamas\nBULLET::::- Panchen Lama\nBULLET::::- History of Tibet\nBULLET::::- List of rulers of Tibet\nBULLET::::- 14th Dalai Lama\nBULLET::::- Engaged Spirituality\nBULLET::::- Patron and priest relationship\n\nBULLET::::- Bell, Sir Charles (1946). \"Portrait of the Dalai Lama\" Wm. Collins, London. 1st edition. (1987) Wisdom Publications, London. .\nBULLET::::- Alexandra David-Neel (1965). \"Magic & Mystery In Tibet\". Corgi Books.London. .\nBULLET::::- Kapstein, Matthew (2006). \"The Tibetans\". Malden, MA, USA. Blackwell Publishing. .\nBULLET::::- Mullin, Glenn H. (1982). \"Selected Works of the Dalai Lama VII: Songs of Spiritual Change\" (2nd ed., 1985). Snow Lion Publications, Inc. New York. .\nBULLET::::- Mullin, Glenn H. (1983). \"Selected Works of the Dalai Lama III: Essence of Refined Gold\" (2nd ed., 1985). Snow Lion Publications, Inc. New York. .\nBULLET::::- Mullin, Glenn H. (2001). \"The Fourteen Dalai Lamas: A Sacred Legacy of Reincarnation\". Clear Light Publishers. Santa Fe, NM. .\nBULLET::::- Van Schaik, Sam (2011), \"Tibet. A History\". New Haven & London: Yale University Press.\nBULLET::::- Shakabpa, Tsepon W.D. (1967), \"Tibet: A Political History\". New York: Yale University Press, and (1984), Singapore: Potala Publications. .\nBULLET::::- Kawanami, C. C. (2016). Buddhism . In C. P. Linda Woodhead, \"Religions in the Modern World\" (p. 94). New York: Routledge.\nBULLET::::- A Reader's Guide to the Works of the Dalai Lama (Shambhala Publications)\nBULLET::::- Dalai Lama. (1991) \"Freedom in Exile: The Autobiography of the Dalai Lama.\" San Francisco, CA.\nBULLET::::- Goodman, Michael H. (1986). \"The Last Dalai Lama\". Shambhala Publications. Boston, MA.\nBULLET::::- Harrer, Heinrich (1951) \"Seven Years in Tibet: My Life Before, During and After\"\nBULLET::::- Karmay, Samten G. (Translator) (1988). \"Secret visions of the Fifth Dalai Lama.\" Serindia Publications, London. .\nBULLET::::- Dalai Lama Quotes\n\n"}
{"id": "8134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8134", "title": "Damages", "text": "Damages\n\nAt common law, damages are a remedy in the form of a monetary award to be paid to a claimant as compensation for loss or injury. To warrant the award, the claimant must show that a breach of duty has caused foreseeable loss. To be recognised at law, the loss must involve damage to property, or mental or physical injury; pure economic loss is rarely recognised for the award of damages.\n\nCompensatory damages are further categorized into special damages, which are economic losses such as loss of earnings, property damage and medical expenses, and general damages, which are non-economic damages such as pain and suffering and emotional distress. Rather than being compensatory, at common law damages may instead be nominal, contemptuous or exemplary.\n\nAmong the Saxons, a price called \"Weregild\" was placed on every human being and every piece of property in the Salic Code. If property was stolen, or someone was injured or killed, the guilty person would have to pay weregild as restitution to the victim's family, or to the owner of the property.\n\nRecovery of damages by a plaintiff in lawsuit is subject to the legal principle that damages must be proximately caused by the wrongful conduct of the defendant. This is known as the principle of proximate cause. This principle governs the recovery of all compensatory damages, whether the underlying claim is based on contract, tort, or both. Damages are likely to be limited to those reasonably foreseeable by the defendant. If a defendant could not reasonably have foreseen that someone might be hurt by their actions, there may be no liability.\n\nThis rule does not usually apply to intentional torts (for example, tort of deceit), and also has stunted applicability to the quantum in negligence where the maxim 'Intended consequences are never too remote]' applies: 'never' is inaccurate here but resorts to unforeseeable direct and natural consequences of an act.\n\nIt may be useful for the lawyers, the plaintiff and/or the defendant to employ forensic accountants or someone trained in the relevant field of economics to give evidence on the value of the loss. In this case, they may be called upon to give opinion evidence as an expert witness.\n\nCompensatory damages are paid to compensate the claimant for loss, injury, or harm suffered as a result of (see requirement of causation) another's breach of duty (e.g., in a negligence claim under tort law). Expectation damages are used in contract law to put an injured party in the position it would have occupied but for the breach.\n\nLiability for payment of an award of damages is established when the claimant proves, on the balance of probabilities, that a defendant's wrongful act caused a tangible, harm, loss or injury to the plaintiff. Once that threshold is met, the plaintiff is entitled to some amount of recovery for that loss or injury. No recovery is not an option. The court must then assess the amount of compensation attributable to the harmful acts of the defendant.\n\n\"Special damages\" compensate the claimant for the quantifiable monetary losses suffered by the plaintiff. For example, extra costs, repair or replacement of damaged property, lost earnings (both historically and in the future), loss of irreplaceable items, additional domestic costs, and so on. They are seen in both personal and commercial actions.\n\nSpecial damages can include direct losses (such as amounts the claimant had to spend to try to mitigate damages) and consequential or economic losses resulting from lost profits in a business. Special damages basically include compensatory damages for the injury or harm to the plaintiff that result from the tort committed by the defendant.\n\nDamages in tort are awarded generally to place the claimant in the position in which he would have been had the tort not taken place. Damages for breach of contract are generally awarded to place the claimant in the position in which he would have been had the contract not been breached. This can often result in a different measure of damages. In cases where it is possible to frame a claim in either contract or tort, it is necessary to be aware of what gives the best outcome.\n\nIf the transaction was a \"good bargain\", contract generally gives a better result for the claimant.\n\nAs an example, Neal agrees to sell Mary an antique Rolex for £100. In fact the watch is a fake and worth only £50. If it had been a genuine antique Rolex, it would have been worth £500. Neal is in breach of contract and could be sued. In contract, Mary is entitled to an item worth £500, but she has only one worth £50. Her damages are £450. Neal also induced Mary to enter into the contract through a misrepresentation (a tort). If Mary sues in tort, she is entitled to damages that put herself back to the same financial position place she would have been in had the misrepresentation not been made. She would clearly not have entered into the contract knowing the watch was fake, and is entitled to her £100 back. Thus her damages in tort are £100. (However, she would have to return the watch, or else her damages would be £50.)\n\nIf the transaction were a \"bad bargain\", tort gives a better result for the claimant. If in the above example Mary had overpaid, paying £750 for the watch, her damages in contract would still be £450 (giving her the item she contracted to buy), however in tort damages are £700. This is because damages in tort put her in the position she would have been in had the tort not taken place, and are calculated as her money back (£750) less the value of what she actually got (£50).\n\nSpecial damages are sometimes divided into incidental damages, and consequential damages.\n\nIncidental losses include the costs needed to remedy problems and put things right. The largest element is likely to be the reinstatement of property damage. Take for example a factory which was burnt down by the negligence of a contractor. The claimant would be entitled to the direct costs required to rebuild the factory and replace the damaged machinery.\n\nThe claimant may also be entitled to any consequential losses. These may include the lost profits that the claimant could have been expected to make in the period whilst the factory was closed and rebuilt.\n\nOn a breach of contract by a defendant, a court generally awards the sum that would restore the injured party to the economic position they expected from performance of the promise or promises (known as an \"expectation measure\" or \"benefit-of-the-bargain\" measure of damages). This rule, however, has attracted increasing scrutiny from Australian courts and legal commentators.\n\nWhen it is either not possible or not desirable to award the victim in that way, a court may award money damages designed to restore the injured party to the economic position s/he occupied at the time the contract was entered (known as the \"reliance measure\") or designed to prevent the breaching party from being unjustly enriched (\"restitution\") (see below).\n\nParties may contract for liquidated damages to be paid upon a breach of the contract by one of the parties. Under common law, a liquidated damages clause will not be enforced if the purpose of the term is solely to punish a breach (in this case it is termed penal damages). The clause will be enforceable if it involves a genuine attempt to quantify a loss in advance and is a good faith estimate of economic loss. Courts have ruled as excessive and invalidated damages which the parties contracted as liquidated, but which the court nonetheless found to be penal. To determine whether a clause is a liquidated damages clause or a penalty clause, it is necessary to consider:\n\ni) Whether the clause is 'extravagant, out of all proportion, exorbitant or unconscionable'\n\nii) Whether there is a single sum stipulated for a number of different breaches, or individual sums for each breach\n\niii) Whether a genuine pre-estimate of damage is ascertainable\n\nDamages in tort are generally awarded to place the claimant in the position that would have been taken had the tort not taken place. Damages in tort are quantified under two headings: general damages and special damages.\n\nIn personal injury claims, damages for compensation are quantified by reference to the severity of the injuries sustained (see below general damages for more details). In non-personal injury claims, for instance, a claim for professional negligence against solicitors, the measure of damages will be assessed by the loss suffered by the client due to the negligent act or omission by the solicitor giving rise to the loss. The loss must be reasonably foreseeable and not too remote. Financial losses are usually simple to quantify but in complex cases which involve loss of pension entitlements and future loss projections, the instructing solicitor will usually employ a specialist expert actuary or accountant to assist with the quantification of the loss.\n\n\"General damages\" compensate the claimant for the non-monetary aspects of the specific harm suffered. This is usually termed 'pain, suffering and loss of amenity'. Examples of this include physical or emotional pain and suffering, loss of companionship, loss of consortium, disfigurement, loss of reputation, loss or impairment of mental or physical capacity, hedonic damages or loss of enjoyment of life, etc. This is not easily quantifiable, and depends on the individual circumstances of the claimant. Judges in the United Kingdom base the award on damages awarded in similar previous cases.\n\nGeneral damages are generally awarded only in claims brought by individuals, when they have suffered personal harm. Examples would be personal injury (following the tort of negligence by the defendant), or the tort of defamation.\n\nSpeculative damages are damages that have not yet occurred, but the plaintiff expects them to. Typically, these damages cannot be recovered unless the plaintiff can prove that they are reasonably likely to occur.\n\nStatutory damages are an amount stipulated within the statute rather than calculated based on the degree of harm to the plaintiff. Lawmakers will provide for statutory damages for acts in which it is difficult to determine the value of the harm to the victim. Mere violation of the law can entitle the victim to a statutory award, even if no actual injury occurred. These are different from nominal damages, in which no written sum is specified.\n\nNominal damages are very small damages awarded to show that the loss or harm suffered was technical rather than actual. Perhaps the most famous nominal damages award in modern times has been the $1 verdict against the National Football League (NFL) in the 1986 antitrust suit prosecuted by the United States Football League. Although the verdict was automatically trebled pursuant to antitrust law in the United States, the resulting $3 judgment was regarded as a victory for the NFL. Historically, one of the best known nominal damage awards was the farthing that the jury awarded to James Whistler in his libel suit against John Ruskin. In the English jurisdiction, nominal damages are generally fixed at £2.\n\nMany times a party that has been wronged but is not able to prove significant damages will sue for nominal damages. This is particularly common in cases involving alleged violations of constitutional rights, such as freedom of speech.\n\nContemptuous damages are a form of damage award available in some jurisdictions. They are similar to nominal damages awards, as they are given when the plaintiff's suit is trivial, used only to settle a point of honour or law. Awards are usually of the smallest amount, usually 1 cent or similar. The key distinction is that in jurisdictions that follow the loser-pays for attorney fees, the claimant in a contemptuous damages case may be required to pay his or her own attorney fees.\n\nTraditionally, the court awarded the smallest coin in the Realm, which in England was one farthing, 1/960 of a pound before decimalisation in the 1970s. Court costs are not awarded.\n\nGenerally, punitive damages, which are also termed \"exemplary damages\" in the United Kingdom, are not awarded in order to compensate the plaintiff, but in order to reform or deter the defendant and similar persons from pursuing a course of action such as that which damaged the plaintiff. Punitive damages are awarded only in special cases where conduct was egregiously insidious and are over and above the amount of compensatory damages, such as in the event of malice or intent. Great judicial restraint is expected to be exercised in their application. In the United States punitive damages awards are subject to the limitations imposed by the due process of law clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.\n\nIn England and Wales, exemplary damages are limited to the circumstances set out by Lord Devlin in the leading case of \"Rookes v. Barnard\". They are:\n\nBULLET::::1. Oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional actions by the servants of government.\nBULLET::::2. Where the defendant's conduct was 'calculated' to make a profit for himself.\nBULLET::::3. Where a statute expressly authorises the same.\n\nRookes v Barnard has been much criticised and has not been followed in Canada or Australia or by the Privy Council.\n\nPunitive damages awarded in a US case would be difficult to get recognition for in a European court, where punitive damages are most likely to be considered to violate ordre public.\n\nSome jurisdictions recognize a form of damages, called, aggravated damages, that are similar to punitive or exemplary damages. Aggravated damages are not often awarded; they apply where the injury has been aggravated by the wrongdoer's behaviour, for example, their cruelty.\n\nIn certain areas of the law another head of damages has long been available, whereby the defendant is made to give up the profits made through the civil wrong in restitution. Doyle and Wright define restitutionary damages as being a monetary remedy that is measured according to the defendant's gain rather than the plaintiff's loss. The plaintiff thereby gains damages which are not measured by reference to any loss sustained. In some areas of the law this heading of damages is uncontroversial; most particularly intellectual property rights and breach of fiduciary relationship.\n\nIn England and Wales the House of Lords case of \"Attorney-General v. Blake\" opened up the possibility of restitutionary damages for breach of contract. In this case the profits made by a defecting spy, George Blake, for the publication of his book, were awarded to the British Government for breach of contract. The case has been followed in English courts, but the situations in which restitutionary damages will be available remain unclear.\n\nThe basis for restitutionary damages is much debated, but is usually seen as based on denying a wrongdoer any profit from his wrongdoing. The really difficult question, and one which is currently unanswered, relates to what wrongs should allow this remedy.\n\nIn addition to damages, the successful party is entitled to be awarded their reasonable legal costs that they spent during the case. This is the rule in most countries other than the United States. In the United States, a party generally is not entitled to its attorneys' fees or for hardships undergone during trial unless the parties agreed in a contract that attorney's fees should be covered or a specific statute or law permits recovery of legal fees, such as discrimination.\n\nThe quantification of personal injury is not an exact science. In English law solicitors like to call personal injury claims as \"general damages\" for pain and suffering and loss of amenity (PSLA). Solicitors quantify personal injury claims by reference to previous awards made by the courts which are \"similar\" to the case in hand. The guidance solicitors will take into account to help quantify general damages are as hereunder:\n\nThe age of the client is important especially when dealing with fatal accident claims or permanent injuries. The younger the injured victim with a permanent injury the longer that person has to live with the PSLA. As a consequence, the greater the compensation payment. In fatal accident claims, generally the younger deceased, the greater the dependency claim by the partner and children.\n\nSolicitors will consider \"like for like\" injuries with the case in hand and similar cases decided by the courts previously. These cases are known as precedents. Generally speaking decisions from the higher courts will bind the lower courts. Therefore, judgments from the House of Lords and the Court of Appeal have greater authority than the lower courts such as the High Court and the County Court. A compensation award can only be right or wrong with reference to that specific judgment. Solicitors must be careful when looking at older cases when quantifying a claim to ensure that the award is brought up to date and to take into account the court of appeal case in Heil v Rankin Generally speaking the greater the injury the greater the damages awarded.\n\nThis heading is inextricably linked with the other points above. Where two clients are of the same age, experience and suffer the same injury, it does not necessarily mean that they will be affected the same. We are all different. Some people will recover more quickly than others. The courts will assess each claim on its own particular facts and therefore if one claimant recovers more quickly than another, the damages will be reflected accordingly. It is important to note here that \"psychological injuries\" may also follow from an accident which may increase the quantum of damages.\n\nWhen a personal injury claim is settled either in court or out of court, the most common way the compensation payment is made is by a lump sum award in full and final settlement of the claim. Once accepted there can be no further award for compensation at a later time unless the claim is settled by provisional damages often found in industrial injury claims such as asbestos related injuries.\n\nBULLET::::- Arbitration award\nBULLET::::- Bad faith\nBULLET::::- Fine (penalty)\nBULLET::::- Measure of Damages (under English law)\nBULLET::::- Non-economic damages caps\nBULLET::::- Restorative justice\nBULLET::::- Subrogation\nBULLET::::- Restitution\nBULLET::::- Reparations (transitional justice)\nBULLET::::- Legal remedy\nBULLET::::- Restitution\nBULLET::::- Reparation (legal)\nBULLET::::- Reparations\nBULLET::::- War reparations\nBULLET::::- Reparations for slavery\n"}
{"id": "8137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8137", "title": "Disaster", "text": "Disaster\n\nA disaster is a serious disruption occurring over a short or long period of time that causes widespread human, material, economic or environmental loss which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources. Developing countries suffer the greatest costs when a disaster hits – more than 95 percent of all deaths caused by hazards occur in developing countries, and losses due to natural hazards are 20 times greater (as a percentage of GDP) in developing countries than in industrialized countries.\n\nThe word \"disaster\" is derived from Middle French \"désastre\" and that from Old Italian \"disastro\", which in turn comes from the Ancient Greek pejorative prefix δυσ-, (\"dus-\") \"bad\" and ἀστήρ (\"aster\"), \"star\". The root of the word \"disaster\" (\"bad star\" in Greek) comes from an astrological sense of a calamity blamed on the position of planets.\n\nDisasters are routinely divided into natural or human-made, although complex disasters, where there is no single root cause, are more common in developing countries. A specific disaster may spawn a secondary disaster that increases the impact. A classic example is an earthquake that causes a tsunami, resulting in coastal flooding. Some manufactured disasters have been ascribed to nature.\n\nSome researchers also differentiate between recurring events, such as seasonal flooding, and those considered unpredictable.\n\nA natural disaster is a natural process or phenomenon that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage.\n\nVarious phenomena like earthquakes, landslides, volcanic eruptions, floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, blizzards, tsunamis, and cyclones are all natural disasters that kill thousands of people and destroy billions of dollars of habitat and property each year. However, the rapid growth of the world's population and its increased concentration often in hazardous environments has escalated both the frequency and severity of disasters. With the tropical climate and unstable landforms, coupled with deforestation, unplanned growth proliferation, non-engineered constructions make the disaster-prone areas more vulnerable. Developing countries suffer more or less chronically from natural disasters due to ineffective communication combined with insufficient budgetary allocation for disaster prevention and management.\n\nHuman-instigated disasters are the consequence of technological or human hazards. Examples include stampedes, fires, transport accidents, industrial accidents, oil spills, \nnuclear explosions/nuclear radiation. War and deliberate attacks may also be put in this category.\n\nOther types of induced disasters include the more cosmic scenarios of catastrophic global warming, nuclear war, and bioterrorism.\n\nOne opinion argues that disasters can be seen as human-made, due to human failure to introduce appropriate emergency management measures.\n\nThe following table categorizes some disasters and notes first response initiatives.\n\n! rowspan=\"16\"  Natural\n! colspan=\"3\"  Disaster\n!Example Profile  First response\nAvalancheThe sudden, drastic flow of snow down a slope, occurring when either natural triggers, such as loading from new snow or rain, or artificial triggers, such as explosives or backcountry skiers, overload the snowpackShut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption\nBlizzardA severe snowstorm characterized by very strong winds and low temperaturesPower off all equipment; listen to blizzard advisories; Evacuate area, if unsafe; Assess damage\nEarthquakeThe shaking of the earth's crust, caused by underground volcanic forces of breaking and shifting rock beneath the earth's surfaceShut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption\nFire (wild)Fires that originate in uninhabited areas and which pose the risk to spread to inhabited areasAttempt to suppress fire in early stages; Evacuate personnel on alarm, as necessary; Notify fire department; Shut off utilities; Monitor weather advisories\nFloodFlash flooding: Small creeks, gullies, dry streambeds, ravines, culverts or even low-lying areas flood quicklyMonitor flood advisories; Determine flood potential to facilities; Pre-stage emergency power generating equipment; Assess damage\nFreezing rainRain occurring when outside surface temperature is below freezingMonitor weather advisories; arrange for snow and ice removal\nHeat waveA prolonged period of excessively hot weather relative to the usual weather pattern of an area and relative to normal temperatures for the seasonListen to weather advisories; Power-off all servers after a graceful shutdown if there is imminent potential of power failure; Shut down main electric circuit usually located in the basement or the first floor\nHurricaneHeavy rains and high windsPower off all equipment; listen to hurricane advisories; Evacuate area, if flooding is possible; Check gas, water and electrical lines for damage; Do not use telephones, in the event of severe lightning; Assess damage\nLandslideGeological phenomenon which includes a range of ground movement, such as rock falls, deep failure of slopes and shallow debris flowsShut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption\nLightning strikeAn electrical discharge caused by lightning, typically during thunderstormsPower off all equipment; listen to hurricane advisories; Evacuate area, if flooding is possible; Check gas, water and electrical lines for damage; Do not use telephones, in the event of severe lightning; Assess damage\nLimnic eruptionThe sudden eruption of carbon dioxide from deep lake waterShut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption\nTornadoViolent rotating columns of air which descent from severe thunderstorm cloud systemsMonitor tornado advisories; Power off equipment; Shut off utilities (power and gas); Assess damage once storm passes\nTsunamiA series of water waves caused by the displacement of a large volume of a body of water, typically an ocean or a large lake, usually caused by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, underwater explosions, landslides, glacier calvings, meteorite impacts and other disturbances above or below waterPower off all equipment; listen to tsunami advisories; Evacuate area, if flooding is possible; Check gas, water and electrical lines for damage; Assess damage\nVolcanic eruptionThe release of hot magma, volcanic ash and/or gases from a volcanoShut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption\n! rowspan=\"6\"  Human-made\nBioterrorismThe intentional release or dissemination of biological agents as a means of coercionGet information immediately from public health officials via the news media as to the right course of action; If you think you have been exposed, quickly remove your clothing and wash off your skin; put on a HEPA to help prevent inhalation of the agent \nCivil unrestA disturbance caused by a group of people that may include sit-ins and other forms of obstructions, riots, sabotage and other forms of crime, and which is intended to be a demonstration to the public and the government, but can escalate into general chaosContact local police or law enforcement \nFire (urban)Even with strict building fire codes, people still perish needlessly in firesAttempt to suppress fire in early stages; Evacuate personnel on alarm, as necessary; Notify fire department; Shut off utilities; Monitor weather advisories\nHazardous material spillsThe escape of solids, liquids, or gases that can harm people, other living organisms, property or the environment, from their intended controlled environment such as a container.Leave the area and call the local fire department for help. If anyone was affected by the spill, call the your local Emergency Medical Services line\nNuclear and radiation accidentsAn event involving significant release of radioactivity to the environment or a reactor core meltdown and which leads to major undesirable consequences to people, the environment, or the facilityRecognize that a CBRN incident has or may occur. Gather, assess and disseminate all available information to first responders. Establish an overview of the affected area. Provide and obtain regular updates to and from first responders.\nPower failureCaused by summer or winter storms, lightning or construction equipment digging in the wrong locationWait 5–10 minutes; power off all servers after a graceful shutdown; do not use telephones, in the event of severe lightning; shut down main electric circuit usually located in the basement or the first floor\n\nBULLET::::- Act of God\nBULLET::::- Catastrophic failure\nBULLET::::- Disaster convergence\nBULLET::::- Disaster medicine\nBULLET::::- Disaster recovery\nBULLET::::- Disaster recovery and business continuity auditing\nBULLET::::- Disaster recovery plan\nBULLET::::- Disaster research\nBULLET::::- Disaster response\nBULLET::::- Emergency management\nBULLET::::- Environmental emergency\nBULLET::::- Human extinction\nBULLET::::- List of accidents and disasters by death toll\nBULLET::::- Lists of disasters\nBULLET::::- Opportunism\nBULLET::::- Sociology of disaster\n\nBULLET::::- Barton, Allen H. \"Communities in Disaster: A Sociological Analysis of Collective Stress Situations\", Doubleday, 1st edition 1969, ASIN: B0006BVVOW\nBULLET::::- Susanna M. Hoffman, Susanna M. & Anthony Oliver-Smith, authors & editors. \"Catastrophe and Culture: The Anthropology of Disaster\", School of American Research Press, 1st edition 2002,\nBULLET::::- Bankoff, Greg, Georg Frerks, Dorothea Hilhorst. \"Mapping Vulnerability: Disasters, Development and People\", Routledge, 2004,\nBULLET::::- Alexander, David. \"Principles of Emergency planning and Management\", Oxford University Press, 1 edition 2002,\nBULLET::::- Quarantelli, E. L. (2008). \"Conventional Beliefs and Counterintuitive Realities\". Conventional Beliefs and Counterintuitive Realities in Social Research: an international Quarterly of the social Sciences, Vol. 75 (3): 873–904.\nBULLET::::- Paul, B. K et al. (2003). \"Public Response to Tornado Warnings: a comparative Study of the 4 May 2003 Tornadoes in Kansas, Missouri and Tennessee\". Quick Response Research Report, no 165, Natural Hazard Center, Universidad of Colorado\nBULLET::::- Kahneman, D. y Tversky, A. (1984). \"Choices, Values and frames\". American Psychologist 39 (4): 341–350.\nBULLET::::- Beck, U. (2006). Risk Society, towards a new modernity. Buenos Aires, Paidos\nBULLET::::- Aguirre, B. E & Quarantelli, E. H. (2008). \"Phenomenology of Death Counts in Disasters: the invisible dead in the 9/11 WTC attack\". International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters. Vol. 26 (1): 19–39.\nBULLET::::- Wilson, H. (2010). \"Divine Sovereignty and The Global Climate Change debate\". Essays in Philosophy. Vol. 11 (1): 1–7\nBULLET::::- Uscher-Pines, L. (2009). \"Health effects of Relocation following disasters: a systematic review of literature\". Disasters. Vol. 33 (1): 1–22.\nBULLET::::- Scheper-Hughes, N. (2005). \"Katrina: the disaster and its doubles\". Anthropology Today. Vol. 21 (6).\nBULLET::::- Phillips, B. D. (2005). \"Disaster as a Discipline: The Status of Emergency Management Education in the US\". International Journal of Mass-Emergencies and Disasters. Vol. 23 (1): 111–140.\nBULLET::::- Mileti, D. and Fitzpatrick, C. (1992). \"The causal sequence of Risk communication in the Parkfield Earthquake Prediction experiment\". Risk Analysis. Vol. 12: 393–400.\nBULLET::::- Perkins, Jamey. \"The Calamity of Disaster – Recognizing the possibilities, planning for the event, managing crisis and coping with the effects\", Public Safety Degrees\nBULLET::::- List of Disasters at ReliefWeb of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs\nBULLET::::- The Disaster Roundtable of the National Academy of Sciences\nBULLET::::- EM-DAT International Disaster Database of the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters\nBULLET::::- Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System – The Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System is a joint initiative of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the European Commission\nBULLET::::- UN-SPIDER – UN-SPIDER, the United Nations Programme for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response], a project of the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA)\n"}
{"id": "8138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8138", "title": "Dino Zoff", "text": "Dino Zoff\n\nDino Zoff (; born 28 February 1942) is an Italian former professional football goalkeeper and is the oldest ever winner of the World Cup, which he earned as captain of the Italian national team in the 1982 tournament in Spain, at the age of 40 years, 4 months and 13 days, also winning the award for best goalkeeper of the tournament, and being elected to the team of the tournament for his performances, keeping two clean-sheets, an honour he also received after winning the 1968 European Championship on home soil; he is the only Italian player to have won both the World Cup and the European Championship. Zoff also achieved great club success with Juventus, winning 6 Serie A titles, 2 Coppa Italia titles, and a UEFA Cup, also reaching two European Champions' Cup finals in the 1972–73 and 1982–83 seasons, as well as finishing second in the 1973 Intercontinental Cup final.\n\nZoff was a goalkeeper of outstanding ability, and he has a place in the history of the sport among the very best in this role, being named the 3rd greatest goalkeeper of the 20th century by the IFFHS behind Lev Yashin and Gordon Banks. He holds the record for the longest playing time without allowing goals in international tournaments (1142 minutes) set between 1972 and 1974. With 112 caps, he is the sixth most capped player for the \"Azzurri\". In 2004 Pelé named him as one of the 100 greatest living footballers. In the same year, Zoff placed fifth in the UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll, and was elected as Italy's golden player of the past 50 years. He also placed second in the 1973 Ballon d'Or, as he narrowly missed out on a treble with Juventus. In 1999, Zoff placed 47th in World Soccer Magazine's \"100 Greatest Players of the Twentieth Century\".\n\nAfter retiring as a footballer, Zoff went on to pursue a managerial career, coaching the Italian national team, with which he reached the Euro 2000 Final, and several other Italian clubs, including his former club Juventus, with which he won an UEFA Cup and a Coppa Italia double during the 1989–90 season, trophies he had also won as a player. In September 2014, Zoff published his Italian autobiography \"Dura Solo un Attimo la Gloria\" (\"Glory only Lasts a Moment\").\n\nDino Zoff was born in Mariano del Friuli, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Italy into a farming family. Upon his father's suggestion, Zoff initially also pursued studies to be a mechanic in case his football career proved to be unsuccessful. As a young aspiring footballer, Zoff was also interested in other sports, and his two main role models were the cyclist Fausto Coppi, and the race walker Abdon Pamich.\n\nZoff's career got off to an inauspicious start, when at the age of fourteen he had trials with Inter Milan and Juventus, but was rejected due to a lack of height. Five years later, having grown by 33 centimetres (supposedly due to his grandmother Adelaide's recommended increased daily intake of eight eggs), he made his Serie A debut with Udinese on 24 September 1961, in a 5–2 defeat to Fiorentina, although Zoff was not criticised for any of the goals he conceded. Zoff made only four appearances in his first season for Udinese, as they were relegated to Serie B. He played the next season as the club's starting goalkeeper, helping the club to Serie A promotion, before moving to Mantova in 1963, where he spent four seasons, making 131 appearances.\n\nHis performances for Mantova in the top flight caught the attention of larger clubs, while Italy's national coach at the time, Edmondo Fabbri, even considered bringing him as a back-up for the 1966 FIFA World Cup, although he ultimately chose to bring Enrico Albertosi, Roberto Anzolin, and Pierluigi Pizzaballa instead. In 1967, Zoff was transferred to Napoli, in exchange for fellow goalkeeper Claudio Bandoni, and a transfer fee of 130 million Lire; he spent five seasons in Naples, making 143 Serie A appearances with the club. During this time, he began to achieve increasing recognition in Italy, also making his International debut with the Italian national side in 1968, and earning a place in Italy's squads at Euro 68 and the 1970 World Cup.\n\nFollowing his achievements with the national side, and due to his performances during his time with Napoli, Zoff was signed by Juventus in 1972, at the age of 30, where he resumed his success. In eleven years with Juventus, Zoff won the Serie A championship six times, the Coppa Italia twice and the UEFA Cup once, also reaching two European Cup finals, another semi-final in 1978 (during which Zoff played a decisive role in the club's shoot-out victory over Ajax in the quarter-finals by saving two penalties), and the semi-finals of the European Cup Winners' Cup during the 1979–80 season. In 1973, he placed second in the Ballon d'Or, following his Serie A title victory, also narrowly missing out on an historical treble with Juventus, after reaching both the European Cup and the Coppa Italia finals that season, in which his club were defeated, however; Juventus also finished as runners-up in the 1973 Intercontinental Cup that year. In winning the 1977 UEFA Cup Final against Athletic Bilbao, Zoff came out on top against his 'twin', the Basque goalkeeper José Ángel Iribar.\n\nOverall, Zoff made 479 appearances for Juventus in all competitions, making 330 Serie A appearances with the club (all of which came consecutively, a club record), 74 in the Coppa Italia, 71 in European Competitions, and 4 in other Club Competitions. He is currently Juventus's 6th record appearance holder in all competitions, their 7th all-time appearance holder in Serie A, their 3rd all-time appearance holder in the Coppa Italia, their 7th all-time appearance holder in UEFA Club competitions, and their 9th all-time appearance holder in international club competitions.\nZoff won his final Serie A championship with Juventus during the 1981–82 Serie A season, also winning the 1982 FIFA World Cup with Italy that year, as his team's captain. During the following 1982–83 season, the final season of his career, Dino Zoff won the Coppa Italia with defending Serie A champions Juventus, and he reached his second European Cup final with the club in 1983; Juventus were defeated 1–0 by Hamburg in Athens on 25 May, after Zoff was beaten by Felix Magath's long-distance strike; this was the final match of his career. His final league appearance came in a 4–2 home win over Genoa on 15 May 1983.\n\nUpon retirement, Zoff held the records for the oldest Serie A player, at the age of 41, and the most Serie A appearances (570 matches) for more than 20 years, until the 2005–06 season, when the records were broken by Lazio goalkeeper Marco Ballotta, and A.C. Milan defender Paolo Maldini respectively. Behind only former A.C. Milan goalkeeper Sebastiano Rossi, who overtook him during the 1993–94 season, Zoff has conceded the fewest goals in a single Serie A season; behind only Gianluigi Buffon and Sebastiano Rossi, he has also gone the most time unbeaten in Serie A without conceding a goal, producing a 903-minute unbeaten streak during the 1972–73 season, a record that stood until Rossi overtook him in the 1993–94 season; Buffon broke the record during the 2015–16 season. He also held the Serie A record for most consecutive clean sheets alongside Rossi (9), until Gianluigi Buffon overtook them both with his 10th consecutive clean sheet in 2016. With 570 Serie A appearances, Zoff is also the sixth highest appearance holder in Serie A of all time, and he is the fourth oldest player in Serie A to have ever played a match. He holds the record for most consecutive matches played in Serie A (332), a streak which went unbroken from 21 May 1972 (in a 0–0 home draw with Napoli against Bologna), until his final league appearance with Juventus in 1983. At 41 years and 86 days, Zoff is also the oldest player to have appeared in a European Cup or UEFA Champions League Final.\n\nPrior to representing the senior Italian side, Zoff had won a gold medal with the Italy under-23 side at the 1963 Mediterranean Games. On 20 April 1968, Zoff made his senior debut for Italy, playing in a 2–0 win against Bulgaria in the quarter finals of the 1968 European Championships, in Naples. Zoff ended up being promoted to starting goalkeeper over his perceived career rival Enrico Albertosi during the tournament, and Italy proceeded to win the European Championship on home soil, with Zoff taking home a winners' medal after only his fourth international appearance, keeping two clean sheets, and winning the award for the best goalkeeper of the tournament. Zoff was left out of the Italian starting eleven in the 1970 World Cup, however, and was Albertosi's deputy throughout the tournament, as Italy went on to reach the final of the World Cup, and was defeated 4–1 by Brazil. He returned to the starting line-up, however, ahead of Albertosi, in Italy's disappointing 1974 World Cup campaign, during which they would be eliminated in the first round.\nFrom 1972 onwards, Zoff became Italy's undisputed number 1, and he participated in the 1978 World Cup with Italy, during which he managed a fourth-place finish, keeping 3 clean-sheets. Italy were eliminated in the semi-final, in a 2–1 loss to the Netherlands. After the match, Zoff was criticised for making a fairly uncommon error, as he was beaten by a strike from distance by Arie Haan. Zoff was also Italy's starting goalkeeper once again at the 1980 European Championships on home soil, however, helping his side to reach the semi-finals, finishing the tournament in fourth place once again. During the 1980 European Championship, Zoff kept three clean sheets, only conceding one goal in the bronze medal match, which Italy would lose on penalties; Zoff was elected as the goalkeeper of the tournament once again, an honour he had previously managed after winning the tournament in 1968. Throughout these two tournaments, Zoff established a record for most consecutive minutes unbeaten in a European Championship, which was later beaten by Iker Casillas in 2012. Zoff had also established the record for most minutes unbeaten European Championship qualifying, which was also beaten, by compatriot Buffon in 2011. He still holds the record, however, for most consecutive minutes without conceding a goal at the European Championships including qualifying, having kept eight consecutive cleans sheets between 1975 and 1980, while going unbeaten for 784 minutes. Alongside Casillas, Buffon, and Thomas Myhre, he is the goalkeeper with the fewest goals conceded in a single edition of the European Championships, having conceded only one goal in the 1968 European Championships; of these players, only Zoff and Casillas won the title while achieving this feat.\n\nZoff's greatest accomplishment, however, came in the 1982 World Cup in Spain, where he captained Italy to victory in the tournament at the age of 40, making him the oldest ever winner of the World Cup; throughout the tournament, he kept two clean sheets, and produced a crucial goal-line save in the final minutes of the last second-round group match against favourites Brazil on 5 July, which enabled the Italians to earn a 3–2 victory and advance to the semi-finals of the competition. On 11 July, at the age of 40 years and 133 days, he became the oldest player ever to feature in a World Cup final; following Italy's 3–1 victory over West Germany at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in Madrid, he followed in the footsteps of compatriot Gianpiero Combi (1934) as only the second goalkeeper to captain a World Cup-winning side (later Iker Casillas and Hugo Lloris repeated this feat for Spain and France in the 2010 and 2018 World Cups respectively). Due to his performances, he was voted as the Best Goalkeeper of the Tournament. Regarding Zoff's importance during Italy's victorious World Cup campaign, his manager Enzo Bearzot said of him:\nZoff also holds the record for the longest stretch (1142 minutes) without allowing any goals in international football, set between 1972 and 1974. That clean sheet stretch was ended by Haitian player Manno Sanon's beautiful goal during the 1974 World Cup. Zoff made his final appearance for Italy on 29 May 1983, in a 2–0 away loss to Sweden, in a Euro 1984 qualifying match. At the time of his retirement, Zoff's 112 caps were the most ever by a member of the Italian national team. He currently sits in sixth place in this category, as well as second among goalkeepers, with Gianluigi Buffon having surpassed the latter record.\n\nZoff was a traditional, effective, and experienced goalkeeper, who usually favoured efficiency and caution over flamboyance when making saves, although he was also capable of producing spectacular dives and decisive saves when necessary due to his strength and athleticism. He was particularly regarded for his outstanding positioning and handling of the ball, in particular when coming out to collect crosses, as well as his concentration, consistency, calm mindset, and composure under pressure; he also possessed good reactions and excellent shot-stopping abilities. Zoff was also noted for his attention to detail during matches, as well as his ability to read the game, anticipate his opponents, communicate with his defenders, and organise his back-line, which also enabled him to start attacking plays quickly from the back after claiming the ball. Despite his serious and reserved character, Zoff also drew praise for his leadership skills, correct behaviour, and competitive spirit, which led him to serve as captain of his national side, and enabled him to inspire a sense of calmness and confidence in his teammates. On occasion, however, Zoff was accused by certain pundits of occasionally struggling when facing long-range shots, and for not always being particularly adept at stopping penalties. Known for his work-rate in training, dedication, and discipline as a footballer, in addition to his goalkeeping skills, Zoff also stood out for his stamina, longevity, and determination, which enabled him to avoid injuries and have an extensive and highly successful career; due to his constant desire to improve himself, he was able to maintain a consistent level of performance throughout his entire career, even with his advancing age towards the end of his career, into his late 30s and early 40s. Considered one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, in 1999 he was elected in a poll by the IFFHS as the third best goalkeeper of the 20th Century – after Lev Yashin (1st) and Gordon Banks (2nd) – as well as Italy's best keeper of the century, and the second best European keeper of the century – behind only Yashin.\n\nAfter his retirement as a player, Zoff went into coaching, joining the technical staff at Juventus, initially as a goalkeeping coach, although this experience proved to be unsatisfactory for him. He subsequently coached the Italian Olympic side, his first experience as a coach, helping the team to qualify for the 1988 Summer Olympic Games in Seoul, before returning to Juventus in a coaching role; the Italian Olympic side eventually managed a fourth-place finish in the final tournament. Zoff served as Juventus's head coach from 1988 to 1990. In 1990, he was sacked, however, despite winning the UEFA Cup and the Coppa Italia during the 1989–90 season, while also helping the club to a third-place finish in the league. He then joined Lazio, where he became the coach in 1994, and later the club's sporting director, winning the Coppa Italia in 1998, and helping the club to an UEFA Cup final the same season, and was defeated by compatriots Inter.\n\nIn 1998, Zoff was appointed as the head coach of the Italian national team. Although Italy were still cautious and organised defensively, Zoff used a more open, fluid, and attacking style of play than that used by his more defensive Italian coaching predecessors Cesare Maldini and Arrigo Sacchi. Zoff helped the team to qualify for Euro 2000, and he introduced several younger players to the team, such as Francesco Totti, Gianluca Zambrotta, Stefano Fiore, Massimo Ambrosini, Christian Abbiati, Marco Delvecchio, and Vincenzo Montella. Although Italy were not favourites, he coached a young Italy squad to a second-place finish in Euro 2000, suffering a 2–1 extra-time defeat at the hands of reigning World Cup Champions France in the final, due to a golden goal by David Trezeguet. En route to the final, a ten-man Italy had eliminated co-hosts the Netherlands in the semi-finals in a penalty shoot-out, after a 0–0 draw, following extra-time. In the final of the tournament, Italy had been 1–0 up for most of the second half, and were less than sixty seconds away from winning the tournament, before France forward Sylvain Wiltord scored in the fourth and final minute of stoppage time to equalise, and send the match into extra time. Despite reaching the final, Zoff resigned a few days later, following strong criticism from A.C. Milan president and politician Silvio Berlusconi. Zoff was voted the World Soccer Manager of the Year in 2000.\n\nZoff returned to defending Serie A, Coppa Italia, and Supercoppa Italiana champions Lazio as a manager for the next season, replacing Sven-Göran Eriksson in 2001, and finishing third in Serie A. The following season, he resigned on 20 September, after only the third match, due to a poor start to the 2001–02 season. In 2005, he was named the coach of Fiorentina as a replacement for Sergio Buso. Despite saving the team from relegation on the last day of the season, Zoff was let go.\n\nAs a manager, Zoff was known for his use of tactics based upon the zona mista system, which is a cross between the \"catenaccio\" man-marking and zonal marking systems. His teams often used a sweeper, who, in addition to his defensive duties and organisational responsibilities, was also required to start plays from the back. He preferred not to base his team's play on set plays and formations, as he believed that cultivating a good relationship with his players and fostering a winning team mentality were the keys to getting the best out of them, and that this would also allow their natural creativity to come through in matches.\n\nZoff is married to Annamaria Passerini; they have a son, Marco, born in 1967. Zoff is Roman Catholic.\n\nOn 28 November 2015, it was reported Zoff was hospitalized for three weeks with a viral neurological infection, which made it difficult for him to walk. On 23 December 2015, it was reported Zoff had been recovering well, however stating, \"For the first time in my life, I was actually afraid... When I say scared, I wasn't afraid for myself, but for those around me. My wife, my son, my grandchildren. My tribe, basically. I would've really hurt them by leaving.\" He also revealed, \"One night I saw two figures at the end of my bed. They had the faces of Gaetano Scirea [one of his former, deceased teammates] and Enzo Bearzot [one of his former, deceased coaches]. They were both smiling. I wasn't asleep, it wasn't a dream. I told them: 'Not yet, not now.' And I am still here.\"\n\n!rowspan=2Club\n!rowspan=2Season\n!colspan=3League\n!colspan=2Cup\n!colspan=2Continental\n!colspan=2Total\n!rowspan=2\n!DivisionAppsGoalsAppsGoalsAppsGoalsAppsGoals\n!colspan=2Italy\n!colspan=3League\n!colspan=2Coppa Italia\n!colspan=2Europe\n!colspan=2Total\n\nrowspan=3Udinese1961–62Serie A\n40\n\n1962–63Serie B\n340\n\n!colspan=2Total\n!380\n\nrowspan=5Mantova1963–64rowspan=2Serie A\n270\n\n1964–65\n320\n\n1965–66Serie B\n380\n\n1966–67Serie A\n340\n\n!colspan=2Total\n!1310\n\nrowspan=6Napoli1967–68rowspan=5Serie A\n30040\n\n1968–69\n30030\n\n1969–70\n30060\n\n1970–71\n300\n\n1971–72\n23020\n\n!colspan=2Total\n!1430150\n\nrowspan=12Juventus1972–73rowspan=11Serie A\n30090\n\n1973–74\n30020\n\n1974–75\n300100\n\n1975–76\n30040\n\n1976–77\n300120\n\n1977–78\n30070\n\n1978–79\n3001020330\n\n1979–80\n30080\n\n1980–81\n30040\n\n1981–82\n30040\n\n1982–83\n30090\n\n!colspan=2Total\n!3300710\n\n!colspan=3Career total\n!6420860\n\nSource: \n\n!colspan=3Italy national team\n!YearAppsGoals\n196850\n196940\n197020\n197160\n197250\n197380\n197480\n197570\n1976100\n197760\n1978120\n197940\n1980120\n198170\n1982130\n198330\n!Total1120\n\n!rowspan=2Team\n!rowspan=2From\n!rowspan=2To\n!colspan=\"5\"Record\n!GWDLWin %\nalign=leftJuventus\nalign=left1 July 1988\nalign=left30 June 1990\nalign=leftLazio\nalign=left1 July 1990\nalign=left30 June 1994\nalign=leftLazio\nalign=left28 January 1997\nalign=left30 June 1997\nalign=leftItaly\nalign=left1 July 1998\nalign=left30 June 2000\nalign=leftLazio\nalign=left1 January 2001\nalign=left30 September 2001\nalign=leftFiorentina\nalign=left25 January 2005\nalign=left30 June 2005\n!colspan=3Total\n\nJuventus\nBULLET::::- Serie A: 1972–73, 1974–75, 1976–77, 1977–78, 1980–81, 1981–82\nBULLET::::- Coppa Italia: 1978–79, 1982–83\nBULLET::::- UEFA Cup: 1976–77\n\nItaly\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup: 1982\nBULLET::::- UEFA European Championship: 1968\n\nJuventus\nBULLET::::- Coppa Italia: 1989–90\nBULLET::::- UEFA Cup: 1989–90\n\nPlayer\nBULLET::::- UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament: 1968, 1980\nBULLET::::- Ballon d'Or: 1973 (2nd place)\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1982\nBULLET::::- FIFA Order of Merit: 1984\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup Best Goalkeeper: 1982\nBULLET::::- IFFHS Italian Goalkeeper of the 20th Century: 1999\nBULLET::::- IFFHS European Goalkeeper of the 20th Century (2nd): 1999\nBULLET::::- IFFHS World Goalkeeper of the 20th Century (3rd): 1999\nBULLET::::- World Soccer Magazine's \"100 Greatest Players of the Twentieth Century\": 1999\nBULLET::::- November 2003: Italy's Golden Player – the best Italian player of the last 50 years, selected by the Italian Football Federation.\nBULLET::::- UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll: #5\nBULLET::::- FIFA 100\nBULLET::::- Golden Foot \"Football Legends\" Award: 2004\nBULLET::::- Inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame: 2012\nBULLET::::- Inducted into the Walk of Fame of Italian sport: 2015\nBULLET::::- IFFHS Legends\n\nManager\nBULLET::::- Seminatore d'oro: 1990\nBULLET::::- World Soccer Manager of the Year: 2000\n\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup: Oldest player to play in and win a final, at 40 years, 4 months and 13 days in 1982\nBULLET::::- UEFA Champions League/European Cup: Oldest player to play in a final, at 41 years and 86 days in 1983\nBULLET::::- Most consecutive appearances in Serie A with Juventus: 330 (1972–1983)\nBULLET::::- Most consecutive appearances in Serie A: 332 (1972–1983)\nBULLET::::- Longest period time without conceding a goal in international matches: 1142 minutes (1972–1974).\nBULLET::::- Most consecutive minutes without conceding a goal at the European Championships including qualifying: 784 (1975–1980)\nBULLET::::- Fewest goals conceded in a single edition of the European Championships: 1 (1968) (alongside Gianluigi Buffon, Iker Casillas, and Thomas Myhre)\nBULLET::::- Fewest goals conceded in a single edition of the European Championships by a tournament-winning starting goalkeeper: 1 (1968) (alongside Iker Casillas)\nBULLET::::- One of four goalkeepers to win the FIFA World Cup as captain: 1982 (alongside Gianpiero Combi, Iker Casillas, and Hugo Lloris)\n\nBULLET::::- List of footballers with 100 or more caps\n\nBULLET::::- Dino Zoff the Legend – a lot of useful information\nBULLET::::- Dino Zoff @ Goalkeeping Greats\n"}
{"id": "8141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8141", "title": "Dipsacales", "text": "Dipsacales\n\nThe Dipsacales are an order of flowering plants, included within the asterid group of dicotyledons. In the APG III system of 2009, the order includes only two families, Adoxaceae and a broadly defined Caprifoliaceae. Some well-known members of the Dipsacales order are honeysuckle, elder, viburnum, and valerian.\n\nUnder the Cronquist system, the order included Adoxaceae, Caprifoliaceae sensu stricto, Dipsacaceae, and Valerianaceae. Under the 2003 APG II system, the circumscription of the order was much the same but the system allowed either a broadly circumscribed Caprifoliaceae including the families Diervillaceae, Dipsacaceae, Linnaeaceae, Morinaceae, and Valerianaceae, or these families being kept separate. The APG III system only uses the broadly circumscribed Caprifoliceae.\n\nThe Dipsacales appear to be most closely related to the Paracryphiales.\n\nBULLET::::- Bell, C. D., E. J. Edwards, S. T. Kim, & M. J. Donoghue. 2001. Dipsacales phylogeny based on chloroplast DNA sequences. Harvard Papers in Botany 6:481-499.\nBULLET::::- Donoghue, M. J., C. D. Bell, & R. C. Winkworth. 2003. The evolution of reproductive characters in Dipsacales. International Journal of Plant Sciences 164:S453-S464\n\nBULLET::::- Dipsacales at Tree of Life\nBULLET::::- Phylogeny of the Asteridae s. str. based on rbcL sequences, with particular reference to the Dipsacales (link to abstract)\n"}
{"id": "8142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8142", "title": "Democrat", "text": "Democrat\n\nDemocrat, Democrats, or Democratic may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- A proponent of democracy, or democratic government; rule of the people or rule by many.\nBULLET::::- A member of a Democratic Party:\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (United States) (D)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (Cyprus) (DCY)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (Japan) (DP)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (Italy) (PD)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (Hong Kong) (DPHK)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Progressive Party (DPP)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party of Korea\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (disambiguation), for a full list\nBULLET::::- A member of a Democrat Party\nBULLET::::- A member of a Democracy Party\nBULLET::::- Australian Democrats, a political party\nBULLET::::- Democrats (Brazil), a political party\nBULLET::::- Supporters of certain movements in Hong Kong and Macau:\nBULLET::::- Pro-democracy camp (Hong Kong)\nBULLET::::- Localist groups (Hong Kong)\nBULLET::::- Pro-democracy camp (Macau)\n\nBULLET::::- Democrat, California\nBULLET::::- Democrat, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Democrat Gulch, a valley in Oregon\n\nBULLET::::- \"Democrats\" (film), a 2014 documentary about politics in Zimbabwe\n\nBULLET::::- Democracy (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Democrat Party (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Democracy Party (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Democratic Party (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Democrat Party (epithet), a political epithet used in the United States instead of the Democratic Party\nBULLET::::- Republicanism\nBULLET::::- Monarchism\n"}
{"id": "8143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8143", "title": "December", "text": "December\n\nDecember is the twelfth and final month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian Calendars and is the seventh and last of seven months to have a length of 31 days. \n\nDecember got its name from the Latin word \"decem\" (meaning ten) because it was originally the tenth month of the year in the calendar of Romulus which began in March. The winter days following December were not included as part of any month. Later, the months of January and February were created out of the monthless period and added to the beginning of the calendar, but December retained its name. \n\nIn Ancient Rome, as one of the four Agonalia, this day in honor of Sol Indiges was held on December 11, as was Septimontium. Dies natalis (birthday) was held at the temple of Tellus on December 13, Consualia was held on December 15, Saturnalia was held December 17–23, Opiconsivia was held on December 19, Divalia was held on December 21, Larentalia was held on December 23, and the dies natalis of Sol Invictus was held on December 25. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar. \n\nThe Anglo-Saxons referred to December–January as Ġēolamonaþ (modern English: \"Yule month\"). The French Republican Calendar contained December within the months of Frimaire and Nivôse.\n\nDecember contains the winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere, the day with the fewest daylight hours, and the summer solstice in the Southern Hemisphere, the day with the most daylight hours (excluding polar regions in both cases). December in the Northern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent to June in the Southern Hemisphere and vice versa. In the Northern hemisphere, the beginning of the astronomical winter is traditionally 21 December or the date of the solstice.\n\nMeteor showers occurring in December are the Andromedids (September 25 – December 6, peaking around November 9), the Canis-Minorids (December 4 – December 15, peaking around December 10–11), the Coma Berenicids (December 12 to December 23, peaking around December 16), the Delta Cancrids (December 14 to February 14, the main shower from January 1 to January 24, peaking on January 17), the Geminids (December 13–14), the Monocerotids (December 7 to December 20, peaking on December 9. This shower can also start in November), the Phoenicids (November 29 to December 9, with a peak occurring around 5/6 December), the Quadrantids (typically a January shower but can also start in December), the Sigma Hydrids (December 4–15), and the Ursids (December 17-to December 25/26, peaking around December 22).\n\nBULLET::::- The zodiac signs for the month of December are Sagittarius (until December 21) and Capricorn (December 22 onwards).\n\nBULLET::::- December's birth flower is the narcissus.\nBULLET::::- December's birthstones are the turquoise, zircon, and tanzanite.\n\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Bahá'í calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Chinese calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Hebrew calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Islamic calendar\nBULLET::::- List of observances set by the Solar Hijri calendar\n\nBULLET::::- In Catholic tradition, December is the Month of the Advent of Christ.\nBULLET::::- National Egg Nog Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Impaired Driving Prevention Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Fruit Cake Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Pear Month (United States)\nBULLET::::- No Gender December (International)\n\nBULLET::::- See also Movable Western Christian observances\nBULLET::::- See also Movable Eastern Christian observances\nBULLET::::- Small Business Saturday UK: December 7\nFirst Sunday: December 1 \nBULLET::::- Good Neighborliness Day (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- Sindhi Cultural Day (Sindhi diaspora)\nMonday after fourth Thursday in November: December 2\nBULLET::::- Cyber Monday\nFirst Friday: December 6 \nBULLET::::- Farmer's Day (Ghana)\nBULLET::::- Gospel Day (Marshall Islands)\nSecond Monday: December 9\nBULLET::::- Green Monday\nBULLET::::- National Tree Planting Day (Malawi)\nDecember 15, unless the date falls on a Sunday, then December 16: December 16 \nBULLET::::- Koninkrijksdag (Kingdom of the Netherlands)\nWinter Solstice: December 21\nBULLET::::- Blue Christmas (holiday)\nBULLET::::- Brumalia (Ancient Rome)\nBULLET::::- Dongzhi Festival (Asia)\nBULLET::::- Global Orgasm\nBULLET::::- Korochun (Slavic)\nBULLET::::- Midsummer in the Southern Hemisphere. (Contemporary Paganism)\nBULLET::::- Sanghamitta Day (Theravada Buddhism)\nBULLET::::- Shalako (Zuni)\nBULLET::::- Yaldā (Iran)\nBULLET::::- Yule in the Northern Hemisphere (Contemporary Paganism)\nBULLET::::- Ziemassvētki (Latvia)\nDecember 22, unless that date is a Sunday, in which case it's moved to the 23rd: December 23\nBULLET::::- Forefathers' Day (Plymouth, Massachusetts)\nDecember 26, unless that day is a Sunday, in which case the 27th: December 26 \nBULLET::::- Boxing Day (Commonwealth of Nations)\nBULLET::::- Day of Good Will (South Africa and Namibia)\nBULLET::::- Family Day (Vanuatu)\nBULLET::::- Thanksgiving (Solomon Islands)\nBULLET::::- Start of Boxing Week\n\nBULLET::::- November 25 – December 10: 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based Violence\nBULLET::::- December 1\nBULLET::::- Battle of the Sinop Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Bifocals at the Monitor Day (unofficial)\nBULLET::::- Damrong Rajanubhab Day (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- Day of Restoration of Independence (Portugal)\nBULLET::::- Eat A Red Apple Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Feast for Death of Aleister Crowley (Thelema)\nBULLET::::- First President Day (Kazakhstan)\nBULLET::::- Freedom and Democracy Day (Chad)\nBULLET::::- Great Union Day (Romania)\nBULLET::::- Military Abolition Day (Costa Rica)\nBULLET::::- National Day (Myanmar)\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Central African Republic)\nBULLET::::- Restoration of Independence Day (Portugal)\nBULLET::::- Rosa Parks Day (Ohio and Oregon, United States)\nBULLET::::- Self-governance Day (Iceland)\nBULLET::::- Teachers' Day (Panama)\nBULLET::::- World AIDS Day\nBULLET::::- Day Without Art\nBULLET::::- December 2\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Cuba)\nBULLET::::- International Day for the Abolition of Slavery\nBULLET::::- National Day (Laos)\nBULLET::::- National Day (United Arab Emirates)\nBULLET::::- National Fritters Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- December 3\nBULLET::::- Doctors' Day (Cuba)\nBULLET::::- United Nations' International Day of Persons with Disabilities\nBULLET::::- December 4\nBULLET::::- National Cookie Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Saint Barbara's Day-related observances:\nBULLET::::- Barbórka (Poland)\nBULLET::::- Eid il-Burbara (Russia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, Turkey)\nBULLET::::- Thai Environment Day (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- Tupou I Day (Tonga)\nBULLET::::- December 5\nBULLET::::- Bathtub Party Day (unofficial)\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (Suriname)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Ninja (unofficial)\nBULLET::::- Day of Military Honour – Battle of Moscow (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Discovery Day (Haiti and Dominican Republic)\nBULLET::::- International Volunteer Day for Economic and Social Development\nBULLET::::- Klozum (Schiermonnikoog, Netherlands)\nBULLET::::- Saint Nicholas Eve (Belgium, Czech Republic, Slovakia, the Netherlands, Hungary, Romania, Germany, Poland and the UK)\nBULLET::::- Krampusnacht (Austria)\nBULLET::::- King's Birthday (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- Repeal Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- World Soil Day\nBULLET::::- December 6\nBULLET::::- Anniversary of the Founding of Quito (Ecuador)\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Spain)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technologies of Azerbaijan\nBULLET::::- Independence Day of Finland\nBULLET::::- National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women (Canada)\nBULLET::::- St Nicholas Day (Western Christianity)\nBULLET::::- December 7\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Flag Day (India\nBULLET::::- Eve of the Immaculate Conception (Western Christianity) and related observances:\nBULLET::::- Day of the Little Candles, begins after sunset (Colombia)\nBULLET::::- Quema del Diablo, begins after sunset. (Guatemala)\nBULLET::::- Flag Land Base Day (Scientology)\nBULLET::::- International Civil Aviation Day\nBULLET::::- National Heroes Day (East Timor)\nBULLET::::- National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Spitak Remembrance Day (Armenia)\nBULLET::::- December 8\nBULLET::::- Battle Day (Falkland Islands)\nBULLET::::- Bodhi Day (Japan)\nBULLET::::- CARICOM–Cuba Day (Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and Cuba)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Romania)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Uzbekistan)\nBULLET::::- Day of Finnish Music (Finland)\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Immaculate Conception (public holiday in several countries, a holy day of obligation in others), and its related observances:\nBULLET::::- Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Anglican Communion), lesser commemoration\nBULLET::::- Christmas on Campus (University of Dayton)\nBULLET::::- Mother's Day (Panama)\nBULLET::::- Festa da Conceição da Praia, celebrating Yemanjá, Queen of the Ocean (Salvador, Bahia)\nBULLET::::- Festival of Lights (Lyon)\nBULLET::::- Pansexual/Panromantic Pride Day\nBULLET::::- Saint Clement of Ohrid Day (North Macedonia)\nBULLET::::- National Brownie Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Youth Day (Albania)\nBULLET::::- December 9\nBULLET::::- Anna's Day (Sweden and Finland)\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Conception of the Most Holy Theotokos by St. Anne (Eastern Orthodox)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Tanzania)\nBULLET::::- International Anti-Corruption Day\nBULLET::::- National Heroes Day (Antigua and Barbuda)\nBULLET::::- National Pastry Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Navy Day (Sri Lanka)\nBULLET::::- Remembrance for Egill Skallagrímsson (The Troth)\nBULLET::::- Yuri's Day in the Autumn (Russian Orthodox Church)\nBULLET::::- December 10\nBULLET::::- Alfred Nobel Day (Sweden)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Thailand)\nBULLET::::- Human Rights Day (International)\nBULLET::::- December 11\nBULLET::::- Human Rights and Peace Day (Kiribati)\nBULLET::::- Indiana Day (Indiana, United States)\nBULLET::::- National Have a Bagel Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Noodle Ring Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Tango Day (Argentina)\nBULLET::::- Pampanga Day (Pampanga province, Philippines)\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Burkina Faso)\nBULLET::::- December 12\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Croatian Air Force Day (Croatia)\nBULLET::::- Day of Neutrality (Turkmenistan)\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Apparition of Our Lady of Guadalupe (Mexico)\nBULLET::::- Feast of Masá'il Bahá'í calendar (only if Bahá'í Naw-Rúz falls on March 21, which it does for 2015)\nBULLET::::- Kanji Day (Japan)\nBULLET::::- Jamhuri Day (Kenya)\nBULLET::::- December 13\nBULLET::::- Acadian Remembrance Day (Acadians)\nBULLET::::- National Day (Saint Lucia)\nBULLET::::- Pick a Pathologist Pal Day\nBULLET::::- Republic Day (Malta)\nBULLET::::- Sailor's Day (Brazil)\nBULLET::::- Saint Lucy's Day (mainly Scandinavia, some regions of Italy)\nBULLET::::- December 14\nBULLET::::- Alabama Day (Alabama)\nBULLET::::- Forty-seven Ronin Remembrance Day (Sengaku-ji, Tokyo)\nBULLET::::- Martyred Intellectuals Day (Bangladesh)\nBULLET::::- Monkey Day (International)\nBULLET::::- December 15\nBULLET::::- Bill of Rights Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- 2nd Amendment Day (South Carolina)\nBULLET::::- Cat Herders Day\nBULLET::::- Homecoming Day (Alderney)\nBULLET::::- International Tea Day\nBULLET::::- National Cupcake Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Remembrance Day of Journalists Killed in the Line of Duty (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Zamenhof Day (International Esperanto Community)\nBULLET::::- December 16\nBULLET::::- Barbie and Barney Backlash Day\nBULLET::::- National Day (Kingdom of Bahrain)\nBULLET::::- Victory day of Bangladesh\nBULLET::::- Day of Reconciliation in South Africa\nBULLET::::- December 17\nBULLET::::- Accession Day (Bahrain)\nBULLET::::- International Day to End Violence Against Sex Workers\nBULLET::::- National Day (Bhutan)\nBULLET::::- National Maple Syrup Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Pan American Aviation Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Wright Brothers Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- December 18\nBULLET::::- National Muffin Day (Brazil)\nBULLET::::- December 19\nBULLET::::- Goa Liberation Day (Goa, India)\nBULLET::::- National Heroes and Heroines Day (Anguilla)\nBULLET::::- December 20\nBULLET::::- Abolition of Slavery Day, also known as \"Fête des Cafres\" (Réunion, French Guiana)\nBULLET::::- Bo Aung Kyaw Day (Myanmar)\nBULLET::::- International Human Solidarity Day (International)\nBULLET::::- Macau Special Administrative Region Establishment Day (Macau)\nBULLET::::- National Sangria Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- December 21\nBULLET::::- First day of winter (some cultures)\nBULLET::::- Humbug Day\nBULLET::::- National Hamburger Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- December 22\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Day (Vietnam)\nBULLET::::- Mother's Day (Indonesia)\nBULLET::::- National Date Nut Bread Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- National Mathematics Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Teachers' Day (Cuba)\nBULLET::::- Unity Day (Zimbabwe)\nBULLET::::- December 23\nBULLET::::- The Emperor's Birthday, a national holiday in Japan\nBULLET::::- Festivus\nBULLET::::- HumanLight (Humanism)\nBULLET::::- December 24\nBULLET::::- Christmas Eve\nBULLET::::- Aðfangadagskvöld, the day when the 13th and the last Yule Lad arrives to towns. (Iceland)\nBULLET::::- Feast of the Seven Fishes (Italy)\nBULLET::::- Juleaften (Denmark)/Julaften (Norway)/Julafton (Sweden)\nBULLET::::- Nittel Nacht (certain Orthodox Jewish denominations)\nBULLET::::- Nochebuena (Spain and Spanish-speaking countries)\nBULLET::::- The Declaration of Christmas Peace (Old Great Square of Turku, Finland's official Christmas City)\nBULLET::::- Day of Military Honour – Siege of Ismail (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day (Libya)\nBULLET::::- Mōdraniht (Anglo-Saxon paganism)\nBULLET::::- National Eggnog Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- December 25\nBULLET::::- Children's Day (Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Republic of Congo)\nBULLET::::- Christmas (Christianity)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Taiwan)\nBULLET::::- Good Governance Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Malkh-Festival (Nakh peoples of Chechnya and Ingushetia)\nBULLET::::- Newtonmas (Atheist community)\nBULLET::::- Quaid-e-Azam's Day (Pakistan)\nBULLET::::- Takanakuy (Chumbivilcas Province, Peru)\nBULLET::::- National Pumpkin Pie Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- December 26\nBULLET::::- Boxing Day\nBULLET::::- Saint Stephen's Day\nBULLET::::- Day of Goodwill\nBULLET::::- Kwanzaa (December 26 to January 1) (African-American community, United States)\nBULLET::::- Independence Day in Slovenia – Independence and Unity Day\nBULLET::::- December 27\nBULLET::::- Independence and Unity Day (Slovenia)\nBULLET::::- Mauro Hamza Day (Houston, Texas)\nBULLET::::- Mummer's Day (Padstow, Cornwall)\nBULLET::::- St. Stephen's Day (public holiday in Alsace, Austria, Catalonia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Ireland, Luxembourg, Poland, Slovakia and Switzerland)\nBULLET::::- Father's Day (Bulgaria)\nBULLET::::- The first day of Junkanoo street parade, the second day is on the New Year's Day (The Bahamas)\nBULLET::::- National Fruitcake Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Wren Day (Ireland, Isle of Man)\nBULLET::::- Zartosht No-Diso (Zoroastrianism)\nBULLET::::- December 28\nBULLET::::- Proclamation Day in South Australia\nBULLET::::- December 29\nBULLET::::- Tick Tock Day\nBULLET::::- December 30\nBULLET::::- Day of the Declaration of Slovakia as an Independent Ecclesiastic Province (Slovakia)\nBULLET::::- Falling Needles Family Fest\nBULLET::::- Freedom Day (Church of Scientology)\nBULLET::::- National Bicarbonate of Soda Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Rizal Day (Philippines)\nBULLET::::- December 31\nBULLET::::- International Solidarity Day (Azerbaijan)\nBULLET::::- National Champagne Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- New Year's Eve\nBULLET::::- Bisperás ng Bagong Taón\" (Philippines)\nBULLET::::- Ōmisoka (Japan)\nBULLET::::- Start of Hogmanay (Scotland) December 31 – January 1, in some cases until January 2.\n\nBULLET::::- Historical anniversaries\nBULLET::::- Undecimber\n"}
{"id": "8144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8144", "title": "December 7", "text": "December 7\n\nBULLET::::- 43 BC – Marcus Tullius Cicero is assassinated in Formia.\nBULLET::::- 574 – Byzantine Emperor Justin II, suffering recurring seizures of insanity, adopts his general Tiberius and proclaims him as \"Caesar\".\nBULLET::::- 1703 – The Great Storm of 1703, the greatest windstorm ever recorded in the southern part of Great Britain, makes landfall. Winds gust up to 120 mph, and 9,000 people die.\nBULLET::::- 1724 – Tumult of Thorn: Religious unrest is followed by the execution of nine Protestant citizens and the mayor of Thorn (Toruń) by Polish authorities.\nBULLET::::- 1732 – The Royal Opera House opens at Covent Garden, London, England.\nBULLET::::- 1776 – Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, arranges to enter the American military as a major general.\nBULLET::::- 1787 – Delaware becomes the first state to ratify the United States Constitution.\nBULLET::::- 1837 – The Battle of Montgomery's Tavern, the only battle of the Upper Canada Rebellion, takes place in Toronto, where the rebels are quickly defeated.\nBULLET::::- 1842 – First concert of the New York Philharmonic, founded by Ureli Corelli Hill.\nBULLET::::- 1869 – American outlaw Jesse James commits his first confirmed bank robbery in Gallatin, Missouri.\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Comparative fuel trials begin between warships and : \"Spiteful\" was the first warship powered solely by fuel oil, and the trials led to the obsolescence of coal in ships of the Royal Navy.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – World War I: The United States declares war on Austria-Hungary.\nBULLET::::- 1922 – The Parliament of Northern Ireland votes to remain a part of the United Kingdom and not unify with Southern Ireland.\nBULLET::::- 1930 – W1XAV in Boston, Massachusetts telecasts video from the CBS radio orchestra program, \"The Fox Trappers\". The telecast also includes the first television commercial in the United States, an advertisement for I.J. Fox Furriers, who sponsored the radio show.\nBULLET::::- 1932 – German-born Swiss physicist Albert Einstein is granted an American visa.\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Australian cricketer Jack Fingleton becomes the first player to score centuries in four consecutive Test innings.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – World War II: Attack on Pearl Harbor: The Imperial Japanese Navy carries out a surprise attack on the United States Pacific Fleet and its defending Army and Marine air forces at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. (For Japan's near-simultaneous attacks on Eastern Hemisphere targets, see December 8.)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: British commandos conduct Operation Frankton, a raid on shipping in Bordeaux harbour.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – A fire at the Winecoff Hotel in Atlanta, Georgia kills 119 people, the deadliest hotel fire in U.S. history.\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Chinese Civil War: The Government of the Republic of China moves from Nanking to Taipei, Taiwan.\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Prince Rainier III of Monaco revises the principality's constitution, devolving some of his power to advisory and legislative councils.\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Instant replay makes its debut during the Army-Navy football game in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Pope Paul VI and Patriarch Athenagoras I simultaneously revoke mutual excommunications that had been in place since 1054.\nBULLET::::- 1971 – The Battle of Sylhet is fought between the Pakistani military and the Mukti Bahini.\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Pakistan President Yahya Khan announces the formation of a coalition government with Nurul Amin as Prime Minister and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto as Deputy Prime Minister.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – \"Apollo 17\", the last Apollo moon mission, is launched. The crew takes the photograph known as \"The Blue Marble\" as they leave the Earth.\nBULLET::::- 1982 – In Texas, Charles Brooks, Jr., becomes the first person to be executed by lethal injection in the United States.\nBULLET::::- 1983 – An Iberia Airlines Boeing 727 collides with an Aviaco DC-9 in dense fog while the two airliners are taxiing down the runway at Madrid–Barajas Airport, killing 93 people.\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Pacific Southwest Airlines Flight 1771, a British Aerospace 146-200A, crashes near Paso Robles, California, killing all 43 on board, after a disgruntled passenger shoots his ex-boss traveling on the flight, then shoots both pilots and steers the plane into the ground.\nBULLET::::- 1988 – The 6.8 Armenian earthquake shakes the northern part of the country with a maximum MSK intensity of X (\"Devastating\"), killing 25,000–50,000 and injuring 31,000–130,000.\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Long Island Rail Road shooting: Passenger Colin Ferguson murders six people and injures 19 others on the LIRR in Nassau County, New York.\nBULLET::::- 1995 – The \"Galileo\" spacecraft arrives at Jupiter, a little more than six years after it was launched by Space Shuttle \"Atlantis\" during Mission STS-34.\nBULLET::::- 2003 – The Conservative Party of Canada is officially registered, following the merger of the Canadian Alliance and the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Rigoberto Alpizar, a passenger on American Airlines Flight 924 who allegedly claimed to have a bomb, is shot and killed by a team of U.S. federal air marshals at Miami International Airport.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – The JAXA probe Akatsuki successfully enters orbit around Venus five years after the first attempt.\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Pakistan International Airlines Flight 661, a domestic passenger flight from Chitral to Islamabad, operated by ATR-42-500 crashes near Havelian, killing all 47 on board.\nBULLET::::- 2017 – The Marriage Amendment Bill to legally recognize same-sex marriages is passed in Australia's parliament.\n\nBULLET::::- 521 – Columba, Irish missionary, monk, and saint (d. 597)\nBULLET::::- 903 – Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, Persian astronomer and author (d. 986)\nBULLET::::- 967 – Abū-Sa'īd Abul-Khayr, Persian Sufi poet (d. 1049)\nBULLET::::- 1302 – Azzone Visconti, Italian nobleman (d. 1339)\nBULLET::::- 1532 – Louis I, German nobleman and politician (d. 1605)\nBULLET::::- 1545 – Henry Stuart, English-Scottish husband of Mary, Queen of Scots (d. 1567)\nBULLET::::- 1561 – Kikkawa Hiroie, Japanese daimyō (d. 1625)\nBULLET::::- 1595 – Injo of Joseon, Korean king (d. 1649)\nBULLET::::- 1598 – Gian Lorenzo Bernini, Italian sculptor and painter (d. 1680)\nBULLET::::- 1643 – Giovanni Battista Falda, Italian architect and engraver (d. 1678)\nBULLET::::- 1637 – Bernardo Pasquini, Italian organist and composer (d. 1710)\nBULLET::::- 1764 – Claude Victor-Perrin, French general and politician (d. 1841)\nBULLET::::- 1784 – Allan Cunningham, Scottish author and poet (d. 1842)\nBULLET::::- 1791 – Ferenc Novák, Hungarian-Slovene priest and poet (d. 1836)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Abraham Jacob van der Aa, Dutch author and academic (d. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1801 – Johann Nestroy, Austrian actor and playwright (d. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1810 – Josef Hyrtl, Hungarian-Austrian anatomist and biologist (d. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1810 – Theodor Schwann, German physiologist and biologist (d. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1823 – Leopold Kronecker, Polish-German mathematician and academic (d. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1838 – Thomas Bent, Australian businessman and politician, 22nd Premier of Victoria (d. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1860 – Joseph Cook, English-born Australian politician, 6th Prime Minister of Australia (d. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Henri Mathias Berthelot, French general during World War I (d. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1862 – Paul Adam, French author (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Felix Calonder, Swiss soldier and politician, 36th President of the Swiss Confederation (d. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Pietro Mascagni, Italian composer and conductor (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Richard Warren Sears, American businessman, co-founded Sears (d. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Frank Laver, Australian cricketer (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Willa Cather, American novelist, short story writer, and poet (d. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Akiko Yosano, Japanese author, poet, pioneering feminist, pacifist, and social reformer (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Rudolf Friml, Czech-American pianist, composer, and academic (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – John Carpenter, American sprinter (d. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Mason Phelps, American golfer (d. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Peter Sturholdt, American boxer and painter (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Ernst Toch, Austrian-American composer and songwriter (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Joyce Cary, Irish novelist (d. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Hamilton Fish III, American captain and politician (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Stuart Davis, American painter and academic (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Fay Bainter, American actress (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Hermann Balck, German general (d. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Freddie Adkins, English author and illustrator (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Kateryna Vasylivna Bilokur, Ukrainian folk artist (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Hilda Taba, Estonian architect, author, and educator (d. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Danilo Blanuša, Croatian mathematician, physicist, and academic (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Clarence Nash, American voice actor and singer (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Gerard Kuiper, Dutch-American astronomer and academic (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Fred Rose, Polish-Canadian politician and spy (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Nikola Vaptsarov, Bulgarian poet and author (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Duncan McNaughton, Canadian high jumper and geologist (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Louis Prima, American singer-songwriter, trumpet player, and actor (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Daniel Jones, Welsh captain and composer (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Kersti Merilaas, Estonian author and poet (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Leigh Brackett, American author and screenwriter (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Eli Wallach, American actor (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Tatamkhulu Afrika, South African poet and author (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Fiorenzo Magni, Italian cyclist (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Walter Nowotny, Austrian-German soldier and pilot (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Pramukh Swami Maharaj, Indian guru and scholar (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Intizar Hussain, Indian-Pakistani author and scholar (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Ted Knight, American actor and comedian (d. 1986)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – John Love, Zimbabwean race car driver (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Mário Soares, Portuguese historian, lawyer, and politician, 17th President of Portugal (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Bent Fabric, Danish pianist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Hermano da Silva Ramos, French-Brazilian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1926 – William John McNaughton, American bishop\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Jack S. Blanton, American businessman and philanthropist (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Helen Watts, Welsh opera singer (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Noam Chomsky, American linguist and philosopher\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Mickey Thompson, American race car driver (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Christopher Nicole, Guyanese-English author\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Hal Smith, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Allan B. Calhamer, American game designer, created \"Diplomacy\" (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Bobby Osborne, American bluegrass singer and musician\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Ellen Burstyn, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Oktay Ekşi, Turkish journalist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Rosemary Rogers, American journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1932 – J. B. Sumarlin, Indonesian economist and politician, 17th Indonesian Minister of Finance\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Bobby Whitton, Australian rugby league player (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Krsto Papić, Croatian director and screenwriter (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Armando Manzanero, Mexican musician, singer and composer\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Thad Cochran, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Stan Boardman, English comedian\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Gerry Cheevers, Canadian ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Melba Pattillo Beals, American journalist and activist\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Harry Chapin, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Alex Johnson, American baseball player (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Peter Tomarken, American game show host and producer (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Susan Isaacs, American author and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Nick Katz, American mathematician and academic\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Bernard C. Parks, American police officer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1943 – John Bennett Ramsey, American businessman and pilot\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Daniel Chorzempa, American organist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Miroslav Macek, Czech dentist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Johnny Bench, American baseball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Anne Fine, English author\nBULLET::::- 1947 – James Keach, American actor, producer, and director\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Garry Unger, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Gary Morris, American country singer-songwriter and actor\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Tony Thomas, American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1949 – James Rivière, Italian sculptor and jeweler\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Tom Waits, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Ron Hynes, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Susan Collins, American politician, senior senator of Maine\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Eckhard Märzke, German footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Mary Fallin, American businesswoman and politician, 27th Governor of Oklahoma\nBULLET::::- 1955 – John Watkins, Australian educator and politician, 14th Deputy Premier of New South Wales\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Larry Bird, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Anna Soubry, British politician\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Geoff Lawson, Australian cricketer, coach, and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Tom Winsor, English lawyer and civil servant\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Tijjani Muhammad-Bande, Nigerian career-diplomat, President of the United Nations General Assembly (2019)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Tim Butler, English bass player and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Rick Rude, American wrestler and sportscaster (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Saleem Yousuf, Pakistani cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Craig Scanlon, English guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Alain Blondel, French decathlete\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Jeffrey Donaldson, Northern Irish politician\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Imad Mughniyah, Lebanese activist (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Theo Snelders, Dutch footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Katsuya Terada, Japanese illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Barbara Weathers, American R&B/soul singer\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Hugo Blick, English filmmaker\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Patrick Fabian, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Peter Laviolette, American ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Colin Hendry, Scottish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Jeffrey Wright, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1966 – C. Thomas Howell, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Shinichi Ito, Japanese motorcycle racer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Kazue Itoh, Japanese actress\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Andres Kasekamp, Canadian-Estonian historian and academic\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Louise Post, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Mark Geyer, Australian rugby league player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Tino Martinez, American baseball player, coach, and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Nina Turner, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Vladimir Akopian, Azerbaijani-Armenian chess player\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Hermann Maier, Austrian skier\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Tammy Lynn Sytch, American wrestler and manager\nBULLET::::- 1973 – İbrahim Kutluay, Turkish basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Hack Meyers, American wrestler and trainer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Terrell Owens, American football player and actor\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Fabien Pelous, French rugby player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Damien Rice, Irish singer-songwriter, musician and record producer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Nicole Appleton, Canadian singer and actress\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Manuel Martínez Gutiérrez, Spanish shot putter and actor\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Jamie Clapham, English footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Alan Faneca, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Ivan Franceschini, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Georges Laraque, Canadian ice hockey player and politician\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Derek Ramsay, Filipino-British actor, model and television personality\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Sunny Sweeney, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Benoît Tréluyer, French race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Eric Chavez, American baseball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Luke Donald, English golfer\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Dominic Howard, English drummer and producer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Shiri Appleby, American actress, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Suzannah Lipscomb, English historian, academic and television presenter\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Sara Bareilles, American singer-songwriter, pianist, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Lampros Choutos, Greek-Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Ayako Fujitani, Japanese actress and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1980 – John Terry, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Mike Mucitelli, American mixed martial artist\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Aaron Gray, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Robert Kubica, Polish race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Milan Michálek, Czech ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Luca Rigoni, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Jon Moxley, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Billy Horschel, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Nita Strauss, American guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Aaron Carter, American singer-songwriter, dancer, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Nathan Adrian, American swimmer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Angelina Gabueva, Russian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Emily Browning, Australian actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Kyle Hendricks, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Alessandro Marchi, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Nicholas Hoult, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1990 – David Goffin, Belgian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Aleksandr Menkov, Russian long jumper\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Yasiel Puig, Cuban baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Urszula Radwańska, Polish tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Eugenio Pisani, Italian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Rahama Sadau, Nigerian actress\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Yuzuru Hanyu, Japanese figure skater\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Tony Yike Yang, Canadian pianist\nBULLET::::- 43 BC – Cicero, Roman philosopher, lawyer, and politician (b. 106 BC)\nBULLET::::- 283 – Eutychian, pope of the Catholic Church\nBULLET::::- 881 – Anspert, archbishop of Milan\nBULLET::::- 983 – Otto II, Holy Roman Emperor (b. 955)\nBULLET::::- 1254 – Innocent IV, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1195)\nBULLET::::- 1279 – Bolesław V, High Duke of Poland (b. 1226)\nBULLET::::- 1295 – Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester, English officer (b. 1243)\nBULLET::::- 1383 – Wenceslaus I, duke of Luxembourg (b. 1337)\nBULLET::::- 1498 – Alexander Hegius von Heek, German poet (b. 1433)\nBULLET::::- 1562 – Adrian Willaert, Dutch-Italian composer and educator (b. 1490)\nBULLET::::- 1649 – Charles Garnier, French missionary and saint (b. 1606)\nBULLET::::- 1672 – Richard Bellingham, English-American lawyer and politician, 8th (b. 1592)\nBULLET::::- 1680 – Peter Lely, Dutch-English painter (b. 1618)\nBULLET::::- 1683 – Algernon Sidney, English philosopher and politician, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports (b. 1623)\nBULLET::::- 1723 – Jan Santini Aichel, Czech architect, designed the Pilgrimage Church of Saint John of Nepomuk and Karlova Koruna Chateau (b. 1677)\nBULLET::::- 1725 – Florent Carton Dancourt, French actor and playwright (b. 1661)\nBULLET::::- 1772 – Martín Sarmiento, Spanish monk, scholar, and author (b. 1695)\nBULLET::::- 1775 – Charles Saunders, English admiral and politician (b. 1715)\nBULLET::::- 1793 – Joseph Bara, French soldier and drummer (b. 1779)\nBULLET::::- 1803 – Küçük Hüseyin Pasha, Turkish admiral and politician (b. 1757)\nBULLET::::- 1815 – Michel Ney, German-French general (b. 1769)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – William Bligh, English admiral and politician, 4th Governor of New South Wales (b. 1745)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – Robert Nicoll, Scottish poet (b.1814)\nBULLET::::- 1842 – Thomas Hamilton, Scottish philosopher and author (b. 1789)\nBULLET::::- 1874 – Constantin von Tischendorf, German theologian, scholar, and academic (b. 1815)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Jón Sigurðsson, Icelandic scholar and politician, 1st Speaker of the Parliament of Iceland (b. 1811)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – Arthur Blyth, English-Australian politician, 9th Premier of South Australia (b. 1823)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Ferdinand de Lesseps, French businessman and diplomat, co-developed the Suez Canal (b. 1805)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Juan Luna, Filipino painter and sculptor (b. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Thomas Nast, German-American cartoonist (b. 1840)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Élie Ducommun, Swiss journalist and educator, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1833)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano, Italian cardinal (b. 1828)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Ludwig Minkus, Austrian violinist and composer (b. 1826)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Frank Wilson, English-Australian politician, 9th Premier of Western Australia (b. 1859)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Attack on Pearl Harbor:\nBULLET::::- Mervyn S. Bennion, American captain (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- Frederick Curtice Davis, American sailor (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- Julius Ellsberry, American sailor (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- John C. England, American sailor (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- Edwin J. Hill, American sailor (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Hollis, American sailor (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- Herbert C. Jones, American sailor (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- Isaac C. Kidd, American admiral (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- Robert Lawrence Leopold, American sailor (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- Herbert Hugo Menges, American sailor (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- Thomas James Reeves, American sailor (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- Aloysius Schmitt, American priest and sailor (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- Robert R. Scott, American sailor (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- Peter Tomich, American sailor (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- Robert Uhlmann, American sailor (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- Franklin Van Valkenburgh, American captain (b. 1888)\nBULLET::::- Eldon P. Wyman, American sailor (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Tristan Bernard, French author and playwright (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Nicholas Murray Butler, American philosopher and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1862)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Rex Beach, American author, playwright, and water polo player (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Huntley Gordon, Canadian-American actor (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Reşat Nuri Güntekin, Turkish author and playwright (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Ioannis Demestichas, Greek admiral and politician (b. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Kirsten Flagstad, Norwegian opera singer (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Lefty O'Doul, American baseball player and manager (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Eric Portman, English actor (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Rube Goldberg, American cartoonist, sculptor, and author (b. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Thornton Wilder, American novelist and playwright (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Hardie Albright, American actor (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Paul Bragg, American nutritionist (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Paul Gibb, English cricketer and umpire (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Peter Carl Goldmark, Hungarian-American engineer (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Georges Grignard, French race car driver (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Alexander Wetmore, American ornithologist and paleontologist (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin, English-American astronomer and astrophysicist (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – LeeRoy Yarbrough, American race car driver (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – J. R. Eyerman, American photographer and journalist (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Robert Graves, English poet, novelist, critic (b. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Potter Stewart, American soldier and jurist (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Haystacks Calhoun, American wrestler and actor (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Hans Hartung, French-German painter (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Joan Bennett, American actress (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Jean Paul Lemieux, Canadian painter and educator (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Richard J. Hughes, American politician, 45th Governor of New Jersey, and Chief Justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Abidin Dino, Turkish-French painter and illustrator (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Ivoirian physician and politician, 1st President of Ivory Coast (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Kathleen Harrison, English actress (b. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Billy Bremner, Scottish footballer and manager (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – John Addison, English-American composer and conductor (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Martin Rodbell, American biochemist and endocrinologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Carl F. H. Henry American journalist and theologian (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Azie Taylor Morton, American educator and politician, 36th Treasurer of the United States (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Frederick Fennell, American conductor and educator (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Jerry Scoggins, American singer and guitarist (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Jay Van Andel, American businessman and philanthropist, co-founded Amway (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Bud Carson, American football player and coach (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Jeane Kirkpatrick, American academic and diplomat, 16th United States Ambassador to the United Nations (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Herbert Hutner, American banker and lawyer (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Elizabeth Edwards, American lawyer and author (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Kari Tapio, Finnish singer (b. 1945)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Harry Morgan, American actor (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Roelof Kruisinga, Dutch physician and politician, Dutch Minister of Defence (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Ralph Parr, American colonel and pilot (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Marty Reisman, American table tennis player and author (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Saul Steinberg, American businessman and financier (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Édouard Molinaro, French actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Chick Willis, American singer and guitarist (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Mark Lewis, American author and educator (b. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Jesse C. Deen, American soldier and politician (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Gerhard Lenski, American sociologist and academic (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Hyron Spinrad, American astronomer and academic (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Peter Westbury, English race car driver (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Junaid Jamshed, Pakistani recording artist, television personality, fashion designer, occasional actor, singer-songwriter and preacher. (b. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Greg Lake, English musician (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2019 – Ron Saunders, English football player and manager (b.1932)\nBULLET::::- Armed Forces Flag Day (India)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Aemilianus (Greek Church)\nBULLET::::- Ambrose\nBULLET::::- Maria Giuseppa Rossello\nBULLET::::- Sabinus of Spoleto\nBULLET::::- December 7 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Eve of the Immaculate Conception-related observances:\nBULLET::::- Day of the Little Candles, begins after sunset (Colombia)\nBULLET::::- Flag Base Day (Scientology)\nBULLET::::- International Civil Aviation Day\nBULLET::::- National Heroes Day (East Timor)\nBULLET::::- National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- Spitak Remembrance Day (Armenia)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "8145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8145", "title": "December 15", "text": "December 15\n\nBULLET::::- 533 – Vandalic War: Byzantine general Belisarius defeats the Vandals, commanded by King Gelimer, at the Battle of Tricamarum.\nBULLET::::- 687 – Pope Sergius I is elected.\nBULLET::::- 1025 – Constantine VIII becomes sole emperor of the Byzantine Empire, 63 years after being crowned co-emperor.\nBULLET::::- 1161 – Jin–Song wars: Military officers conspire against the emperor Wanyan Liang of the Jin dynasty after a military defeat at the Battle of Caishi, and assassinate the emperor at his camp.\nBULLET::::- 1167 – Sicilian Chancellor Stephen du Perche moves the royal court to Messina to prevent a rebellion.\nBULLET::::- 1256 – Mongol forces under the command of Hulagu Khan enter and destroy the Hashshashin stronghold at Alamut Castle (in present-day Iran) as part of their offensive on Islamic southwest Asia.\nBULLET::::- 1467 – Stephen III of Moldavia defeats Matthias Corvinus of Hungary, with the latter being injured thrice, at the Battle of Baia.\nBULLET::::- 1651 – Castle Cornet in Guernsey, the last stronghold which had supported the King in the Third English Civil War, surrenders.\nBULLET::::- 1778 – American Revolutionary War: British and French fleets clash in the Battle of St. Lucia.\nBULLET::::- 1791 – The United States Bill of Rights becomes law when ratified by the Virginia General Assembly.\nBULLET::::- 1864 – American Civil War: Battle of Nashville: The Union's Army of the Cumberland routs and destroys the Confederacy's Army of Tennessee, ending its effectiveness as a combat unit.\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Hunkpapa Lakota leader Sitting Bull is killed on Standing Rock Indian Reservation, leading to the Wounded Knee Massacre.\nBULLET::::- 1905 – The Pushkin House is established in Saint Petersburg, Russia, to preserve the cultural heritage of Alexander Pushkin.\nBULLET::::- 1906 – The London Underground's Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway opens.\nBULLET::::- 1914 – World War I: The Serbian Army recaptures Belgrade from the invading Austro-Hungarian Army.\nBULLET::::- 1914 – A gas explosion at Mitsubishi Hōjō coal mine, in Kyushu, Japan, kills 687.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – World War I: An armistice between Russia and the Central Powers is signed.\nBULLET::::- 1933 – The Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution officially becomes effective, repealing the Eighteenth Amendment that prohibited the sale, manufacture, and transportation of alcohol.\nBULLET::::- 1939 – \"Gone with the Wind\" (highest inflation adjusted grossing film) receives its premiere at Loew's Grand Theatre in Atlanta, Georgia, United States.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – The Holocaust in Ukraine: German troops murder over 15,000 Jews at Drobytsky Yar, a ravine southeast of the city of Kharkiv.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: The Battle of Mount Austen, the Galloping Horse, and the Sea Horse begins during the Guadalcanal Campaign.\nBULLET::::- 1943 – World War II: The Battle of Arawe begins during the New Britain campaign.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – World War II: a single-engine UC-64A Norseman aeroplane carrying United States Army Air Forces Major Glenn Miller is lost in a flight over the English Channel.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Occupation of Japan/Shinto Directive: General Douglas MacArthur orders that Shinto be abolished as the state religion of Japan.\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Richard Pavlick is arrested for plotting to assassinate U.S. President-Elect John F. Kennedy.\nBULLET::::- 1960 – King Mahendra of Nepal suspends the country's constitution, dissolves parliament, dismisses the cabinet, and imposes direct rule.\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Adolf Eichmann is sentenced to death after being found guilty by an Israeli court of 15 criminal charges, including charges of crimes against humanity, crimes against the Jewish people, and membership of an outlawed organization.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Project Gemini: \"Gemini 6A\", crewed by Wally Schirra and Thomas Stafford, is launched from Cape Kennedy, Florida. Four orbits later, it achieves the first space rendezvous, with \"Gemini 7\".\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Soviet spacecraft \"Venera 7\" successfully lands on Venus. It is the first successful soft landing on another planet.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – John Paul Getty III, grandson of American billionaire J. Paul Getty, is found alive near Naples, Italy, after being kidnapped by an Italian gang on July 10.\nBULLET::::- 1973 – The American Psychiatric Association votes 13–0 to remove homosexuality from its official list of psychiatric disorders, the DSM-II.\nBULLET::::- 1978 – U.S. President Jimmy Carter announces that the United States will recognize the People's Republic of China and sever diplomatic relations with Taiwan.\nBULLET::::- 1981 – A suicide car bombing targeting the Iraqi embassy in Beirut, Lebanon, levels the embassy and kills 61 people, including Iraq's ambassador to Lebanon. The attack is considered the first modern suicide bombing.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights relating the abolition of capital punishment is adopted.\nBULLET::::- 1993 – The Troubles: The Downing Street Declaration is issued by British Prime Minister John Major and Irish Taoiseach Albert Reynolds.\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Tajikistan Airlines Flight 3183 crashes in the desert near Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, killing 85.\nBULLET::::- 2000 – The third reactor at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant is shut down.\nBULLET::::- 2001 – The Leaning Tower of Pisa reopens after 11 years and $27,000,000 spent to stabilize it, without fixing its famous lean.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Introduction of the Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor into USAF active service.\nBULLET::::- 2010 – A boat carrying 90 asylum seekers crashes into rocks off the coast of Christmas Island, Australia, killing 48 people.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – The South Sudanese Civil War begins when opposition leaders Dr. Riek Machar, Pagan Amum and Rebecca Nyandeng vote to boycott the meeting of the National Liberation Council at Nyakuron.\nBULLET::::- 2014 – A gunman takes 18 hostages inside a café in Martin Place for 16 hours in Sydney. Monis and two hostages are killed when police raid the café the following morning.\nBULLET::::- 2017 – A 6.5earthquake strikes the Indonesian island of Java in the city of Tasikmalaya, resulting in four deaths.\n\nBULLET::::- AD 37 – Nero, Roman emperor (d. 68)\nBULLET::::- 130 – Lucius Verus, Roman emperor (d. 169)\nBULLET::::- 1242 – Prince Munetaka, Japanese shōgun (d. 1274)\nBULLET::::- 1447 – Albert IV, Duke of Bavaria (d. 1508)\nBULLET::::- 1567 – Christoph Demantius, German composer, poet, and theorist (d. 1643)\nBULLET::::- 1610 – David Teniers the Younger, Flemish painter (d. 1690)\nBULLET::::- 1657 – Michel Richard Delalande, French organist and composer (d. 1726)\nBULLET::::- 1686 – Jean-Joseph Fiocco, Flemish violinist and composer (d. 1746)\nBULLET::::- 1710 – Francesco Zahra, Maltese painter (d. 1773)\nBULLET::::- 1789 – Carlos Soublette, Venezuelan general and politician, 11th President of Venezuela (d. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1832 – Gustave Eiffel, French architect and engineer, co-designed the Eiffel Tower (d. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1837 – E. W. Bullinger, English minister, scholar, and theologian (d. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1852 – Henri Becquerel, French physicist and chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1859 – L. L. Zamenhof, Polish linguist and ophthalmologist, created Esperanto (d. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1860 – Niels Ryberg Finsen, Faroese-Danish physician and educator, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1860 – Abner Powell, American baseball player and manager (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Charles Duryea, American engineer and businessman, co-founded the Duryea Motor Wagon Company (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1861 – Pehr Evind Svinhufvud, Finnish lawyer, judge, and politician, 3rd President of Finland (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Arthur Dehon Little, American chemist and engineer (d. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Leon Marchlewski, Polish chemist and academic (d. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – Emilio Jacinto, Filipino journalist and activist (d. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Hans Carossa, German author and poet (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1885 – Leonid Pitamic, Slovenian lawyer, philosopher, and academic (d. 1971)\nBULLET::::- 1886 – Wanda Krahelska-Filipowicz, Polish politician and resistance fighter (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Maxwell Anderson, American journalist and playwright (d. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Harry Babcock, American pole vaulter (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1891 – A.P. Carter, American country singer-songwriter and musician (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – J. Paul Getty, American-English businessman and art collector, founded Getty Oil (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Vibert Douglas, Canadian astrophysicist and astronomer (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – Josef Imbach, Swiss sprinter (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Betty Smith, American author and playwright (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Harold Abrahams, English sprinter, lawyer, and journalist (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1902 – Robert F. Bradford, American lawyer and politician, 57th Governor of Massachusetts (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Tamanishiki San'emon, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 32nd Yokozuna (d. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Gordon Douglas, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Oscar Niemeyer, Brazilian architect, designed the United Nations Headquarters and the Cathedral of Brasília (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Swami Ranganathananda, Indian monk, scholar, and author (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Sattar Bahlulzade, Azerbaijani-Russian painter (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Eliza Atkins Gleason, African American librarian (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – John Hammond, American record producer and critic (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Nicholas P. Dallis, American psychiatrist and illustrator (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Stan Kenton, American pianist and composer (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Roger Gaudry, Canadian chemist and businessman (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Muriel Rukeyser, American poet, academic, and activist (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Miguel Arraes, Brazilian lawyer and politician, Governor of Pernambuco (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Buddy Cole, American pianist and conductor (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Maurice Wilkins, New Zealand-English physicist and biologist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Shan-ul-Haq Haqqee, Indian-Pakistani linguist and lexicographer (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Jeff Chandler, American actor (d. 1961)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Chihiro Iwasaki, Japanese painter and illustrator (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Max Yasgur, American dairy farmer and host of the Woodstock Music & Art Fair (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Gamal al-Banna, Egyptian author and scholar (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Kurt Schaffenberger, German-American sergeant and illustrator (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Alan Freed, American radio host (d. 1965)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Pierre Cossette, American producer and manager (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Freeman Dyson, English-American physicist and mathematician\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Uziel Gal, German-Israeli engineer, designed the Uzi gun (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Valentin Varennikov, Russian general and politician (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Frank W. J. Olver, English-American mathematician and academic (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ruhi Sarıalp, Turkish triple jumper and educator (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Kasey Rogers, American actress and author (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Ernest Ashworth, American singer-songwriter (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Ida Haendel, Polish-English violinist and educator\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Friedensreich Hundertwasser, Austrian-New Zealand painter and architect (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Edna O'Brien, Irish novelist, playwright, poet and short story writer\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Klaus Rifbjerg, Danish author and poet (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Jesse Belvin, American singer-songwriter and pianist (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – John Meurig Thomas, Welsh chemist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Bapu, Indian director and screenwriter (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Tim Conway, American comedian, actor, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Donald Woods, South African journalist and activist (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Joe D'Amato, Italian director and producer (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Michael Bogdanov, Welsh director and screenwriter (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Bob Foster, American boxer and police officer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Billy Shaw, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Cindy Birdsong, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Nick Buoniconti, American football player and sportscaster (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Kathleen Blanco, American educator and politician, 54th Governor of Louisiana (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Dave Clark, English drummer, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Lucien den Arend, Dutch sculptor\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Jim Leyland, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Chico Mendes, Brazilian trade union leader and activist (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Heather Booth, American civil rights activist, feminist, and political strategist\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Ivor Crewe, English political scientist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Carmine Appice, American drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Art Howe, American baseball player and manager\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Cassandra Harris, Australian actress (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Don Johnson, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Brian Roper, English economist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Melanie Chartoff, American actress and comedian\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Sylvester James Gates, American theoretical physicist and professor\nBULLET::::- 1951 – George Donikian, Australian journalist\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Joe Jordan, Scottish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Tim Webster, Australian journalist and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Rudi Protrudi, American singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Allan Simonsen, Danish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Julie Taymor, American director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1953 – John R. Allen, American general and diplomat\nBULLET::::- 1953 – J. M. DeMatteis, American author\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Robert Charles Wilson, American-Canadian author\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Alex Cox, English film director, screenwriter, nonfiction author, broadcaster and sometime actor\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Oliver Heald, English lawyer and politician, Solicitor General for England and Wales\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Mark Warner, American businessman and politician, 69th Governor of Virginia\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Hector Sants, English banker\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Paul Simonon, English singer-songwriter and bass player\nBULLET::::- 1956 – John Lee Hancock, American screenwriter, film director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Tony Leon, South African lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Mario Marois, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Mike McAlary, American journalist and author (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Laura Molina, American singer, guitarist, actress, and painter\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Tim Reynolds, German-American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Carlo J. Caparas, Filipino director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Richard Kastle, American classical pianist\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Greg Matthews, Australian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Alan Whetton, New Zealand rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Gary Whetton, New Zealand rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Walter Werzowa, Austrian composer and producer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Karin Resetarits, Austrian journalist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Tim Gaines, American bass player\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Simon Hodgkinson, English rugby player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Ellie Cornell, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Norman J. Grossfeld, American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Helen Slater, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1963 – David Wingate, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Paul Kaye, British actor\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Carl Hooper, Guyanese cricketer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Molly Price, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1967 – David Howells, English footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Mo Vaughn, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Garrett Wang, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Ralph Ineson, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Chantal Petitclerc, Canadian wheelchair racer and senator\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Adam Setliff, American discus thrower and lawyer\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Frankie Dettori, Italian jockey\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Lawrence Funderburke, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Michael Shanks, Canadian actor, screenwriter and director\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Clint Lowery, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Rodney Harrison, American football player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Stuart Townsend, Irish actor\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Alexandra Tydings, American actress, director, writer and producer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Surya Bonaly, French figure skater\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Ryoo Seung-wan, South Korean actor, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Garath Archer, English rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1974 – P. J. Byrne American actor\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Samira Saraya, Palestinian actor, filmmaker, poet and rapper\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Baichung Bhutia, Indian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Aaron Miles, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Todd Tichenor, American baseball player and umpire\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Mehmet Aurélio, Brazilian-Turkish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Geoff Stults, American actor and producer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Ned Brower, American drummer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Mark Jansen, Dutch guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Jerome McDougle, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Adam Brody, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Eric Young, Canadian-American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Élodie Gossuin, French beauty pageant titleholder, model,\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Sergio Pizzorno, English singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Manuel Wilhelm, German rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Michelle Dockery, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Brendan Fletcher, Canadian actor and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Andy González, Puerto Rican-American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Thomas Herrion, American football player (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Roman Pavlyuchenko, Russian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Charlie Cox, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Borja García, Spanish race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Tatiana Perebiynis, Ukrainian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Delon Armitage, Trinidadian-English rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – René Duprée, Canadian professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Camilla Luddington, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Ronnie Radke, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Martyn Bernard, English high jumper\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Diogo Fernandes, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Kim Junsu, South Korean singer-songwriter and dancer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Iveta Mazáčová, Czech sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Keylor Navas, Costa Rican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Josh Norman, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Snejana Onopka, Ukrainian model\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Emily Head, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Steven Nzonzi, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Nichole Bloom, American actress and model\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Conor Daly, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Daiamami Genki, Japanese sumo wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Jesse Lingard, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Jenifer Brening, German singer\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Oleksandr Zinchenko, Ukrainian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Maude Apatow, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Zach Banks, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Magdalena Fręch, Polish tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Stefania LaVie Owen, New Zealand-American actress\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Chandler Canterbury, American actor\nBULLET::::- 933 – Li Siyuan, Chinese emperor (b. 867)\nBULLET::::- 1025 – Basil II, Byzantine emperor (b. 958)\nBULLET::::- 1072 – Alp Arslan, Turkish sultan (b. 1029)\nBULLET::::- 1161 – Wanyan Liang, Chinese emperor (b. 1122)\nBULLET::::- 1230 – Ottokar I, duke of Bohemia (b. 1155)\nBULLET::::- 1283 – Philip I, Latin emperor (b. 1243)\nBULLET::::- 1343 – Hasan Kucek, Chopanid prince (b. c. 1319)\nBULLET::::- 1467 – Jöns Bengtsson Oxenstierna, archbishop and regent of Sweden (b. 1417)\nBULLET::::- 1574 – Selim II, Ottoman sultan (b. 1524)\nBULLET::::- 1598 – Philips of Marnix, Lord of Saint-Aldegonde, Dutch nobleman (b. 1540)\nBULLET::::- 1621 – Charles d'Albert, duc de Luynes, French courtier, Constable of France (b. 1578)\nBULLET::::- 1673 – Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, English noblewoman (b. 1623)\nBULLET::::- 1675 – Johannes Vermeer, Dutch painter and educator (b. 1632)\nBULLET::::- 1683 – Izaak Walton, English author (b. 1593)\nBULLET::::- 1688 – Gaspar Fagel, Dutch lawyer and politician (b. 1634)\nBULLET::::- 1688 – Louis Victor de Rochechouart de Mortemart, French nobleman (b. 1636)\nBULLET::::- 1715 – George Hickes, English minister and scholar (b. 1642)\nBULLET::::- 1753 – Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington, English architect and politician, designed Chiswick House (b. 1694)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Joseph Martin Kraus, Swedish pianist, violinist, and composer (b. 1756)\nBULLET::::- 1812 – Shneur Zalman, Russian rabbi, author and founder of Chabad (b. 1745)\nBULLET::::- 1819 – Daniel Rutherford, Scottish chemist and physician (b. 1749)\nBULLET::::- 1855 – Jacques Charles François Sturm, French mathematician and academic (b. 1803)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – Alfred Bird, English chemist and businessman, invented baking powder (b. 1811)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Sitting Bull, Hunkpapa Lakota tribal chief (b. 1831)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Fats Waller, American singer-songwriter and pianist (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Glenn Miller, American bandleader and composer (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Arthur Machen, Welsh journalist and author (b. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Crawford Vaughan, Australian politician, 27th Premier of South Australia (b. 1874)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Vallabhbhai Patel, Indian lawyer and politician, 1st Deputy Prime Minister of India (b. 1875)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Wolfgang Pauli, Austrian-Swiss physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Charles Laughton, English-American actor, director, and producer (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – M. Balasundaram, Sri Lankan journalist, lawyer, and politician (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Keith Arbuthnott, 15th Viscount of Arbuthnott, Indian-Scottish general and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Kincardineshire (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Walt Disney, American animator, director, producer, and screenwriter, co-founded The Walt Disney Company (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Antonio Barrette, Canadian politician, 18th Premier of Quebec (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Jess Willard, American boxer and actor (b. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Karl Theodor Bleek, German lawyer and politician, 12th Mayor of Marburg (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Paul Lévy, French mathematician and theorist (b. 1886)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Anatole Litvak, Russian-American director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Wilfred Kitching, English 7th General of The Salvation Army (b. 1893)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Chill Wills, American actor (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Jan Peerce, American tenor and actor (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, Mauritian physician and politician, 1st Prime Minister of Mauritius (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Serge Lifar, Russian-French ballet dancer and choreographer\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Edward Underdown, English actor and jockey (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Vasily Zaytsev, Russian captain (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – William Dale Phillips, American chemist and engineer (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Haris Brkić, Bosnian-Serbian basketball player (b. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Vincent Apap, Maltese sculptor (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – George Fisher, American cartoonist (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Keith Magnuson, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Vassal Gadoengin, Nauruan educator and politician, Speaker of the Nauru Parliament (b. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Heinrich Gross, Austrian physician and psychiatrist (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Stan Leonard, Canadian golfer (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – William Proxmire, American soldier, journalist, and politician (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Darrell Russell, American football player (b. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Clay Regazzoni, Swiss race car driver (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Mary Stolz, American journalist and author (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Julia Carson, American lawyer and politician (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – León Febres Cordero, Ecuadorian engineer and politician, 46th President of Ecuador (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Eliza Atkins Gleason, African American librarian (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Oral Roberts, American evangelist, founded the Oral Roberts Evangelistic Association (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Blake Edwards, American director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Bob Feller, American baseball player and sportscaster (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Eugene Victor Wolfenstein, American psychoanalyst and theorist (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Bob Brookmeyer, American trombone player and composer (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Christopher Hitchens, English-American essayist, literary critic, and journalist (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Owoye Andrew Azazi, Nigerian general (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Patrick Ibrahim Yakowa, Nigerian politician, 18th Governor of Kaduna State (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Olga Zubarry, Argentinian actress (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Harold Camping, American evangelist, author, radio host (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Joan Fontaine, British-American actress (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Dyron Nix, American basketball player (b. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Donald Metcalf, Australian physiologist and immunologist (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Fausto Zapata, Mexican journalist, lawyer, and politician, Governor of San Luis Potosí (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Harry Zvi Tabor, English-Israeli physicist and engineer (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Craig Sager, American sports journalist (b. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Heinz Wolff, scientist and TV presenter (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Calestous Juma, academic (b. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Eryue He, Chinese historical fiction writer (b.1945)\nBULLET::::- 2018 – Girma Wolde-Giorgis, President of Ethiopia (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- Bill of Rights Day (United States)\nBULLET::::- 2nd Amendment Day (South Carolina)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Drina Martyrs\nBULLET::::- Drostan (Aberdeen Breviary)\nBULLET::::- John Horden and Robert McDonald (Episcopal Church (USA))\nBULLET::::- Maria Crocifissa di Rosa\nBULLET::::- Mesmin\nBULLET::::- Valerian of Abbenza\nBULLET::::- Virginia Centurione Bracelli\nBULLET::::- December 15 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Homecoming Day (Alderney)\nBULLET::::- International Tea Day\nBULLET::::- Kingdom Day (Netherlands), moves to December 16 if the 15th is on a Sunday\nBULLET::::- Zamenhof Day (International Esperanto Community)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\n\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "8148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8148", "title": "Diogo Cão", "text": "Diogo Cão\n\nDiogo Cão (), anglicised as Diogo Cam and also known as Diego Cam, was a Portuguese explorer and one of the most notable navigators of the Age of Discovery. He made two voyages sailing along the west coast of Africa in the 1480s, exploring the Congo River and the coasts of the present-day Angola and Namibia.\n\nCão was born in Vila Real (some say in Évora), in the middle of the 15th century, the illegitimate son of Álvaro Fernandes or Gonçalves Cão, fidalgo of the Royal Household, himself the illegitimate son of Gonçalo Cão. He married and had four children: Pedro Cão, Manuel Cão, André Afonso Cão, and Isabel Cão.\n\nHis Christian name was Jacobus. \"Cão\" was a nickname meaning \"dog\", which means his nickname translated to \"Diego the dog\".\n\nHe was the first European known to sight and enter the Congo River and to explore the West African coast between Cape St. Catherine in Gabon and Cape Cross, almost from the equator to Walvis Bay in Namibia.\n\nWhen King John II of Portugal restarted the work of Henry the Navigator, he sent out Cão (probably around midsummer 1482) to explore the African coast south of the equator. Diogo Cão filled his ship with stone pillars surmounted by the cross of the Order of Christ and engraved with the Portuguese royal arms (padrãos), with the plan to erect one in every new place he would discover.\n\nOn his way, he stopped in the newly-built Elmina Castle to stock up. However, the Flemish merchant Eustache de la Fosse recalled encountering Diogo Cão in Elmina in 1480 (and not 1482).\n\nHe discovered the mouth and estuary of the Congo, probably in August 1482 and marked it with a padrão, or stone pillar erected on Shark Point, attesting to the sovereignty of Portugal. This padrão still stands to this day, albeit in ruins.\n\nHe also ascended the great river for a short distance, and commenced modest commerce with the natives of the Bakongo kingdom. He was told that their King lived farther upriver. He sent 4 men to meet the King, kept four natives to serve as ambassadors of Kongo in Portugal, and sailed back down the river to the Atlantic. Cão then coasted down along the present Angola (Portuguese West Africa), and erected a second padrão, probably marking the termination of this voyage, at Cape Saint Mary (the Monte Negro of these first visitors).\n\nThe first padrão erected at the mouth of the Congo River, the S. Jorge, has been taken by an English ship that sunk, according to indigenous rumors (the base is still there). The second one, the St. Agostinho, still stands today, but misses its cross on top.\n\nHe returned to Lisbon by 8 April 1484 (on his return he discovered the Island of Annobón), where John II ennobled him, promoting him from esquire to a knight of his household, and granted him an annuity (10000 reais) and a coat of arms where two padrões are represented. The King also asked him to sail back to Kongo to repatriate the 4 men he left behind.\n\nThat Cão, on his second voyage of 1484–1486, was accompanied by Martin Behaim (as alleged on the latter's Nuremberg globe of 1492) is very doubtful. But it is known that the explorer revisited the Congo and erected two more padrãos on land beyond his previous voyage. The first was at Cabo Negro, Angola, the second at Cape Cross. The Cape Cross pillar probably marked the end of his progress southward, some 1,400 kilometers. Diogo Cão also embarked the 4 indigenous ambassadors, that he had promised not to keep for more than fifteen moons. Other reports state that those ambassadors were not on Cão's ship.\n\nCão ascended the Kongo River (which he thought led towards the realm of Prester John), up to the neighborhood of the site of Matadi. There, in October or November 1485, near the falls of Ielala, he left an inscription engraved on the stone which testifies of its passage and that of his men: \"Aqui chegaram os navios do esclarecido rei D.João II de Portugal - Diogo Cão, Pero Anes, Pero da Costa.\" (\"Here reached the ships of the enlightened king John II of Portugal – Diogo Cão, Pero Anes, Pero da Costa\").\n\nAccording to one authority (a legend on the 1489 map of Henricus Martellus Germanus), Cão died off Cape Cross; but João de Barros and others wrote of his return to the Kongo, and subsequent taking of a native envoy to Portugal. A report by a board of astronomers and pilots presented at a 1525 conference in Badajo clearly stated that his death happened near Serra Parda. A coast map by Henricus Martellus Germanus published in 1489 indicated the location of a padrão erected by Diogo Cão in Ponta dos Farilhões nearby Serra Parda, with the legend \"et hic moritur\" (\"and here he died\"). The Venetian cartographer Pietro Coppo corroborated this location of death in 1520.\n\nThe four pillars set up by Cão on his two voyages have all been discovered still on their original site, and the inscriptions on two of them from Cape Santa Maria and Cape Cross, dated 1482 and 1485 respectively, are still to be read and have been printed. The Cape Cross padrão is now at Berlin (replaced on the spot by a granite facsimile); those from the Kongo estuary and the more southerly Cape Santa Maria and Cabo Negro are in the Museum of the Lisbon Geographical Society.\n\nIn Vila Real, the plaza Diogo Cão was named after him. In the center of the plaza stands a bronze statue of him supported by a square granite pedestal base.\n\nIn 1999, André Roubertou from the French Hydrographic Office (SHOM) named an undersea hole located off the southern coast of Portugal (Gulf of Cádiz) the Diogo Cão Hole.\n\nIn 2018, a hopper dredger called the Diogo Cao and immatriculated in Luxembourg was launched afloat.\n\nDiogo Cão is the subject of \"Padrão\", one of the best-known poems in Fernando Pessoa's book \"Mensagem\", the only one published during the author's lifetime. He also figures strongly in the 1996 novel \"Lord of the Kongo\" by Peter Forbath.\n\nBULLET::::- Barros, João de. \"Décadas da Ásia\", Década I. bk. III., esp. ch. 3;\nBULLET::::- Ruy de Pina, \"Chronica d'el Rei D. João II.\";\nBULLET::::- Garcia de Resende, \"Chronica\";\nBULLET::::- Luciano Cordeiro, \"Diogo Cão\" in \"Boletim da Sociedade de Geografia de Lisboa\", 1892;\nBULLET::::- E; G. Ravenstein, \"Voyages of Diogo Cão, &c.\", in \"Geog. Jnl.\" vol. xvi. (1900), also \"Geog. Jnl.\" xxxi. (1908).\nBULLET::::- António da Costa de Albuquerque de Sousa Lara, 2nd Count de Guedes, Vasco de Bettencourt de Faria Machado e Sampaio and Marcelo Olavo Correia de Azevedo, \"Ascendências Reais de Sua Alteza Real a Senhora Dona Isabel de Herédia Duquesa de Bragança\", I, \"pelos Costados Herédia, Bettencourt e Meneses da Ilha da Madeira\"\" (Universitária Editora, 1999)\n\nBULLET::::- Portugal in the period of discoveries\n\nBULLET::::- Diogo Cão\nBULLET::::- (pt) Os descobrimentos portugueses: Diogo Cão e Bartolomeu Dias\n"}
{"id": "8162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8162", "title": "Drinking game", "text": "Drinking game\n\nDrinking games are games which involve the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Evidence of the existence of drinking games dates back to antiquity. Drinking games have been banned at some institutions, particularly colleges and universities.\n\nKottabos is one of the earliest known drinking games from ancient Greece, dated to the 5th to 4th centuries BC. Players would use dregs (remnants of what was left in their cup) to hit targets across the room with their wine. Often, there were special prizes and penalties for one's performance in the game.\n\nDrinking games were enjoyed in ancient China, usually incorporating the use of dice or verbal exchange of riddles. During the Tang Dynasty (618-907), the Chinese used a silver canister where written lots could be drawn that designated which player had to drink and specifically how much; for example, from 1, 5, 7, or 10 measures of drink that the youngest player, or the last player to join the game, or the most talkative player, or the host, or the player with the greatest alcohol tolerance, etc. had to drink. There were even drinking game referee officials, including a 'registrar of the rules' who knew all the rules to the game, a 'registrar of the horn' who tossed a silver flag down on calling out second offenses, and a 'governor' who decided one's third call of offense. These referees were used mainly for maintaining order (as drinking games often became rowdy) and for reviewing faults that could be punished with a player drinking a penalty cup. If a guest was considered a 'coward' for dropping out of the game, he could be branded as a 'deserter' and not invited back to further drinking bouts. There was another game where little puppets and dolls dressed as western foreigners with blue eyes (Iranian peoples) were set up and when one fell over, the person it pointed to had to empty his cup of wine.\n\nDrinking games in 19th century Germany included Bierskat, Elfern, Rammes and Quodlibet, as well as \"Schlauch\" and \"Laubober\" which may well be the same game as Grasobern. But the \"crown of all drinking games\" was one with an ancient and distinctive name: Cerevis. One feature of the game was that everything went under a different name from normal. So the cards (\"Karten\") were called 'spoons' (\"Löffel\"), the Sevens were 'Septembers' and the Aces were the 'Juveniles' (\"junge Leichtsinn\"). A player who used the normal names was penalised. Everytime a card was played, it was supposed to be accompanied by humorous words, so if a Jack or Unter was played, the player might say something like \"my merry \"Unterkasser\"\" (\"Lustig mein Unterkasser\") or \"long live my \"Unterkasser\"\" (\"Vivat mein Unterkasser\"). If his opponent beat it, he might say \"hang the \"Unterkasser\"\" (\"Hängt den Unterkasser\"). The loser had to chalk up a figure such as a swallow, a wheel or a pair of scissors depending on the number of minus points gained and was only allowed to erase them once he had drunk the associated amount of beer.\n\nThe simplest drinking games are endurance games in which players compete to out-drink one another. Players take turns taking shots, and the last person standing is the winner. Some games have rules involving the \"cascade\", \"fountain\" or \"waterfall\", which encourages each player to drink constantly from their cup so long as the player before him does not stop drinking. Such games can also favor speed over quantity, in which players race to drink a case of beer the fastest. Often drinking large amounts will be combined with a stylistic element or an abnormal method of drinking, as with the boot of beer, yard of ale or a keg stand.\n\nTolerance games are simply about seeing which player can last the longest. It can be as simple as two people matching each other drink for drink until one of the participants \"passes out\". Power hour and its variant, centurion, fall under this category.\n\nMany pub or bar games involve competitive drinking for speed. Examples of such drinking games are Edward Fortyhands, boat races, beer bonging, shotgunning, flippy cup (a team-based speed game), and yard. Some say that the most important skill to improving speed is to relax and take fewer but larger gulps. There are a variety of individual tactics to accomplishing this, such as bending the knees in anticipation, or when drinking from a plastic cup, squeezing the sides of the cup to form a more perfect funnel.\n\nAthletic races involving alcohol including the beer mile, which consists of a mile run with a can of beer consumed before each of the four laps. A variant is known in German speaking countries as \"Bierkastenlauf\" (beer crate running) where a team of two carries a crate of beer along a route of several kilometers and must consume all of the bottles prior to crossing the finish line.\n\nSome party and pub games focus on the performance of a particular act of skill, rather than on either the amount a participant drinks or the speed with which they do so. Examples include beer pong, quarters, chandeliers (also known as gaucho ball, rage cage, stack cup), caps, polish horseshoes, pong, and beer darts.\n\nPub Golf involves orienteering and pub crawling together.\n\nA unique drinking game is made in the tavern Oepfelchammer in Zürich, Switzerland. It is called \"Balkenprobe\" and one has therefore to climb up a beam at the ceiling and move to another beam and then to drink a glass of wine with the head hanging down.\n\nThinking games rely on the players' powers of observation, recollection, logic and articulation.\n\nNumerous types of thinking games exist, including Think or Drink, 21, beer checkers, bizz buzz, buffalo, saved by the bell, bullshit, tourettes, matchboxes, never have I ever, roman numerals, fuzzy duck, pennying, wine games, and Zoom Schwartz Profigliano. Trivia games, such as Trivial Pursuit, are sometimes played as drinking games.\n\nDrinking games involving cards are president, horserace, Kings, liar's poker, pyramid, Ring of Fire, Toepen, ride the bus and Black or Red.\n\nDice games include beer die, dudo, kinito, liar's dice, Mexico, mia, 15, pounce!, ship, captain, and crew, and three man.\n\nMovie drinking games are played while watching a movie (sometimes a TV show or a sporting event) and have a set of rules for who drinks when and how much based on on-screen events and dialogue. The rules may be the same for all players, or alternatively players may each be assigned rules related to particular characters. The rules are designed so that rarer events require larger drinks. Rule sets for such games are usually arbitrary and local, although they are sometimes published by fan clubs.\n\nIn reference to film, a popular game among young adults consists of printing out a mustache and taping it on the television screen. Every time the mustache fits appropriately to a person on the screen, one must drink the designated amount.\n\nLive drinking games such as Los Angeles-based \"A Drinking Game\" involve recreating films of the 80s in a \"Rocky Horror\" fashion, with gift bags, drinking cues, and costumed actors. A suggestion to \"do six shots for SEAL Team 6\" following every mention of Osama bin Laden at the 2012 Democratic National Convention necessitated a prominent disclaimer on the satire site that posted it, as the quantity of alcohol ingested would probably have been lethal.\n\n\"Datsyuk Game\" involves a Datsyuk highlight reel being played and contestants drink every time the word \"Datsyuk\" is mentioned. The ceremonial playing of the Russian national anthem before the game is another tradition.\n\nMusic can also be used as a basis for drinking games. The song \"Thunderstruck\" by AC/DC is used in which a player begins drinking when the word thunder is sung and switches to the next player the next time it is sung.\n\nSport related drinking games involve the participants each selecting a scenario of the game resulting in their drink being downed. Examples of this include participants each picking a footballer in a game while other versions require multiple players to be selected. Should a player score or be sent off, a drink must be taken. Another version requires a drink for every touch a player takes of the ball.\n\nSome drinking games can fall into multiple categories such as a Power hour which is a primarily an endurance-based game, but can also incorporate the arts if players are prompted to drink by a playlist that changes songs every 60 seconds. Similarly, Flip cup combines the skill of flipping cups with the speed of drinking quickly prior to flipping.\n\nMany drinking game apps have been launched on mobile devices, Android, iOS, and Windows Phone.\n\nBULLET::::- Binge drinking\nBULLET::::- Pregaming\nBULLET::::- List of drinking games\nBULLET::::- List of public house topics\nBULLET::::- \"Beerfest\"\n\nBULLET::::- _ (1862). \"Lese-Stübchen: Illustrirte Unterhaltungs-Blätter für Familie und Haus\", Vol. 3. Brünn.\nBULLET::::- Haupt, Richard (1877). \"Neues Bücher-Lexicon\", Part 13 A-K. Weigel, Leipzig.\n"}
{"id": "8166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8166", "title": "Devon", "text": "Devon\n\nDevon (), also known as Devonshire, is a county of England, reaching from the Bristol Channel in the north to the English Channel in the south. It is part of South West England, bounded by Cornwall to the west, Somerset to the north east, and Dorset to the east. The city of Exeter is the county town. The county includes the districts of East Devon, Mid Devon, North Devon, South Hams, Teignbridge, Torridge, and West Devon. Plymouth and Torbay are each geographically part of Devon, but are administered as unitary authorities. Combined as a ceremonial county, Devon's area is and its population is about 1.1 million.\n\nDevon derives its name from Dumnonia. During the British Iron Age, Roman Britain, and the early Middle Ages, this was the homeland of the Dumnonii Brittonic Celts. (The shift from \"M\" to \"V\" is a typical Celtic consonant shift.) The Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain resulted in the partial assimilation of Dumnonia into the Kingdom of Wessex during the eighth and ninth centuries. The western boundary with Cornwall was set at the River Tamar by King Æthelstan in 936. Devon was later constituted as a shire of the Kingdom of England.\n\nThe north and south coasts of Devon each have both cliffs and sandy shores, and the county's bays contain seaside resorts, fishing towns, and ports. The inland terrain is rural and generally hilly, and has a lower population density than many other parts of England. Dartmoor is the largest open space in southern England, at ; its moorland extends across a large expanse of granite bedrock. To the north of Dartmoor are the Culm Measures and Exmoor. In the valleys and lowlands of south and east Devon the soil is more fertile, drained by rivers including the Exe, the Culm, the Teign, the Dart, and the Otter.\n\nAs well as agriculture, much of the economy of Devon is based on tourism. The comparatively mild climate, coastline and landscape make Devon a destination for recreation and leisure in England, with visitors particularly attracted to the Dartmoor and Exmoor national parks; its coasts, including the resort towns along the south coast known collectively as the English Riviera; the Jurassic Coast, and North Devon's UNESCO Biosphere Reserve; and the countryside including the Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape.\n\nThe name \"Devon\" derives from the name of the Britons who inhabited the southwestern peninsula of Britain at the time of the Roman conquest of Britain known as the Dumnonii, thought to mean \"deep valley dwellers\" from proto Celtic \"*dubnos\" 'deep'. In the Brittonic, Devon is known as , and , each meaning \"deep valleys.\" (For an account of Celtic \"Dumnonia\", see the separate article.) Among the most common Devon placenames is \"-combe\" which derives from Brittonic \"cwm\" meaning 'valley' usually prefixed by the name of the possessor.\n\nWilliam Camden, in his 1607 edition of \"Britannia\", described Devon as being one part of an older, wider country that once included Cornwall:\nThe term \"Devon\" is normally used for everyday purposes e.g. \"Devon County Council\" but \"Devonshire\" continues to be used in the names of the \"Devonshire and Dorset Regiment\" (until 2007) and \"The Devonshire Association\". One erroneous theory is that the \"shire\" suffix is due to a mistake in the making of the original letters patent for the Duke of Devonshire, resident in Derbyshire. However, there are references to \"Defenascire\" in Anglo-Saxon texts from before 1000 AD (this would mean \"Shire of the Devonians\"), which translates to modern English as \"Devonshire\". The term Devonshire may have originated around the 8th century, when it changed from \"Dumnonia\" (Latin) to \"Defenascir\".\n\nKents Cavern in Torquay had produced human remains from 30–40,000 years ago. Dartmoor is thought to have been occupied by Mesolithic hunter-gatherer peoples from about 6000 BC. The Romans held the area under military occupation for around 350 years. Later, the area began to experience Saxon incursions from the east around 600 AD, firstly as small bands of settlers along the coasts of Lyme Bay and southern estuaries and later as more organised bands pushing in from the east. Devon became a frontier between Brittonic and Anglo-Saxon Wessex, and it was largely absorbed into Wessex by the mid 9th century. A genetic study carried out by the University of Oxford & University College London discovered separate genetic groups in Cornwall and Devon, not only were there differences on either side of the Tamar, with a division almost exactly along the modern county boundary dating back to the 6th Century but also between Devon and the rest of Southern England, and similarities with the modern northern France, including Brittany. This suggests the Anglo-Saxon migration into Devon was limited rather than a mass movement of people.\n\nThe border with Cornwall was set by King Æthelstan on the east bank of the River Tamar in 936 AD. Danish raids also occurred sporadically along many coastal parts of Devon between around 800AD and just before the time of the Norman conquest, including the silver mint at \"Hlidaforda\" Lydford in 997 and Taintona (a settlement on the Teign estuary) in 1001.\n\nDevon was the home of a number of anticlerical movements in the Later Middle Ages. For example, the Order of Brothelyngham—a fake monastic order of 1348—regularly rode through Exeter, kidnapping both religious and laymen, and extorting money from them as ransom.\n\nDevon has also featured in most of the civil conflicts in England since the Norman conquest, including the Wars of the Roses, Perkin Warbeck's rising in 1497, the Prayer Book Rebellion of 1549, and the English Civil War. The arrival of William of Orange to launch the Glorious Revolution of 1688 took place at Brixham.\n\nDevon has produced tin, copper and other metals from ancient times. Devon's tin miners enjoyed a substantial degree of independence through Devon's Stannary Convocation, which dates back to the 12th century. The last recorded sitting was in 1748.\n\nLike neighbouring Cornwall to the west, historically Devon has been disadvantaged economically compared to other parts of Southern England, owing to the decline of a number of core industries, notably fishing, mining and farming. Agriculture has been an important industry in Devon since the 19th century. The 2001 UK foot and mouth crisis harmed the farming community severely. Since then some parts of the agricultural industry have begun to diversify and recover, with a strong local food sector and many artisan producers. Nonetheless in 2015 the dairy industry was still suffering from the low prices offered for wholesale milk by major dairies and especially large supermarket chains.\nThe attractive lifestyle of the area is drawing in new industries which are not heavily dependent upon geographical location; Dartmoor, for instance, has recently seen a significant rise in the percentage of its inhabitants involved in the financial services sector. The Met Office, the UK's national and international weather service, moved to Exeter in 2003. Plymouth hosts the head office and first ever store of The Range, the only major national retail chain headquartered in Devon.\n\nSince the rise of seaside resorts with the arrival of the railways in the 19th century, Devon's economy has been heavily reliant on tourism. The county's economy followed the declining trend of British seaside resorts since the mid-20th century, but with some recent revival and regeneration of its resorts, particularly focused around camping; sports such as surfing, cycling, sailing and heritage. This revival has been aided by the designation of much of Devon's countryside and coastline as the Dartmoor and Exmoor national parks, and the Jurassic Coast and Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape World Heritage Sites. In 2004 the county's tourist revenue was £1.2 billion. More successful visitor attractions are particularly concentrated on food and drink, including sea-view restaurants in North-West Devon (such as one example belonging to Damien Hurst), walking the South West Coast Path, cycling on the Devon Coast to Coast cycle route and other cycle routes such as the Tarka Trail and the Stover Trail; watersports; surfing; indoor and outdoor folk music festivals across the county and sailing in the hill-surrounded inlet (ria) at Salcombe.\n\nIncomes vary significantly and the average is bolstered by a high proportion of affluent retired people from across Europe's major cities, particularly from the rest of England. Incomes in much of the South Hams and in villages surrounding Exeter and Plymouth are above the national average. The claimant count of the unemployed and people receiving very low incomes is close to the national average of 4.5% in Torbay, Plymouth and Exeter. Their exurbs and rural villages contribute to low unemployment in the administrative county as shown below.\n\nThe table also shows the population change in the ten years to the 2011 census by subdivision. It also shows the proportion of residents in each district reliant upon lowest income and/or joblessness benefits, the national average proportion of which was 4.5% as at August 2012, the year for which latest datasets have been published. It can be seen that the most populous district of Devon is East Devon but only if excluding Torbay which has marginally more residents and Plymouth which has approximately double the number of residents of either of these. West Devon has the fewest residents, having 63,839 at the time of the census.\n\n+ \"Population from census to census. Claimants of Jobseeker's Allowance (JSA) or Income Support (DWP)\"\n!UnitJSA or Inc. Supp. claimants (August 2012) % of 2011 populationJSA and Income Support claimants (August 2001) % of 2001 populationPopulation (April 2011)Population (April 2001)\ncolspan=\"4\"\"Ranked by district\"\ncolspan=\"4\"\"In historic Devon\"\n\nThe key train operator for Devon is Great Western Railway, which operates numerous regional, local and suburban services, as well as intercity services north to London Paddington and south to Plymouth and Penzance. Other intercity services are operated by CrossCountry north to Manchester Piccadilly, Edinburgh Waverley, Glasgow Central, Dundee, Aberdeen and south to Plymouth and Penzance, and South Western Railway,operating services between London Waterloo and Exeter St Davids via the West of England Main Line. All Devon services are diesel-hauled, since there are no electrified lines in the county.\n\nThere are proposals to reopen the line from Tavistock to Bere Alston for a through service to Plymouth. On the night of 4 February 2014, amid high winds and extremely rough seas, part of the sea wall at Dawlish was breached washing away around of the wall and the ballast under the railway immediately behind. The line was closed. Network Rail began repair work and the line reopened on 4 April 2014. In the wake of widespread disruption caused by damage to the mainline track at Dawlish by coastal storms in February 2014, Network Rail are considering reopening the Tavistock to Okehampton and Exeter section of the line as an alternative to the coastal route. This would connect Cornwall and Plymouth to the rest of the UK railway system on an all weather basis.\n\nDevon County Council has proposed a \"Devon Metro\" scheme to improve rail services in the county and offer a realistic alternative to car travel. This includes the delivery of Cranbrook station, plus four new stations (including Edginswell) as a priority.\n\nExeter Airport is a base for Flybe. Destinations include various locations within the UK (London City, Manchester, Belfast, Edinburgh, etc), as well as locations in Cyprus, Italy, Netherlands, Lapland, Portugal, Spain, France, Malta, Switzerland and Turkey.\n\nDevon straddles a peninsula and so has two separate coastlines, on the Bristol Channel and Celtic Sea in the north, and on the English Channel in the south. The South West Coast Path runs along the entire length of both, around 65% of which is named as Heritage Coast. Before the changes to English counties in 1974, Devon was the third largest county by area and the largest of the counties not divided into county-like divisions (only Yorkshire and Lincolnshire were larger and both were sub-divided into ridings or parts, respectively). Since 1974 the county is ranked fourth by area (due to the creation of Cumbria) amongst ceremonial counties and is the third largest non-metropolitan county. The island of Lundy and the reef of Eddystone are also in Devon. The county has more mileage of road than any other county in England.\n\nInland, the Dartmoor National Park lies wholly in Devon, and the Exmoor National Park lies in both Devon and Somerset. Apart from these areas of high moorland the county has attractive rolling rural scenery and villages with thatched cob cottages. All these features make Devon a popular holiday destination.\n\nIn South Devon the landscape consists of rolling hills dotted with small towns, such as Dartmouth, Ivybridge, Kingsbridge, Salcombe, and Totnes. The towns of Torquay and Paignton are the principal seaside resorts on the south coast. East Devon has the first seaside resort to be developed in the county, Exmouth and the more upmarket Georgian town of Sidmouth, headquarters of the East Devon District Council. Exmouth marks the western end of the Jurassic Coast World Heritage Site. Another notable feature is the coastal railway line between Newton Abbot and the Exe Estuary: the red sandstone cliffs and sea views are very dramatic and in the resorts railway line and beaches are very near.\n\nNorth Devon is very rural with few major towns except Barnstaple, Great Torrington, Bideford and Ilfracombe. Devon's Exmoor coast has the highest cliffs in southern Britain, culminating in the Great Hangman, a \"hog's-back\" hill with an cliff-face, located near Combe Martin Bay. Its sister cliff is the Little Hangman, which marks the western edge of coastal Exmoor. One of the features of the North Devon coast is that Bideford Bay and the Hartland Point peninsula are both west-facing, Atlantic facing coastlines; so that a combination of an off-shore (east) wind and an Atlantic swell produce excellent surfing conditions. The beaches of Bideford Bay (Woolacombe, Saunton, Westward Ho! and Croyde), along with parts of North Cornwall and South Wales, are the main centres of surfing in Britain.\n\nA geological dividing line cuts across Devon roughly along the line of the Bristol to Exeter Line and the M5 motorway east of Tiverton and Exeter. It is a part of the Tees-Exe line broadly dividing Britain into a southeastern lowland zone typified by gently dipping sedimentary rocks and a northwestern upland zone typified by igneous rocks and folded sedimentary and metamorphic rocks.\n\nThe principal geological components of Devon are the Devonian (in north Devon, south west Devon and extending into Cornwall); the Culm Measures (north western Devon also extending into north Cornwall); and the granite intrusion of Dartmoor in central Devon, part of the Cornubian batholith forming the 'spine' of the southwestern peninsula. There are small remains of pre-Devonian rocks on the south Devon coast.\n\nThe oldest rocks which can be dated are those of the Devonian period which are approximately 395–345 million years old. Sandstones and shales were deposited in North and South Devon beneath tropical seas. In shallower waters, limestone beds were laid down in the area now near Torquay and Plymouth.\nThis geological period was named after Devon by Roderick Murchison and Adam Sedgwick in the 1840s and is the only British county whose name is used worldwide as a geological time period.\n\nDevon's second major rock system is the Culm Measures, a geological formation of the Carboniferous period that occurs principally in Devon and Cornwall. The measures are so called either from the occasional presence of a soft, sooty coal, which is known in Devon as \"culm\", or from the contortions commonly found in the beds. This formation stretches from Bideford to Bude in Cornwall, and contributes to a gentler, greener, more rounded landscape. It is also found on the western, north and eastern borders of Dartmoor.\n\nThe sedimentary rocks in more eastern parts of the county include Permian and Triassic sandstones (giving rise to east Devon's well known fertile red soils); Bunter pebble beds around Budleigh Salterton and Woodbury Common and Jurassic rocks in the easternmost parts of Devon. Smaller outcrops of younger rocks also exist, such as Cretaceous chalk cliffs at Beer Head and gravels on Haldon, plus Eocene and Oligocene ball clay and lignite deposits in the Bovey Basin, formed around 50 million years ago under tropical forest conditions.\n\nDevon generally has a cool oceanic climate, heavily influenced by the North Atlantic Drift. In winter snow is relatively uncommon away from high land, although there are exceptions. The county has mild summers with occasional warm spells and cool rainy periods. Winters are generally cool and the county often experiences some of the mildest winters in the world for its high latitude, with average daily maximum temperatures in January at . Rainfall varies significantly across the county, ranging from over on parts of Dartmoor, to around in the rain shadow along the coast in southeastern Devon and around Exeter. Sunshine amounts also vary widely: the moors are generally cloudy, but the SE coast from Salcombe to Exmouth is one of the sunniest parts of the UK (a generally cloudy region). With westerly or southwesterly winds and high pressure the area around Torbay and Teignmouth will often be warm, with long sunny spells due to shelter by high ground (Foehn wind). \n\nThe variety of habitats means that there is a wide range of wildlife (see Dartmoor wildlife, for example). A popular challenge among birders is to find over 100 species in the county in a day. The county's wildlife is protected by several wildlife charities such as the Devon Wildlife Trust, which looks after 40 nature reserves. The Devon Bird Watching and Preservation Society (founded in 1928 and known since 2005 as \"Devon Birds\") is a county bird society dedicated to the study and conservation of wild birds. The RSPB has reserves in the county, and Natural England is responsible for over 200 Devon Sites of Special Scientific Interest and National Nature Reserves, such as Slapton Ley. The Devon Bat Group was founded in 1984 to help conserve bats. Wildlife found in this area extend to a plethora of different kinds of insects, butterflies and moths; an interesting butterfly to take look at is the Chequered skipper.\n\nThe botany of the county is very diverse and includes some rare species not found elsewhere in the British Isles other than Cornwall. Devon is divided into two Watsonian vice-counties: north and south, the boundary being an irregular line approximately across the higher part of Dartmoor and then along the canal eastwards. Botanical reports begin in the 17th century and there is a \"Flora Devoniensis\" by Jones and Kingston in 1829. A general account appeared in \"The Victoria History of the County of Devon\" (1906), and a \"Flora of Devon\" was published in 1939 by Keble Martin and Fraser. An \"Atlas of the Devon Flora\" by Ivimey-Cook appeared in 1984, and \"A New Flora of Devon\", based on field work undertaken between 2005 and 2014, was published in 2016.\n\nRising temperatures have led to Devon becoming the first place in modern Britain to cultivate olives commercially.\n\nThe administrative centre and capital of Devon is the city of Exeter. The largest city in Devon, Plymouth, and the conurbation of Torbay (which includes the largest town in Devon and capital of Torbay, Torquay, as well as Paignton and Brixham) have been unitary authorities since 1998, separate from the remainder of Devon which is administered by Devon County Council for the purposes of local government.\n\nDevon County Council is controlled by the Conservatives, and the political representation of its 62 councillors are: 38 Conservatives, 9 Liberal Democrats, seven Labour, four UKIP, three Independents and one Green.\n\nAt the 2015 general election, Devon returned 11 Conservatives and one Labour MP from its 12 constituencies through first-past-the-post. The county is represented in the wider South West England (European Parliament constituency), which returned two UKIP, two Conservative, one Labour and one Green MEP at the 2014 election using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation.\n\nAt the 2019 general election, Devon returned 10 Conservatives and two Labour MPs to the House of Commons.\n\nBULLET::::- Hundreds\nHistorically Devon was divided into 32 hundreds: Axminster, Bampton, Black Torrington, Braunton, Cliston, Coleridge, Colyton, Crediton, East Budleigh, Ermington, Exminster, Fremington, Halberton, Hartland, Hayridge, Haytor, Hemyock, Lifton, North Tawton and Winkleigh, Ottery, Plympton, Roborough, Shebbear, Shirwell, South Molton, Stanborough, Tavistock, Teignbridge, Tiverton, West Budleigh, Witheridge, and Wonford.\n\nThe main settlements in Devon are the cities of Plymouth, a historic port now administratively independent, Exeter, the county town, and Torbay, the county's tourist centre. Devon's coast is lined with tourist resorts, many of which grew rapidly with the arrival of the railways in the 19th century. Examples include Dawlish, Exmouth and Sidmouth on the south coast, and Ilfracombe and Lynmouth on the north. The Torbay conurbation of Torquay, Paignton and Brixham on the south coast is now administratively independent of the county. Rural market towns in the county include Barnstaple, Bideford, Honiton, Newton Abbot, Okehampton, Tavistock, Totnes and Tiverton.\n\nThe boundary with Cornwall has not always been on the River Tamar as at present: until the late 19th century a few parishes in the Torpoint area were in Devon and five parishes now in north-east Cornwall were in Devon until 1974. (However, for ecclesiastical purposes these were nevertheless in the Archdeaconry of Cornwall and in 1876 became part of the Diocese of Truro.)\n\nThe region of Devon was the dominion of the Dumnonii Celtic tribe they were also called \"Deep Valley Dwellers\". The region was less Romanised than the rest of Roman Britain since it was considered a remote province. The Romans left the region around AD 410, this is when one of the leading Dumnonii families attempted to create a dynasty and rule over Devon as the Kings of Dumnonii.\n\nCeltic paganism and Roman practices were the first known religions in Devon, although in the mid-fourth century AD, Christianity was introduced to Devon. In the Sub-Roman period the church in the British Isles was characterised by some differences in practice from the Latin Christianity of the continent of Europe and is known as Celtic Christianity; however it was always in communion with the wider Roman Catholic Church. Many Cornish saints are commemorated also in Devon in legends, churches and place-names. Western Christianity came to Devon when it was over a long period incorporated into the kingdom of Wessex and the jurisdiction of the bishop of Wessex. Saint Petroc is said to have passed through Devon, where ancient dedications to him are even more numerous than in Cornwall: a probable seventeen (plus Timberscombe just over the border in Somerset), compared to Cornwall's five. The position of churches bearing his name, including one within the old Roman walls of Exeter, are nearly always near the coast, reminding us that in those days travelling was done mainly by sea. The Devonian villages of Petrockstowe and Newton St Petroc are also named after Saint Petroc and the flag of Devon is dedicated to him.\n\nThe history of Christianity in the South West of England remains to some degree obscure. Parts of the historic county of Devon formed part of the diocese of Wessex, while nothing is known of the church organisation of the Celtic areas. About 703 Devon and Cornwall were included in the separate diocese of Sherborne and in 900 this was again divided into two, the Devon bishop having from 905 his seat at Tawton (now Bishop's Tawton) and from 912 at Crediton, birthplace of St Boniface. Lyfing became Bishop of Crediton in 1027 and shortly afterwards became Bishop of Cornwall.\n\nThe two dioceses of Crediton and Cornwall, covering Devon and Cornwall, were permanently united under Edward the Confessor by Lyfing's successor Bishop Leofric, hitherto Bishop of Crediton, who became first Bishop of Exeter under Edward the Confessor, which was established as his cathedral city in 1050. At first, the abbey church of St Mary and St Peter, founded by Athelstan in 932 and rebuilt in 1019, served as the cathedral.\n\nIn 1549, the Prayer Book Rebellion caused the deaths of thousands of people from Devon and Cornwall. During the English Reformation, churches in Devon officially became affiliated with the Church of England. From the late sixteenth century onwards, zealous Protestantism – or 'puritanism' – became increasingly well-entrenched in some parts of Devon, while other districts of the county remained much more conservative. These divisions would become starkly apparent during the English Civil War of 1642–46, when the county split apart along religious and cultural lines. The Methodism of John Wesley proved to be very popular with the working classes in Devon in the 19th century. Methodist chapels became important social centres, with male voice choirs and other church-affiliated groups playing a central role in the social lives of working class Devonians. Methodism still plays a large part in the religious life of Devon today, although the county has shared in the post-World War II decline in British religious feeling.\n\nThe Diocese of Exeter remains the Anglican diocese including the whole of Devon. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Plymouth was established in the mid 19th century.\n\nDespite its small Jewish population, Devon is also noted for containing two of Britain's oldest synagogues, located in Plymouth and Exeter, built in 1762 and 1763 respectively.\n\nThere was no established coat of arms for the county until 1926: the arms of the City of Exeter were often used to represent Devon, for instance in the badge of the Devonshire Regiment. During the forming of a county council by the Local Government Act 1888 adoption of a common seal was required. The seal contained three shields depicting the arms of Exeter along with those of the first chairman and vice-chairman of the council (Lord Clinton and the Earl of Morley).\n\nOn 11 October 1926, the county council received a grant of arms from the College of Arms. The main part of the shield displays a red crowned lion on a silver field, the arms of Richard Plantagenet, Earl of Cornwall. The \"chief\" or upper portion of the shield depicts an ancient ship on wavers, for Devon's seafaring traditions. The Latin motto adopted was \"Auxilio Divino\" (by Divine aid), that of Sir Francis Drake. The 1926 grant was of arms alone. On 6 March 1962 a further grant of crest and supporters was obtained. The crest is the head of a Dartmoor Pony rising from a \"Naval Crown\". This distinctive form of crown is formed from the sails and sterns of ships, and is associated with the Royal Navy. The supporters are a Devon bull and a sea lion.\n\nDevon County Council adopted a \"ship silhouette\" logo after the 1974 reorganisation, adapted from the ship emblem on the coat of arms, but following the loss in 1998 of Plymouth and Torbay re-adopted the coat of arms. In April 2006 the council unveiled a new logo which was to be used in most everyday applications, though the coat of arms will continue to be used for \"various civic purposes\".\n\nDevon also has its own flag which has been dedicated to Saint Petroc, a local saint with dedications throughout Devon and neighbouring counties. The flag was adopted in 2003 after a competition run by BBC Radio Devon. The winning design was created by website contributor Ryan Sealey, and won 49% of the votes cast. The colours of the flag are those popularly identified with Devon, for example, the colours of Exeter University, the rugby union team, and the Green and White flag flown by the first Viscount Exmouth at the Bombardment of Algiers (now on view at the Teign Valley Museum), as well as one of the county's football teams, Plymouth Argyle. On 17 October 2006, the flag was hoisted for the first time outside County Hall in Exeter to mark Local Democracy Week, receiving official recognition from the county council. In 2019 Devon County Council with the support of both the Anglican and Catholic churches in Exeter and Plymouth, officially recognised Saint Boniface as the Patron Saint of Devon.\n\nDevon's toponyms include many with the endings \"coombe/combe\" and \"tor\". Both 'coombe' (valley or hollow, cf. Welsh \"cwm\", Cornish \"komm\") and 'tor' (Old Welsh \"twrr\" and Scots Gaelic \"tòrr\" from Latin \"turris\"; 'tower' used for granite formations) are rare Celtic loanwords in English and their frequency is greatest in Devon which shares a boundary with Brittonic speaking Cornwall. Ruined medieval settlements of Dartmoor longhouses indicate that dispersed rural settlement (OE \"tun\", now often -ton) was very similar to that found in Cornish 'tre-' settlements, however these are generally described with the local placename -(a)cott, from the Old English for homestead, cf. cottage. Saxon endings in -worthy (from Anglo-Saxon \"worthig\") indicate larger settlements. Several 'Bere's indicate Anglo-Saxon wood groves, as 'leighs' indicate clearings.\n\nDevon has a variety of festivals and traditional practices, including the traditional orchard-visiting Wassail in Whimple every 17 January, and the carrying of flaming tar barrels in Ottery St. Mary, where people who have lived in Ottery for long enough are called upon to celebrate Bonfire Night by running through the village (and the gathered crowds) with flaming barrels on their backs. Berry Pomeroy still celebrates \"Queen's Day\" for Elizabeth I.\n\nDevon has a mostly comprehensive education system. There are 37 state and 23 independent secondary schools. There are three tertiary (FE) colleges and an agricultural college (Bicton College, near Budleigh Salterton). Torbay has 8 state (with 3 grammar schools) and 3 independent secondary schools, and Plymouth has 17 state (with 3 grammar schools – two female and one male) and one independent school, Plymouth College. East Devon and Teignbridge have the largest school populations, with West Devon the smallest (with only two schools). Only one school in Exeter, Mid Devon, Torridge and North Devon have a sixth form – the schools in other districts mostly have sixth forms, with all schools in West Devon and East Devon having a sixth form.\n\nTwo universities are located in Devon, the University of Exeter (split between the Streatham Campus and St Luke's Campus, both in Exeter, and a campus in Cornwall); in Plymouth the University of Plymouth in Britain is present, along with the University of St Mark & St John to the city's north. The universities of Exeter and Plymouth have together formed the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry which has bases in Exeter and Plymouth. There is also Schumacher College.\n\nThe county has given its name to a number of culinary specialities. The Devonshire cream tea, involving scones, jam and clotted cream, is thought to have originated in Devon (though claims have also been made for neighbouring counties); in other countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, it is known as a \"Devonshire tea\". In Australia, Devon is a name for luncheon meat (processed ham).\n\nIn October 2008, Devon was awarded Fairtrade County status by the Fairtrade Foundation.\n\nDevon has been home to a number of customs, such as its own form of Devon wrestling, similar in some ways to Cornish wrestling. As recently as the 19th century, a crowd of 17,000 at Devonport, near Plymouth, attended a match between the champions of Devon and Cornwall. Another Devon sport was outhurling which was played in some regions until the 20th century (e.g. 1922, at Great Torrington). Other ancient customs which survive include Dartmoor step dancing, and \"Crying The Neck\".\n\nDevon has three professional football teams, based in each of its most populous towns and cities. As of the 2018–2019 football season, both Plymouth Argyle F.C. and Exeter City F.C. compete in English Football League Two (the fourth tier), whilst Torquay United F.C. compete in the National League (the fifth tier). Plymouth's highest Football League finish was fourth in the Second Division, which was achieved twice, in 1932 and 1953. Torquay and Exeter have never progressed beyond the third tier of the league; Torquay finished second on goal average in the Third Division (S) behind Sir Alf Ramsey's Ipswich Town in 1957. Exeter's highest position has been eighth in the Third Division (S). The county's biggest non-league clubs are Bideford F.C. which competes in the Southern Football League Premier Division, and Tiverton Town F.C. which is in the Southern Football League Division One South and West.\n\nRugby Union is popular in Devon with over forty clubs under the banner of the Devon Rugby Football Union, many with various teams at senior, youth and junior levels. One club – Exeter Chiefs play in the Aviva Premiership, winning the title in 2017 for the first time in their history after beating Wasps RFC in the final 23–20. Plymouth Albion who are, , in the National League 1 (The 3rd tier of English Professional Rugby Union.\n\nThere are five rugby league teams in Devon. Plymouth Titans, Exeter Centurions, Devon Sharks from Torquay, North Devon Raiders from Barnstaple and East Devon Eagles from Exmouth. They all play in the Rugby League Conference.\n\nIn basketball, Plymouth Raiders play in the British Basketball League. Tamar Valley Cannons, also based in Plymouth, are Devon's only other representatives in the National Leagues. Motorcycle speedway is also supported in the county, with both the Exeter Falcons and Plymouth Devils succeeding in the National Leagues in recent years.\n\nThe University of Exeter Hockey Club enter teams in both the Men's and Women's England Hockey Leagues.\n\nHorse Racing is also popular in the county, with two National Hunt racecourses (Exeter and Newton Abbot), and numerous point to point courses. There are also many successful professional racehorse trainers based in Devon.\n\nThe county is represented in cricket by Devon County Cricket Club, who play at a Minor counties level.\n\nDevon is known for its mariners, such as Sir Francis Drake, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Sir Richard Grenville, Sir Walter Raleigh, and Sir Francis Chichester. Henry Every, described as the most notorious pirate of the late 17th century, was probably born in the village of Newton Ferrers. John Oxenham (1536–1580) was a lieutenant of Drake but considered a pirate by the Spanish. Thomas Morton (1576–1647) was an avid Elizabethan outdoorsman probably born in Devon who became an attorney for The Council For New England, and built the New England fur-trading-plantation called Ma-Re Mount or Merrymount around a West Country-style Maypole, much to the displeasure of Pilgrim and Puritan colonists. Morton wrote a 1637 book \"New English Canaan\" about his experiences, partly in verse, and may have thereby become America's first poet to write in English. Another famous mariner and Devonian was Robert Falcon Scott, the leader of the unfortunate Terra Nova Expedition to reach the geographical South Pole. The poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the crime writer Agatha Christie, the Irish writer William Trevor, and the poet Ted Hughes lived in Devon. The painter and founder of the Royal Academy, Sir Joshua Reynolds, was born in Devon. Chris Dawson, the billionaire owner of retailer The Range was born in Devon, where his business retains its head office in Plymouth.\nThe actor Matthew Goode was raised in Devon, and Bradley James, also an actor, was born there. The singer Joss Stone was brought up in Devon and frontman Chris Martin from the British rock group Coldplay was born there. Matt Bellamy, Dominic Howard and Chris Wolstenholme from the English group Muse all grew up in Devon and formed the band there. Dave Hill of rock band Slade was born in Flete House which is in the South Hams district of Devon. Singer-songwriter Ben Howard grew up in Totnes, a small town in Devon. Another famous Devonian is the model and actress Rosie Huntington-Whiteley, who was born in Plymouth and raised in Tavistock. The singer and songwriter Rebecca Newman was born and raised in Exmouth. Roger Deakins, called “the pre-eminent cinematographer of our time\", was born and lives in Devon.\n\nTrevor Francis, former Nottingham Forest and Birmingham City professional footballer, and the first English footballer to cost £1 million, was born and brought up in Plymouth.\n\nSwimmer Sharron Davies and diver Tom Daley were born in Plymouth. The Olympic runner Jo Pavey was born in Honiton. Peter Cook the satirist, writer and comedian was born in Torquay, Devon. Leicester Tigers and British and Irish Lions Rugby player Julian White MBE was born and raised in Devon and now farms a herd of pedigree South Devon beef cattle. The dog breeder John \"Jack\" Russell was also from Devon. Jane McGrath, who married Australian cricketer Glenn McGrath was born in Paignton, her long battle with and subsequent death from breast cancer inspired the formation of the McGrath Foundation, which is one of Australia's leading charities.\n\nDevon has also been represented in the House of Commons by notable MPs such as Nancy Astor, Gwyneth Dunwoody, Michael Foot and David Owen.\n\nTamar Valley AONB\n\nBULLET::::- List of Lord Lieutenants of Devon\nBULLET::::- List of High Sheriffs of Devon\nBULLET::::- Healthcare in Devon\nBULLET::::- Custos Rotulorum of Devon – Keepers of the Rolls\nBULLET::::- List of MPs for Devon constituency\nBULLET::::- Devonshire eggs\nBULLET::::- List of hills of Devon\nBULLET::::- List of monastic houses in Devon\nBULLET::::- List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Devon\nBULLET::::- North Devon Coast\nBULLET::::- West Country English\nBULLET::::- Circular linhay\nBULLET::::- Devon Sinfonia\nBULLET::::- Oliver, George (1846) \"Monasticon Dioecesis Exoniensis: being a collection of records and instruments illustrating the ancient conventual, collegiate, and eleemosynary foundations, in the Counties of Cornwall and Devon, with historical notices, and a supplement, comprising a list of the dedications of churches in the Diocese, an amended edition of the taxation of Pope Nicholas, and an abstract of the Chantry Rolls\" [with supplement and index]. Exeter: P. A. Hannaford, 1846, 1854, 1889\nBULLET::::- Pevsner, N. (1952) \"North Devon\" and \"South Devon\" (Buildings of England). 2 vols. Penguin Books\nBULLET::::- Stabb, John \"Some Old Devon Churches: their rood screens, pulpits, fonts, etc.\". 3 vols. London: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent, 1908, 1911, 1916\nBULLET::::- Stoyle, Mark (1994) \"Loyalty and Locality: Popular Allegiance in Devon during the English Civil War\". Exeter: University of Exeter Press\n\nBULLET::::- Devon County Council\nBULLET::::- BBC Devon\nBULLET::::- Genuki Devon Historical, geographical and genealogical information\nBULLET::::- The Devonshire Association, a Devon-centric equivalent of the British Association\nBULLET::::- Images of Devon at the English Heritage Archive\n"}
{"id": "8167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8167", "title": "Dartmoor", "text": "Dartmoor\n\nDartmoor is an upland area in southern Devon, England. The moor and surrounding land has been protected by National Park status since 1951. Dartmoor National Park covers .\n\nThe granite which forms the uplands dates from the Carboniferous Period of geological history. The landscape consists of moorland capped with many exposed granite hilltops known as tors, providing habitats for Dartmoor wildlife. The highest point is High Willhays, above sea level. The entire area is rich in antiquities and archaeology.\n\nDartmoor National Park is managed by the Dartmoor National Park Authority, whose 22 members are drawn from Devon County Council, local district councils and Government.\n\nParts of Dartmoor have been used as military firing ranges for over 200 years. The public is granted extensive land access rights on Dartmoor (including restricted access to the firing ranges) and it is a popular tourist destination.\n\nDartmoor includes the largest area of granite in Britain, with about at the surface, though most of it is under superficial peat deposits. The granite (or more specifically adamellite) was intruded at depth as a pluton into the surrounding sedimentary rocks during the Carboniferous period, probably about 309 million years ago. It is generally accepted that the present surface is not far below the original top of the pluton; evidence for this includes partly digested shale xenoliths, contamination of the granite and the existence of two patches of altered sedimentary rock on top of the granite.\nA considerable gravity anomaly is associated with the Dartmoor pluton as with other such plutons. Measurement of the anomaly has helped to determine the likely shape and extent of the rock mass at depth.\n\nDartmoor is known for its tors – hills topped with outcrops of bedrock, which in granite country such as this are usually rounded boulder-like formations. More than 160 of the hills of Dartmoor have the word \"tor\" in their name but quite a number do not. However, this does not appear to relate to whether or not there is an outcrop of rock on their summit. The tors are the focus of an annual event known as the Ten Tors Challenge, when around 2400 people aged between 14 and 19 walk for distances of 56, 72 or 88 km (35, 45 or 55 mi) between ten tors on many differing routes.\n\nThe highest points on Dartmoor are on the northern moor: High Willhays, , () and Yes Tor, , () The highest points on the southern moor are Ryder's Hill, , (), Snowdon , (), and an unnamed point, at (), between Langcombe Hill and Shell Top. The best-known tor on Dartmoor is Haytor (called Hey Tor by William Crossing), , (). For a more complete list see List of Dartmoor tors and hills.\n\nThe high ground of Dartmoor forms the catchment area for many of Devon's rivers. As well as shaping the landscape, these have traditionally provided a source of power for moor industries such as tin mining and quarrying.\n\nThe moor takes its name from the River Dart, which starts as the East Dart and West Dart and then becomes a single river at Dartmeet. It leaves the moor at Buckfastleigh, flowing through Totnes below where it opens up into a long ria, reaching the sea at Dartmouth.\n\nFor a full list, expand the \"Rivers of Dartmoor\" navigational box at the bottom of this page.\n\nMuch more rain falls on Dartmoor than in the surrounding lowlands. As much of the national park is covered in thick layers of peat (decaying vegetation), the rain is usually absorbed quickly and distributed slowly, so the moor is rarely dry. In areas where water accumulates, dangerous bogs or mires can result. Some of these, topped with bright green moss, are known to locals as \"feather beds\" or \"quakers\", because they can shift (or 'quake') beneath a person's feet. Quakers result from sphagnum moss growing over the water that accumulates in the hollows in the granite.\nThe vegetation of the bogs depends on the type and location. Blanket bog, which forms on the highest land where the rainfall exceeds a year, consists mainly of cotton-grass (\"Eriophorum\" species), sedges (\"Carex\" and \"Rhynchospora\"), \"Bog Asphodel\" and \"Common Tormentil\", with \"Sphagnum\" thriving in the wettest patches. The valley bogs have lush growth of rushes, with sphagnum, cross-leaved heath, sundews and several other species.\n\nSome of the bogs on Dartmoor have achieved notoriety. Fox Tor Mires was supposedly the inspiration for Great Grimpen Mire in Conan Doyle's novel \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\", although there is a waymarked footpath across it. Sabine Baring-Gould, in his \"Book of Dartmoor\" (1900) related the story of a man who was making his way through Aune Mire at the head of the River Avon when he came upon a top-hat brim down on the surface of the mire. He kicked it, whereupon a voice called out: \"What be you a-doin' to my 'at?\" The man replied, \"Be there now a chap under'n?\" \"Ees, I reckon,\" was the reply, \"and a hoss under me likewise.\"\n\nAlong with the rest of South West England, Dartmoor has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than locations at similar height in the rest of England. At Princetown, near the centre of the moor at a height of , January and February are the coldest months with mean minimum temperatures around . July and August are the warmest months with mean daily maxima not reaching . Compared with Teignmouth, which is on the coast about to the east, the average maximum and minimum temperatures are and lower respectively, and frost is at least five times as frequent. On the highest ground, in the north of the moor, the growing season is less than 175 days – this contrasts with some 300 days along most of the south coast of the county.\n\nRainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection. In summer, convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds and a large proportion of rainfall falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year. The wettest months are November and December and on the highest parts of the moor the average annual total rainfall is over . This compares with less than in the lower land to the east around the Exe Estuary, which is in the rain shadow of the moor. Due to the influence of the Gulf Stream snowfall is not common, though due to its high altitude it is more vulnerable to snowfall than surrounding regions.\n\nBetween 1961 and 1990 Met Office data shows that there was an average of 20 days when snow fell on the moor, and over 40 days a year with hail, which is as high as anywhere else in the country. This results when cold polar maritime air that has travelled over a large expanse of warmer ocean is forced to rise over high country.\n\nWhen average temperatures at Princetown between 1961 and 2000 are compared, the average annual temperature in the decade 1990–2000 was up by and the late winter temperature increased by .\nBecause of Dartmoor's height and granite geology, it experiences strong winds and has acidic soils. In consequence it has been subject to very little intensive farming, and all these factors combine to form the basis of the important ecosystems found here. The landscape is one of granite with peat bogs overlying it. While the moors topped with granite tors are the most iconic part of Dartmoor's landscape, only about half of Dartmoor is actually moorland. Equally important for wildlife are the blanket bogs, upland heaths and the oak woodlands which are all of global importance. Dartmoor is a Special Area of Conservation (SAC) with four habitats (\"Northern Atlantic wet heaths with Erica tetralix\"; \"European dry heaths\"; \"Blanket bog\"s and \"Old sessile oak woods with Ilex and Blechnum in the British Isles\") being listed as primary reasons for the selection of Dartmoor as a SAC. In addition the area has a population of the Southern damselfly which is also a primary reason for its selection along with populations of Atlantic salmon and Otter being qualifying reasons. \n\nWistman's Wood is one of the old sessile oak woods which contribute to the listing of Dartmoor as a SAC and is possibly a surviving fragment from the earliest Neolithic woodland clearances. It is home to exceptional epiphytic mosses, liverworts and lichens. Nearly 50 species of moss and liverwort are found in the wood along with 120 types of lichen, including Smith's horsehair lichen, speckled sea-storm lichen and pendulous wing-moss. Over 60 species of lichens grow on the exposed surfaces of the granite tors, including granite-speck rim-lichen, purple rock lichen, brown cobblestone lichen and goldspot lichen and many rare lichen grow on rocks exposed by mining which are rich in heavy metals. On the upland heaths heather (ling) and bell heather are common along with western gorse. In dry grassy areas tormentil, heath bedstraw and heath milkwort are all common. Cross-leaved heath and purple moor grass grow in wetter spots and in the boggy areas many different species of sphagnum and other mosses can be found along with liverworts, Hare's-tail Cotton-grass, round-leaved sundew and bog asphodel and in the valley bottoms, many different sedges, bogbean and pale butterwort all grow.\n\nA large variety of bird species can be found on Dartmoor including ones that have declined elsewhere in the UK, such as skylark and snipe, or are even rare nationally, such as the ring ouzel and the cuckoo. There are internationally important populations of meadow pipit and stonechat. Woodland birds include a number of migrant species, like the pied flycatcher, the wood warbler or the common redstart. Mammals found here include otters, hazel dormice and nearly all of the UK's 16 bat species. Three rare species, the barbastelle, and the greater and lesser horseshoe bats are of particular importance. The upper reaches of the rivers, are spawning grounds for Salmon and trout and Palmate newts, frogs and toads breed in the numerous small pools. Two shrimp species can be found on Dartmoor: fairy shrimp that can be found in temporary pools and in underground streams very rare cave shrimp. The world's largest land slug, the Ash black, is also found. Reptiles include common lizards and adders. The farmland in the wet valleys around the edge of the moors is the most important habitat for insects\nincluding the marsh fritillary butterfly, southern damselfly, narrow-bordered bee hawkmoth and bog hoverfly. Areas of bracken are home to the high brown fritillary and pearl-bordered fritillary. Insects found in the heathlands include the emperor moth, green hairstreak and the bilberry bumblebee. The old oak woodlands have a distinctive group of insects including the blue ground beetle and Heckford's pygmy moth, a species found nowhere else in the world.\n\nThe majority of the prehistoric remains on Dartmoor date back to the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age. Indeed, Dartmoor contains the largest concentration of Bronze Age remains in the United Kingdom, which suggests that this was when a larger population moved onto the hills of Dartmoor. The large systems of Bronze Age fields, divided by reaves, cover an area of over of the lower moors.\n\nThe climate at the time was warmer than today, and much of today's moorland was covered with trees. The prehistoric settlers began clearing the forest, and established the first farming communities. Fire was the main method of clearing land, creating pasture and swidden types of fire-fallow farmland. Areas less suited for farming tended to be burned for livestock grazing. Over the centuries these Neolithic practices greatly expanded the upland moors, and contributed to the acidification of the soil and the accumulation of peat and bogs.\n\nAfter a few thousand years the mild climate deteriorated leaving these areas uninhabited and consequently relatively undisturbed to the present day. The highly acidic soil has ensured that no organic remains have survived, but the durability of the granite has meant that the remains of buildings, enclosures and monuments have survived well, as have flint tools. A number of remains were \"restored\" by enthusiastic Victorians and that, in some cases, they have placed their own interpretation on how an area may have looked.\n\nNumerous prehistoric menhirs (more usually referred to locally as standing stones or longstones), stone circles, kistvaens, cairns and stone rows are to be found on the moor. The most significant sites include:\n\nBULLET::::- Upper Erme stone row is the longest on Dartmoor and in fact in the world at\nBULLET::::- Beardown Man, near Devil's Tor – isolated standing stone high, said to have another below ground.\nBULLET::::- Challacombe, near the prehistoric settlement of Grimspound — triple stone row.\nBULLET::::- Drizzlecombe, east of Sheepstor village – stone rows, standing stones, kistvaens and cairns.\nBULLET::::- Grey Wethers, near Postbridge — double circle, aligned almost exactly north south.\nBULLET::::- Laughter Tor, near Two Bridges — standing stone high and two double stone rows, one long.\nBULLET::::- Merrivale, between Princetown and Tavistock — includes a double stone row long, wide, aligned almost exactly east-west, stone circles and a kistvaen.\nBULLET::::- Scorhill (pronounced 'Scorill'), west of Chagford — circle, in circumference, and stone rows.\nBULLET::::- Shovel Down, north of Fernworthy reservoir — double stone row approximately long.\nBULLET::::- Yellowmead Down, a quadruple concentric stone circle and stone rows.\n\nThere are also an estimated 5,000 hut circles still surviving although many have been raided over the centuries by the builders of the traditional dry stone walls. These are the remnants of Bronze Age houses. The smallest are around in diameter, and the largest may be up to five times this size.\n\nSome have L-shaped porches to protect against wind and rain; some particularly good examples are to be found at Grimspound. It is believed that they would have had a conical roof, supported by timbers and covered in turf or thatch.\n\nThere are also numerous kistvaens, Neolithic stone box-like tombs.\n\nThe climate became wetter and cooler over the course of a thousand years from around 1000 BC, resulting in much of high Dartmoor being largely abandoned by its early inhabitants.\n\nIt was not until the early Mediaeval period that the weather again became warmer, and settlers moved back onto the moors. Like their ancient forebears, they also used the natural granite to build their homes, preferring a style known as the longhouse — some of which are still inhabited today, although they have been clearly adapted over the centuries. Many are now being used as farm buildings, while others were abandoned and fell into ruin.\n\nThe earliest surviving farms, still in operation today, are known as the Ancient Tenements. Most of these date back to the 14th century and sometimes earlier.\n\nSome way into the moor stands the town of Princetown, the site of Dartmoor Prison, which was originally built by Isbell Rowe & Company, Plymouth, for prisoners of war from the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812. The prison has an incorrect reputation for being escape-proof, due to both the buildings themselves and its physical location.\n\nThe Dartmoor landscape is scattered with the marks left by the many generations who have lived and worked there over the centuries – such as the remains of the Dartmoor tin-mining industry, and farmhouses long since abandoned. Indeed, the industrial archaeology of Dartmoor is a subject in its own right.\n\nDartmoor is known for its myths and legends. It is reputedly the haunt of pixies, a headless horseman, a mysterious pack of \"spectral hounds\", and a large black dog, among others. During the Great Thunderstorm of 1638, the moorland village of Widecombe-in-the-Moor was even said to have been visited by the Devil.\n\nMany landmarks have ancient legends and ghost stories associated with them, such as the allegedly haunted Jay's Grave, the ancient burial site of Childe's Tomb, the rock pile called Bowerman's Nose, and the stone crosses that mark former mediaeval routes across the moor.\n\nA few stories have emerged in recent decades, such as the \"hairy hands\", that are said to attack motorists on the B3212 near Two Bridges; and the \"Beast of Dartmoor\", a supposed big cat.\n\nDartmoor has inspired a number of artists and writers, such as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" and \"The Adventure of Silver Blaze\", R. D. Blackmore, Eden Phillpotts, Beatrice Chase, Agatha Christie, Rosamunde Pilcher, and the Reverend Sabine Baring-Gould. In \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\", the fictional 1994 Quidditch World Cup final between Ireland and Bulgaria was hosted on the moor.\nIn 1820, the newly formed Royal Society of Literature offered a prize for a poem on the subject of Dartmoor, this being won by Felicia Hemans.\nOver half of Dartmoor National Park (57.3%) is private land; the Forest of Dartmoor being the major part of this, owned by the Duke of Cornwall. The Ministry of Defence owns 14% (see below), 3.8% is owned by water companies (see Dartmoor reservoirs), 3.7% by the National Trust, 1.8% by the Forestry Commission and 1.4% by Dartmoor's national park authority. About 37% of Dartmoor is common land.\n\nDartmoor differs from some other National Parks in England and Wales, in that since the Dartmoor Commons Act 1985 much of it has been designated as 'Access Land', which, although it remains privately owned, has no restrictions on where walkers can roam. In addition to this Access Land, there are about of public rights of way on Dartmoor, and many kilometres of permitted footpaths and bridleways where the owner allows access.\n\nBecause of the 1985 Act, Dartmoor was largely unaffected by the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, which established similar rights in other rural parts of the country, but in 2006, this Act opened up much of the remaining restricted land to walkers.\n\nThere is a tradition of military usage of Dartmoor dating back to the Napoleonic Wars. Today, a large British Army training camp remains at Okehampton — also the site of an airbase during the Second World War.\n\nThe Ministry of Defence (MoD) uses three areas of the northern moor for manoeuvres and live-firing exercises, totalling , or just over 11% of the National Park. Red and white posts mark the boundaries of these military areas (shown on Ordnance Survey 1:25,000 scale maps). Flagpoles on many tors in and around the ranges fly red flags when firing is taking place. At other times, members of the public are allowed access. Blank rounds may also be used, but the MoD does not notify the public of this in advance.\n\nSome \"challenge\" and charitable events take place with assistance of the military on Dartmoor including the long established Ten Tors event and the more recent Dartmoor Beast.\n\nDartmoor's fictional use as an MoD centre for animal testing called Baskerville was referenced in the BBC drama \"Sherlock\" episode \"The Hounds of Baskerville\".\n\nThe disused Rippon Tor Rifle Range was built to train soldiers during the Second World War, and remained in use until its closure in 1977.\n\nThroughout human history, the landscape has been exploited for industrial purposes. In recent years, controversy has surrounded the work of industrial conglomerates Imerys and Sibelco (formerly Watts Blake Bearne), who have used parts of the moor for china clay mining. Licences were granted by the British Government but were recently renounced after sustained public pressure from bodies such as the Dartmoor Preservation Association.\n\nThe British government has made promises to protect the integrity of the moor; however, the cost of compensating companies for these licences, which may not have been granted in today's political climate, could prove prohibitive.\n\nThe military use of the moor has been another source of controversy, such as when training was extended in January 2003. The national park authority received 1,700 objections before making the decision. Objectors claimed that Dartmoor should be an area for recreation, and that the training disturbs the peace.\n\nThose who objected included the Open Spaces Society and the Dartmoor Preservation Association. During her lifetime, Lady Sayer was another outspoken critic of the damage which she perceived that the army was doing to the moor.\n\nDartmoor has a resident population of about 33,000, which swells considerably during holiday periods with incoming tourists. The largest settlements within the National Park are Ashburton (the largest with a population of about 3,500), Buckfastleigh, Moretonhampstead, Princetown, Yelverton, Horrabridge, South Brent, Christow, and Chagford.\n\nFor a full list, expand the \"Settlements of Dartmoor\" navigational box at the bottom of this page.\n\nBULLET::::- Avon Dam Reservoir – reservoir popular with walks and trout fishing\nBULLET::::- Black Tor Beare (Black-a-Tor Copse) – remote woodland of stunted oaks over above sea level in West Okement valley\nBULLET::::- Bowerman's Nose – a tor said to be shaped like a nose\nBULLET::::- Brentor Church – remote church high on crag at western edge of moor\nBULLET::::- Buckfast Abbey – abbey near Buckfastleigh\nBULLET::::- Burrator Reservoir – late Victorian reservoir\nBULLET::::- Canonteign Falls – second highest waterfall in England\nBULLET::::- Castle Drogo – Edwardian faux castle built by Edwin Lutyens on a crag above Teign Gorge, Drewsteignton\nBULLET::::- Childe's Tomb – ancient burial site\nBULLET::::- Church House, South Tawton – 15th century church ales house\nBULLET::::- Cosdon Hill – prominent hill, northern extremity of moor, site of beacon fire for invasion warning\nBULLET::::- Cranmere Pool – original letterbox site and location of the legend of Cranmere Binjie\nBULLET::::- Crazywell Cross – ancient cross near Crazywell Pool\nBULLET::::- Crazywell Pool – artificial lake\nBULLET::::- Dartmeet – meeting point of East and West Dart\nBULLET::::- Dartmoor Prison – large prison\nBULLET::::- Devonport Leat – man-made water channel\nBULLET::::- Devonport Leat aqueduct – aqueduct over the River Meavy just down from Raddick Hill Falls\nBULLET::::- Duck's Pool – location of a memorial to local writer William Crossing\nBULLET::::- Fernworthy Dam & Reservoir – granite-faced concrete dam and lake in Fernworthy Forest, near Chagford\nBULLET::::- Fingle Bridge – a 17th-century crossing of the River Teign near Chagford\nBULLET::::- Great Links Tor – dominant tor on north west scarp of moor\nBULLET::::- Grey Wethers – pair of ancient stone circles\nBULLET::::- Grimspound – Bronze Age settlement\nBULLET::::- Haytor Granite Tramway – early tramway with stone rails; ran from quarries at Haytor to Stover Canal\nBULLET::::- Haytor Rock – prominent tor and viewpoint between Bovey Tracey and Widecombe\nBULLET::::- High Willhays – highest point on Dartmoor\nBULLET::::- Hound Tor – rugged tor with remains of Iron Age village\nBULLET::::- Jay's Grave – burial site\nBULLET::::- Lustleigh Cleave – deep cleave on the Sticklepath Fault lined with trees and tors.\nBULLET::::- Lydford Gorge – very deep and narrow gorge with waterfalls\nBULLET::::- Meldon Reservoir & viaduct – wide and high concrete dam and Victorian iron bridge which itself is wide and high\nBULLET::::- Nuns Cross – ancient cross\nBULLET::::- Powdermills, Cherrybrook – remains of gunpowder grinding mill near Two Bridges\nBULLET::::- Rattlebrook railway – remains of horse-worked railway track to peat works near Great Links Tor\nBULLET::::- Rippon Tor Rifle Range – disused rifle range\nBULLET::::- Scorhill stone circle – (pronounced 'Scorill') well-preserved circle of standing stones near Teign-e-ver, Gidleigh\nBULLET::::- Skaigh Valley – narrow, wooded valley leading up on to moor at Belstone; on famous Sticklepath geological fault\nBULLET::::- Spitchwick – a swimming spot where the River Webburn joins the River Dart\nBULLET::::- Staldon Stone Row – longest stone row on Dartmoor and potentially the world.\nBULLET::::- Tavistock Canal – 19th-century canal\nBULLET::::- Tavy Cleave – river gorge on western moor near Mary Tavy\nBULLET::::- Teign-e-ver – confluence of North Teign and Wallabrook; clapper bridges & tolmen stone\nBULLET::::- Two Bridges – 18th-century coaching inn\nBULLET::::- Warren House Inn – highest inn in south west England\nBULLET::::- Wheal Betsy – engine house of mine on Blackdown, Marytavy\nBULLET::::- Widgery Cross – granite cross atop Brat Tor, memorial erected by Dartmoor artist William Widgery to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria in 1887\nBULLET::::- Wistman's Wood – remote copse of stunted oaks in valley of West Dart near Two Bridges\nBULLET::::- White Hart Hotel – historic 17th-century coaching inn in Moretonhampstead\n\nUntil the early 19th century Dartmoor was not considered to be a place worth visiting: in the 1540s John Leland wrote in his \"Itinerary\" that \"Dartmore is muche a wilde Morish and forest Ground\", and even by 1789 Richard Gough's opinion was that it is a \"dreary mountainous tract\". At the turn of the 19th century John Swete was one of the first people to visit Dartmoor for pleasure and his journals and watercolour paintings now provide a valuable historical resource.\n\nThe oldest leisure pursuit on the moor is hill walking. William Crossing's definitive \"Guide to Dartmoor\" was published in 1909, and in 1938 a plaque and letterbox in his memory were placed at Duck's Pool on the southern moor. Parts of the Abbots Way, Two Moors Way and the Templer Way are on Dartmoor.\n\nLetterboxing originated on Dartmoor in the 19th century and has become increasingly popular in recent decades. Watertight containers, or 'letterboxes', are hidden throughout the moor, each containing a visitor's book and a rubber stamp. Visitors take an impression of the letterbox's rubber stamp as proof of finding the box and record their visit by stamping their own personal stamp in the letterbox's logbook. A recent related development is geocaching. Geocache clues make use of GPS coordinates, whereas letterboxing clues tend to consist of grid references and compass bearings.\n\nWhitewater kayaking and canoeing are popular on the rivers due to the high rainfall and their high quality, though for environmental reasons access is restricted to the winter months. The River Dart is the most prominent meeting place, the section known as the Loop being particularly popular. Other white water rivers are the Erme, Tavy, Plym and Meavy.\n\nOther activities are rock climbing on the granite tors and outcrops, some of the well-known venues being Haytor, Hound Tor and The Dewerstone; horse riding, which can be undertaken on any of the common land; cycling (but not on open moorland); and angling for wild brown trout, sea trout and salmon—although much of the river fishing on Dartmoor is privately owned, permits are available for some stretches.\n\nThe park's main visitor centre is located in Princetown and features exhibits about Dartmoor's history, culture and wildlife, as well as changing displays of local art. The visitor centres located in Postbridge and Haytor feature information, maps, guidebooks and items for exploring the area.\n\nBULLET::::- Dartmoor Discovery, Ultramarathon race\nBULLET::::- Dartmoor Preservation Association\nBULLET::::- Dartmoor Way long-distance footpath\nBULLET::::- Geology of the United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Haytor Granite Tramway\nBULLET::::- Museum of Dartmoor Life\nBULLET::::- Rock-cut basin, the Tolmen stone\n\nBULLET::::- Crossing, William Crossing's Guide to Dartmoor, the 1912 edition reprinted with new introd. by Brian Le Messurier. Dawlish: David & Charles, 1965.\n\nBULLET::::- Dartmoor National Park Authority\n"}
{"id": "8169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8169", "title": "Dante Alighieri", "text": "Dante Alighieri\n\nDurante di Alighiero degli Alighieri (; ), commonly known by his pen name Dante Alighieri or simply as Dante (, , ; – 1321), was an Italian poet. His \"Divine Comedy\", originally called (modern Italian: \"Commedia\") and later christened by Giovanni Boccaccio, is widely considered the most important poem of the Middle Ages and the greatest literary work in the Italian language.\n\nIn the Late Middle Ages, most poetry was written in Latin, making it accessible only to the most educated readers. In \"De vulgari eloquentia\" (\"On Eloquence in the Vernacular\"), however, Dante defended the use of the vernacular in literature. He would even write in the Tuscan dialect for works such as \"The New Life\" (1295) and the \"Divine Comedy\"; this highly unorthodox choice set a precedent that important later Italian writers such as Petrarch and Boccaccio would follow.\n\nDante was instrumental in establishing the literature of Italy, and his depictions of Hell, Purgatory and Heaven provided inspiration for the larger body of Western art. He is cited as an influence on John Milton, Geoffrey Chaucer and Alfred Tennyson, among many others. In addition, the first use of the interlocking three-line rhyme scheme, or the \"terza rima\", is attributed to him. He is described as the \"father\" of the Italian language, and in Italy, he is often referred to as \"\" (\"the Supreme Poet\"). Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio are also called the (\"three crowns\") of Italian literature.\n\nDante was born in Florence, Republic of Florence, present-day Italy. The exact date of his birth is unknown, although it is generally believed to be around 1265. This can be deduced from autobiographic allusions in the \"Divine Comedy.\" Its first section, the \"Inferno,\" begins, \"\"Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita\"\" (\"Midway upon the journey of our life\"), implying that Dante was around 35 years old, since the average lifespan according to the Bible (Psalm 89:10, Vulgate) is 70 years; and since his imaginary travel to the netherworld took place in 1300, he was most probably born around 1265. Some verses of the \"Paradiso\" section of the \"Divine Comedy\" also provide a possible clue that he was born under the sign of Gemini: \"As I revolved with the eternal twins, I saw revealed, from hills to river outlets, the threshing-floor that makes us so ferocious\" (XXII 151–154). In 1265, the sun was in Gemini between approximately May 11 and June 11 (Julian calendar).\n\nGiovanni Boccaccio described Dante's appearance and demeanor as follows: \"the poet was of middle height, and in his later years he walked somewhat bent over, with a grave and gentle gait. He was clad always in most seemly attire, such as befitted his ripe years. His face was long, his nose aquiline, and his eyes big rather than small. His jaws were large, and his lower lip protruded. He had a brown complexion, his hair and beard were thick, black, and curly, and his countenance was always melancholy and thoughtful.\"\n\nDante claimed that his family descended from the ancient Romans (\"Inferno\", XV, 76), but the earliest relative he could mention by name was Cacciaguida degli Elisei (\"Paradiso\", XV, 135), born no earlier than about 1100. Dante's father, Alighiero or Alighiero di Bellincione, was a White Guelph who suffered no reprisals after the Ghibellines won the Battle of Montaperti in the middle of the 13th century. This suggests that Alighiero or his family may have enjoyed some protective prestige and status, although some suggest that the politically inactive Alighiero was of such low standing that he was not considered worth exiling.\n\nDante's family was loyal to the Guelphs, a political alliance that supported the Papacy and which was involved in complex opposition to the Ghibellines, who were backed by the Holy Roman Emperor. The poet's mother was Bella, probably a member of the Abati family. She died when Dante was not yet ten years old, and Alighiero soon married again, to Lapa di Chiarissimo Cialuffi. It is uncertain whether he really married her, since widowers were socially limited in such matters, but this woman definitely bore him two children, Dante's half-brother Francesco and half-sister Tana (Gaetana). When Dante was 12, he was promised in marriage to Gemma di Manetto Donati, daughter of Manetto Donati, member of the powerful Donati family. Contracting marriages at this early age was quite common and involved a formal ceremony, including contracts signed before a notary. But by this time Dante had fallen in love with another, Beatrice Portinari (known also as Bice), whom he first met when he was only nine. Years after his marriage to Gemma he claims to have met Beatrice again; he wrote several sonnets to Beatrice but never mentioned Gemma in any of his poems. The exact date of his marriage is not known: the only certain information is that, before his exile in 1301, he had three children (Pietro, Jacopo and Antonia).\n\nDante fought with the Guelph cavalry at the Battle of Campaldino (June 11, 1289). This victory brought about a reformation of the Florentine constitution. To take any part in public life, one had to enroll in one of the city's many commercial or artisan guilds, so Dante entered the Physicians' and Apothecaries' Guild. In the following years, his name is occasionally recorded as speaking or voting in the various councils of the republic. A substantial portion of minutes from such meetings in the years 1298–1300 was lost, however, so the true extent of Dante's participation in the city's councils is uncertain.\n\nGemma bore Dante several children. Although several others subsequently claimed to be his offspring, it is likely that only Jacopo, Pietro, Giovanni, and Antonia were his actual children. Antonia later became a nun, taking the name Sister Beatrice.\n\nNot much is known about Dante's education; he presumably studied at home or in a chapter school attached to a church or monastery in Florence. It is known that he studied Tuscan poetry and that he admired the compositions of the Bolognese poet Guido Guinizelli—whom in \"Purgatorio\" XXVI he characterized as his \"father\"—at a time when the Sicilian School (\"Scuola poetica Siciliana\"), a cultural group from Sicily, was becoming known in Tuscany. His interests brought him to discover the Provençal poetry of the troubadours, such as Arnaut Daniel, and the Latin writers of classical antiquity, including Cicero, Ovid and especially Virgil.\n\nDante said he first met Beatrice Portinari, daughter of Folco Portinari, at age nine, and claimed to have fallen in love with her \"at first sight\", apparently without even talking with her. He saw her frequently after age 18, often exchanging greetings in the street, but never knew her well. In effect, he set an example of so-called courtly love, a phenomenon developed in French and Provençal poetry of prior centuries. Dante's experience of such love was typical, but his expression of it was unique. It was in the name of this love that Dante left his imprint on the \"dolce stil novo\" (\"sweet new style,\" a term which Dante himself coined), and he would join other contemporary poets and writers in exploring never-before-emphasized aspects of love (\"Amore\"). Love for Beatrice (as Petrarch would show for Laura somewhat differently) would be his reason for poetry and for living, together with political passions. In many of his poems, she is depicted as semi-divine, watching over him constantly and providing spiritual instruction, sometimes harshly. When Beatrice died in 1290, Dante sought refuge in Latin literature. The \"Convivio\" chronicles his having read Boethius's \"De consolatione philosophiae\" and Cicero's \"De Amicitia.\" He then dedicated himself to philosophical studies at religious schools like the Dominican one in Santa Maria Novella. He took part in the disputes that the two principal mendicant orders (Franciscan and Dominican) publicly or indirectly held in Florence, the former explaining the doctrines of the mystics and of St. Bonaventure, the latter expounding on the theories of St. Thomas Aquinas.\n\nAt 18, Dante met Guido Cavalcanti, Lapo Gianni, Cino da Pistoia and soon after Brunetto Latini; together they became the leaders of the \"dolce stil novo.\" Brunetto later received special mention in the \"Divine Comedy\" (\"Inferno\", XV, 28) for what he had taught Dante: \"Nor speaking less on that account I go With Ser Brunetto, and I ask who are his most known and most eminent companions.\" Some fifty poetical commentaries by Dante are known (the so-called \"Rime,\" rhymes), others being included in the later \"Vita Nuova\" and \"Convivio.\" Other studies are reported, or deduced from \"Vita Nuova\" or the \"Comedy,\" regarding painting and music.\n\nDante, like most Florentines of his day, was embroiled in the Guelph–Ghibelline conflict. He fought in the Battle of Campaldino (June 11, 1289), with the Florentine Guelphs against Arezzo Ghibellines; then in 1294 he was among the escorts of Charles Martel of Anjou (grandson of Charles I of Anjou) while he was in Florence. To further his political career, he became a pharmacist. He did not intend to practice as one, but a law issued in 1295 required nobles aspiring to public office to be enrolled in one of the Corporazioni delle Arti e dei Mestieri, so Dante obtained admission to the Apothecaries' Guild. This profession was not inappropriate since at that time books were sold from apothecaries' shops. As a politician, he accomplished little but held various offices over some years in a city rife with political unrest.\n\nAfter defeating the Ghibellines, the Guelphs divided into two factions: the White Guelphs (\"Guelfi Bianchi\")—Dante's party, led by Vieri dei Cerchi—and the Black Guelphs (\"Guelfi Neri\"), led by Corso Donati. Although the split was along family lines at first, ideological differences arose based on opposing views of the papal role in Florentine affairs, with the Blacks supporting the Pope and the Whites wanting more freedom from Rome. The Whites took power first and expelled the Blacks. In response, Pope Boniface VIII planned a military occupation of Florence. In 1301, Charles of Valois, brother of King Philip IV of France, was expected to visit Florence because the Pope had appointed him peacemaker for Tuscany. But the city's government had treated the Pope's ambassadors badly a few weeks before, seeking independence from papal influence. It was believed that Charles had received other unofficial instructions, so the council sent a delegation to Rome to ascertain the Pope's intentions. Dante was one of the delegates.\n\nPope Boniface quickly dismissed the other delegates and asked Dante alone to remain in Rome. At the same time (November 1, 1301), Charles of Valois entered Florence with the Black Guelphs, who in the next six days destroyed much of the city and killed many of their enemies. A new Black Guelph government was installed, and Cante dei Gabrielli da Gubbio was appointed \"podestà\" of the city. In March 1302, Dante, a White Guelph by affiliation, along with the Gherardini family, was condemned to exile for two years and ordered to pay a large fine. Dante was accused of corruption and financial wrongdoing by the Black Guelphs for the time that Dante was serving as city prior (Florence's highest position) for two months in 1300. The poet was still in Rome in 1302 where the Pope, who had backed the Black Guelphs, had \"suggested\" that Dante stay. Florence under the Black Guelphs therefore considered Dante an absconder. Dante did not pay the fine, in part because he believed he was not guilty and in part because all his assets in Florence had been seized by the Black Guelphs. He was condemned to perpetual exile; if he returned to Florence without paying the fine, he could have been burned at the stake. (In June 2008, nearly seven centuries after his death, the city council of Florence passed a motion rescinding Dante's sentence.)\nHe took part in several attempts by the White Guelphs to regain power, but these failed due to treachery. Dante, bitter at the treatment he received from his enemies, also grew disgusted with the infighting and ineffectiveness of his erstwhile allies and vowed to become a party of one. He went to Verona as a guest of Bartolomeo I della Scala, then moved to Sarzana in Liguria. Later he is supposed to have lived in Lucca with a woman called Gentucca, who made his stay comfortable (and was later gratefully mentioned in \"Purgatorio\", XXIV, 37). Some speculative sources claim he visited Paris between 1308 and 1310, and other sources even less trustworthy took him to Oxford: these claims, first occurring in Boccaccio's book on Dante several decades after his death, seem inspired by readers who were impressed with the poet's wide learning and erudition. Evidently, Dante's command of philosophy and his literary interests deepened in exile and when he was no longer busy with the day-to-day business of Florentine domestic politics, and this is evidenced in his prose writings in this period, but there is no real evidence that he ever left Italy. Dante's \"Immensa Dei dilectione testante\" to Henry VII of Luxembourg confirms his residence \"beneath the springs of Arno, near Tuscany\" in March 1311.\n\nIn 1310, Holy Roman Emperor Henry VII of Luxembourg marched into Italy at the head of 5,000 troops. Dante saw in him a new Charlemagne who would restore the office of the Holy Roman Emperor to its former glory and also retake Florence from the Black Guelphs. He wrote to Henry and several Italian princes, demanding that they destroy the Black Guelphs. Mixing religion and private concerns in his writings, he invoked the worst anger of God against his city and suggested several particular targets that were also his personal enemies. It was during this time that he wrote \"De Monarchia\", proposing a universal monarchy under Henry VII.\n\nAt some point during his exile, he conceived of the \"Comedy\", but the date is uncertain. The work is much more assured and on a larger scale than anything he had produced in Florence; it is likely he would have undertaken such a work only after he realized his political ambitions, which had been central to him up to his banishment, had been halted for some time, possibly forever. It is also noticeable that Beatrice has returned to his imagination with renewed force and with a wider meaning than in the \"Vita Nuova\"; in \"Convivio\" (written c. 1304–07) he had declared that the memory of this youthful romance belonged to the past.\n\nAn early outside indication that the poem was underway is a notice by Francesco da Barberino, tucked into his \"Documenti d'Amore\" (\"Lessons of Love\"), written probably in 1314 or early 1315. Speaking of Virgil, Francesco notes in appreciative words that Dante followed the Roman classic in a poem called \"Comedy\" and that the setting of this poem (or part of it) was the underworld; i.e., hell. The brief note gives no incontestable indication that he himself had seen or read even the \"Inferno\" or that this part had been published at the time, but it indicates composition was well underway and that the sketching of the poem might have begun some years before. (It has been suggested that a knowledge of Dante's work also underlies some of the illuminations in Francesco da Barberino's earlier \"Officiolum\" [c. 1305–08], a manuscript that came to light only in 2003.) We know that the \"Inferno\" had been published by 1317; this is established by quoted lines interspersed in the margins of contemporary dated records from Bologna, but there is no certainty as to whether the three parts of the poem were each published in full or, rather, a few cantos at a time. \"Paradiso\" seems to have been published posthumously.\n\nIn Florence, Baldo d'Aguglione pardoned most of the White Guelphs in exile and allowed them to return. However, Dante had gone too far in his violent letters to \"Arrigo\" (Henry VII) and his sentence was not revoked.\nIn 1312 Henry assaulted Florence and defeated the Black Guelphs, but there is no evidence that Dante was involved. Some say he refused to participate in the assault on his city by a foreigner; others suggest that he had become unpopular with the White Guelphs, too, and that any trace of his passage had carefully been removed. Henry VII died (from a fever) in 1313, and with him any hope for Dante to see Florence again. He returned to Verona, where Cangrande I della Scala allowed him to live in certain security and, presumably, in a fair degree of prosperity. Cangrande was admitted to Dante's Paradise (\"Paradiso\", XVII, 76).\n\nDuring the period of his exile Dante corresponded with Dominican theologian Fr. Nicholas Brunacci OP [1240–1322] who had been a student of Thomas Aquinas at the Santa Sabina \"studium\" in Rome, later at Paris, and of Albert the Great at the Cologne \"studium\". Brunacci became lector at the Santa Sabina \"studium\", forerunner of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, and later served in the papal curia.\n\nIn 1315, Florence was forced by Uguccione della Faggiuola (the military officer controlling the town) to grant an amnesty to those in exile, including Dante. But for this, Florence required public penance in addition to a heavy fine. Dante refused, preferring to remain in exile. When Uguccione defeated Florence, Dante's death sentence was commuted to house arrest on condition that he go to Florence to swear he would never enter the town again. He refused to go, and his death sentence was confirmed and extended to his sons. He still hoped late in life that he might be invited back to Florence on honorable terms. For Dante, exile was nearly a form of death, stripping him of much of his identity and his heritage. He addressed the pain of exile in \"Paradiso\", XVII (55–60), where Cacciaguida, his great-great-grandfather, warns him what to expect:\nAs for the hope of returning to Florence, he describes it as if he had already accepted its impossibility (in \"Paradiso\", XXV, 1–9):\n\nAlighieri accepted Prince Guido Novello da Polenta's invitation to Ravenna in 1318. He finished \"Paradiso\" and died in 1321 (aged 56) while returning to Ravenna from a diplomatic mission to Venice, possibly of malaria contracted there. He was buried in Ravenna at the Church of San Pier Maggiore (later called Basilica di San Francesco). Bernardo Bembo, praetor of Venice, erected a tomb for him in 1483.\n\nOn the grave, a verse of Bernardo Canaccio, a friend of Dante, is dedicated to Florence:\nThe first formal biography of Dante was the \"Vita di Dante\" (also known as \"Trattatello in laude di Dante\"), written after 1348 by Giovanni Boccaccio. Although several statements and episodes of it have been deemed unreliable on the basis of modern research, an earlier account of Dante's life and works had been included in the \"Nuova Cronica\" of the Florentine chronicler Giovanni Villani.\nFlorence eventually came to regret Dante's exile, and the city made repeated requests for the return of his remains. The custodians of the body in Ravenna refused, at one point going so far as to conceal the bones in a false wall of the monastery. Nonetheless, a tomb was built for him in Florence in 1829, in the Basilica of Santa Croce. That tomb has been empty ever since, with Dante's body remaining in Ravenna, far from the land he had loved so dearly. The front of his tomb in Florence reads \"Onorate l'altissimo poeta\"—which roughly translates as \"Honor the most exalted poet\". The phrase is a quote from the fourth canto of the \"Inferno,\" depicting Virgil's welcome as he returns among the great ancient poets spending eternity in limbo. The ensuing line, \"L'ombra sua torna, ch'era dipartita\" (\"his spirit, which had left us, returns\"), is poignantly absent from the empty tomb.\nA copy of Dante's so-called death mask has been displayed since 1911 in the Palazzo Vecchio; scholars today believe it is not a true death mask and was probably carved in 1483, perhaps by Pietro and Tullio Lombardo.\n\nItaly's first dreadnought battleship was completed in 1913 and named \"Dante Alighieri\" in honor of him.\n\nOn April 30, 1921, in honor of the 600th anniversary of Dante's death, Pope Benedict XV promulgated an encyclical named \"In praeclara summorum\", calling him one \"of the many celebrated geniuses of whom the Catholic faith can boast\" and the \"pride and glory of humanity\".\n\nIn 2007, a reconstruction of Dante's face was undertaken in a collaborative project. Artists from Pisa University and engineers at the University of Bologna at Forlì constructed the model, portraying Dante's features as somewhat different from what was once thought.\n\nIn 2008, the Municipality of Florence officially apologized for expelling Dante 700 years earlier.\n\nA celebration was held in 2015 at Italy's Senate of the Republic for the 750th anniversary of Dante's birth. It included a commemoration from Pope Francis.\n\nThe \"Divine Comedy\" describes Dante's journey through Hell (\"Inferno\"), Purgatory (\"Purgatorio\"), and Paradise (\"Paradiso\"); he is first guided by the Roman poet Virgil and then by Beatrice, the subject of his love (and of another of his works, \"La Vita Nuova\"). Of the books, \"Purgatorio\" is arguably the most lyrical of the three, referring to more contemporary poets and artists than \"Inferno\"; \"Paradiso\" is the most heavily theological, and the one in which, many scholars have argued, the \"Divine Comedy\"'s most beautiful and mystic passages appear (e.g., when Dante looks into the face of God: \"all'alta fantasia qui mancò possa\"—\"at this high moment, ability failed my capacity to describe,\" \"Paradiso,\" XXXIII, 142).\n\nWith its seriousness of purpose, its literary stature and the range—both stylistic and thematic—of its content, the \"Comedy\" soon became a cornerstone in the evolution of Italian as an established literary language. Dante was more aware than most early Italian writers of the variety of Italian dialects and of the need to create a literature and a unified literary language beyond the limits of Latin writing at the time; in that sense, he is a forerunner of the Renaissance, with its effort to create vernacular literature in competition with earlier classical writers. Dante's in-depth knowledge (within the limits of his time) of Roman antiquity, and his evident admiration for some aspects of pagan Rome, also point forward to the 15th century. Ironically, while he was widely honored in the centuries after his death, the \"Comedy\" slipped out of fashion among men of letters: too medieval, too rough and tragic, and not stylistically refined in the respects that the high and late Renaissance came to demand of literature.\n\nHe wrote the \"Comedy\" in a language he called \"Italian\", in some sense an amalgamated literary language mostly based on the regional dialect of Tuscany, but with some elements of Latin and other regional dialects. He deliberately aimed to reach a readership throughout Italy including laymen, clergymen and other poets. By creating a poem of epic structure and philosophic purpose, he established that the Italian language was suitable for the highest sort of expression. In French, Italian is sometimes nicknamed \"la langue de Dante\". Publishing in the vernacular language marked Dante as one of the first in Roman Catholic Western Europe (among others such as Geoffrey Chaucer and Giovanni Boccaccio) to break free from standards of publishing in only Latin (the language of liturgy, history and scholarship in general, but often also of lyric poetry). This break set a precedent and allowed more literature to be published for a wider audience, setting the stage for greater levels of literacy in the future. However, unlike Boccaccio, Milton or Ariosto, Dante did not really become an author read all over Europe until the Romantic era. To the Romantics, Dante, like Homer and Shakespeare, was a prime example of the \"original genius\" who sets his own rules, creates persons of overpowering stature and depth, and goes far beyond any imitation of the patterns of earlier masters; and who, in turn, cannot truly be imitated. Throughout the 19th century, Dante's reputation grew and solidified; and by 1865, the 600th anniversary of his birth, he had become established as one of the greatest literary icons of the Western world.\n\nNew readers often wonder how such a serious work may be called a \"comedy\". In the classical sense the word \"comedy\" refers to works which reflect belief in an ordered universe, in which events tend toward not only a happy or amusing ending but one influenced by a Providential will that orders all things to an ultimate good. By this meaning of the word, as Dante himself wrote in a letter to Cangrande I della Scala, the progression of the pilgrimage from Hell to Paradise is the paradigmatic expression of comedy, since the work begins with the pilgrim's moral confusion and ends with the vision of God.\n\nDante's other works include \"Convivio\" (\"The Banquet\"), a collection of his longest poems with an (unfinished) allegorical commentary; \"De Monarchia\", a summary treatise of political philosophy in Latin which was condemned and burned after Dante's death by the Papal Legate Bertrando del Poggetto, which argues for the necessity of a universal or global monarchy to establish universal peace in this life, and this monarchy's relationship to the Roman Catholic Church as guide to eternal peace; \"De vulgari eloquentia\" (\"On the Eloquence of Vernacular\"), on vernacular literature, partly inspired by the \"Razos de trobar\" of Raimon Vidal de Bezaudun; and \"La Vita Nuova\" (\"The New Life\"), the story of his love for Beatrice Portinari, who also served as the ultimate symbol of salvation in the \"Comedy\". The \"Vita Nuova\" contains many of Dante's love poems in Tuscan, which was not unprecedented; the vernacular had been regularly used for lyric works before, during all the thirteenth century. However, Dante's commentary on his own work is also in the vernacular—both in the \"Vita Nuova\" and in the \"Convivio\"—instead of the Latin that was almost universally used.\n\nBULLET::::- Teodolinda Barolini (ed.). \"Dante's Lyric Poetry: Poems of Youth and of the 'Vita Nuova\"'. University of Toronto Press, 2014.\nBULLET::::- Guénon, René (1925). \"The Esoterism of Dante\", trans. by C.B. Berhill, in the \"Perennial Wisdom Series\". Ghent, NY: Sophia Perennis et Universalis, 1996. viii, 72 p. \"N.B\".: Originally published in French, entitled L'Esoterisme de Danté, in 1925.\n\nBULLET::::- Works by Dante Alighieri at One More Library (Works in English, Italian, Latin, Arabic, German, French and Spanish)\nBULLET::::- The Dante Museum in Florence: his life, his books and a history & literature blog about Dante\nBULLET::::- The World of Dante multimedia, texts, maps, gallery, searchable database, music, teacher resources, timeline\nBULLET::::- The Princeton Dante Project texts and multimedia\nBULLET::::- The Dartmouth Dante Project searchable database of commentary\nBULLET::::- Dante Online manuscripts of works, images and text transcripts by Società Dantesca Italiana\nBULLET::::- Digital Dante – \"Divine Comedy\" with commentary, other works, scholars on Dante\nBULLET::::- Open Yale Course on Dante by Yale University\nBULLET::::- DanteSources project about Dante's primary sources developed by ISTI-CNR and the University of Pisa\nBULLET::::- Works Italian and Latin texts, concordances and frequency lists by IntraText\nBULLET::::- Dante Today citings and sightings of Dante in contemporary culture\nBULLET::::- Bibliotheca Dantesca journal dedicated to all tendencies in Dante studies\n"}
{"id": "8171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8171", "title": "Dennis the Menace", "text": "Dennis the Menace\n\nDennis the Menace may refer to either of two comic strip characters that both appeared in March 1951, one in the UK and one in the US. Both are still published as of 2019.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (UK comics) is the original title of a British comic strip which first appeared in \"The Beano\" on March 12, 1951 (in the edition cover dated March 17, 1951); it is now published as \"Dennis the Menace and Gnasher\".\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace Annual\", now known as the \"Dennis and Gnasher Annual\", is a compilation of the comics plus new material.\nBULLET::::- Various television adaptations of the comic strip:\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace and Gnasher\" (1996 TV series) is an animated television series based on the Beano comic strip, known internationally as \"Dennis and Gnasher\".\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace and Gnasher\" (2009 TV series) was released on September 7, 2009.\nBULLET::::- is the latest animated CGI series, first broadcast in November 2017. A Second series has subsequently been made.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (U.S. comics), a daily US syndicated newspaper comic strip since March 12, 1951\nBULLET::::- Various television and film adaptations of the comic strip:\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (1959 TV series), a CBS network live action television show\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (1986 TV series), an animated TV series\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (1987 film), a made-for-television live action film released in 1987; a.k.a. \"Dennis the Menace: Dinosaur Hunter\"\nBULLET::::- \"All-New Dennis the Menace\", a 1993 animated television series\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (film), A live-action film released in 1993\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace\" (video game), based on the 1993 film\nBULLET::::- \"Dennis the Menace Strikes Again\", a 1998 direct-to-video sequel of the 1993 film\nBULLET::::- \"A Dennis the Menace Christmas\", a 2007 direct-to-video sequel of the 1993 film\n"}
{"id": "8176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8176", "title": "Dave Brubeck", "text": "Dave Brubeck\n\nDavid Warren Brubeck (; December 6, 1920 – December 5, 2012) was an American jazz pianist and composer, considered one of the foremost exponents of cool jazz. Many of his compositions have become jazz standards including \"In Your Own Sweet Way\" and \"The Duke\". Brubeck's style ranged from refined to bombastic, reflecting both his mother's classical training and his own improvisational skills. His music is known for employing unusual time signatures as well as superimposing contrasting rhythms, meters, and tonalities.\n\nBrubeck experimented with time signatures throughout his career, recording \"Pick Up Sticks\" in , \"Unsquare Dance\" in , \"World's Fair\" in , and \"Blue Rondo à la Turk\" in . He was also a composer of orchestral and sacred music and wrote soundtracks for television, such as \"Mr. Broadway\" and the animated miniseries \"This Is America, Charlie Brown\".\n\nOften incorrectly attributed to Brubeck, the song \"Take Five\", which has become a jazz standard, was composed by Brubeck's long-time musical partner, alto saxophonist Paul Desmond. Appearing on one of the top-selling jazz albums, \"Time Out\", and written in time, \"Take Five\" has endured as a jazz classic associated with Brubeck.\n\nDave Brubeck was born in the San Francisco Bay Area city of Concord, California, and grew up in a city located in the Mother Lode called Ione, California. His father, Peter Howard \"Pete\" Brubeck, was a cattle rancher, and his mother, Elizabeth (née Ivey), who had studied piano in England under Myra Hess and intended to become a concert pianist, taught piano for extra money.\n\nHis father had Swiss ancestry (the family surname was originally Brodbeck) and possibly Native American Modoc lineage, while his maternal grandparents were English and German. Brubeck originally did not intend to become a musician (his two older brothers, Henry and Howard, were already on that track), but took lessons from his mother. He could not read music during these early lessons, attributing this difficulty to poor eyesight, but \"faked\" his way through well enough that this deficiency went mostly unnoticed.\n\nIntending to work with his father on their ranch, Brubeck entered the College of the Pacific in Stockton, California (now the University of the Pacific), studying veterinary science. He changed to music on the urging of the head of zoology, Dr. Arnold, who told him \"Brubeck, your mind's not here. It's across the lawn in the conservatory. Please go there. Stop wasting my time and yours.\" Later, Brubeck was nearly expelled when one of his professors discovered that he could not read music on sight. Several of his professors came forward, arguing that his ability to write counterpoint and harmony more than compensated, and demonstrated his familiarity with music notation. The college was still afraid that it would cause a scandal, and agreed to let Brubeck graduate only after he had promised never to teach piano.\n\nAfter graduating in 1942, Brubeck was drafted into the U.S. Army. He served in Europe in the Third Army. He volunteered to play piano at a Red Cross show and was such a hit that he was spared from combat service and ordered to form a band. He created one of the U.S. armed forces' first racially integrated bands, \"The Wolfpack\". While serving in the military, Brubeck met Paul Desmond in early 1944. He returned to college after serving nearly four years in the army, this time attending Mills College in Oakland. He studied under Darius Milhaud, who encouraged him to study fugue and orchestration, but not classical piano. While on active duty, he received two lessons from Arnold Schoenberg at UCLA in an attempt to connect with high modernist theory and practice. However, the encounter did not end on good terms since Schoenberg believed that every note should be accounted for, an approach which Brubeck could not accept, although according to his son Chris Brubeck, there is a twelve-tone row in \"The Light in the Wilderness\", Dave Brubeck's first oratorio. In it, Jesus's twelve disciples are introduced each singing their own individual notes; it is described as “quite dramatic, especially when Judas starts singing 'Repent' on a high and straining dissonant note.”\n\nJack Sheedy owned San Francisco-based Coronet Records, which had previously recorded area Dixieland bands. (This Coronet Records should not be confused with either the late 1950s New York-based budget label, nor with Australia-based Coronet Records.) In 1949, Sheedy was talked into making the first recording of Brubeck's octet and later his trio. But Sheedy was unable to pay his bills and in 1949 turned his masters over to his record stamping company, the Circle Record Company, owned by Max and Sol Weiss. The Weiss brothers soon changed the name of their business to Fantasy Records.\n\nThese initial Brubeck records sold well, and he recorded and issued new records for Fantasy. Soon the company was shipping 40,000 to 50,000 copies of Brubeck records each quarter, making enormous profits.\n\nIn 1951, Brubeck damaged several neck vertebrae and his spinal cord while diving into the surf in Hawaii. He would later remark that the rescue workers who responded had described him as a \"DOA\" (dead on arrival). Brubeck recovered after a few months, but suffered with residual nerve pain in his hands for years after. The injury also influenced his playing style towards complex, blocky chords rather than speedy, high-dexterity, single-note runs.\n\nBrubeck organized the Dave Brubeck Quartet in 1951, with Paul Desmond on alto saxophone. They took up a long residency at San Francisco's Black Hawk nightclub and gained great popularity touring college campuses, recording a series of albums with such titles as \"Jazz at Oberlin\" (1953), \"Jazz at the College of the Pacific\" (1953), and Brubeck's debut on Columbia Records, \"Jazz Goes to College\" (1954).\n\nWhen Brubeck signed with Fantasy Records, he thought he had a half interest in the company and he worked as a sort of A & R man for the label, encouraging the Weiss brothers to sign other contemporary jazz performers, including Gerry Mulligan, Chet Baker and Red Norvo. When he discovered that all he owned was a half interest in his own recording, he quit to sign with another label, Columbia Records.\n\nIn 1954, he was featured on the cover of \"Time\", the second jazz musician to be so honored (the first was Louis Armstrong on February 21, 1949). Brubeck personally found this accolade embarrassing, since he considered Duke Ellington more deserving of it and was convinced that he had been favored for being Caucasian. Ellington himself knocked on the door of Brubeck's hotel room to show him the cover and the only reaction Brubeck could give was, “It should have been you.”\n\nEarly bassists for the group included Ron Crotty, Bob Bates and his brother Norman Bates; Lloyd Davis and Joe Dodge held the drum chair. In 1956 Brubeck hired drummer Joe Morello, who had been working with Marian McPartland; Morello's presence made possible the rhythmic experiments that were to come. In 1958 African-American bassist Eugene Wright joined for the group's U.S. Department of State tour of Europe and Asia. The group visited Poland, Turkey, India, Sri Lanka (then Ceylon), Pakistan, Iran and Iraq on behalf of the U.S. Government. They spent two weeks in Poland, giving thirteen concerts and spending time visiting with Polish musicians and citizens as part of the People-to-People program. Wright became a permanent member in 1959, making the \"classic\" Quartet's personnel complete. During the late 1950s and early 1960s Brubeck canceled several concerts because the club owners or hall managers continued to resist the idea of an integrated band on their stages. He also canceled a television appearance when he found out that the producers intended to keep Wright off-camera.\n\nIn 1959, the Dave Brubeck Quartet recorded \"Time Out\", an album about which the record label was enthusiastic but which they were nonetheless hesitant to release. Featuring the cover art of S. Neil Fujita, the album contained all original compositions, almost none of which were in common time: , , , and were used, inspired by Eurasian folk music they experienced during their 1958 Department of State sponsored tour. Nonetheless, on the strength of these unusual time signatures (the album included \"Take Five\", \"Blue Rondo à la Turk\", and \"Three To Get Ready\"), it quickly went Platinum. It was the first jazz album to sell more than a million copies.\n\n\"Time Out\" was followed by several albums with a similar approach, including \"Time Further Out: Miro Reflections\" (1961), using more , , and , plus the first attempt at ; \"Countdown—Time in Outer Space\" (dedicated to John Glenn, 1962), featuring and more ; \"Time Changes\" (1963), with much , (which was really ), and ; and \"Time In\" (1966).\n\nThese albums (except the last) were also known for using contemporary paintings as cover art, featuring the work of Joan Miró on \"Time Further Out\", Franz Kline on \"Time in Outer Space\", and Sam Francis on \"Time Changes\".\n\nOn a handful of albums in the early 1960s, clarinetist Bill Smith replaced Desmond. These albums were devoted to Smith's compositions and thus had a somewhat different aesthetic than other Brubeck Quartet albums. Nonetheless, according to critic Ken Dryden, \"[Smith] proves himself very much in Desmond's league with his witty solos.\" Smith was an old friend of Brubeck's; they would record together, intermittently, from the 1940s until the final years of Brubeck's career.\n\nIn the early 1960s, Brubeck and his wife Iola developed a jazz musical, \"The Real Ambassadors\", based in part on experiences they and their colleagues had during foreign tours on behalf of the Department of State. The soundtrack album, which featured Louis Armstrong, Lambert, Hendricks & Ross, and Carmen McRae was recorded in 1961; the musical was performed at the 1962 Monterey Jazz Festival.\n\nAt its peak in the early 1960s, the Brubeck Quartet was releasing as many as four albums a year. Apart from the \"College\" and the \"Time\" series, Brubeck recorded four LPs featuring his compositions based on the group's travels, and the local music they encountered. \"Jazz Impressions of the U.S.A.\" (1956, Morello's debut with the group), \"Jazz Impressions of Eurasia\" (1958), \"Jazz Impressions of Japan\" (1964), and \"Jazz Impressions of New York\" (1964) are less well-known albums, but all are brilliant examples of the quartet's studio work, and they produced Brubeck standards such as \"Summer Song\", \"Brandenburg Gate\", \"Koto Song\", and \"Theme From Mr. Broadway\". (Brubeck wrote, and the Quartet performed, the theme song for this Craig Stevens CBS drama series; the music from the series became material for the \"New York\" album.) In 1961, Brubeck appeared in a few scenes of the British jazz/beat film \"All Night Long\", which starred Patrick McGoohan and Richard Attenborough. Brubeck merely plays himself, with the film featuring close-ups of his piano fingerings. Brubeck performs \"It's a Raggy Waltz\" from the \"Time Further Out\" album and duets briefly with bassist Charles Mingus in \"Non-Sectarian Blues\".\n\nIn the early 1960s Dave Brubeck was the program director of WJZZ-FM radio (now WEZN-FM). He achieved his vision of an all-jazz format radio station along with his friend and neighbor John E. Metts, one of the first African Americans in senior radio management. The final studio album for Columbia by the Desmond/Wright/Morello quartet was \"Anything Goes\" (1966) featuring the songs of Cole Porter. A few concert recordings followed, and \"The Last Time We Saw Paris\" (1967) was the \"Classic\" Quartet's swan-song.\n\n!Years\n!Lineup\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1951–1956\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Bob Bates – double bass\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\nBULLET::::- Joe Dodge – drums\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1953<br>\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\nBULLET::::- Ron Crotty – double bass\nBULLET::::- Lloyd Davis – drums\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1956–1958\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\nBULLET::::- Norman Bates – double bass\nBULLET::::- Joe Morello – drums\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1958–1968<br>\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\nBULLET::::- Joe Morello – drums\nBULLET::::- Eugene Wright – double bass\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1968–1972<br>\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Alan Dawson – drums\nBULLET::::- Gerry Mulligan – baritone saxophone\nBULLET::::- Jack Six – double bass\n\nBULLET::::- Additional personnel\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1972–1978<br>\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Chris Brubeck – bass trombone, electric upright bass, electric fretless bass\nBULLET::::- Dan Brubeck – drums\nBULLET::::- Darius Brubeck – piano, electric piano, clavinet, electric organ, synthesizer\n\nBULLET::::- Additional personnel\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\nBULLET::::- Gerry Mulligan – baritone saxophone\nBULLET::::- Jerry Bergonzi – tenor saxophone, soprano saxophone\nBULLET::::- Perry Robinson – clarinet\nBULLET::::- Peter \"Madcat\" Ruth – harmonicas, Jew's harp\nBULLET::::- Muruga Booker = drums, percussion\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1976–1977<br>\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Paul Desmond – alto saxophone\nBULLET::::- Joe Morello – drums\nBULLET::::- Eugene Wright – double bass\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1977–Early 2000s\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Chris Brubeck – bass trombone, electric upright bass, electric fretless bass\nBULLET::::- Dan Brubeck – drums\nBULLET::::- Darius Brubeck – piano, electric piano\n\nBULLET::::- Additional personnel\nBULLET::::- Matthew Brubeck – cello\nBULLET::::- Randy Jones – drums\nBULLET::::- Bobby Militello – alto saxophone, tenor saxophone, flute\nBULLET::::- Jack Six – double bass\nBULLET::::- Bill Smith – clarinet\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" 1978–1982\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Jerry Bergonzi – tenor saxophone, electric fretless bass\nBULLET::::- Chris Brubeck – electric fretless bass, bass trombone\nBULLET::::- Butch Miles – drums\nBULLET::::- Randy Jones – drums\n! style=\"background:#e7ebee;\" Early 2000s–2012\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck – piano\nBULLET::::- Randy Jones – drums\nBULLET::::- Bobby Militello – alto saxophone, tenor saxophone, flute\nBULLET::::- Michael Moore – double bass\n\nBrubeck produced \"The Gates of Justice\" in 1968, a cantata mixing Biblical scripture with the words of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. The new senior management at Columbia Records decided not to renew Brubeck's contract in 1971, as they wished to focus on rock music. He moved to Atlantic Records. His music was used in the 1985 film \"Ordeal by Innocence\". He also composed for – and performed with his ensemble on – \"The NASA Space Station\", a 1988 episode of the CBS TV series \"This Is America, Charlie Brown\".\n\nDave Brubeck married jazz lyricist Iola Whitlock in September 1942, remaining married for 70 years up until his death. Iola died on March 12, 2014, from cancer in Wilton, Connecticut, at the age of 90.\n\nFour of Brubeck's six children have been professional musicians. Darius, the eldest, is a pianist, producer, educator and performer. (He was named after Dave Brubeck's mentor Darius Milhaud.) Dan is a percussionist, Chris is a multi-instrumentalist and composer. Matthew, the youngest, is a cellist with an extensive list of composing and performance credits. Another son, Michael, died in 2009. Brubeck's children often joined him in concerts and in the recording studio.\n\nBrubeck became a Catholic in 1980, shortly after completing the Mass \"To Hope\" which had been commissioned by Ed Murray, editor of the national Catholic weekly \"Our Sunday Visitor\". Although he had spiritual interests before that time, he said, \"I didn't convert to Catholicism, because I wasn't anything to convert from. I just joined the Catholic Church.\" In 1996, he received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. In 2006, Brubeck was awarded the University of Notre Dame's Laetare Medal, the oldest and most prestigious honor given to American Catholics, during the University's commencement. He performed \"Travellin' Blues\" for the graduating class of 2006.\n\nBrubeck founded the Brubeck Institute with his wife, Iola, at their alma mater, the University of the Pacific in 2000. What began as a special archive, consisting of the personal document collection of the Brubecks, has since expanded to provide fellowships and educational opportunities in jazz for students, also leading to having one of the main streets on which the school resides named in his honor, Dave Brubeck Way.\n\nThe main-belt asteroid 5079 Brubeck was named after Brubeck.\n\nBrubeck recorded five of the seven tracks of his album \"Jazz Goes to College\" in Ann Arbor. He returned to Michigan many times, including a performance at Hill Auditorium where he received a Distinguished Artist Award from the University of Michigan's Musical Society in 2006. On April 8, 2008, United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice presented Brubeck with a \"Benjamin Franklin Award for Public Diplomacy\" for offering an American \"vision of hope, opportunity and freedom\" through his music. \"As a little girl I grew up on the sounds of Dave Brubeck because my dad was your biggest fan,\" said Rice. The State Department said in a statement that \"as a pianist, composer, cultural emissary and educator, Dave Brubeck's life's work exemplifies the best of America's cultural diplomacy.\" At the ceremony Brubeck played a brief recital for the audience at the State Department. \"I want to thank all of you because this honor is something that I never expected. Now I am going to play a cold piano with cold hands,\" Brubeck stated.\n\nCalifornia Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced on May 28, 2008, that Brubeck would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. The induction ceremony occurred December 10, and he was inducted alongside eleven other famous Californians.\n\nIn 2008 Brubeck became a supporter of the Jazz Foundation of America in its mission to save the homes and the lives of elderly jazz and blues musicians, including those who had survived Hurricane Katrina. Brubeck supported the Jazz Foundation by performing in its annual benefit concert \"A Great Night in Harlem\". On October 18, 2008, Brubeck received an honorary Doctor of Music degree from the prestigious Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York.\nIn September 2009, the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts announced Brubeck as a Kennedy Center Honoree for exhibiting excellence in performance arts. The Kennedy Center Honors Gala took place on Sunday, December 6 (Brubeck's 89th birthday), and was broadcast nationwide on CBS on December 29 at 9:00 pm EST. When the award was made, President Barack Obama recalled a 1971 concert Brubeck had given in Honolulu and said, \"You can't understand America without understanding jazz, and you can't understand jazz without understanding Dave Brubeck.\"\n\nOn September 20, 2009, at the Monterey Jazz Festival, Brubeck was awarded an honorary Doctor of Music degree (D.Mus. \"honoris causa\") from Berklee College of Music.\n\nOn May 16, 2010, Brubeck was awarded an honorary Doctor of Music degree (honoris causa) from the George Washington University in Washington, D.C. The ceremony took place on the National Mall.\n\nOn July 5, 2010, Brubeck was awarded the Miles Davis Award at the Montreal International Jazz Festival. In 2010, Bruce Ricker and Clint Eastwood produced \"\", a documentary about Brubeck for Turner Classic Movies (TCM) to commemorate his 90th birthday in December 2010.\n\nBrubeck died of heart failure on December 5, 2012, in Norwalk, Connecticut, one day before his 92nd birthday. He was on his way to a cardiology appointment, accompanied by his son Darius. A birthday party concert had been planned for him with family and famous guests. A memorial tribute was held in May 2013.\n\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" noted that he \"was one of Jazz's first pop stars,\" even though he was not always happy with his fame. He felt uncomfortable, for example, that \"Time\" had featured him on the cover before it did so for Duke Ellington, saying, \"It just bothered me.\" \"The New York Times\" noted he had continued to play well into his old age, performing in 2011 and in 2010 only a month after getting a pacemaker, with \"Times\" music writer Nate Chinen commenting that Brubeck had replaced \"the old hammer-and-anvil attack with something almost airy\" and that his playing at the Blue Note Jazz Club in New York City was \"the picture of judicious clarity\".\n\nIn \"The Daily Telegraph\", music journalist Ivan Hewett wrote: \"Brubeck didn't have the réclame of some jazz musicians who lead tragic lives. He didn't do drugs or drink. What he had was endless curiosity combined with stubbornness,\" adding, \"His work list is astonishing, including oratorios, musicals and concertos, as well as hundreds of jazz compositions. This quiet man of jazz was truly a marvel.\"\n\nIn \"The Guardian\", John Fordham said \"Brubeck's real achievement was to blend European compositional ideas, very demanding rhythmic structures, jazz song-forms and improvisation in expressive and accessible ways. His son Chris told \"The Guardian\" \"when I hear Chorale, it reminds me of the very best Aaron Copland, something like Appalachian Spring. There's a sort of American honesty to it.\" Robert Christgau dubbed Brubeck the \"jazz hero of the rock and roll generation\".\n\n\"The Economist\" wrote: \"Above all they found it hard to believe that the most successful jazz in America was being played by a family man, a laid-back Californian, modest, gentle and open, who would happily have been a rancher all his days—except that he couldn't live without performing, because the rhythm of jazz, under all his extrapolation and exploration, was, he had discovered, the rhythm of his heart.\"\n\nThe Concord Boulevard Park in his hometown of Concord, California, was renamed to \"Dave Brubeck Memorial Park\" in his honor. Mayor Dan Helix favorably recalled one of his performances at the park, saying \"He will be with us forever because his music will never die.\"\n\nWhile on tour performing \"Hot House\" in Toronto, Chick Corea and Gary Burton completed a tribute to Brubeck on the day of his death. Corea played \"Strange Meadow Lark\", from Brubeck's album \"Time Out\".\n\nBrubeck is interred at Umpawaug Cemetery in Redding, Connecticut.\n\nIn the United States, May 4 is informally observed as \"Dave Brubeck Day\". In the format most commonly used in the U.S., May 4 is written \"5/4,\" recalling the time signature of \"Take Five\", Brubeck's best known recording. In September 2019, musicologist Stephen A. Crist's book, \"Dave Brubeck's Time Out\", provided the first scholarly book length analysis of the seminal album. In addition to his musical analyses of each of the album's original compositions, Crist provides insight into Brubeck's career during a time he was rising to the top of the jazz charts. \n\nA new biography of Dave Brubeck, by the British writer Philip Clark, will be published by Da Capo Press in 2020.\n\nOn June 25, 2019, \"The New York Times Magazine\" listed Dave Brubeck among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 Universal Studios fire.\n\nBULLET::::- Connecticut Arts Award (1987)\nBULLET::::- National Medal of Arts, National Endowment for the Arts (1994)\nBULLET::::- DownBeat Hall of Fame (1994)\nBULLET::::- Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award (1996)\nBULLET::::- Doctor of Sacred Theology, Doctorate honoris causa, University of Fribourg, Switzerland (2004)\nBULLET::::- Laetare Medal (University of Notre Dame) (2006)\nBULLET::::- BBC Jazz Lifetime Achievement Award (2007)\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Franklin Award for Public Diplomacy (2008)\nBULLET::::- Inducted into California Hall of Fame (2008)\nBULLET::::- Eastman School of Music Honorary Degree (2008)\nBULLET::::- Kennedy Center Honors (2009)\nBULLET::::- George Washington University Honorary Degree (2010)\nBULLET::::- Honorary Fellow of Westminster Choir College, Princeton, New Jersey (2011)\n\n!Year recorded\n!Title\n!Label\n!Personnel/Notes\n1946–48?\n\"Old Sounds From San Francisco\"\n\n1946–50\n\"Dave Brubeck Octet\"\nFantasy\nOctet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Jack Weeks (bass), Cal Tjader (drums), William O. Smith (clarinet), Bob Collins (baritone sax), Dick Collins (trumpet), Dave Van Kriedt (tenor sax); reissue of EPs and an LP\n1950\n\"The Dave Brubeck Trio\"\nFantasy\nTrio, with Ron Crotty (bass), Cal Tjader (vibraphone, drums, percussion) (Volumes 1 & 2)\n1951?\n\"Brubeck/Desmond\"\nFantasy\n\n1952?\n\"Jazz at Storyville\"\nFantasy\n\n1952\n\"The Dave Brubeck Quartet\"\nFantasy\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Bull Ruther (bass), Herb Barman and Lloyd Davis (drums; separately); reissue contained a track from 1954\n1952\n\"Jazz at the Blackhawk\"\nFantasy\n\n1953\n\"Jazz at Oberlin\"\nFantasy\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Ron Crotty (bass), Lloyd Davis (drums); in concert\n1953\n\"Brubeck & Desmond at Wilshire-Ebell\"\nFantasy\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Ron Crotty (bass), Lloyd Davis (drums); in concert\n1953\n\"Jazz at the College of the Pacific\"\nFantasy\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Ron Crotty (bass), Joe Dodge (drums); in concert\n1953?\n\"Jazz at the College of the Pacific, Vol. 2\"\nOJC\n\n1954?\nColumbia\n\n1954\n\"Jazz Goes to College\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Bob Bates (bass), Joe Dodge (drums); in concert\n1954\n\"Brubeck Time\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Bob Bates (bass), Joe Dodge (drums)\n1954–55\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Bob Bates (bass), Joe Dodge (drums); in concert\n1956\n\"Brubeck Plays Brubeck\"\nColumbia\nSolo piano\n1956\n\"Dave Brubeck and Jay & Kai at Newport\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Norman Bates (bass), Joe Dodge (drums); in concert; album shared with the J. J. Johnson–Kai Winding Quintet\n1957\n\"Jazz Impressions of the U.S.A.\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Norman Bates (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1957\n\"Dave Brubeck Plays and Plays and...\"\nFantasy\nSolo piano\n1957\n\"Reunion\"\nFantasy\nQuintet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Dave Van Kriedt (tenor sax), Norman Bates (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1957?\n\"Jazz Goes to Junior College\"\nColumbia\n\n1957\n\"Dave Digs Disney\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Norman Bates (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1958\n\"The Dave Brubeck Quartet in Europe\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1958\n\"Newport 1958\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Joe Benjamin (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1958\n\"Jazz Impressions of Eurasia\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Joe Benjamin (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1959\n\"Gone with the Wind\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1959\n\"Time Out\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1959 \n\"The Riddle\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Bill Smith (clarinet), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1960 \n\"Southern Scene\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1960\n\"Brubeck and Rushing\"\nColumbia\nQuintet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), Jimmy Rushing (vocals)\n1960\n\"Bernstein Plays Brubeck Plays Bernstein\"\nColumbia\nWith Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), New York Philharmonic\n1960\n\"Brubeck à la mode\"\nFantasy\nQuartet, with Bill Smith (clarinet), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1960\n\"Tonight Only!\"\nColumbia\nQuintet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), Carmen McRae (vocals)\n1960\n\"Near-Myth\"\nFantasy\nQuartet, with Bill Smith (clarinet), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1961\n\"Time Further Out\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1961\nColumbia\nWith Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), orchestra\n1961\n\"Take Five Live\"\nColumbia\nQuintet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), Carmen McRae (vocals); in concert\n1961\n\"The Real Ambassadors\"\nColumbia\nSoundtrack for the musical\n1961–62\n\"Countdown—Time in Outer Space\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1962\nColumbia Legacy\nwith Tony Bennett (vocals); released 2013\n1962\n\"Bossa Nova U.S.A.\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1962\n\"Brubeck in Amsterdam\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert; released 1969\n1963\n\"The Dave Brubeck Quartet at Carnegie Hall\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1964\n\"Time Changes\"\nColumbia\nWith Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), orchestra\n1964\n\"Jazz Impressions of Japan\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1964\n\"Jazz Impressions of New York\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1964\n\"Dave Brubeck in Berlin\" \nCBS\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1962–65\n\"Angel Eyes\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1962–65\n\"My Favorite Things\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1965\n\"Time In\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1966\n\"Anything Goes! The Dave Brubeck Quartet Plays Cole Porter\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1966\n\"Jackpot!\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1967\n\"Bravo! Brubeck!\"\nColumbia\nWith Paul Desmond (alto sax), Chamin Correa (guitar), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums), Salvatore Agueros (bongo, conga); in concert\n1967\n\"Buried Treasures\nColumbia Legacy\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert; released 1998\n1967\n\"The Last Time We Saw Paris\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums); in concert\n1967\nColumbia Legacy\nIn concert; released 2011\n1968?\n\"Compadres\"\nColumbia\nIn concert\n1968?\n\"Blues Roots\"\nColumbia\n\n1968?\n\"The Light in the Wilderness\"\nDecca\n\n1969?\n\"The Gates of Justice\"\nDecca\n\n1970?\n\"Brubeck/Mulligan/Cincinnati\"\nDecca\n\n1970\n\"Live at the Berlin Philharmonie\"\nColumbia\nQuartet, with Gerry Mulligan (baritone sax), Jack Six (bass), Alan Dawson (drums); in concert\n1971?\n\"Summit Sessions\"\nColumbia\n\n1971\n\"The Last Set at Newport\"\nAtlantic\nQuartet, with Gerry Mulligan (baritone sax), Jack Six (bass), Alan Dawson (drums); in concert\n1971?\n\"Truth Is Fallen\"\nAtlantic\n\n1972\n\"We're All Together Again for the First Time\"\nAtlantic\nQuintet, with Gerry Mulligan (baritone sax), Paul Desmond (alto sax), Jack Six (bass), Alan Dawson (drums); in concert\n1973\n\"Two Generations of Brubeck\"\nAtlantic\nWith Darius Brubeck (electric piano, piano, clavinet), Jerry Bergonzi (soprano sax, tenor sax), Chris Brubeck (electric bass, trombone), Dan Brubeck (drums), Randie Powell (percussion), David Powell (double bass), Perry Robinson (clarinet), Peter \"Madcat\" Ruth (harmonica), David Dutemple (electric bass), Richie Morales (drums), Stephan Dudash (violin), Dave Mason (guitar), Jimmy Cathcart (electric piano)\n1973–74\n\"All the Things We Are\"\nAtlantic\nOne track trio, with Jack Six (bass), Alan Dawson (drums); some tracks quartet, with Lee Konitz (alto sax), Six (bass), Roy Haynes (drums); one track quintet, with Anthony Braxton (alto sax) added; one track quartet with Braxton replacing Konitz\n1974\n\"Brother, the Great Spirit Made Us All\"\nAtlantic\nWith Darius Brubeck (electric piano), Jerry Bergonzi (soprano sax, tenor sax), Chris Brubeck (electric bass, trombone), Dan Brubeck (drums), David Powell (double bass), Perry Robinson (clarinet), Peter \"Madcat\" Ruth (harmonica, Jew's harp)\n1975\nA&M\nDuo, with Paul Desmond (alto sax)\n1976\n\"25th Anniversary Reunion\"\nA&M\nQuartet, with Paul Desmond (alto sax), Eugene Wright (bass), Joe Morello (drums)\n1977?\nTomato\nIn concert\n1978?\nDirect to Disk\nIn concert\n1979?\n\"La Fiesta de la Posada (The Festival of the Inn)\"\nColumbia\n\n1979\n\"Back Home\"\nConcord\nQuartet, with Jerry Bergonzi (tenor sax), Chris Brubeck (bass, trombone), Butch Miles (drums)\n1980\n\"Tritonis\"\nConcord\nQuartet, with Jerry Bergonzi (tenor sax), Chris Brubeck (bass, trombone), Butch Miles (drums)\n1981\n\"Paper Moon\"\nConcord\nQuartet, with Jerry Bergonzi (tenor sax), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Randy Jones (drums)\n1982\n\"Concord on a Summer Night\"\nConcord\nQuartet, with William O. Smith (clarinet), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Randy Jones (drums)\n1982?\n\"Aurex Jazz Festival '82\"\nEastworld\nIn concert\n1984?\nThe Jazz Alliance/Concord\n\n1984\n\"For Iola\"\nConcord\nQuartet, with William O. Smith (clarinet), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Randy Jones (drums)\n1985\n\"Reflections\"\nConcord\nQuartet, with William O. Smith (clarinet), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Randy Jones (drums)\n1986\n\"Blue Rondo\" \nConcord\nQuartet, with William O. Smith (clarinet), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Randy Jones (drums)\n1987\n\"Moscow Night\" \nConcord\nQuartet, with William O. Smith (clarinet), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Randy Jones (drums)\n1987\n\"New Wine\"\nMusicMasters\nwith the Montreal International Jazz Festival Orchestra; in concert; released 1990\n1991?\n\"Quiet as the Moon\"\nMusicMasters\n\n1992?\n\"Once When I Was Very Young\"\nMusicMasters\n\n1993?\n\"Trio Brubeck\"\nMusicMasters\n\n1993\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (alto sax, tenor sax, flute), Jack Six (bass), Randy Jones (drums); in concert\n1993\nTelarc\nIn concert\n1994\n\"Just You, Just Me\"\nTelarc\nSolo piano\n1994\n\"In Their Own Sweet Way\"\nTelarc\nMost tracks quintet, with Darius Brubeck (piano), Matthew Brubeck (cello), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Dan Brubeck (drums)\n1995\n\"Young Lions & Old Tigers\"\nTelarc\n\n1995\n\"To Hope! A Celebration\"\nTelarc\nWith quartet, Cathedral Choral Society and Orchestra\n1996\n\"A Dave Brubeck Christmas\"\nTelarc\nSolo piano\n1998\n\"So What's New?\"\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (sax, flute), Jack Six (bass), Randy Jones (drums)\n1995–98\n\"Double Live from the USA & UK\"\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (alto sax), Alec Dankworth and Jack Six (bass; separately), Randy Jones (drums); in concert; released 2001\n1998\n\"The 40th Anniversary Tour of the U.K.\"\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (alto sax), Alec Dankworth (bass), Randy Jones (drums); in concert\n2000\nTelarc\nWith Bobby Militello (alto sax, flute), Darius Brubeck (piano), Matthew Brubeck (cello), Chris Brubeck (bass, bass trombone), Dan Brubeck (drums); London Symphony Orchestra; in concert\n2000\n\"One Alone\"\nTelarc\nSolo piano; in concert\n2000\n\"The Crossing\"\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (alto sax, flute), Alec Dankworth (bass), Randy Jones (drums)\n2002?\n\"Brubeck in Chattanooga\"\nChoral Arts Society of Chattanooga\nIn concert\n2002\n\"Park Avenue South\"\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (alto sax, flute), Michael Moore (bass), Randy Jones (drums); in concert\n2003?\n\"Classical Brubeck\"\nTelarc\nwith the London Symphony Orchestra\n2004\n\"Private Brubeck Remembers\"\nTelarc\nSolo piano; limited edition adds an interview with Brubeck\n2004\n\"London Flat, London Sharp\"\nTelarc\nQuartet, with Bobby Militello (alto sax), Michael Moore (bass), Randy Jones (drums)\n2004?\n\"Brubeck meets Bach\"\nSony Classical \nwith the Bach Collegium Munich; in concert\n2004\n\"Songs\"\nNaxos\nwith John de Haan and Jane Giering (vocals)\n2005?\n\"The Gates of Justice\"\nNaxos\n\n2006\n\"Indian Summer\"\nTelarc\nSolo piano\n1958–2007\n\"50 Years of Dave Brubeck: Live at the Monterey Jazz Festival, 1958-2007\"\nMonterey Jazz Festival/Concord\nIn concert\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Brubeck's Greatest Hits\" (Columbia CS 9284 / CL 2484, 1966)\nBULLET::::- \"The Essential Dave Brubeck\" (Columbia Legacy, 2003?)\n\nWith Yo-Yo Ma\nVarious artists\n\nBULLET::::- Brubeck Institute at the University of the Pacific\nBULLET::::- \"Rediscovering Dave Brubeck\", PBS, December 16, 2001 documentary\nBULLET::::- Brubeck biography and concert review in cosmopolis.ch\nBULLET::::- University of the Pacific Library's Digital Collections website\nBULLET::::- Interview September 21, 2006, Oral History, National Association of Music Merchants\nBULLET::::- \"Q&A Special: Dave Brubeck, a Life in Music\" theartsdesk.com\nBULLET::::- Interview: Dave Brubeck & the First Annual Maine Jazz Festival, \"Portland Magazine\"\nBULLET::::- Dave Brubeck interview on BBC Radio 4, \"Desert Island Discs\", January 8, 1998\nBULLET::::- Thank you Dave Brubeck...for showing us yet again that music wells up in the most unlikely places! Includes the complete eight-part BBC interview of 1994, \"Unsquare Dances\".\n"}
{"id": "8179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8179", "title": "Dye", "text": "Dye\n\nA dye is a coloured substance that chemically bonds to the substrate to which it is being applied. This distinguishes dyes from pigments which do not chemically bind to the material they colour. The dye is generally applied in an aqueous solution, and may require a mordant to improve the fastness of the dye on the fiber.\n\nBoth dyes and pigments are colored, because they absorb only some wavelengths of visible light. Dyes are usually soluble in water whereas pigments are insoluble. Some dyes can be rendered insoluble with the addition of salt to produce a lake pigment.\n\nThe majority of natural dyes are derived from plant sources: roots, berries, bark, leaves, wood, fungi and lichens. Most dyes are synthetic, i.e., are man-made from petrochemicals. Other than pigmentation, they have a range of applications including organic dye lasers, optical media (CD-R) and caera sensors (color filter array).\n\nTextile dyeing dates back to the Neolithic period. Throughout history, people have dyed their textiles using common, locally available materials. Scarce dyestuffs that produced brilliant and permanent colors such as the natural invertebrate dyes Tyrian purple and crimson kermes were highly prized luxury items in the ancient and medieval world. Plant-based dyes such as woad, indigo, saffron, and madder were important trade goods in the economies of Asia and Europe. Across Asia and Africa, patterned fabrics were produced using resist dyeing techniques to control the absorption of color in piece-dyed cloth. Dyes from the New World such as cochineal and logwood were brought to Europe by the Spanish treasure fleets, and the dyestuffs of Europe were carried by colonists to America.\n\nDyed flax fibers have been found in the Republic of Georgia in a prehistoric cave dated to 36,000 BP. Archaeological evidence shows that, particularly in India and Phoenicia, dyeing has been widely carried out for over 5,000 years. Early dyes were obtained from animal, vegetable or mineral sources, with no to very little processing. By far the greatest source of dyes has been from the plant kingdom, notably roots, berries, bark, leaves and wood, only few of which are used on a commercial scale.\n\nThe first synthetic dye, mauve, was discovered serendipitously by William Henry Perkin in 1856. The discovery of mauveine started a surge in synthetic dyes and in organic chemistry in general. Other aniline dyes followed, such as fuchsine, safranine, and induline. Many thousands of synthetic dyes have since been prepared. The discovery of mauve also led to developments within immunology and chemotherapy. In 1891 Paul Ehrlich discovered that certain cells or organisms took up certain dyes selectively. He then reasoned that a sufficiently large dose could be injected to kill pathogenic microorganisms, if the dye did not affect other cells. Erlich went on to use a compound to target syphillis, the first time a chemical was used in order to selectively kill bacteria in the body, he also used methylene blue to target the plasmodium responsible for malaria.\n\nThe colour of a dye is dependent upon the ability of the substance to absorb light within the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum (400-700 nm). An earlier theory known as Witt theory stated that a coloured dye had two components, a chromophore which imparts colour by absorbing light in the visible region (some examples are nitro, azo, quinoid groups) and an auxochrome which serves to deepen the colour. This theory has been superseded by modern electronic structure theory which states that the colour in dyes is due to excitation of valence π-electrons by visible light.\n\nDyes are classified according to their solubility and chemical properties.\n\nAcid dyes are water-soluble anionic dyes that are applied to fibers such as silk, wool, nylon and modified acrylic fibers using neutral to acid dye baths. Attachment to the fiber is attributed, at least partly, to salt formation between anionic groups in the dyes and cationic groups in the fiber. Acid dyes are not substantive to cellulosic fibers. Most synthetic food colors fall in this category. Examples of acid dye are Alizarine Pure Blue B, Acid red 88, etc.\n\nBasic dyes are water-soluble cationic dyes that are mainly applied to acrylic fibers, but find some use for wool and silk. Usually acetic acid is added to the dye bath to help the uptake of the dye onto the fiber. Basic dyes are also used in the coloration of paper.\n\nDirect or substantive dyeing is normally carried out in a neutral or slightly alkaline dye bath, at or near boiling point, with the addition of either sodium chloride (NaCl) or sodium sulfate (NaSO) or sodium carbonate (NaCO). Direct dyes are used on cotton, paper, leather, wool, silk and nylon. They are also used as pH indicators and as biological stains.\n\nMordant dyes require a mordant, which improves the fastness of the dye against water, light and perspiration. The choice of mordant is very important as different mordants can change the final color significantly. Most natural dyes are mordant dyes and there is therefore a large literature base describing dyeing techniques. The most important mordant dyes are the synthetic mordant dyes, or chrome dyes, used for wool; these comprise some 30% of dyes used for wool, and are especially useful for black and navy shades. The mordant potassium dichromate is applied as an after-treatment. It is important to note that many mordants, particularly those in the heavy metal category, can be hazardous to health and extreme care must be taken in using them.\n\nVat dyes are essentially insoluble in water and incapable of dyeing fibres directly. However, reduction in alkaline liquor produces the water-soluble alkali metal salt of the dye. This form is often colorless, in which case it is referred to as a Leuco dye, and has an affinity for the textile fibre. Subsequent oxidation reforms the original insoluble dye. The color of denim is due to indigo, the original vat dye.\n\nReactive dyes utilize a chromophore attached to a substituent that is capable of directly reacting with the fiber substrate. The covalent bonds that attach reactive dye to natural fibers make them among the most permanent of dyes. \"Cold\" reactive dyes, such as Procion MX, Cibacron F, and Drimarene K, are very easy to use because the dye can be applied at room temperature. Reactive dyes are by far the best choice for dyeing cotton and other cellulose fibers at home or in the art studio.\n\nDisperse dyes were originally developed for the dyeing of cellulose acetate, and are water-insoluble. The dyes are finely ground in the presence of a dispersing agent and sold as a paste, or spray-dried and sold as a powder. Their main use is to dye polyester, but they can also be used to dye nylon, cellulose triacetate, and acrylic fibers. In some cases, a dyeing temperature of is required, and a pressurized dyebath is used. The very fine particle size gives a large surface area that aids dissolution to allow uptake by the fiber. The dyeing rate can be significantly influenced by the choice of dispersing agent used during the grinding.\n\nAzoic dyeing is a technique in which an insoluble Azo dye is produced directly onto or within the fiber. This is achieved by treating a fiber with both diazoic and coupling components. With suitable adjustment of dyebath conditions the two components react to produce the required insoluble azo dye. This technique of dyeing is unique, in that the final color is controlled by the choice of the diazoic and coupling components. This method of dyeing cotton is declining in importance due to the toxic nature of the chemicals used.\n\nSulfur dyes are inexpensive dyes used to dye cotton with dark colors. Dyeing is effected by heating the fabric in a solution of an organic compound, typically a nitrophenol derivative, and sulfide or polysulfide. The organic compound reacts with the sulfide source to form dark colors that adhere to the fabric. Sulfur Black 1, the largest selling dye by volume, does not have a well defined chemical structure.\n\nSome dyes commonly used in Staining: \n!Basic Dyes\n!Acidic Dyes\nSafranin\nEosin\nBasic Fuchsin \nAcid Fuchsin \nCrystal violet\nCongo Red\nMethylene Blue\nOne other class that describes the role of dyes, rather than their mode of use, is the food dye. Because food dyes are classed as food additives, they are manufactured to a higher standard than some industrial dyes. Food dyes can be direct, mordant and vat dyes, and their use is strictly controlled by legislation. Many are azo dyes, although anthraquinone and triphenylmethane compounds are used for colors such as green and blue. Some naturally occurring dyes are also used.\n\nA number of other classes have also been established, including:\nBULLET::::- Oxidation bases, for mainly hair and fur\nBULLET::::- Laser dyes:rhodamine 6G and coumarin dyes.\nBULLET::::- Leather dyes, for leather\nBULLET::::- Fluorescent brighteners, for textile fibres and paper\nBULLET::::- Solvent dyes, for wood staining and producing colored lacquers, solvent inks, coloring oils, waxes.\nBULLET::::- Contrast dyes, injected for magnetic resonance imaging, are essentially the same as clothing dye except they are coupled to an agent that has strong paramagnetic properties.\nBULLET::::- Mayhems dye, used in water cooling for looks, often rebranded RIT dye\n\nBy the nature of their chromophore, dyes are divided into:\nBULLET::::- , derivates of acridine\nBULLET::::- , derivates of anthraquinone\nBULLET::::- Arylmethane dyes\nBULLET::::- , based on diphenyl methane\nBULLET::::- , derivates of triphenylmethane\nBULLET::::- , based on -N=N- azo structure\nBULLET::::- Phthalocyanine dyes, derivatives of phthalocyanine\nBULLET::::- Quinone-imine dyes, derivatives of quinone\nBULLET::::- , derivates of safranin\nBULLET::::- Indamins\nBULLET::::- , derivates of indophenol\nBULLET::::- , derivates of oxazin\nBULLET::::- Oxazone dyes, derivates of oxazone\nBULLET::::- Xanthene dyes\nBULLET::::- Fluorene dyes, derivatives of fluorene\nBULLET::::- Pyronin dyes\nBULLET::::- , based on fluorone\nBULLET::::- , derivatives of rhodamine\n\nDyes produced by the textile, printing and paper industries can end up in waste waters and are therefore a potential source of pollution of rivers and waterways.\n\nVarious porous materials, often used to adsorb harmful chemicals in general, have been specifically tested to remove dyes from aqueous environments, especially those who could combine wide availability, fast kinetics and strong adsorption capacities.\n\nPossible examples include nickel oxide nanoplates, clays, activated\ncarbons, composites of hydroxyapatite with organic substrates, graphene oxides.\n\nBULLET::::- Biological pigment, any colored substance in organisms\nBULLET::::- Blue Wool Scale\nBULLET::::- Hair coloring\nBULLET::::- Industrial dye degradation\nBULLET::::- J-aggregate\nBULLET::::- Oxidant\nBULLET::::- Phototendering\nBULLET::::- Laser dyes\nBULLET::::- List of dyes\nBULLET::::- Stain\n\nBULLET::::- Abelshauser, Werner. \"German History and Global Enterprise: BASF: The History of a Company\" (2004) covers 1865 to 2000\nBULLET::::- Beer, John J. \"The Emergence of the German Dye Industry\" (1959)\n"}
