{"id": "5672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5672", "title": "Cadmium", "text": "Cadmium\n\nCadmium is a chemical element with the symbol Cd and atomic number 48. This soft, silvery-white metal is chemically similar to the two other stable metals in group 12, zinc and mercury. Like zinc, it demonstrates oxidation state +2 in most of its compounds, and like mercury, it has a lower melting point than the transition metals in groups 3 through 11. Cadmium and its congeners in group 12 are often not considered transition metals, in that they do not have partly filled \"d\" or \"f\" electron shells in the elemental or common oxidation states. The average concentration of cadmium in Earth's crust is between 0.1 and 0.5 parts per million (ppm). It was discovered in 1817 simultaneously by Stromeyer and Hermann, both in Germany, as an impurity in zinc carbonate.\n\nCadmium occurs as a minor component in most zinc ores and is a byproduct of zinc production. Cadmium was used for a long time as a corrosion-resistant plating on steel, and cadmium compounds are used as red, orange and yellow pigments, to color glass, and to stabilize plastic. Cadmium use is generally decreasing because it is toxic (it is specifically listed in the European Restriction of Hazardous Substances) and nickel-cadmium batteries have been replaced with nickel-metal hydride and lithium-ion batteries. One of its few new uses is cadmium telluride solar panels.\n\nAlthough cadmium has no known biological function in higher organisms, a cadmium-dependent carbonic anhydrase has been found in marine diatoms.\n\nCadmium is a soft, malleable, ductile, silvery-white divalent metal. It is similar in many respects to zinc but forms complex compounds. Unlike most other metals, cadmium is resistant to corrosion and is used as a protective plate on other metals. As a bulk metal, cadmium is insoluble in water and is not flammable; however, in its powdered form it may burn and release toxic fumes.\n\nAlthough cadmium usually has an oxidation state of +2, it also exists in the +1 state. Cadmium and its congeners are not always considered transition metals, in that they do not have partly filled d or f electron shells in the elemental or common oxidation states. Cadmium burns in air to form brown amorphous cadmium oxide (CdO); the crystalline form of this compound is a dark red which changes color when heated, similar to zinc oxide. Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, and nitric acid dissolve cadmium by forming cadmium chloride (CdCl), cadmium sulfate (CdSO), or cadmium nitrate (Cd(NO)). The oxidation state +1 can be produced by dissolving cadmium in a mixture of cadmium chloride and aluminium chloride, forming the Cd cation, which is similar to the Hg cation in mercury(I) chloride.\nThe structures of many cadmium complexes with nucleobases, amino acids, and vitamins have been determined.\n\nNaturally occurring cadmium is composed of 8 isotopes. Two of them are radioactive, and three are expected to decay but have not done so under laboratory conditions. The two natural radioactive isotopes are Cd (beta decay, half-life is 7.7 × 10 years) and Cd (two-neutrino double beta decay, half-life is 2.9 × 10 years). The other three are Cd, Cd (both double electron capture), and Cd (double beta decay); only lower limits on these half-lives have been determined. At least three isotopes – Cd, Cd, and Cd – are stable. Among the isotopes that do not occur naturally, the most long-lived are Cd with a half-life of 462.6 days, and Cd with a half-life of 53.46 hours. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives of less than 2.5 hours, and the majority have half-lives of less than 5 minutes. Cadmium has 8 known meta states, with the most stable being Cd (\"t\" = 14.1 years), Cd (\"t\" = 44.6 days), and Cd (\"t\" = 3.36 hours).\n\nThe known isotopes of cadmium range in atomic mass from 94.950 u (Cd) to 131.946 u (Cd). For isotopes lighter than 112 u, the primary decay mode is electron capture and the dominant decay product is element 47 (silver). Heavier isotopes decay mostly through beta emission producing element 49 (indium).\n\nOne isotope of cadmium, Cd, absorbs neutrons with high selectivity: With very high probability, neutrons with energy below the \"cadmium cut-off\" will be absorbed; those higher than the \"cut-off will be transmitted\". The cadmium cut-off is about 0.5 eV, and neutrons below that level are deemed slow neutrons, distinct from intermediate and fast neutrons.\n\nCadmium is created via the s-process in low- to medium-mass stars with masses of 0.6 to 10 solar masses, over thousands of years. In that process, a silver atom captures a neutron and then undergoes beta decay.\n\nCadmium (Latin \"cadmia\", Greek \"καδμεία\" meaning \"calamine\", a cadmium-bearing mixture of minerals that was named after the Greek mythological character Κάδμος, Cadmus, the founder of Thebes) was discovered simultaneously in 1817 by Friedrich Stromeyer and Karl Samuel Leberecht Hermann, both in Germany, as an impurity in zinc carbonate. Stromeyer found the new element as an impurity in zinc carbonate (calamine), and, for 100 years, Germany remained the only important producer of the metal. The metal was named after the Latin word for calamine, because it was found in this zinc ore. Stromeyer noted that some impure samples of calamine changed color when heated but pure calamine did not. He was persistent in studying these results and eventually isolated cadmium metal by roasting and reducing the sulfide. The potential for cadmium yellow as pigment was recognized in the 1840s, but the lack of cadmium limited this application.\n\nEven though cadmium and its compounds are toxic in certain forms and concentrations, the British Pharmaceutical Codex from 1907 states that cadmium iodide was used as a medication to treat \"enlarged joints, scrofulous glands, and chilblains\".\n\nIn 1907, the International Astronomical Union defined the international ångström in terms of a red cadmium spectral line (1 wavelength = 6438.46963 Å). This was adopted by the 7th General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1927. In 1960, the definitions of both the metre and ångström were changed to use krypton.\n\nAfter the industrial scale production of cadmium started in the 1930s and 1940s, the major application of cadmium was the coating of iron and steel to prevent corrosion; in 1944, 62% and in 1956, 59% of the cadmium in the United States was used for plating. In 1956, 24% of the cadmium in the United States was used for a second application in red, orange and yellow pigments from sulfides and selenides of cadmium.\n\nThe stabilizing effect of cadmium chemicals like the carboxylates cadmium laurate and cadmium stearate on PVC led to an increased use of those compounds in the 1970s and 1980s. The demand for cadmium in pigments, coatings, stabilizers, and alloys declined as a result of environmental and health regulations in the 1980s and 1990s; in 2006, only 7% of to total cadmium consumption was used for plating, and only 10% was used for pigments.\nAt the same time, these decreases in consumption were compensated by a growing demand for cadmium for nickel-cadmium batteries, which accounted for 81% of the cadmium consumption in the United States in 2006.\n\nCadmium makes up about 0.1 ppm of Earth's crust. It is much rarer than zinc, which makes up about 65 ppm. No significant deposits of cadmium-containing ores are known. The only cadmium mineral of importance, greenockite (CdS), is nearly always associated with sphalerite (ZnS). This association is caused by geochemical similarity between zinc and cadmium, with no geological process likely to separate them. Thus, cadmium is produced mainly as a byproduct of mining, smelting, and refining sulfidic ores of zinc, and, to a lesser degree, lead and copper. Small amounts of cadmium, about 10% of consumption, are produced from secondary sources, mainly from dust generated by recycling iron and steel scrap. Production in the United States began in 1907, but wide use began after World War I.\n\nMetallic cadmium can be found in the Vilyuy River basin in Siberia.\n\nRocks mined for phosphate fertilizers contain varying amounts of cadmium, resulting in a cadmium concentration of as much as 300 mg/kg in the fertilizers and a high cadmium content in agricultural soils. Coal can contain significant amounts of cadmium, which ends up mostly in flue dust. Cadmium in soil can be absorbed by crops such as rice. Chinese ministry of agriculture measured in 2002 that 28% of rice it sampled had excess lead and 10% had excess cadmium above limits defined by law. Some plants such as willow trees and poplars have been found to clean both lead and cadmium from soil.\n\nTypical background concentrations of cadmium do not exceed 5 ng/m in the atmosphere; 2 mg/kg in soil; 1 μg/L in freshwater and 50 ng/L in seawater.\n\nThe British Geological Survey reports that in 2001, China was the top producer of cadmium with almost one-sixth of the world's production, closely followed by South Korea and Japan.\n\nCadmium is a common impurity in zinc ores, and it is most often isolated during the production of zinc. Some zinc ores concentrates from sulfidic zinc ores contain up to 1.4% of cadmium. In the 1970s, the output of cadmium was 6.5 pounds per ton of zinc. Zinc sulfide ores are roasted in the presence of oxygen, converting the zinc sulfide to the oxide. Zinc metal is produced either by smelting the oxide with carbon or by electrolysis in sulfuric acid. Cadmium is isolated from the zinc metal by vacuum distillation if the zinc is smelted, or cadmium sulfate is precipitated from the electrolysis solution.\n\nCadmium is a common component of electric batteries, pigments, coatings, and electroplating.\n\nIn 2009, 86% of cadmium was used in batteries, predominantly in rechargeable nickel-cadmium batteries. Nickel-cadmium cells have a nominal cell potential of 1.2 V. The cell consists of a positive nickel hydroxide electrode and a negative cadmium electrode plate separated by an alkaline electrolyte (potassium hydroxide). The European Union put a limit on cadmium in electronics in 2004 of 0.01%, with some exceptions, and reduced the limit on cadmium content to 0.002%. Another type of battery based on cadmium is the silver-cadmium battery.\n\nCadmium electroplating, consuming 6% of the global production, is used in the aircraft industry to reduce corrosion of steel components. This coating is passivated by chromate salts. A limitation of cadmium plating is hydrogen embrittlement of high-strength steels from the electroplating process. Therefore, steel parts heat-treated to tensile strength above 1300 MPa (200 ksi) should be coated by an alternative method (such as special low-embrittlement cadmium electroplating processes or physical vapor deposition).\n\nTitanium embrittlement from cadmium-plated tool residues resulted in banishment of those tools (and the implementation of routine tool testing to detect cadmium contamination) in the A-12/SR-71, U-2, and subsequent aircraft programs that use titanium.\n\nCadmium is used in the control rods of nuclear reactors, acting as a very effective \"neutron poison\" to control neutron flux in nuclear fission. When cadmium rods are inserted in the core of a nuclear reactor, cadmium absorbs neutrons, preventing them from creating additional fission events, thus controlling the amount of reactivity. The pressurized water reactor designed by Westinghouse Electric Company uses an alloy consisting of 80% silver, 15% indium, and 5% cadmium.\n\nQLED TVs have been starting to include cadmium in construction. Some companies have been looking to reduce the environmental impact of human exposure and pollution of the material in televisions during production.\n\nCadmium oxide was used in black and white television phosphors and in the blue and green phosphors of color television cathode ray tubes. Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is used as a photoconductive surface coating for photocopier drums.\nVarious cadmium salts are used in paint pigments, with CdS as a yellow pigment being the most common. Cadmium selenide is a red pigment, commonly called \"cadmium red\". To painters who work with the pigment, cadmium provides the most brilliant and durable yellows, oranges, and reds — so much so that during production, these colors are significantly toned down before they are ground with oils and binders or blended into watercolors, gouaches, acrylics, and other paint and pigment formulations. Because these pigments are potentially toxic, users should use a barrier cream on the hands to prevent absorption through the skin even though the amount of cadmium absorbed into the body through the skin is reported to be less than 1%.\n\nIn PVC, cadmium was used as heat, light, and weathering stabilizers. Currently, cadmium stabilizers have been completely replaced with barium-zinc, calcium-zinc and organo-tin stabilizers. Cadmium is used in many kinds of solder and bearing alloys, because it has a low coefficient of friction and fatigue resistance. It is also found in some of the lowest-melting alloys, such as Wood's metal.\n\nHelium–cadmium lasers are a common source of blue-ultraviolet laser light. They operate at either 325 or 422 nm in fluorescence microscopes and various laboratory experiments. Cadmium selenide quantum dots emit bright luminescence under UV excitation (He-Cd laser, for example). The color of this luminescence can be green, yellow or red depending on the particle size. Colloidal solutions of those particles are used for imaging of biological tissues and solutions with a fluorescence microscope.\n\nCadmium is a component of some compound semiconductors, such as cadmium sulfide, cadmium selenide, and cadmium telluride, used for light detection and solar cells. HgCdTe is sensitive to infrared light and can be used as an infrared detector, motion detector, or switch in remote control devices.\n\nIn molecular biology, cadmium is used to block voltage-dependent calcium channels from fluxing calcium ions, as well as in hypoxia research to stimulate proteasome-dependent degradation of Hif-1α.\n\nCadmium-selective sensors based on the fluorophore BODIPY have been developed for imaging and sensing of cadmium in cells. One of the most popular ways to monitor cadmium in aqueous environments is the use of electrochemistry, one example is by attaching a self-assembled monolayer that can help obtain a cadmium selective electrode with a ppt-level sensitivity.\n\nCadmium has no known function in higher organisms, but a cadmium-dependent carbonic anhydrase has been found in some marine diatoms. Administration of cadmium to cells causing the oxidative stress and increase the levels of antioxidants to protect the cells against macro molecular damage. The diatoms live in environments with very low zinc concentrations and cadmium performs the function normally carried out by zinc in other anhydrases. This was discovered with X-ray absorption fluorescence spectroscopy (XAFS).\n\nThe highest concentration of cadmium is absorbed in the kidneys of humans, and up to about 30 mg of cadmium is commonly inhaled throughout human childhood and adolescence. Cadmium is under preliminary research for its toxicity in humans, potentially affecting mechanisms and risks of cancer, cardiovascular disease, and osteoporosis.\n\nThe biogeochemistry of cadmium and its release to the environment has been the subject of review, as has the speciation of cadmium in the environment.\n\nIndividuals and organizations have been reviewing cadmium's bioinorganic aspects for its toxicity. The most dangerous form of occupational exposure to cadmium is inhalation of fine dust and fumes, or ingestion of highly soluble cadmium compounds. Inhalation of cadmium fumes can result initially in metal fume fever but may progress to chemical pneumonitis, pulmonary edema, and death.\n\nCadmium is also an environmental hazard. Human exposure is primarily from fossil fuel combustion, phosphate fertilizers, natural sources, iron and steel production, cement production and related activities, nonferrous metals production, and municipal solid waste incineration. Bread, root crops, and vegetables also contribute to the cadmium in modern populations.\nThere have been a few instances of general population poisoning as the result of long-term exposure to cadmium in contaminated food and water, and research into an estrogen mimicry that may induce breast cancer is ongoing. In the decades leading up to World War II, mining operations contaminated the Jinzū River in Japan with cadmium and traces of other toxic metals. As a consequence, cadmium accumulated in the rice crops along the riverbanks downstream of the mines. Some members of the local agricultural communities consumed the contaminated rice and developed itai-itai disease and renal abnormalities, including proteinuria and glucosuria. The victims of this poisoning were almost exclusively post-menopausal women with low iron and other mineral body stores. Similar general population cadmium exposures in other parts of the world have not resulted in the same health problems because the populations maintained sufficient iron and other mineral levels. Thus, although cadmium is a major factor in the itai-itai disease in Japan, most researchers have concluded that it was one of several factors.\n\nCadmium is one of six substances banned by the European Union's Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) directive, which regulates hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment but allows for certain exemptions and exclusions from the scope of the law.\nThe International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified cadmium and cadmium compounds as carcinogenic to humans. Although occupational exposure to cadmium is linked to lung and prostate cancer, there is still a substantial controversy about the carcinogenicity of cadmium in low environmental exposure. Recent data from epidemiological studies suggest that intake of cadmium through diet associates to higher risk of endometrial, breast and prostate cancer as well as to osteoporosis in humans. A recent study has demonstrated that endometrial tissue is characterized by higher levels of cadmium in current and former smoking females.\n\nCadmium exposure is a risk factor associated with a large number of illnesses including kidney disease, early atherosclerosis, hypertension, and cardiovascular diseases. Although studies show a significant correlation between cadmium exposure and occurrence of disease in human populations, a necessary molecular mechanism has not been identified. One hypothesis holds that cadmium is an endocrine disruptor and some experimental studies have shown that it can interact with different hormonal signaling pathways. For example, cadmium can bind to the estrogen receptor alpha, and affect signal transduction along the estrogen and MAPK signaling pathways at low doses.\n\nThe tobacco plant readily absorbs and accumulates heavy metals such as cadmium from the surrounding soil into its leaves. These are readily absorbed into the user's body following smoke inhalation. Tobacco smoking is the most important single source of cadmium exposure in the general population. An estimated 10% of the cadmium content of a cigarette is inhaled through smoking. Absorption of cadmium through the lungs is more effective than through the gut, and as much as 50% of the cadmium inhaled in cigarette smoke may be absorbed.\nOn average, cadmium concentrations in the blood of smokers is 4 times 5 times greater and in the kidney, 2–3 times greater than non-smokers. Despite the high cadmium content in cigarette smoke, there seems to be little exposure to cadmium from passive smoking.\n\nIn a non-smoking population, food is the greatest source of exposure. High quantities of cadmium can be found in crustaceans, mollusks, offal, and algae products. However, grains, vegetables, and starchy roots and tubers are consumed in much greater quantity in the US, and are the source of the greatest dietary exposure. Most plants bio-accumulate metal toxins like Cd, and when composted to form organic fertilizers yield a product which can often contain high amounts (e.g., over 0.5 mg) of metal toxins for every kilo of fertilizer. Fertilizers made from animal dung (e.g., cow dung) or urban waste can contain similar amounts of Cd. The Cd added to the soil from fertilizers (rock phosphates or organic fertilizers) become bio-available and toxic only if the soil pH is low (i.e., acidic soils).\n\nZn, Cu, Ca, and Fe ions, and selenium with vitamin C are used to treat Cd intoxication, though it is not easily reversed.\n\nBecause of the adverse effects of cadmium on the environment and human health, the supply and use of cadmium is restricted in Europe under the REACH Regulation.\n\nThe EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain specifies that 2.5 μg/kg body weight is a tolerable weekly intake for humans. The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives has declared 7 μg/kg bw to be the provisional tolerable weekly intake level.\n\nThe US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the permissible exposure limit (PEL) for cadmium at a time-weighted average (TWA) of 0.005 ppm. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has not set a recommended exposure limit (REL) and has designated cadmium as a known human carcinogen. The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) level for cadmium is 9 mg/m.\n!Lethal dose\n!Organism\n!Route\n!Time\nLD: 225 mg/kg\nrat\noral\nn/a\nLD: 890 mg/kg\nmouse\noral\nn/a\nLC: 25 mg/m\nrat\nn/a\n30 min\n\nIn May 2006, a sale of the seats from Arsenal F.C.'s old stadium, Highbury in London, England was cancelled when the seats were discovered to contain trace amounts of cadmium. Reports of high levels of cadmium use in children's jewelry in 2010 led to a US Consumer Product Safety Commission investigation. The U.S. CPSC issued specific recall notices for cadmium content in jewelry sold by Claire's and Wal-Mart stores.\n\nIn June 2010, McDonald's voluntarily recalled more than 12 million promotional \"Shrek Forever After 3D\" Collectible Drinking Glasses because of the cadmium levels in paint pigments on the glassware. The glasses were manufactured by Arc International, of Millville, NJ, USA.\n\nBULLET::::- Cadmium pigments\nBULLET::::- Cadmium telluride\nBULLET::::- Red List building materials\nBULLET::::- Toxic heavy metal\n\nBULLET::::- Cadium at \"The Periodic Table of Videos\" (University of Nottingham)\nBULLET::::- ATSDR Case Studies in Environmental Medicine: Cadmium Toxicity U.S. Department of Health and Human Services\n\nBULLET::::- National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health – Cadmium Page\nBULLET::::- NLM Hazardous Substances Databank – Cadmium, Elemental\n"}
{"id": "5675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5675", "title": "Curium", "text": "Curium\n\nCurium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with the symbol Cm and atomic number 96. This element of the actinide series was named after Marie and Pierre Curie – both were known for their research on radioactivity. Curium was first intentionally produced and identified in July 1944 by the group of Glenn T. Seaborg at the University of California, Berkeley. The discovery was kept secret and only released to the public in November 1947. Most curium is produced by bombarding uranium or plutonium with neutrons in nuclear reactors – one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 20 grams of curium.\n\nCurium is a hard, dense, silvery metal with a relatively high melting point and boiling point for an actinide. Whereas it is paramagnetic at ambient conditions, it becomes antiferromagnetic upon cooling, and other magnetic transitions are also observed for many curium compounds. In compounds, curium usually exhibits valence +3 and sometimes +4, and the +3 valence is predominant in solutions. Curium readily oxidizes, and its oxides are a dominant form of this element. It forms strongly fluorescent complexes with various organic compounds, but there is no evidence of its incorporation into bacteria and archaea. When introduced into the human body, curium accumulates in the bones, lungs and liver, where it promotes cancer.\n\nAll known isotopes of curium are radioactive and have a small critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction. They predominantly emit α-particles, and the heat released in this process can serve as a heat source in radioisotope thermoelectric generators, but this application is hindered by the scarcity and high cost of curium isotopes. Curium is used in production of heavier actinides and of the Pu radionuclide for power sources in artificial pacemakers. It served as the α-source in the alpha particle X-ray spectrometers installed on several space probes, including the Sojourner, Spirit, Opportunity and Curiosity Mars rovers and the Philae lander on comet 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko, to analyze the composition and structure of the surface.\n\nAlthough curium had likely been produced in previous nuclear experiments, it was first intentionally synthesized, isolated and identified in 1944, at the University of California, Berkeley, by Glenn T. Seaborg, Ralph A. James, and Albert Ghiorso. In their experiments, they used a cyclotron.\n\nCurium was chemically identified at the Metallurgical Laboratory (now Argonne National Laboratory) at the University of Chicago. It was the third transuranium element to be discovered even though it is the fourth in the series – the lighter element americium was unknown at the time.\n\nThe sample was prepared as follows: first plutonium nitrate solution was coated on a platinum foil of about 0.5 cm area, the solution was evaporated and the residue was converted into plutonium(IV) oxide (PuO) by annealing. Following cyclotron irradiation of the oxide, the coating was dissolved with nitric acid and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution. The residue was dissolved in perchloric acid, and further separation was carried out by ion exchange to yield a certain isotope of curium. The separation of curium and americium was so painstaking that the Berkeley group initially called those elements \"pandemonium\" (from Greek for \"all demons\" or \"hell\") and \"delirium\" (from Latin for \"madness\").\n\nThe curium-242 isotope was produced in July–August 1944 by bombarding Pu with α-particles to produce curium with the release of a neutron:\n\nCurium-242 was unambiguously identified by the characteristic energy of the α-particles emitted during the decay:\nThe half-life of this alpha decay was first measured as 150 days and then corrected to 162.8 days.\n\nAnother isotope Cm was produced in a similar reaction in March 1945:\nThe half-life of the Cm α-decay was correctly determined as 26.7 days.\n\nThe discovery of curium, as well as americium, in 1944 was closely related to the Manhattan Project, so the results were confidential and declassified only in 1945. Seaborg leaked the synthesis of the elements 95 and 96 on the U.S. radio show for children, the Quiz Kids, five days before the official presentation at an American Chemical Society meeting on November 11, 1945, when one of the listeners asked whether any new transuranium element beside plutonium and neptunium had been discovered during the war. The discovery of curium (Cm and Cm), its production, and its compounds was later patented listing only Seaborg as the inventor.\nThe new element was named after Marie Skłodowska-Curie and her husband Pierre Curie who are noted for discovering radium and for their work in radioactivity. It followed the example of gadolinium, a lanthanide element above curium in the periodic table, which was named after the explorer of the rare earth elements Johan Gadolin:\n\nThe first curium samples were barely visible, and were identified by their radioactivity. Louis Werner and Isadore Perlman created the first substantial sample of 30 µg curium-242 hydroxide at the University of California, Berkeley in 1947 by bombarding americium-241 with neutrons. Macroscopic amounts of curium(III) fluoride were obtained in 1950 by W. W. T. Crane, J. C. Wallmann and B. B. Cunningham. Its magnetic susceptibility was very close to that of GdF providing the first experimental evidence for the +3 valence of curium in its compounds. Curium metal was produced only in 1951 by reduction of CmF with barium.\n\nA synthetic, radioactive element, curium is a hard, dense metal with a silvery-white appearance and physical and chemical properties resembling those of gadolinium. Its melting point of 1344 °C is significantly higher than that of the previous transuranic elements neptunium (637 °C), plutonium (639 °C) and americium (1173 °C). In comparison, gadolinium melts at 1312 °C. The boiling point of curium is 3556 °C. With a density of 13.52 g/cm, curium is significantly lighter than neptunium (20.45 g/cm) and plutonium (19.8 g/cm), but is heavier than most other metals. Between two crystalline forms of curium, the α-Cm is more stable at ambient conditions. It has a hexagonal symmetry, space group P6/mmc, lattice parameters \"a\" = 365 pm and \"c\" = 1182 pm, and four formula units per unit cell. The crystal consists of a double-hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic with α-lanthanum. At pressures above 23 GPa, at room temperature, α-Cm transforms into β-Cm, which has a face-centered cubic symmetry, space group Fmm and the lattice constant \"a\" = 493 pm. Upon further compression to 43 GPa, curium transforms to an orthorhombic γ-Cm structure similar to that of α-uranium, with no further transitions observed up to 52 GPa. These three curium phases are also referred to as Cm I, II and III.\n\nCurium has peculiar magnetic properties. Whereas its neighbor element americium shows no deviation from Curie-Weiss paramagnetism in the entire temperature range, α-Cm transforms to an antiferromagnetic state upon cooling to 65–52 K, and β-Cm exhibits a ferrimagnetic transition at about 205 K. Meanwhile, curium pnictides show ferromagnetic transitions upon cooling: CmN and CmAs at 109 K, CmP at 73 K and CmSb at 162 K. The lanthanide analogue of curium, gadolinium, as well as its pnictides, also show magnetic transitions upon cooling, but the transition character is somewhat different: Gd and GdN become ferromagnetic, and GdP, GdAs and GdSb show antiferromagnetic ordering.\n\nIn accordance with magnetic data, electrical resistivity of curium increases with temperature – about twice between 4 and 60 K – and then remains nearly constant up to room temperature. There is a significant increase in resistivity over time (about 10 µΩ·cm/h) due to self-damage of the crystal lattice by alpha radiation. This makes uncertain the absolute resistivity value for curium (about 125 µΩ·cm). The resistivity of curium is similar to that of gadolinium and of the actinides plutonium and neptunium, but is significantly higher than that of americium, uranium, polonium and thorium.\n\nUnder ultraviolet illumination, curium(III) ions exhibit strong and stable yellow-orange fluorescence with a maximum in the range about 590–640 nm depending on their environment. The fluorescence originates from the transitions from the first excited state D and the ground state S. Analysis of this fluorescence allows monitoring interactions between Cm(III) ions in organic and inorganic complexes.\n\nCurium ions in solution almost exclusively assume the oxidation state of +3, which is the most stable oxidation state for curium. The +4 oxidation state is observed mainly in a few solid phases, such as CmO and CmF. Aqueous curium(IV) is only known in the presence of strong oxidizers such as potassium persulfate, and is easily reduced to curium(III) by radiolysis and even by water itself. The chemical behavior of curium is different from the actinides thorium and uranium, and is similar to that of americium and many lanthanides. In aqueous solution, the Cm ion is colorless to pale green, and Cm ion is pale yellow. The optical absorption of Cm ions contains three sharp peaks at 375.4, 381.2 and 396.5 nanometers and their strength can be directly converted into the concentration of the ions. The +6 oxidation state has only been reported once in solution in 1978, as the curyl ion (): this was prepared from the beta decay of americium-242 in the americium(V) ion . Failure to obtain Cm(VI) from oxidation of Cm(III) and Cm(IV) may be due to the high Cm/Cm ionization potential and the instability of Cm(V).\n\nCurium ions are hard Lewis acids and thus form most stable complexes with hard bases. The bonding is mostly ionic, with a small covalent component. Curium in its complexes commonly exhibits a 9-fold coordination environment, within a tricapped trigonal prismatic geometry.\n\nAbout 19 radioisotopes and 7 nuclear isomers between Cm and Cm are known for curium, none of which are stable. The longest half-lives have been reported for Cm (15.6 million years) and Cm (348,000 years). Other long-lived isotopes are Cm (half-life 8500 years), Cm (8,300 years) and Cm (4,760 years). Curium-250 is unusual in that it predominantly (about 86%) decays via spontaneous fission. The most commonly used curium isotopes are Cm and Cm with the half-lives of 162.8 days and 18.1 years, respectively.\n\nAll isotopes between Cm and Cm, as well as Cm, undergo a self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction and thus in principle can act as a nuclear fuel in a reactor. As in most transuranic elements, the nuclear fission cross section is especially high for the odd-mass curium isotopes Cm, Cm and Cm. These can be used in thermal-neutron reactors, whereas a mixture of curium isotopes is only suitable for fast breeder reactors since the even-mass isotopes are not fissile in a thermal reactor and accumulate as burn-up increases. The mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel, which is to be used in power reactors, should contain little or no curium because the neutron activation of Cm will create californium. Californium is a strong neutron emitter, and would pollute the back end of the fuel cycle and increase the dose to reactor personnel. Hence, if the minor actinides are to be used as fuel in a thermal neutron reactor, the curium should be excluded from the fuel or placed in special fuel rods where it is the only actinide present.\nThe adjacent table lists the critical masses for curium isotopes for a sphere, without a moderator and reflector. With a metal reflector (30 cm of steel), the critical masses of the odd isotopes are about 3–4 kg. When using water (thickness ~20–30 cm) as the reflector, the critical mass can be as small as 59 gram for Cm, 155 gram for Cm and 1550 gram for Cm. There is a significant uncertainty in these critical mass values. Whereas it is usually on the order of 20%, the values for Cm and Cm were listed as large as 371 kg and 70.1 kg, respectively, by some research groups.\n\nCurrently, curium is not used as a nuclear fuel owing to its low availability and high price. Cm and Cm have a very small critical mass and therefore could be used in portable nuclear weapons, but none have been reported thus far. Curium-243 is not suitable for this purpose because of its short half-life and strong α emission which would result in excessive heat. Curium-247 would be highly suitable, having a half-life 647 times that of plutonium-239.\n\nThe longest-lived isotope of curium, Cm, has a half-life of 15.6 million years. Therefore, any primordial curium, that is curium present on the Earth during its formation, should have decayed by now, although some of it would be detectable as an extinct radionuclide as an excess of its primordial, long-lived daughter U. Trace amounts of curium possibly occur naturally in uranium minerals as a result of neutron capture and beta decay sequences, though this has not been confirmed.\n\nCurium is produced artificially in small quantities for research purposes. Furthermore, it occurs in spent nuclear fuel. Curium is present in nature in certain areas used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests, which were conducted between 1945 and 1980. So the analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb, Ivy Mike, (1 November 1952, Enewetak Atoll), beside einsteinium, fermium, plutonium and americium also revealed isotopes of berkelium, californium and curium, in particular Cm, Cm and smaller quantities of Cm, Cm and Cm.\n\nAtmospheric curium compounds are poorly soluble in common solvents and mostly adhere to soil particles. Soil analysis revealed about 4,000 times higher concentration of curium at the sandy soil particles than in water present in the soil pores. An even higher ratio of about 18,000 was measured in loam soils.\n\nThe transuranic elements from americium to fermium, including curium, occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo, but no longer do so.\n\nCurium is produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors, and by now only kilograms of it have been accumulated for the Cm and Cm and grams or even milligrams for heavier isotopes. This explains the high price of curium, which has been quoted at 160–185 USD per milligram, with a more recent estimate at US$2,000/g for Cm and US$170/g for Cm. In nuclear reactors, curium is formed from U in a series of nuclear reactions. In the first chain, U captures a neutron and converts into U, which via β decay transforms into Np and Pu.\n\nFurther neutron capture followed by β-decay produces the Am isotope of americium which further converts into Cm:\nFor research purposes, curium is obtained by irradiating not uranium but plutonium, which is available in large amounts from spent nuclear fuel. A much higher neutron flux is used for the irradiation that results in a different reaction chain and formation of Cm:\nCurium-244 decays into Pu by emission of alpha particle, but it also absorbs neutrons resulting in a small amount of heavier curium isotopes. Among those, Cm and Cm are popular in scientific research because of their long half-lives. However, the production rate of Cm in thermal neutron reactors is relatively low because it is prone to undergo fission induced by thermal neutrons. Synthesis of Cm via neutron absorption is also rather unlikely because of the short half-life of the intermediate product Cm (64 min), which converts by β decay to the berkelium isotope Bk.\n\nThe above cascade of (n,γ) reactions produces a mixture of different curium isotopes. Their post-synthesis separation is cumbersome, and therefore a selective synthesis is desired. Curium-248 is favored for research purposes because of its long half-life. The most efficient preparation method of this isotope is via α-decay of the californium isotope Cf, which is available in relatively large quantities due to its long half-life (2.65 years). About 35–50 mg of Cm is being produced by this method every year. The associated reaction produces Cm with isotopic purity of 97%.\n\nAnother interesting for research isotope Cm can be obtained from the α-decay of Cf, and the latter isotope is produced in minute quantities from the β-decay of the berkelium isotope Bk.\n\nMost synthesis routines yield a mixture of different actinide isotopes as oxides, from which a certain isotope of curium needs to be separated. An example procedure could be to dissolve spent reactor fuel (e.g. MOX fuel) in nitric acid, and remove the bulk of the uranium and plutonium using a PUREX (Plutonium – URanium EXtraction) type extraction with tributyl phosphate in a hydrocarbon. The lanthanides and the remaining actinides are then separated from the aqueous residue (raffinate) by a diamide-based extraction to give, after stripping, a mixture of trivalent actinides and lanthanides. A curium compound is then selectively extracted using multi-step chromatographic and centrifugation techniques with an appropriate reagent. \"Bis\"-triazinyl bipyridine complex has been recently proposed as such reagent which is highly selective to curium. Separation of curium from a very similar americium can also be achieved by treating a slurry of their hydroxides in aqueous sodium bicarbonate with ozone at elevated temperature. Both americium and curium are present in solutions mostly in the +3 valence state; whereas americium oxidizes to soluble Am(IV) complexes, curium remains unchanged and can thus be isolated by repeated centrifugation.\n\nMetallic curium is obtained by reduction of its compounds. Initially, curium(III) fluoride was used for this purpose. The reaction was conducted in the environment free from water and oxygen, in the apparatus made of tantalum and tungsten, using elemental barium or lithium as reducing agents.\n\nAnother possibility is the reduction of curium(IV) oxide using a magnesium-zinc alloy in a melt of magnesium chloride and magnesium fluoride.\n\nCurium readily reacts with oxygen forming mostly CmO and CmO oxides, but the divalent oxide CmO is also known. Black CmO can be obtained by burning curium oxalate (Cm(CO)), nitrate (Cm(NO)) or hydroxide in pure oxygen. Upon heating to 600–650 °C in vacuum (about 0.01 Pa), it transforms into the whitish CmO:\n\nAlternatively, CmO can be obtained by reducing CmO with molecular hydrogen:\n\nFurthermore, a number of ternary oxides of the type M(II)CmO are known, where M stands for a divalent metal, such as barium.\n\nThermal oxidation of trace quantities of curium hydride (CmH) has been reported to produce a volatile form of CmO and the volatile trioxide CmO, one of the two known examples of the very rare +6 state for curium. Another observed species was reported to behave similarly to a supposed plutonium tetroxide and was tentatively characterized as CmO, with curium in the extremely rare +8 state; however, new experiments seem to indicate that CmO does not exist, and have cast doubt on the existence of PuO as well.\n\nThe colorless curium(III) fluoride (CmF) can be produced by introducing fluoride ions into curium(III)-containing solutions. The brown tetravalent curium(IV) fluoride (CmF) on the other hand is only obtained by reacting curium(III) fluoride with molecular fluorine:\n\nA series of ternary fluorides are known of the form ACmF, where A stands for alkali metal.\n\nThe colorless curium(III) chloride (CmCl) is produced in the reaction of curium(III) hydroxide (Cm(OH)) with anhydrous hydrogen chloride gas. It can further be converted into other halides, such as curium(III) bromide (colorless to light green) and curium(III) iodide (colorless), by reacting it with the ammonia salt of the corresponding halide at elevated temperature of about 400–450 °C:\n\nAn alternative procedure is heating curium oxide to about 600 °C with the corresponding acid (such as hydrobromic for curium bromide). Vapor phase hydrolysis of curium(III) chloride results in curium oxychloride:\n\nSulfides, selenides and tellurides of curium have been obtained by treating curium with gaseous sulfur, selenium or tellurium in vacuum at elevated temperature. The pnictides of curium of the type CmX are known for the elements nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic and antimony. They can be prepared by reacting either curium(III) hydride (CmH) or metallic curium with these elements at elevated temperatures.\n\nOrganometallic complexes analogous to uranocene are known also for other actinides, such as thorium, protactinium, neptunium, plutonium and americium. Molecular orbital theory predicts a stable \"curocene\" complex (η-CH)Cm, but it has not been reported experimentally yet.\n\nFormation of the complexes of the type Cm(n-CH-BTP), where BTP stands for 2,6-di(1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)pyridine, in solutions containing n-CH-BTP and Cm ions has been confirmed by EXAFS. Some of these BTP-type complexes selectively interact with curium and therefore are useful in its selective separation from lanthanides and another actinides. Dissolved Cm ions bind with many organic compounds, such as hydroxamic acid, urea, fluorescein and adenosine triphosphate. Many of these compounds are related to biological activity of various microorganisms. The resulting complexes exhibit strong yellow-orange emission under UV light excitation, which is convenient not only for their detection, but also for studying the interactions between the Cm ion and the ligands via changes in the half-life (of the order ~0.1 ms) and spectrum of the fluorescence.\n\nCurium has no biological significance. There are a few reports on biosorption of Cm by bacteria and archaea, however no evidence for incorporation of curium into them.\n\nCurium is one of the most radioactive isolable elements. Its two most common isotopes Cm and Cm are strong alpha emitters (energy 6 MeV); they have relatively short half-lives of 162.8 days and 18.1 years, and produce as much as 120 W/g and 3 W/g of thermal energy, respectively. Therefore, curium can be used in its common oxide form in radioisotope thermoelectric generators like those in spacecraft. This application has been studied for the Cm isotope, while Cm was abandoned due to its prohibitive price of around 2000 USD/g. Cm with a ~30 year half-life and good energy yield of ~1.6 W/g could make a suitable fuel, but it produces significant amounts of harmful gamma and beta radiation from radioactive decay products. Though as an α-emitter, Cm requires a much thinner radiation protection shielding, it has a high spontaneous fission rate, and thus the neutron and gamma radiation rate are relatively strong. As compared to a competing thermoelectric generator isotope such as Pu, Cm emits a 500-fold greater fluence of neutrons, and its higher gamma emission requires a shield that is 20 times thicker — about 2 inches of lead for a 1 kW source, as compared to 0.1 in for Pu. Therefore, this application of curium is currently considered impractical.\n\nA more promising application of Cm is to produce Pu, a more suitable radioisotope for thermoelectric generators such as in cardiac pacemakers. The alternative routes to Pu use the (n,γ) reaction of Np, or the deuteron bombardment of uranium, which both always produce Pu as an undesired by-product — since the latter decays to U with strong gamma emission. Curium is also a common starting material for the production of higher transuranic elements and transactinides. Thus, bombardment of Cm with neon (Ne), magnesium (Mg), or calcium (Ca) yielded certain isotopes of seaborgium (Sg), hassium (Hs and Hs), and livermorium (Lv, Lv, and possibly Lv). Californium was discovered when a microgram-sized target of curium-242 was irradiated with 35 MeV alpha particles using the cyclotron at Berkeley:\nOnly about 5,000 atoms of californium were produced in this experiment.\n\nThe most practical application of Cm — though rather limited in total volume — is as α-particle source in the alpha particle X-ray spectrometers (APXS). These instruments were installed on the Sojourner, Mars, Mars 96, Mars Exploration Rovers and Philae comet lander, as well as the Mars Science Laboratory to analyze the composition and structure of the rocks on the surface of planet Mars. APXS was also used in the Surveyor 5–7 moon probes but with a Cm source.\n\nAn elaborated APXS setup is equipped with a sensor head containing six curium sources having the total radioactive decay rate of several tens of millicuries (roughly a gigabecquerel). The sources are collimated on the sample, and the energy spectra of the alpha particles and protons scattered from the sample are analyzed (the proton analysis is implemented only in some spectrometers). These spectra contain quantitative information on all major elements in the samples except for hydrogen, helium and lithium.\n\nOwing to its high radioactivity, curium and its compounds must be handled in appropriate laboratories under special arrangements. Whereas curium itself mostly emits α-particles which are absorbed by thin layers of common materials, some of its decay products emit significant fractions of beta and gamma radiation, which require a more elaborate protection. If consumed, curium is excreted within a few days and only 0.05% is absorbed in the blood. From there, about 45% goes to the liver, 45% to the bones, and the remaining 10% is excreted. In the bone, curium accumulates on the inside of the interfaces to the bone marrow and does not significantly redistribute with time; its radiation destroys bone marrow and thus stops red blood cell creation. The biological half-life of curium is about 20 years in the liver and 50 years in the bones. Curium is absorbed in the body much more strongly via inhalation, and the allowed total dose of Cm in soluble form is 0.3 μC. Intravenous injection of Cm and Cm containing solutions to rats increased the incidence of bone tumor, and inhalation promoted pulmonary and liver cancer.\n\nCurium isotopes are inevitably present in spent nuclear fuel with a concentration of about 20 g/tonne. Among them, the Cm–Cm isotopes have decay times of thousands of years and need to be removed to neutralize the fuel for disposal. The associated procedure involves several steps, where curium is first separated and then converted by neutron bombardment in special reactors to short-lived nuclides. This procedure, nuclear transmutation, while well documented for other elements, is still being developed for curium.\n\nBULLET::::- Holleman, Arnold F. and Wiberg, Nils \" Lehrbuch der Anorganischen Chemie\", 102 Edition, de Gruyter, Berlin 2007, .\nBULLET::::- Penneman, R. A. and Keenan T. K. The radiochemistry of americium and curium, University of California, Los Alamos, California, 1960\n\nBULLET::::- Curium at \"The Periodic Table of Videos\" (University of Nottingham)\nBULLET::::- NLM Hazardous Substances Databank – Curium, Radioactive\n"}
{"id": "5676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5676", "title": "Californium", "text": "Californium\n\nCalifornium is a radioactive chemical element with the symbol Cf and atomic number 98. The element was first synthesized in 1950 at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (then the University of California Radiation Laboratory), by bombarding curium with alpha particles (helium-4 ions). It is an actinide element, the sixth transuranium element to be synthesized, and has the second-highest atomic mass of all the elements that have been produced in amounts large enough to see with the unaided eye (after einsteinium). The element was named after the university and the state of California.\n\nTwo crystalline forms exist for californium under normal pressure: one above and one below . A third form exists at high pressure. Californium slowly tarnishes in air at room temperature. Compounds of californium are dominated by the +3 oxidation state. The most stable of californium's twenty known isotopes is californium-251, which has a half-life of 898 years. This short half-life means the element is not found in significant quantities in the Earth's crust. Californium-252, with a half-life of about 2.645 years, is the most common isotope used and is produced at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the United States and the Research Institute of Atomic Reactors in Russia.\n\nCalifornium is one of the few transuranium elements that have practical applications. Most of these applications exploit the property of certain isotopes of californium to emit neutrons. For example, californium can be used to help start up nuclear reactors, and it is employed as a source of neutrons when studying materials using neutron diffraction and neutron spectroscopy. Californium can also be used in nuclear synthesis of higher mass elements; oganesson (element 118) was synthesized by bombarding californium-249 atoms with calcium-48 ions. Users of californium must take into account radiological concerns and the element's ability to disrupt the formation of red blood cells by bioaccumulating in skeletal tissue.\n\nCalifornium is a silvery white actinide metal with a melting point of and an estimated boiling point of . The pure metal is malleable and is easily cut with a razor blade. Californium metal starts to vaporize above when exposed to a vacuum. Below californium metal is either ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic (it acts like a magnet), between 48 and 66 K it is antiferromagnetic (an intermediate state), and above it is paramagnetic (external magnetic fields can make it magnetic). It forms alloys with lanthanide metals but little is known about them.\n\nThe element has two crystalline forms under 1 standard atmosphere of pressure: a double-hexagonal close-packed form dubbed alpha (α) and a face-centered cubic form designated beta (β). The α form exists below 600–800 °C with a density of 15.10 g/cm and the β form exists above 600–800 °C with a density of 8.74 g/cm. At 48 GPa of pressure the β form changes into an orthorhombic crystal system due to delocalization of the atom's 5f electrons, which frees them to bond.\n\nThe bulk modulus of a material is a measure of its resistance to uniform pressure. Californium's bulk modulus is , which is similar to trivalent lanthanide metals but smaller than more familiar metals, such as aluminium (70 GPa).\n\n+ Representative californium compounds\n! state !! compound !! formula !! color !! \ncalifornium(III) borate\nCf[BO(OH)]\npale green  style=\"background:#96CD91;\" \nCalifornium exhibits oxidation states of 4, 3, or 2. It typically forms eight or nine bonds to surrounding atoms or ions. Its chemical properties are predicted to be similar to other primarily 3+ valence actinide elements and the element dysprosium, which is the lanthanide above californium in the periodic table. The element slowly tarnishes in air at room temperature, with the rate increasing when moisture is added. Californium reacts when heated with hydrogen, nitrogen, or a chalcogen (oxygen family element); reactions with dry hydrogen and aqueous mineral acids are rapid. \n\nCalifornium is only water-soluble as the californium(III) cation. Attempts to reduce or oxidize the +3 ion in solution have failed. The element forms a water-soluble chloride, nitrate, perchlorate, and sulfate and is precipitated as a fluoride, oxalate, or hydroxide. Californium is the heaviest actinide to exhibit covalent properties, as is observed in the californium borate.\n\nTwenty radioisotopes of californium have been characterized, the most stable being californium-251 with a half-life of 898 years, californium-249 with a half-life of 351 years, californium-250 with a half-life of 13.08 years, and californium-252 with a half-life of 2.645 years. All the remaining isotopes have half-lives shorter than a year, and the majority of these have half-lives shorter than 20 minutes. The isotopes of californium range in mass number from 237 to 256.\n\nCalifornium-249 is formed from the beta decay of berkelium-249, and most other californium isotopes are made by subjecting berkelium to intense neutron radiation in a nuclear reactor. Although californium-251 has the longest half-life, its production yield is only 10% due to its tendency to collect neutrons (high neutron capture) and its tendency to interact with other particles (high neutron cross-section).\n\nCalifornium-252 is a very strong neutron emitter, which makes it extremely radioactive and harmful. Californium-252 undergoes alpha decay 96.9% of the time to form curium-248 while the remaining 3.1% of decays are spontaneous fission. One microgram (µg) of californium-252 emits 2.3 million neutrons per second, an average of 3.7 neutrons per spontaneous fission. Most of the other isotopes of californium decay to isotopes of curium (atomic number 96) via alpha decay.\n\nCalifornium was first synthesized at the University of California Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley, by the physics researchers Stanley G. Thompson, Kenneth Street, Jr., Albert Ghiorso, and Glenn T. Seaborg on or about February 9, 1950. It was the sixth transuranium element to be discovered; the team announced its discovery on March 17, 1950.\n\nTo produce californium, a microgram-sized target of curium-242 () was bombarded with 35 MeV-alpha particles () in the cyclotron at Berkeley, which produced californium-245 () plus one free neutron ().\nOnly about 5,000 atoms of californium were produced in this experiment, and these atoms had a half-life of 44 minutes.\n\nThe discoverers named the new element after the university and the state. This was a break from the convention used for elements 95 to 97, which drew inspiration from how the elements directly above them in the periodic table were named. However, the element directly above element 98 in the periodic table, dysprosium, has a name that simply means \"hard to get at\" so the researchers decided to set aside the informal naming convention. They added that \"the best we can do is to point out [that] ... searchers a century ago found it difficult to get to California.\"\n\nWeighable quantities of californium were first produced by the irradiation of plutonium targets at the Materials Testing Reactor at the National Reactor Testing Station in eastern Idaho; and these findings were reported in 1954. The high spontaneous fission rate of californium-252 was observed in these samples. The first experiment with californium in concentrated form occurred in 1958. The isotopes californium-249 to californium-252 were isolated that same year from a sample of plutonium-239 that had been irradiated with neutrons in a nuclear reactor for five years. Two years later, in 1960, Burris Cunningham and James Wallman of the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of the University of California created the first californium compounds—californium trichloride, californium oxychloride, and californium oxide—by treating californium with steam and hydrochloric acid.\n\nThe High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, started producing small batches of californium in the 1960s. By 1995, the HFIR nominally produced of californium annually. Plutonium supplied by the United Kingdom to the United States under the 1958 US-UK Mutual Defence Agreement was used for californium production.\n\nThe Atomic Energy Commission sold californium-252 to industrial and academic customers in the early 1970s for $10 per microgram and an average of of californium-252 were shipped each year from 1970 to 1990. Californium metal was first prepared in 1974 by Haire and Baybarz who reduced californium(III) oxide with lanthanum metal to obtain microgram amounts of sub-micrometer thick films.\n\nTraces of californium can be found near facilities that use the element in mineral prospecting and in medical treatments. The element is fairly insoluble in water, but it adheres well to ordinary soil; and concentrations of it in the soil can be 500 times higher than in the water surrounding the soil particles.\n\nFallout from atmospheric nuclear testing prior to 1980 contributed a small amount of californium to the environment. Californium isotopes with mass numbers 249, 252, 253, and 254 have been observed in the radioactive dust collected from the air after a nuclear explosion. Californium is not a major radionuclide at United States Department of Energy legacy sites since it was not produced in large quantities.\n\nCalifornium was once believed to be produced in supernovas, as their decay matches the 60-day half-life of Cf. However, subsequent studies failed to demonstrate any californium spectra, and supernova light curves are now thought to follow the decay of nickel-56.\n\nThe transuranic elements from americium to fermium, including californium, occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo, but no longer do so.\n\nCalifornium is produced in nuclear reactors and particle accelerators. Californium-250 is made by bombarding berkelium-249 () with neutrons, forming berkelium-250 () via neutron capture (n,γ) which, in turn, quickly beta decays (β) to californium-250 () in the following reaction:\nBombardment of californium-250 with neutrons produces californium-251 and californium-252.\n\nProlonged irradiation of americium, curium, and plutonium with neutrons produces milligram amounts of californium-252 and microgram amounts of californium-249. As of 2006, curium isotopes 244 to 248 are irradiated by neutrons in special reactors to produce primarily californium-252 with lesser amounts of isotopes 249 to 255.\n\nMicrogram quantities of californium-252 are available for commercial use through the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Only two sites produce californium-252: the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the United States, and the Research Institute of Atomic Reactors in Dimitrovgrad, Russia. As of 2003, the two sites produce 0.25 grams and 0.025 grams of californium-252 per year, respectively.\n\nThree californium isotopes with significant half-lives are produced, requiring a total of 15 neutron captures by uranium-238 without nuclear fission or alpha decay occurring during the process. Californium-253 is at the end of a production chain that starts with uranium-238, includes several isotopes of plutonium, americium, curium, berkelium, and the californium isotopes 249 to 253 (see diagram).\n\nCalifornium-252 has a number of specialized applications as a strong neutron emitter, and each microgram of fresh californium produces 139 million neutrons per minute. This property makes californium useful as a neutron startup source for some nuclear reactors and as a portable (non-reactor based) neutron source for neutron activation analysis to detect trace amounts of elements in samples. Neutrons from californium are employed as a treatment of certain cervical and brain cancers where other radiation therapy is ineffective. It has been used in educational applications since 1969 when the Georgia Institute of Technology received a loan of 119 µg of californium-252 from the Savannah River Plant. It is also used with online elemental coal analyzers and bulk material analyzers in the coal and cement industries.\n\nNeutron penetration into materials makes californium useful in detection instruments such as fuel rod scanners; neutron radiography of aircraft and weapons components to detect corrosion, bad welds, cracks and trapped moisture; and in portable metal detectors. Neutron moisture gauges use californium-252 to find water and petroleum layers in oil wells, as a portable neutron source for gold and silver prospecting for on-the-spot analysis, and to detect ground water movement. The major uses of californium-252 in 1982 were, in order of use, reactor start-up (48.3%), fuel rod scanning (25.3%), and activation analysis (19.4%). By 1994, most californium-252 was used in neutron radiography (77.4%), with fuel rod scanning (12.1%) and reactor start-up (6.9%) as important but distant secondary uses.\n\nCalifornium-251 has a very small calculated critical mass of about , high lethality, and a relatively short period of toxic environmental irradiation. The low critical mass of californium led to some exaggerated claims about possible uses for the element.\n\nIn October 2006, researchers announced that three atoms of oganesson (element 118) had been identified at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia, as the product of bombardment of californium-249 with calcium-48, making it the heaviest element ever synthesized. The target for this experiment contained about 10 mg of californium-249 deposited on a titanium foil of 32 cm area. Californium has also been used to produce other transuranium elements; for example, element 103 (later named lawrencium) was first synthesized in 1961 by bombarding californium with boron nuclei.\n\nCalifornium that bioaccumulates in skeletal tissue releases radiation that disrupts the body's ability to form red blood cells. The element plays no natural biological role in any organism due to its intense radioactivity and low concentration in the environment.\n\nCalifornium can enter the body from ingesting contaminated food or drinks or by breathing air with suspended particles of the element. Once in the body, only 0.05% of the californium will reach the bloodstream. About 65% of that californium will be deposited in the skeleton, 25% in the liver, and the rest in other organs, or excreted, mainly in urine. Half of the californium deposited in the skeleton and liver are gone in 50 and 20 years, respectively. Californium in the skeleton adheres to bone surfaces before slowly migrating throughout the bone.\n\nThe element is most dangerous if taken into the body. In addition, californium-249 and californium-251 can cause tissue damage externally, through gamma ray emission. Ionizing radiation emitted by californium on bone and in the liver can cause cancer.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Californium at \"The Periodic Table of Videos\" (University of Nottingham)\nBULLET::::- NuclearWeaponArchive.org – Californium\nBULLET::::- Hazardous Substances Databank – Californium, Radioactive\n"}
{"id": "5679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5679", "title": "Christian Social Union in Bavaria", "text": "Christian Social Union in Bavaria\n\nThe Christian Social Union in Bavaria (, CSU) is a Christian-democratic and conservative political party in Germany. The CSU operates only in Bavaria while its larger counterpart, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), operates in the other fifteen states of Germany. It differs from the CDU by being somewhat more conservative in social matters. The CSU is considered an effective successor of the Weimar-era Catholic Bavarian People's Party (BVP).\n\nAt the federal level, the CSU forms a common faction in the Bundestag with the CDU, which is frequently referred to as the Union Faction (\"die Unionsfraktion\"). The CSU has had 46 seats in the Bundestag since the 2017 federal election, making it the smallest of the seven parties represented. The CSU is a member of the European People's Party (EPP) and the International Democrat Union. The CSU currently has three ministers in the cabinet of Germany of the federal government in Berlin, including former party leader Horst Seehofer who is Federal Minister of the Interior while party leader Markus Söder serves as Minister-President of Bavaria, a position that CSU representatives have held from 1946 to 1954 and again since 1957.\n\nFranz Josef Strauß (1915–1988) had left behind the strongest legacy as a leader of the party, having led the party from 1961 until his death in 1988. His political career in the federal cabinet was unique in that he had served four ministerial posts in the years between 1953 and 1969. From 1978 until his death in 1988, Strauß served as the Minister-President of Bavaria. Strauß was the first leader of the CSU to be a candidate for the German chancellery in 1980. In the 1980 federal election, Strauß ran against the incumbent Helmut Schmidt of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), but lost thereafter as the SPD and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) managed to secure an absolute majority together, forming a social-liberal coalition.\n\nThe CSU has led the Bavarian state government since it came into existence in 1946, save from 1954 to 1957 when the SPD formed a state government in coalition with the Bavaria Party and the state branches of the GB/BHE and FDP. Before the 2008 elections in Bavaria, the CSU perennially achieved absolute majorities at the state level by itself. This level of dominance is unique among Germany's 16 states. Edmund Stoiber took over the CSU leadership in 1999. He ran for Chancellor of Germany in 2002, but his preferred CDU/CSU–FDP coalition lost against the SPD candidate Gerhard Schröder's SPD–Green alliance.\n\nIn the 2003 Bavarian state election, the CSU won 60.7% of the vote and 124 of 180 seats in the state parliament. This was the first time any party had won a two thirds majority in a German state parliament. \"The Economist\" later suggested that this exceptional result was due to a backlash against Schröder's government in Berlin. The CSU's popularity declined in subsequent years. Stoiber stepped down from the posts of Minister-President and CSU chairman in September 2007. A year later, the CSU lost its majority in the 2008 Bavarian state election, with its vote share dropping from 60.7% to 43.4%. The CSU remained in power by forming a coalition with the FDP. In the 2009 general election, the CSU received only 42.5% of the vote in Bavaria in the 2009 election, which constitutes its weakest showing in the party's history.\n\nThe CSU made gains in the 2013 Bavarian state election and the 2013 federal election, which were held a week apart in September 2013. The CSU regained their majority in the Bavarian Landtag and remained in government in Berlin. They have three ministers in Angela Merkel's current cabinet, namely Horst Seehofer (Minister of the Interior, Building and Community), Andreas Scheuer (Minister of Transport and Digital Infrastructure) and Gerd Müller (Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development).\n\nThe CSU forms after 2018 Bavarian state election on October 14, 2018 a new government with partner Free Voters of Bavaria.\n\nThe CSU is the sister party of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). Together, they are called The Union. The CSU operates only within Bavaria and the CDU operates in all other states, but not Bavaria. While virtually independent, at the federal level the parties form a common CDU/CSU faction. No Chancellor has ever come from the CSU, although Strauß and Edmund Stoiber were CDU/CSU candidates for Chancellor in the 1980 federal election and the 2002 federal election, respectively, which were both won by the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). Below the federal level, the parties are entirely independent.\n\nSince its formation, the CSU has been more conservative than the CDU. The CSU and the state of Bavaria decided not to sign the \"Grundgesetz\" of the Federal Republic of Germany as they could not agree with the division of Germany into two states after World War II. Although Bavaria like all German states has a separate police and justice system (distinctive and non-federal), the CSU has actively participated in all political affairs of the German Parliament, the German government, the German Bundesrat, the parliamentary elections of the German President, the European Parliament and meetings with Mikhail Gorbachev in Russia.\n\n!colspan=2Chairman\n!width=125pxFrom\n!width=125pxTo\nwidth=30px1st\nwidth=150pxJosef Müller\n17 December 1945\n28 May 1949\n2nd\nHans Ehard\n28 May 1949\n22 January 1955\n3rd\nHanns Seidel\n22 January 1955\n16 February 1961\n4th\nFranz Josef Strauß\n18 March 1961\n3 October 1988\n5th\nTheodor Waigel\n16 November 1988\n16 January 1999\n6th\nEdmund Stoiber\n16 January 1999\n29 September 2007\n7th\nErwin Huber\n29 September 2007\n25 October 2008\n8th\nHorst Seehofer\n25 October 2008\n19 January 2019\n9th\nMarkus Söder\n19 January 2019\nPresent day\n\nThe CSU has contributed eleven of the twelve Ministers-President of Bavaria since 1945, with only Wilhelm Hoegner (1945–1946, 1954–1957) of the SPD also holding the office.\n\n!width=185pxMinister-President\n!width=125pxFrom\n!width=125pxTo\nFritz Schäffer\n28 May 1945\n28 September 1945\nHans Ehard (first time)\n21 December 1946\n14 December 1954\nHanns Seidel\n16 October 1957\n22 January 1960\nHans Ehard (second time)\n26 January 1960\n11 December 1962\nAlfons Goppel\n11 December 1962\n6 November 1978\nFranz Josef Strauss\n6 November 1978\n3 October 1988\nMax Streibl\n19 October 1988\n27 May 1993\nEdmund Stoiber\n28 May 1993\n30 September 2007\nGünther Beckstein\n9 October 2007\n27 October 2008\nHorst Seehofer\n27 October 2008\n13 March 2018\nMarkus Söder\n16 March 2018\nPresent day\n\n!Election year\n!No. ofconstituency votes\n!No. ofparty list votes\n!% ofparty list votes\n!No. ofoverall seats won\n\n!1949\nbgcolor=\"lightgrey\"\n1,380,448\n5.8\nbgcolor=\"lightgrey\"\n!1953\n2,450,286\n2,427,387\n8.8\n!1957\n3,186,150\n3,133,060\n10.5\n!1961\n3,104,742\n3,014,471\n9.6\n!1965\n3,204,648\n3,136,506\n9.6\n!1969\n3,094,176\n3,115,652\n9.5\n!1972\n3,620,625\n3,615,183\n9.72\n!1976\n4,008,514\n4,027,499\n10.6\n!1980\n3,941,365\n3,908,459\n10.3\n!1983\n4,318,800\n4,140,865\n10.6\n!1987\n3,859,244\n3,715,827\n9.8\n!1990\n3,423,904\n3,302,980\n7.1\n!1994\n3,657,627\n3,427,196\n7.3\n!1998\n3,602,472\n3,324,480\n6.8\n!2002\n4,311,178\n4,315,080\n9.0\n!2005\n3,889,990\n3,494,309\n7.4\n!2009\n3,191,000\n2,830,238\n6.5\n!2013\n3,544,079\n3,243,569\n7.4\n!2017\n3,255,604\n2,869,744\n6.2\n\n!Election year\n!No. ofoverall votes\n!% ofoverall vote\n!No. ofoverall seats won\n\n!1979\n2,817,120\n10.1 (3rd)\nbgcolor=\"lightgrey\"\n!1984\n2,109,130\n8.5 (3rd)\n!1989\n2,326,277\n8.2 (4th)\n!1994\n2,393,374\n6.8 (4th)\n!1999\n2,540,007\n9.4 (4th)\n!2004\n2,063,900\n8.0 (4th)\n!2009\n1,896,762\n7.2 (6th)\n!2014\n1,567,258\n5.3 (6th)\n!2019\n2,354,816\n6.3 (5th)\n\n!Election year\n!No. ofconstituency votes\n!No. ofparty list votes\n!% ofoverall votes\n!No. ofoverall seats won\n!Government\n!1946\nbgcolor=\"lightgrey\"\n1,593,908\n52.2\nbgcolor=\"lightgrey\"\n\n!1950\n1,264,993\n1,262,377\n27.4\n\n!1954\n1,855,995\n1,835,959\n37.9\n\n!1958\n2,101,645\n2,091,259\n45.5\n\n!1962\n2,343,169\n2,320,359\n47.5\n\n!1966\n2,549,610\n2,524,732\n48.1\n\n!1970\n3,205,170\n3,139,429\n56.4\n\n!1974\n3,520,065\n3,481,486\n62.0\n\n!1978\n3,394,096\n3,387,995\n59.1\n\n!1982\n3,557,068\n3,534,375\n58.2\n\n!1986\n3,142,094\n3,191,640\n55.7\n\n!1990\n3,007,566\n3,085,948\n54.9\n\n!1994\n3,063,635\n3,100,253\n52.8\n\n!1998\n3,168,996\n3,278,768\n52.9\n\n!2003\n3,050,456\n3,167,408\n60.6\n\n!2008\n2,267,521\n2,336,439\n43.4\n\n!2013\n2,754,256 \n2,882,169\n47.7\n\n!2018\n2,495,960 \n2,551,046\n37.2\n\nBULLET::::- List of Christian Social Union of Bavaria politicians\nBULLET::::- Politics of Germany\n\nAlf Mintzel (1975). \"Die CSU. Anatomie einer konservativen Partei 1945-1972\". Opladen (in German).\n\nBULLET::::- Christlich-Soziale Union – official site (English page)\nBULLET::::- Christian-Social Union (Bavaria, Germany)\nBULLET::::- Christian-Social Union of Bavaria (CSU)\n"}
{"id": "5681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5681", "title": "Corporate title", "text": "Corporate title\n\nCorporate titles or business titles are given to company and organization officials to show what duties and responsibilities they have in the organization. Such titles are used by publicly and privately held for-profit corporations. In addition, many non-profit organizations, educational institutions, partnerships, and sole proprietorships also confer corporate titles.\n\nThere are considerable variations in the composition and responsibilities of corporate titles.\n\nWithin the corporate office or corporate center of a company, some companies have a chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) as the top-ranking executive, while the number two is the president and chief operating officer (COO); other companies have a president and CEO but no official deputy. Typically, senior managers are \"higher\" than vice presidents, although many times a senior officer may also hold a vice president title, such as executive vice president and chief financial officer (CFO). The board of directors is technically not part of management itself, although its chairman may be considered part of the corporate office if he or she is an executive chairman.\n\nA corporation often consists of different businesses, whose senior executives report directly to the CEO or COO, but depends on the form of the business. If organized as a division then the top manager is often known as an executive vice president (EVP). If that business is a subsidiary which has considerably more independence, then the title might be chairman and CEO.\n\nIn many countries, particularly in Europe and Asia, there is a separate executive board for day-to-day business and supervisory board (elected by shareholders) for control purposes. In these countries, the CEO presides over the executive board and the chairman presides over the supervisory board, and these two roles will always be held by different people. This ensures a distinction between management by the executive board and governance by the supervisory board. This seemingly allows for clear lines of authority. There is a strong parallel here with the structure of government, which tends to separate the political cabinet from the management civil service.\n\nIn the United States and other countries that follow a single-board corporate structure, the board of directors (elected by the shareholders) is often equivalent to the European or Asian supervisory board, while the functions of the executive board may be vested either in the board of directors or in a separate committee, which may be called an operating committee (J.P. Morgan Chase), management committee (Goldman Sachs), executive committee (Lehman Brothers), or executive council (Hewlett-Packard), or executive board (HeiG) composed of the division/subsidiary heads and senior officers that report directly to the CEO.\n\nState laws in the United States traditionally required certain positions to be created within every corporation, such as president, secretary and treasurer. Today, the approach under the \"Model Business Corporation Act\", which is employed in many states, is to grant companies discretion in determining which titles to have, with the only mandated organ being the board of directors.\n\nSome states that do not employ the MBCA continue to require that certain offices be established. Under the law of Delaware, where most large US corporations are established, stock certificates must be signed by two officers with titles specified by law (e.g. a president and secretary or a president and treasurer). Every corporation incorporated in California must have a chairman of the board or a president (or both), as well as a secretary and a chief financial officer.\n\nLimited liability company (LLC)-structured companies are generally run directly by their members, but the members can agree to appoint officers such as a CEO or to appoint \"managers\" to operate the company.\n\nAmerican companies are generally led by a CEO. In some companies, the CEO also has the title of \"president\". In other companies, a president is a different person, and the primary duties of the two positions are defined in the company's bylaws (or the laws of the governing legal jurisdiction). Many companies also have a CFO, a chief operating officer (COO) and other senior positions such as chief information officer (CIO), chief business officer (CBO), chief marketing officer (CMO), etc. that report to the president and CEO as \"senior vice presidents\" of the company. The next level, which are not executive positions, is middle management and may be called \"vice presidents\", \"directors\" or \"managers\", depending on the size and required managerial depth of the company.\n\nIn British English, the title of managing director is generally synonymous with that of chief executive officer. Managing directors do not have any particular authority under the \"Companies Act\" in the UK, but do have implied authority based on the general understanding of what their position entails, as well as any authority expressly delegated by the board of directors.\n\nIn Japan, corporate titles are roughly standardized across companies and organizations; although there is variation from company to company, corporate titles within a company are always consistent, and the large companies in Japan generally follow the same outline. These titles are the formal titles that are used on business cards. Korean corporate titles are similar to those of Japan.\n\nLegally, Japanese and Korean companies are only required to have a board of directors with at least one representative director. In Japanese, a company director is called a \"torishimariyaku\" (取締役) and a representative director is called a \"daihyo torishimariyaku\" (代表取締役). The equivalent Korean titles are \"isa\" (이사, 理事) and \"daepyo-isa\" (대표이사, 代表理事). These titles are often combined with lower titles, e.g. \"senmu torishimariyaku\" or \"jomu torishimariyaku\" for Japanese executives who are also board members. Most Japanese companies also have statutory auditors, who operate alongside the board of directors in supervisory roles.\n\nThe typical structure of executive titles in large companies includes the following:\n!English gloss\n!\"Kanji\" (\"hanja\")\n!Japanese\n!Korean\n!Comments\nChairman\n会長(會長)\n\"Kaicho\"\n\"Hwejang\"(회장)\nOften a semi-retired president or company founder. Denotes a position with considerable power within the company exercised through behind-the-scenes influence via the active president.\nVice chairman\n副会長(副會長)\n\"Fuku-kaicho\"\n\"Bu-hwejang\"(부회장)\nAt Korean family-owned \"chaebol\" companies such as Samsung, the vice-chairman commonly holds the CEO title (i.e., vice chairman and CEO)\nPresident\n社長\n\"Shacho\"\n\"Sajang\"(사장)\nOften CEO of the corporation. Some companies do not have the \"chairman\" position, in which case the \"president\" is the top position that is equally respected and authoritative.\nDeputy presidentor Senior executive vice president\n副社長\n\"Fuku-shacho\"\n\"Bu-sajang\"(부사장)\nReports to the president\nExecutive vice president\n専務\n\"Senmu\"\n\"Jŏnmu\"(전무)\n\nSenior vice president\n常務\n\"Jomu\"\n\"Sangmu\"(상무)\n\nVice presidentor general manageror department head\n部長\n\"Bucho\"\n\"Bujang\"(부장)\nHighest non-executive title; denotes a head of a division or department. There is significant variation in the official English translation used by different companies.\nDeputy general manager\n次長\n\"Jicho\"\n\"Chajang\"(차장)\nDirect subordinate to \"bucho\"/\"bujang\"\nManageror section head\n課長\n\"Kacho\"\n\"Gwajang\"(과장)\nDenotes a head of a team or section underneath a larger division/department\nAssistant manageror team leader\n係長(代理)\n\"Kakaricho\"\n\"Daeri\"'(대리)\n\nStaff\n社員\n\"Shain\"\n\"Sawon\"(사원)\nStaff without managerial titles are often referred to without using a title at all\n\nThe top management group, comprising \"jomu\"/\"sangmu\" and above, is often referred to collectively as \"senior management\" (幹部 or 重役; \"kambu\" or \"juyaku\" in Japanese; \"ganbu\" or \"jungyŏk\" in Korean).\n\nSome Japanese and Korean companies have also adopted American-style titles, but these are not yet widespread and their usage varies. For example, although there is a Korean translation for chief operating officer (\"최고운영책임자, choego unyŏng chaegimja\"), not many companies have yet adopted it with an exception of a few multi-national companies such as Samsung and CJ, while the CFO title is often used alongside other titles such as \"bu-sajang\" (SEVP) or \"Jŏnmu\" (EVP).\n\nSince the late 1990s, many Japanese companies have introduced the title of \"shikko yakuin\" (執行役員) or \"officer\", seeking to emulate the separation of directors and officers found in American companies. In 2002, the statutory title of \"shikko yaku\" (執行役) was introduced for use in companies that introduced a three-committee structure in their board of directors. The titles are frequently given to \"bucho\" and higher-level personnel. Although the two titles are very similar in intent and usage, there are several legal distinctions: \"shikko yaku\" make their own decisions in the course of performing work delegated to them by the board of directors, and are considered managers of the company rather than employees, with a legal status similar to that of directors. \"Shikko yakuin\" are considered employees of the company that follow the decisions of the board of directors, although in some cases directors may have the \"shikko yakuin\" title as well.\n\nThe highest-level executives in senior management usually have titles beginning with \"chief\" and ending with \"officer\", forming what is often called the C-Suite or CxO, where \"x\" is a variable that could be any functional area; not to be confused with CXO. The traditional three such officers are CEO, COO, and CFO. Depending on the management structure, titles may exist instead of, or be blended/overlapped with, other traditional executive titles, such as \"president\", various designations of \"vice presidents\" (e.g. VP of marketing), and \"general managers\" or \"directors\" of various divisions (such as director of marketing); the latter may or may not imply membership of the \"board of directors\".\n\nCertain other prominent positions have emerged, some of which are sector-specific. For example, chief audit executive (CAE), chief procurement officer (CPO) and chief risk officer (CRO) positions are often found in many types of financial services companies. Technology companies of all sorts now tend to have a chief technology officer (CTO) to manage technology development. A CIO oversees information technology (IT) matters, either in companies that specialize in IT or in any kind of company that relies on it for supporting infrastructure.\n\nMany companies now also have a CMO, particularly mature companies in competitive sectors, where brand management is a high priority. A chief value officer (CVO) is introduced in companies where business processes and organizational entities are focused on the creation and maximization of value. A chief administrative officer may be found in many large complex organizations that have various departments or divisions. Additionally, many companies now call their top diversity leadership position the chief diversity officer (CDO). However, this and many other nontraditional and lower-ranking titles are not universally recognized as corporate officers, and they tend to be specific to particular organizational cultures or the preferences of employees.\n\nBULLET::::- Chairman of the board – presiding officer of the corporate board of directors. The chairman influences the board of directors, which in turn elects and removes the officers of a corporation and oversees the human, financial, environmental and technical operations of a corporation.\nBULLET::::- The CEO may also hold the title of \"chairman\", resulting in an executive chairman. In this case, the board frequently names an independent member of the board as a lead director.\nBULLET::::- Executive chairman – the chairman's post may also exist as an office separate from that of CEO, and it is considered an executive chairman if that titleholder wields influence over company operations, such as Steve Case of AOL Time Warner and Douglas Flint of HSBC. In particular, the group chairmanship of HSBC is considered the top position of that institution, outranking the chief executive, and is responsible for leading the board and representing the company in meetings with government figures. Prior to the creation of the group management board in 2006, HSBC's chairman essentially held the duties of a chief executive at an equivalent institution, while HSBC's chief executive served as the deputy. After the 2006 reorganization, the management cadre ran the business, while the chairman oversaw the controls of the business through compliance and audit and the direction of the business.\nBULLET::::- Non-executive chairman – also a separate post from the CEO, unlike an executive chairman, a non-executive chairman does not interfere in day-to-day company matters. Across the world, many companies have separated the roles of chairman and CEO, often resulting in a non-executive chairman, saying that this move improves corporate governance.\nBULLET::::- Chief business officer is a corporate senior executive who assumes full management responsibility for the company's deal making, provides leadership and executes a deal strategy that will allow the company to fulfill its scientific/technology mission and build shareholder value, provides managerial guidance to the company's product development staff as needed.\nBULLET::::- Chief of staff is a corporate director level manager who has overall responsibility for the staff activity within the company who often would have responsibility of hiring and firing of the highest level managers and sometimes directors. They can work with and report directly to managing directors and the chief executive officer.\nBULLET::::- Commissioner\nBULLET::::- Financial control officer, FCO or FC, also comptroller or controller – supervises accounting and financial reporting within an organization\nBULLET::::- Director or member of a board of directors – high-level official with a fiduciary responsibility of overseeing the operation of a corporation and elects or removes officers of a corporation; nominally, \"directors\", other than the \"chairman\" are usually not considered to be employees of the company \"per se\", although they may receive compensation, often including benefits; in publicly held companies. A \"board of directors\" is normally made up of members (\"directors\") who are a mixture of corporate officials who are also management employees of the company (inside directors) and persons who are not employed by the company in any capacity (outside directors or non-executive directors). In privately held companies, the \"board of directors\" often only consists of the statutory corporate officials, and in \"sole proprietorship\" and \"partnerships\", the board is entirely optional, and if it does exist, only operates in an advisory capacity to the owner or \"partners\". Non-profit corporations’ governing board members may be called \"directors\" like most for-profit corporations, or an alternative like \"trustees\", \"governors\", etc.\nBULLET::::- Director – a manager of managers within an organization who is often responsible for a major business function and who sometimes reports to a vice president (note that in some financial services companies the title vice president has a different meaning). Often used with name of a functional area; \"finance director\", \"director of finance\", \"marketing director\", and so on. Not to be confused with a \"member of the board of directors\", who is also referred to as a \"director\". This is a middle management and not an executive level position, unless it is in the banking industry. Alternatively, a manager of managers is often referred to as a \"senior manager' or as an \"associate vice president\", depending upon levels of management, and industry type.\nBULLET::::- President – legally recognized highest \"titled\" corporate officer, and usually a member of the board of directors. There is much variation; often the CEO also holds the title of president, while in other organizations if there is a separate CEO, the president is then second highest-ranking position. In such a case the president is often the COO and is considered to be more focused upon daily operations compared to the CEO, who is supposed to be the visionary. If the corporate president is not the COO (such as Richard Parsons of Time Warner from 1995–2001), then many division heads report directly to the CEO themselves, with the president taking on special assignments from the CEO.\nBULLET::::- Secretary or company secretary – legally recognized \"titled\" corporate officer who reports to the board of directors and is responsible for keeping the records of the board and the company. This title is often concurrently held by the \"treasurer\" in a dual position called \"secretary-treasurer\"; both positions may be concurrently held by the \"CFO\". Note, however, that the \"secretary\" has a reporting line to the board of directors, regardless of any other reporting lines conferred by concurrent titles.\nBULLET::::- Treasurer – legally recognized corporate officer entrusted with the fiduciary responsibility of caring for company funds. Often this title is held concurrently with that of \"secretary\" in a dual role called \"secretary-treasurer\". It can also be held concurrently with the title of \"CFO\" or fall under the jurisdiction of one, though the CFO tends to oversee the finance department instead, which deals with accounting and audits, while the treasurer deals directly with company funds. Note, however, that the \"treasurer\" has a reporting line to the board of directors, regardless of any other reporting lines conferred by concurrent titles.\nBULLET::::- Superintendent\nBULLET::::- Owner (sometimes proprietor or sole proprietor, for sole proprietorships)\nBULLET::::- Partner – Used in many different ways. This may indicate a co-owner as in a legal partnership or may be used in a general way to refer to a broad class of employees or temporary/contract workers who are often assigned field or customer service work. Associate is often used in a similar way.\nBULLET::::- Vice chair or vice chairman – officer of the board of directors who may stand in for the \"chairman\" in his or her absence. However, this type of vice chairman title on its own usually has only an advisory role and not an operational one (such as Ted Turner at Time Warner). An unrelated definition of \"vice chair\" describes an executive who is higher ranking or has more seniority than \"executive vice president\". Sometimes, EVPs report to the vice chair, who in turn reports directly to the CEO (so vice chairs in effect constitute an additional layer of management), other vice chairs have more responsibilities but are otherwise on an equal tier with EVPs. Executive vice chairman are usually \"not\" on the board of directors. Royal Bank of Canada previously used vice chairs in their inner management circle until 2004 but have since renamed them as \"group heads\".\n\n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 30%;\"  Title \n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 8%;\"  Postnominal \n! scope=\"col\" style=\"width: 62%;\"  Explanation \nchief system engineer\nCSE\nResponsible for the whole system specification, validation, and verification in development processess. Usually using as the manager of other sub-system engineers.\n\nBULLET::::- Supervisor\nBULLET::::- Foreman\nBULLET::::- General manager or GM\nBULLET::::- Manager\nBULLET::::- Of Counsel – A lawyer working on a part-time or temporary basis for a company or law firm.\nBULLET::::- Vice president – Middle or upper manager in a corporation. They often appear in various hierarchical layers such as \"executive vice president\", \"senior vice president\", \"associate vice president\", or \"assistant vice president\", with EVP usually considered the highest and usually reporting to the CEO or president. Many times, corporate officers such as the \"CFO\", \"COO\", \"CIO\", \"CTO\", \"secretary\", or \"treasurer\" will concurrently hold \"vice president\" titles, commonly EVP or SVP. Vice presidents in small companies are also referred to as chiefs of a certain division, such as vice president for finance, or vice president for administration. Note that in some financial contexts, the title of vice president is actually subordinate to a director.\n\nBULLET::::- Corporate governance\nBULLET::::- Corporate liability\nBULLET::::- Identification with corporation\nBULLET::::- List of corporate titles\n\nBULLET::::- Taking Stock - Corporate Execs Get Scammed, Federal Bureau of Investigation\n"}
{"id": "5685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5685", "title": "Cambridge, Massachusetts", "text": "Cambridge, Massachusetts\n\nCambridge ( ) is a city in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, and part of the Boston metropolitan area.\n\nSituated directly north of Boston, across the Charles River, it was named in honor of the University of Cambridge in England, an important center of the Puritan theology embraced by the town's founders.\n\nHarvard University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Lesley University, and Hult Business School are in Cambridge, as was Radcliffe College, a college for women until it merged with Harvard on October 1, 1999.\n\nAccording to the 2010 Census, the city's population was 105,162. , it was the fifth most populous city in the state, behind Boston, Worcester, Springfield, and Lowell. Cambridge was one of two county seats of Middlesex County until the county government was abolished in Massachusetts in 1997.\n\nIn December 1630, the site of what would become Cambridge was chosen because it was safely upriver from Boston Harbor, making it easily defensible from attacks by enemy ships. Thomas Dudley, his daughter Anne Bradstreet, and her husband Simon were among the town's first settlers. The first houses were built in the spring of 1631. The settlement was initially referred to as \"the newe towne\". Official Massachusetts records show the name rendered as Newe Towne by 1632, and as Newtowne by 1638.\n\nLocated at the first convenient Charles River crossing west of Boston, Newe Towne was one of a number of towns (including Boston, Dorchester, Watertown, and Weymouth) founded by the 700 original Puritan colonists of the Massachusetts Bay Colony under Governor John Winthrop. Its first preacher was Thomas Hooker, who led many of its original inhabitants west in 1636 to found Hartford and the Connecticut Colony; before leaving, they sold their plots to more recent immigrants from England.\n\nThe original village site is now within Harvard Square. The marketplace where farmers sold crops from surrounding towns at the edge of a salt marsh (since filled) remains within a small park at the corner of John F. Kennedy and Winthrop Streets.\n\nThe town comprised a much larger area than the present city, with various outlying parts becoming independent towns over the years: Cambridge Village (later Newtown and now Newton) in 1688, Cambridge Farms (now Lexington) in 1712 or 1713, and Little or South Cambridge (now Brighton) and Menotomy or West Cambridge (now Arlington) in 1807. In the late 19th century, various schemes for annexing Cambridge to Boston were pursued and rejected.\n\nIn 1636, the Newe College (later renamed Harvard College after benefactor John Harvard) was founded by the Massachusetts Bay Colony to train ministers. According to Cotton Mather, Newe Towne was chosen for the site of the college by the Great and General Court (the Massachusetts legislature) primarily for its proximity to the popular and highly respected Puritan preacher Thomas Shepard. In May 1638, the settlement's name was changed to Cambridge in honor of the university in Cambridge, England.\n\nNewtowne's ministers, Hooker and Shepard, the college's first president, the college's major benefactor, and the first schoolmaster Nathaniel Eaton were all Cambridge alumni, as was the colony's governor John Winthrop. In 1629, Winthrop had led the signing of the founding document of the city of Boston, which was known as the Cambridge Agreement, after the university. In 1650, Governor Thomas Dudley signed the charter creating the corporation that still governs Harvard College.\n\nCambridge grew slowly as an agricultural village by road from Boston, the colony's capital. By the American Revolution, most residents lived near the Common and Harvard College, with most of the town comprising farms and estates. Most inhabitants were descendants of the original Puritan colonists, but there was also a small elite of Anglican \"worthies\" who were not involved in village life, made their livings from estates, investments, and trade, and lived in mansions along \"the Road to Watertown\" (today's Brattle Street, still known as Tory Row).\n\nComing north from Virginia, George Washington took command of the volunteer American soldiers camped on Cambridge Common on July 3, 1775, now reckoned the birthplace of the U.S. Army. Most of the Tory estates were confiscated after the Revolution. On January 24, 1776, Henry Knox arrived with artillery captured from Fort Ticonderoga, which enabled Washington to drive the British army out of Boston.\nBetween 1790 and 1840, Cambridge grew rapidly, with the construction of the West Boston Bridge in 1792 connecting Cambridge directly to Boston, so that it was no longer necessary to travel through the Boston Neck, Roxbury, and Brookline to cross the Charles River. A second bridge, the Canal Bridge, opened in 1809 alongside the new Middlesex Canal. The new bridges and roads made what were formerly estates and marshland into prime industrial and residential districts.\n\nIn the mid-19th century, Cambridge was the center of a literary revolution. It was home to some of the famous Fireside Poets—so called because their poems would often be read aloud by families in front of their evening fires. The Fireside Poets—Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, James Russell Lowell, and Oliver Wendell Holmes—were highly popular and influential in their day.\n\nSoon after, turnpikes were built: the Cambridge and Concord Turnpike (today's Broadway and Concord Ave.), the Middlesex Turnpike (Hampshire St. and Massachusetts Ave. northwest of Porter Square), and what are today's Cambridge, Main, and Harvard Streets connected various areas of Cambridge to the bridges. In addition, the town was connected to the Boston & Maine Railroad, leading to the development of Porter Square as well as the creation of neighboring Somerville from the formerly rural parts of Charlestown.\nCambridge was incorporated as a city in 1846 despite persistent tensions between East Cambridge, Cambridgeport, and Old Cambridge stemming from differences in culture, sources of income, and the national origins of the residents. The city's commercial center began to shift from Harvard Square to Central Square, which became the city's downtown around that time.\n\nBetween 1850 and 1900, Cambridge took on much of its present character—streetcar suburban development along the turnpikes, with working-class and industrial neighborhoods focused on East Cambridge, comfortable middle-class housing on the old Cambridgeport and Mid-Cambridge estates, and upper-class enclaves near Harvard University and on the minor hills. The coming of the railroad to North Cambridge and Northwest Cambridge led to three major changes: the development of massive brickyards and brickworks between Massachusetts Ave., Concord Ave. and Alewife Brook; the ice-cutting industry launched by Frederic Tudor on Fresh Pond; and the carving up of the last estates into residential subdivisions to house the thousands of immigrants who arrived to work in the new industries.\n\nFor many decades, the city's largest employer was the New England Glass Company, founded in 1818. By the middle of the 19th century it was the world's largest and most modern glassworks. In 1888, Edward Drummond Libbey moved all production to Toledo, Ohio, where it continues today under the name Owens-Illinois. The company's flint glassware with heavy lead content is prized by antique glass collectors. There is none on public display in Cambridge, but the Toledo Museum of Art has a large collection. The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston and the Sandwich Glass Museum on Cape Cod also have a few pieces.\n\nIn 1895, Edwin Ginn founder of Ginn and Company built the Athenaeum Press Building for his publishing text book empire.\n\nBy 1920, Cambridge was one of New England's main industrial cities, with nearly 120,000 residents. Among the largest businesses in Cambridge during the period of industrialization was Carter's Ink Company, whose neon sign long adorned the Charles River and which was for many years the world's largest ink manufacturer. Next door was the Athenaeum Press. Confectionery and snack manufacturers in the Cambridgeport-Area 4-Kendall corridor included the Kennedy Biscuit Factory (later part of Nabisco and originator of the Fig Newton), Necco, Squirrel Brands, George Close Company (1861–1930s), Page & Shaw, Daggett Chocolate (1892–1960s, recipes bought by Necco), Fox Cross Company (1920–1980, originator of the Charleston Chew, and now part of Tootsie Roll Industries), Kendall Confectionery Company, and James O. Welch (1927–1963, originator of Junior Mints, Sugar Daddies, Sugar Mamas and Sugar Babies, now part of Tootsie Roll Industries).\n\nOnly the Cambridge Brands subsidiary of Tootsie Roll Industries remains in town, still manufacturing Junior Mints in the old Welch factory on Main Street. The Blake and Knowles Steam Pump Company (1886), the Kendall Boiler and Tank Company (1880, now in Chelmsford, Massachusetts) and the New England Glass Company (1818–1878) were among the industrial manufacturers in what are now Kendall Square and East Cambridge.\n\nAs industry in New England began to decline during the Great Depression and after World War II, Cambridge lost much of its industrial base. It also began to become an intellectual, rather than an industrial, center. Harvard University had always been important as both a landowner and an institution, but it began to play a more dominant role in the city's life and culture. When Radcliffe College was established in 1879 the town became a mecca for some of the nation's most academically talented female students. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology's move from Boston in 1916 reinforced Cambridge's status as an intellectual center of the United States.\n\nAfter the 1950s, the city's population began to decline slowly as families tended to be replaced by single people and young couples. In Cambridge Highlands, the technology company Bolt, Beranek, & Newman produced the first network router in 1969, and hosted the invention of computer-to-computer email in 1971. The 1980s brought a wave of high-technology startups. Those selling advanced minicomputers were overtaken by the microcomputer. Cambridge-based VisiCorp made the first spreadsheet software for personal computers, Visicalc, and helped propel the Apple II to major consumer success. It was overtaken and purchased by Cambridge-based Lotus Development, maker of Lotus 1-2-3. (This was in turn replaced in the market by Microsoft Excel).\n\nThe city continues to be home to many startups. Kendall Square was a major software hub through the dot-com boom and today hosts offices of such technology companies as Google, Microsoft, and Amazon. The Square also now houses the headquarters of Akamai.\n\nIn 1976, Harvard's plans to start experiments with recombinant DNA led to a three-month moratorium and a citizen review panel. In the end, Cambridge decided to allow such experiments but passed safety regulations in 1977. This led to regulatory certainty and acceptance when Biogen opened a lab in 1982, in contrast to the hostility that caused the Genetic Institute (a Harvard spinoff) to abandon Somerville and Boston for Cambridge. The biotech and pharmaceutical industries have since thrived in Cambridge, which now includes headquarters for Biogen and Genzyme; laboratories for Novartis, Teva, Takeda, Alnylam, Ironwood, Catabasis, Moderna Therapeutics, Editas Medicine; support companies such as Cytel; and many smaller companies.\n\nBy the end of the 20th century, Cambridge had one of the most costly housing markets in the Northeastern United States. While considerable class, race, and age diversity persisted, it became harder for those who grew up in the city to afford to stay. The end of rent control in 1994 prompted many Cambridge renters to move to more affordable housing in Somerville and other cities or towns.\n\nUntil recently, Cambridge's mix of amenities and proximity to Boston kept housing prices relatively stable despite the bursting of the United States housing bubble. Cambridge has been a sanctuary city since 1985 and reaffirmed its status as such in 2006.\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, Cambridge has a total area of , of which is land and (9.82%) is water.\n\nCambridge is located in eastern Massachusetts, bordered by:\nBULLET::::- the city of Boston to the south (across the Charles River) and east\nBULLET::::- the city of Somerville to the north\nBULLET::::- the town of Arlington to the northwest\nBULLET::::- the town of Belmont and\nBULLET::::- the city of Watertown to the west\n\nThe border between Cambridge and the neighboring city of Somerville passes through densely populated neighborhoods which are connected by the MBTA Red Line. Some of the main squares, Inman, Porter, and to a lesser extent, Harvard and Lechmere, are very close to the city line, as are Somerville's Union and Davis Squares.\n\nThrough the City of Cambridge's exclusive municipal water system, the city further controls two exclave areas, one being Payson Park Reservoir and Gatehouse, a 2009 listed American Water Landmark located roughly one mile west of Fresh Pond and surrounded by the town of Belmont. The second area is the larger Hobbs Brook and Stony Brook watersheds, which share borders with neighboring towns and cities including Lexington, Lincoln, Waltham and Weston.\n\nCambridge has been called the \"City of Squares\", as most of its commercial districts are major street intersections known as squares. Each square acts as a neighborhood center. These include:\nBULLET::::- Kendall Square, formed by the junction of Broadway, Main Street, and Third Street. Technology Square is an office and laboratory building cluster in this neighborhood. Just over the Longfellow Bridge from Boston, at the eastern end of the MIT campus, it is served by the Kendall/MIT station on the MBTA Red Line subway. Most of Cambridge's large office towers are located in the Square. A biotech industry has developed in this area. The Cambridge Innovation Center, a large co-working space, is in Kendall Square at 1 Broadway. The Cambridge Center office complex is in Kendall Square, and not at the actual center of Cambridge. The \"One Kendall Square\" complex is nearby, but not actually in Kendall Square.\nBULLET::::- Central Square, formed by the junction of Massachusetts Avenue, Prospect Street, and Western Avenue. Containing a variety of ethnic restaurants, it was economically depressed as recently as the late 1990s; it underwent gentrification in recent years (in conjunction with the development of the nearby University Park at MIT), and continues to grow more costly. It is served by the Central Station stop on the MBTA Red Line subway. Lafayette Square, formed by the junction of Massachusetts Avenue, Columbia Street, Sidney Street, and Main Street, is considered part of the Central Square area. Cambridgeport is south of Central Square along Magazine Street and Brookline Street.\nBULLET::::- Harvard Square, formed by the junction of Massachusetts Avenue, Brattle Street, and JFK Street. This is the primary site of Harvard University and a major Cambridge shopping area. It is served by a Red Line station. Harvard Square was originally the Red Line's northwestern terminus and a major transfer point to streetcars that also operated in a short tunnel—which is still a major bus terminal, although the area under the Square was reconfigured dramatically in the 1980s when the Red Line was extended. The Harvard Square area includes Brattle Square and Eliot Square. A short distance away from the square lies the Cambridge Common, while the neighborhood north of Harvard and east of Massachusetts Avenue is known as Agassiz, after the famed scientist Louis Agassiz.\nBULLET::::- Porter Square, about a mile north on Massachusetts Avenue from Harvard Square, at the junction of Massachusetts and Somerville Avenues. It includes part of the city of Somerville and is served by the Porter Square Station, a complex housing a Red Line stop and a Fitchburg Line commuter rail stop. Lesley University's University Hall and Porter campus are in Porter Square.\nBULLET::::- Inman Square, at the junction of Cambridge and Hampshire streets in Mid-Cambridge. It is home to restaurants, bars, music venues and boutiques. Victorian streetlights, benches and bus stops were recently added to the streets, and a new city park was installed.\nBULLET::::- Lechmere Square, at the junction of Cambridge and First streets, adjacent to the CambridgeSide Galleria shopping mall. It is the MBTA Green Line's northern terminus, at Lechmere Station.\n\nCambridge's residential neighborhoods border but are not defined by the squares.\nBULLET::::- East Cambridge (Area 1) is bordered on the north by Somerville, on the east by the Charles River, on the south by Broadway and Main Street, and on the west by the Grand Junction Railroad tracks. It includes the NorthPoint development.\nBULLET::::- MIT Campus (Area 2) is bordered on the north by Broadway, on the south and east by the Charles River, and on the west by the Grand Junction Railroad tracks.\nBULLET::::- Wellington-Harrington (Area 3) is bordered on the north by Somerville, on the south and west by Hampshire Street, and on the east by the Grand Junction Railroad tracks. Referred to as \"Mid-Block\".\nBULLET::::- The Port, formerly known as Area 4, is bordered on the north by Hampshire Street, on the south by Massachusetts Avenue, on the west by Prospect Street, and on the east by the Grand Junction Railroad tracks. Residents of Area 4 often simply call their neighborhood \"The Port\" and the area of Cambridgeport and Riverside \"The Coast\". In October 2015, the Cambridge City Council officially renamed Area 4 \"The Port\", formalizing the longtime nickname, largely on the initiative of neighborhood native and then-Vice Mayor Dennis Benzan. The port is usually the busier part of the city.\nBULLET::::- Cambridgeport (Area 5) is bordered on the north by Massachusetts Avenue, on the south by the Charles River, on the west by River Street, and on the east by the Grand Junction Railroad tracks.\nBULLET::::- Mid-Cambridge (Area 6) is bordered on the north by Kirkland and Hampshire Streets and Somerville, on the south by Massachusetts Avenue, on the west by Peabody Street, and on the east by Prospect Street.\nBULLET::::- Riverside (Area 7), an area sometimes called \"The Coast\", is bordered on the north by Massachusetts Avenue, on the south by the Charles River, on the west by JFK Street, and on the east by River Street.\nBULLET::::- Agassiz (Harvard North) (Area 8) is bordered on the north by Somerville, on the south and east by Kirkland Street, and on the west by Massachusetts Avenue.\nBULLET::::- Neighborhood Nine or Radcliffe (formerly called Peabody, until the recent relocation of a neighborhood school by that name) is bordered on the north by railroad tracks, on the south by Concord Avenue, on the west by railroad tracks, and on the east by Massachusetts Avenue.\n\nBULLET::::- Brattle area/West Cambridge (Area 10) is bordered on the north by Concord Avenue and Garden Street, on the south by the Charles River and Watertown, on the west by Fresh Pond and the Collins Branch Library, and on the east by JFK Street. It includes the sub-neighborhoods of Brattle Street (formerly known as Tory Row) and Huron Village.\nBULLET::::- North Cambridge (Area 11) is bordered on the north by Arlington and Somerville, on the south by railroad tracks, on the west by Belmont, and on the east by Somerville.\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Highlands (Area 12) is bordered on the north and east by railroad tracks, on the south by Fresh Pond, and on the west by Belmont .\nBULLET::::- Strawberry Hill (Area 13) is bordered on the north by Fresh Pond, on the south by Watertown, on the west by Belmont, and on the east by railroad tracks.\n\nIn the Koppen-Geiger classification Cambridge has a warm continental summer climate (Dfa) that can appear in the southern end of New England's interior. Abundant rain falls on the city; it has no dry season. The average January temperature is 26.6 °F (- 3 °C), making Cambridge part of Group D, independent of the isotherm. There are four well-defined seasons.\n\n! Racial composition !! 2010 !! 1990 !! 1970 !! 1950\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 105,162 people, 44,032 households, and 17,420 families residing in the city. The population density was 16,354.9 people per square mile (6,314.6/km²). There were 47,291 housing units at an average density of 7,354.7 per square mile (2,840.3/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 66.60% White, 11.70% Black or African American, 0.20% Native American, 15.10% Asian (3.7% Chinese, 1.4% Asian Indian, 1.2% Korean, 1.0% Japanese), 0.01% Pacific Islander, 2.10% from other races, and 4.30% from two or more races. 7.60% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race (1.6% Puerto Rican, 1.4% Mexican, 0.6% Dominican, 0.5% Colombian, 0.5% Salvadoran, 0.4% Spaniard). Non-Hispanic Whites were 62.1% of the population in 2010, down from 89.7% in 1970. An individual resident of Cambridge is known as a Cantabrigian.\n\nIn 2010, there were 44,032 households out of which 16.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.9% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 60.4% were non-families. 40.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.00 and the average family size was 2.76.\n\nIn the city, the population was spread out with 13.3% of the population under the age of 18, 21.2% from 18 to 24, 38.6% from 25 to 44, 17.8% from 45 to 64, and 9.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.7 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $47,979, and the median income for a family was $59,423 (these figures had risen to $58,457 and $79,533 respectively ). Males had a median income of $43,825 versus $38,489 for females. The per capita income for the city was $31,156. About 8.7% of families and 12.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.1% of those under age 18 and 12.9% of those age 65 or over.\n\nCambridge has been ranked as one of the most liberal cities in America. Locals living in and near the city jokingly refer to it as \"The People's Republic of Cambridge.\" For 2016, the residential property tax rate in Cambridge was $6.99 per $1,000. Cambridge enjoys the highest possible bond credit rating, AAA, with all three Wall Street rating agencies.\n\nIn 2000, 11.0% of city residents were of Irish ancestry; 7.2% were of English, 6.9% Italian, 5.5% West Indian and 5.3% German ancestry. 69.4% spoke only English at home, while 6.9% spoke Spanish, 3.2% Chinese or Mandarin, 3.0% Portuguese, 2.9% French Creole, 2.3% French, 1.5% Korean, and 1.0% Italian.\n\nData is from the 2009–2013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.\n! Rank\n! ZIP Code (ZCTA)\n! Per capitaincome\n! Medianhouseholdincome\n! Medianfamilyincome\n! Population\n! Number ofhouseholds\n\nManufacturing was an important part of Cambridge's economy in the late 19th and early 20th century, but educational institutions are its biggest employers today. Harvard and MIT together employ about 20,000. As a cradle of technological innovation, Cambridge was home to technology firms Analog Devices, Akamai, Bolt, Beranek, and Newman (BBN Technologies) (now part of Raytheon), General Radio (later GenRad), Lotus Development Corporation (now part of IBM), Polaroid, Symbolics, and Thinking Machines.\n\nIn 1996, Polaroid, Arthur D. Little, and Lotus were Cambridge's top employers, with over 1,000 employees, but they faded out a few years later. Health care and biotechnology firms such as Genzyme, Biogen Idec, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi, Pfizer and Novartis have significant presences in the city. Though headquartered in Switzerland, Novartis continues to expand its operations in Cambridge.\n\nOther major biotech and pharmaceutical firms expanding their presence in Cambridge include GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Shire, and Pfizer. Most of Cambridge's biotech firms are in Kendall Square and East Cambridge, which decades ago were the city's center of manufacturing. Some others are in University Park at MIT, a new development in another former manufacturing area.\n\nNone of the high-technology firms that once dominated the economy was among the 25 largest employers in 2005, but by 2008 Akamai and ITA Software were. Google, IBM Research, Microsoft Research, and Philips Research maintain offices in Cambridge. In late January 2012—less than a year after acquiring Billerica-based analytic database management company, Vertica—Hewlett-Packard announced it would also be opening its first offices in Cambridge. Also around that time, e-commerce giants Staples and Amazon.com said they would be opening research and innovation centers in Kendall Square. And LabCentral provides a shared laboratory facility for approximately 25 emerging biotech companies.\n\nThe proximity of Cambridge's universities has also made the city a center for nonprofit groups and think tanks, including the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cultural Survival, and One Laptop per Child. A group of start-up companies have emerged in Kendall Square since 2010.\n\nIn September 2011, the City of Cambridge launched the \"Entrepreneur Walk of Fame\" initiative. The Walk recognizes people who have made contributions to innovation in global business.\n\n, the city's ten largest employers are:\n\n! #\n! Employer\n! # of employees\nHarvard University\n11,997\n2\nMassachusetts Institute of Technology\n8,763\n3\nCity of Cambridge\n2,950\n4\nBiogen Idec\n2,700\n5\nNovartis Institutes for BioMedical Research\n2,457\n6\nMount Auburn Hospital\n2,115\n7\nCambridge Health Alliance\n1,713\n8\nCambridge Innovation Center\n1,678\n9\nGenzyme\n1,600\n10\nAkamai Technologies\n1,544\n\nBULLET::::- Harvard Art Museum, including the Busch-Reisinger Museum, a collection of Germanic art the Fogg Art Museum, a comprehensive collection of Western art, and the Arthur M. Sackler Museum, a collection of Middle East and Asian art\nBULLET::::- Harvard Museum of Natural History, including the Glass Flowers collection\nBULLET::::- Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard\nBULLET::::- MIT Museum\nBULLET::::- List Visual Arts Center, MIT\nBULLET::::- Semitic Museum, Harvard\n\nCambridge has a large and varied collection of permanent public art, on both city property (managed by the Cambridge Arts Council) and the Harvard and MIT campuses. Temporary public artworks are displayed as part of the annual Cambridge River Festival on the banks of the Charles River, during winter celebrations in Harvard and Central Squares, and at university campus sites. Experimental forms of public artistic and cultural expression include the Central Square World's Fair, the annual Somerville-based Honk! Festival, and If This House Could Talk, a neighborhood art and history event.\n\nStreet musicians and other performers entertain tourists and locals in Harvard Square during the warmer months. The performances are coordinated through a public process that has been developed collaboratively by the performers, city administrators, private organizations and business groups. The Cambridge public library contains four Works Progress Administration murals completed in 1935 by Elizabeth Tracy Montminy: \"Religion\", \"Fine Arts\", \"History of Books and Paper\", and \"The Development of the Printing Press\".\n\nDespite intensive urbanization during the late 19th century and the 20th century, Cambridge has several historic buildings, including some from the 17th century. The city also has abundant contemporary architecture, largely built by Harvard and MIT.\n\nNotable historic buildings in the city include:\nBULLET::::- The Asa Gray House (1810)\nBULLET::::- Austin Hall, Harvard University (1882–84)\nBULLET::::- Cambridge City Hall (1888–89)\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Public Library (1888)\nBULLET::::- Christ Church, Cambridge (1761)\nBULLET::::- Cooper-Frost-Austin House (1689–1817)\nBULLET::::- Elmwood House (1767), residence of the president of Harvard University\nBULLET::::- First Church of Christ, Scientist (1924–30)\nBULLET::::- The First Parish in Cambridge (1833)\nBULLET::::- Harvard-Epworth United Methodist Church (1891–93)\nBULLET::::- Harvard Lampoon Building (1909)\nBULLET::::- The Hooper-Lee-Nichols House (1685–1850)\nBULLET::::- Longfellow House–Washington's Headquarters National Historic Site (1759), former home of poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and headquarters of George Washington\nBULLET::::- The Memorial Church of Harvard University (1932)\nBULLET::::- Memorial Hall, Harvard University (1870–77)\nBULLET::::- Middlesex County Courthouse (1814–48)\nBULLET::::- Urban Rowhouse (1875)\nBULLET::::- O'Reilly Spite House (1908), built to spite a neighbor who would not sell his adjacent land\n\nContemporary architecture:\nBULLET::::- Baker House dormitory, MIT, by Finnish architect Alvar Aalto, one of only two Aalto buildings in the US\nBULLET::::- Harvard Graduate Center/Harkness Commons, by The Architects Collaborative (TAC, with Walter Gropius)\nBULLET::::- Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts, Harvard, the only Le Corbusier building in North America\nBULLET::::- Harvard's Science Center, Holyoke Center and Peabody Terrace, by Catalan architect and Harvard Graduate School of Design Dean Josep Lluís Sert\nBULLET::::- Kresge Auditorium, MIT, by Eero Saarinen\nBULLET::::- MIT Chapel, by Eero Saarinen\nBULLET::::- Design Research Building, by Benjamin Thompson and Associates\nBULLET::::- American Academy of Arts and Sciences, by Kallmann McKinnell and Wood, also architects of Boston City Hall\nBULLET::::- Arthur M. Sackler Museum, Harvard, one of the few buildings in the US by Pritzker Prize winner James Stirling\nBULLET::::- Harvard Art Museums, renovation and major expansion of Fogg Museum building, completed in 2014 by Renzo Piano\nBULLET::::- Stata Center, home to the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, the Department of Linguistics, and the Department of Philosophy, by Frank Gehry\nBULLET::::- The two MIT Media Lab buildings by I. M. Pei and Fumihiko Maki\nBULLET::::- Simmons Hall, MIT, by Steven Holl\n\nThe city has an active music scene, from classical performances to the latest popular bands. Beyond its colleges and universities, Cambridge has many music venues, including The Middle East, Club Passim, The Plough and Stars, and the Nameless Coffeehouse.\n\nConsisting largely of densely built residential space, Cambridge lacks significant tracts of public parkland. Easily accessible open space on the university campuses, including Harvard Yard, the Radcliffe Yard, and MIT's Great Lawn, as well as the considerable open space of Mount Auburn Cemetery, partly compensates for this. At Cambridge's western edge, the cemetery is known as a garden cemetery because its landscaping (the oldest planned landscape in the country) and arboretum. Although known as a Cambridge landmark, much of the cemetery lies within Watertown. It is also an Important Bird Area (IBA) in the Greater Boston area.\n\nPublic parkland includes the esplanade along the Charles River, which mirrors its Boston counterpart; Cambridge Common, a busy and historic public park adjacent to Harvard's campus; and the Alewife Brook Reservation and Fresh Pond in western Cambridge.\n\n! colspan = 6  Voter registration and party enrollment \n! colspan = 2  Party\n! Number of voters\n! Percentage\n\n! colspan = 2  Total\n! style=\"text-align:center;\" 70,733\n! style=\"text-align:center;\" 100%\n\nCambridge is split between Massachusetts's 5th and 7th U.S. congressional districts. The 5th district seat is held by Democrat Katherine Clark, who replaced now Senator Ed Markey in a 2013 special election; the 7th is represented by Democrat Ayanna Pressley, elected in 2018. The state's senior United States Senator is Democrat Elizabeth Warren, elected in 2012, who lives in Cambridge. The governor of Massachusetts is Republican Charlie Baker, elected in 2014.\n\nCambridge is represented in six districts in the Massachusetts House of Representatives: the 24th Middlesex (which includes parts of Belmont and Arlington), the 25th and 26th Middlesex (the latter of which includes a portion of Somerville), the 29th Middlesex (which includes a small part of Watertown), and the Eighth and Ninth Suffolk (both including parts of the City of Boston). The city is represented in the Massachusetts Senate as a part of the First Suffolk and Middlesex district, which contains parts of Boston, Revere and Winthrop in Suffolk County; the Middlesex, Suffolk and Essex district, which includes Everett and Somerville, with Boston, Chelsea, and Revere of Suffolk, and Saugus in Essex; and the Second Suffolk and Middlesex district, containing parts of the City of Boston in Suffolk County, and Cambridge, Belmont and Watertown in Middlesex County.\n\n+ Presidential election results\n! Year\n! Democratic\n! Republican\n\nCambridge has a city government led by a mayor and a nine-member city council. There is also a six-member school committee that functions alongside the superintendent of public schools. The councilors and school committee members are elected every two years using the single transferable vote (STV) system. Cambridge is one of a small number of local governments in the U.S. to use ranked-choice voting; by 2019, the State of Maine and about 18 local governments have adopted similar systems.\n\nThe mayor is elected by the city councilors from among themselves, and serves as the chair of city council meetings. The mayor also sits on the school committee. The mayor is not the city's chief executive. Rather, the city manager, who is appointed by the city council, serves in that capacity.\n\nUnder the city's Plan E form of government, the city council does not have the power to appoint or remove city officials who are under direction of the city manager. The city council and its individual members are also forbidden from giving orders to any subordinate of the city manager.\n\nLouis DePasquale is the City Manager, having succeeded Lisa C. Peterson, the Acting City Manager and Cambridge's first woman City Manager, on November 14, 2016. Peterson became Acting City Manager on September 30, 2016, after Richard C. Rossi announced that he would opt out of his contract renewal. Rossi succeeded Robert W. Healy, who retired in June 2013 after 32 years in the position. In recent history, the media has highlighted the salary of the city manager as one of the highest for a Massachusetts civic employee.\n\n! District\n! Councillor\n! In office since\n\n\"* = current mayor\"\n\"** = former mayor\"\n\nCambridge was a county seat of Middlesex County, along with Lowell, until the abolition of county government. Though the county government was abolished in 1997, the county still exists as a geographical and political region. The employees of Middlesex County courts, jails, registries, and other county agencies now work directly for the state. The county's registrars of Deeds and Probate remain in Cambridge, but the Superior Court and District Attorney have had their operations transferred to Woburn. Third District court has shifted operations to Medford, and the county Sheriff's office awaits near-term relocation.\n\nCambridge is perhaps best known as an academic and intellectual center. Its colleges and universities include:\nBULLET::::- Cambridge School of Culinary Arts\nBULLET::::- Harvard University\nBULLET::::- Hult International Business School\nBULLET::::- Lesley University\nBULLET::::- Longy School of Music of Bard College\nBULLET::::- Massachusetts Institute of Technology\nBULLET::::- Radcliffe College (now merged with Harvard College)\n\nAt least 129 of the world's total 780 Nobel Prize winners have at some point in their careers been affiliated with universities in Cambridge.\n\nThe American Academy of Arts and Sciences is also based in Cambridge.\n\nBULLET::::- Amigos School\nBULLET::::- Baldwin School (formerly the Agassiz School)\nBULLET::::- Cambridgeport School\nBULLET::::- Fletcher-Maynard Academy\nBULLET::::- Graham and Parks Alternative School\nBULLET::::- Haggerty School\nBULLET::::- Kennedy-Longfellow School\nBULLET::::- King Open School\nBULLET::::- Martin Luther King, Jr. School\nBULLET::::- Morse School (a Core Knowledge school)\nBULLET::::- Peabody School\nBULLET::::- Tobin School (a Montessori school)\n\nFive upper schools offer grades 6–8 in some of the same buildings as the elementary schools:\nBULLET::::- Amigos School\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Street Upper School\nBULLET::::- Putnam Avenue Upper School\nBULLET::::- Rindge Avenue Upper School\nBULLET::::- Vassal Lane Upper School\n\nCambridge has three district public high school programs, the principal one being Cambridge Rindge and Latin School (CRLS).\n\nOther public charter schools include Benjamin Banneker Charter School, which serves grades K–6; Community Charter School of Cambridge in Kendall Square, which serves grades 7–12; and Prospect Hill Academy, a charter school whose upper school is in Central Square though it is not a part of the Cambridge Public School District.\n\nCambridge also has several private schools, including:\n\nBULLET::::- Boston Archdiocesan Choir School\nBULLET::::- Buckingham Browne & Nichols School\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Montessori school\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Friends School\nBULLET::::- Fayerweather Street School\nBULLET::::- International School of Boston (formerly École Bilingue)\nBULLET::::- Matignon High School\nBULLET::::- Shady Hill School\nBULLET::::- St. Peter School\n\nCambridge is served by the \"Cambridge Chronicle\", the oldest surviving weekly paper in the United States. Another popular online newspaper is Cambridge Day.\n\nCambridge is home to the following commercially licensed and student-run radio stations:\n\n! Callsign !! Frequency !! City/town !! Licensee !! Format\n\nCambridge Community Television (CCTV) has served the city since its inception in 1988. CCTV operates Cambridge's public access television facility and three television channels, 8, 9, and 96, on the Cambridge cable system (Comcast). The city has invited tenders from other cable providers, but Comcast remains its only fixed television and broadband utility, though services from American satellite TV providers are available. In October 2014, Cambridge City Manager Richard Rossi appointed a citizen Broadband Task Force to \"examine options to increase competition, reduce pricing, and improve speed, reliability and customer service for both residents and businesses.\"\n\nSeveral major roads lead to Cambridge, including Route 2, Route 16 and the McGrath Highway (Route 28). The Massachusetts Turnpike does not pass through Cambridge, but provides access by an exit in nearby Allston. Both U.S. Route 1 and Interstate 93 also provide additional access on the eastern end of Cambridge at Leverett Circle in Boston. Route 2A runs the length of the city, chiefly along Massachusetts Avenue. The Charles River forms the southern border of Cambridge and is crossed by 11 bridges connecting Cambridge to Boston, including the Longfellow Bridge and the Harvard Bridge, eight of which are open to motorized road traffic.\n\nCambridge has an irregular street network because many of the roads date from the colonial era. Contrary to popular belief, the road system did not evolve from longstanding cow-paths. Roads connected various village settlements with each other and nearby towns, and were shaped by geographic features, most notably streams, hills, and swampy areas. Today, the major \"squares\" are typically connected by long, mostly straight roads, such as Massachusetts Avenue between Harvard Square and Central Square, or Hampshire Street between Kendall Square and Inman Square.\n\nCambridge is served by the MBTA, including the Porter Square Station on the regional Commuter Rail; the Lechmere Station on the Green Line; and the Red Line at Alewife, Porter Square, Harvard Square, Central Square, and Kendall Square/MIT Stations. Alewife Station, the terminus of the Red Line, has a large multi-story parking garage (at a rate of $7 per day ).\n\nThe Harvard Bus Tunnel, under Harvard Square, connects to the Red Line underground. This tunnel was originally opened for streetcars in 1912, and served trackless trolleys (trolleybuses) and buses as the routes were converted; four lines of the MBTA trolleybus system continue to use it. The tunnel was partially reconfigured when the Red Line was extended to Alewife in the early 1980s.\n\nBesides the state-owned transit agency, the city is also served by the Charles River Transportation Management Agency (CRTMA) shuttles which are supported by some of the largest companies operating in city, in addition to the municipal government itself.\n\nCambridge has several bike paths, including one along the Charles River, and the Linear Park connecting the Minuteman Bikeway at Alewife with the Somerville Community Path. A connection to Watertown is under construction. Bike parking is common and there are bike lanes on many streets, although concerns have been expressed regarding the suitability of many of the lanes. On several central MIT streets, bike lanes transfer onto the sidewalk. Cambridge bans cycling on certain sections of sidewalk where pedestrian traffic is heavy.\n\nWhile \"Bicycling Magazine\" in 2006 rated Boston as one of the worst cities in the nation for bicycling, it has given Cambridge honorable mention as one of the best and was called by the magazine \"Boston's Great Hope\". Boston has since then followed the example of Cambridge, and made considerable efforts to improve bicycling safety and convenience.\n\nCambridge has an official bicycle committee. The LivableStreets Alliance, headquartered in Cambridge, is an advocacy group for bicyclists, pedestrians, and walkable neighborhoods.\n\nWalking is a popular activity in Cambridge. In 2000, of US cities with more than 100,000 residents, Cambridge had the highest percentage of commuters who walked to work. Cambridge's major historic squares have changed into modern walking neighborhoods, including traffic calming features based on the needs of pedestrians rather than of motorists.\n\nThe Boston intercity bus and train stations at South Station, Boston, and Logan International Airport in East Boston, are accessible by subway. The Fitchburg Line rail service from Porter Square connects to some western suburbs. Since October 2010, there has also been intercity bus service between Alewife Station (Cambridge) and New York City.\n\nIn addition to the Cambridge Police Department, the city is patrolled by the Fifth (Brighton) Barracks of Troop H of the Massachusetts State Police. Due, however, to close proximity, the city also practices functional cooperation with the Fourth (Boston) Barracks of Troop H, as well. The campuses of Harvard and MIT are patrolled by the Harvard University Police Department and MIT Police Department, respectively.\n\nThe city of Cambridge is protected by the Cambridge Fire Department. Established in 1832, the CFD operates eight engine companies, four ladder companies, one rescue company, and two paramedic squad companies from eight fire stations located throughout the city. The Acting Chief is Gerard Mahoney.\n\nCambridge is unusual among cities inside Route 128 in having a non-MWRA water supply. City water is obtained from Hobbs Brook (in Lincoln and Waltham) and Stony Brook (Waltham and Weston). The city owns over of land in other towns that includes these reservoirs and portions of their watershed. Water from these reservoirs flows by gravity through an aqueduct to Fresh Pond in Cambridge. It is then treated in an adjacent plant and pumped uphill to an elevation of above sea level at the Payson Park Reservoir (Belmont). The water is then redistributed downhill via gravity to individual users in the city. A new water treatment plant opened in 2001.\n\nThe city used MWRA water during the old plant's demolition and the new plant's construction. In October 2016, the City of Cambridge announced that, due to drought conditions, they would begin buying water from the MWRA. On January 3, 2017, Cambridge announced that \"As a result of continued rainfall each month since October 2016, we have been able to significantly reduce the need to use MWRA water. We have not purchased any MWRA water since December 12, 2016 and if 'average' rainfall continues this could continue for several months.\"\n\nFurther educational services are provided at the Cambridge Public Library. The large modern main building was built in 2009, and connects to the restored 1888 Richardson Romanesque building. It was founded as the private Cambridge Athenaeum in 1849 and was acquired by the city in 1858, and became the Dana Library. The 1888 building was a donation of Frederick H. Rindge.\n\nCambridge has six official sister cities with active relationships:\nBULLET::::- Coimbra, Portugal (est. June 1982)\nBULLET::::- Gaeta, Lazio, Italy (est. December 1982)\nBULLET::::- Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki, Japan (est. October 1983)\nBULLET::::- San José Las Flores, Chalatenango, El Salvador (est. March 1987)\nBULLET::::- Yerevan, Armenia (est. April 1987)\nBULLET::::- Galway, County Galway, Ireland (est. March 1997)\n\nSince the 2010 Haiti earthquake Cambridge has been in the process of developing a relationship with Les Cayes, Haiti, but the damage wrought then and by Hurricane Matthew in 2015 have delayed the process.\n\nCambridge has ten additional official sister cities that are not active:\nBULLET::::- Dublin, Ireland (October 1983)\nBULLET::::- Ischia, Campania, Italy (June 1984)\nBULLET::::- Catania, Sicily, Italy (February 1987)\nBULLET::::- Kraków, Lesser Poland Voivodeship, Poland (October 1989)\nBULLET::::- Santo Domingo Oeste, Dominican Republic (May 2003)\nBULLET::::- Southwark, Greater London, UK (June 2004)\nBULLET::::- Yuseong District, Daejeon, Korea (February 2005)\nBULLET::::- Haidian District, Beijing, China (March 2005)\nBULLET::::- Cienfuegos, Cuba (May 2005)\n\nBULLET::::- Hezekiah Usher, first bookseller in the thirteen colonies.\nBULLET::::- Kerry Quarter\nBULLET::::- National Register of Historic Places listings in Cambridge, Massachusetts\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge article by Rev. Edward Abbott in Volume 1, pages 305–358.\nBULLET::::- Eliot, Samuel Atkins. \"A History of Cambridge, Massachusetts: 1630–1913\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Cambridge Tribune, 1913.\nBULLET::::- Paige, Lucius. \"History of Cambridge, Massachusettse: 1630–1877\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Riverside Press, 1877.\nBULLET::::- \"Survey of Architectural History in Cambridge: Mid Cambridge\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge Historical Commission, 1967. .\nBULLET::::- \"Survey of Architectural History in Cambridge: Cambridgeport\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge Historical Commission, 1971. .\nBULLET::::- \"Survey of Architectural History in Cambridge: Old Cambridge\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge Historical Commission, 1973. .\nBULLET::::- \"Survey of Architectural History in Cambridge: Northwest Cambridge\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge Historical Commission, 1977. .\nBULLET::::- \"Survey of Architectural History in Cambridge: East Cambridge\" (revised edition). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge Historical Commission, 1988.\n\n"}
{"id": "5686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5686", "title": "Cambridge (disambiguation)", "text": "Cambridge (disambiguation)\n\nCambridge is a city and the county town of Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, famous for being the location of the University of Cambridge.\n\nCambridge may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Tasmania, a suburb of Hobart\nBULLET::::- Town of Cambridge, a Western Australian local government area\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Barbados, a populated place in the parish of Saint Joseph, Barbados\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (electoral district), a federal electoral district\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (provincial electoral district), a provincial electoral district\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Hants County, Nova Scotia\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Kings County, Nova Scotia\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Ontario\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Bay, Nunavut\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Parish, New Brunswick\nBULLET::::- Cambridge-Narrows, New Brunswick\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Jamaica\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Battery/Fort Cambridge, an artillery battery\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, New Zealand\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (ward), Southport\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Gloucestershire\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Scottish Borders, a\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, West Yorkshire, a\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (UK Parliament constituency)\nBULLET::::- County of Cambridge, another name for Cambridgeshire\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Heath, a place in the London borough of Tower Hamlets\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Town (disambiguation) or Camberley, Surrey, England\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Idaho\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Illinois\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Iowa\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Kansas\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Maine\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Maryland\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Massachusetts\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Minnesota\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Nebraska\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, New Hampshire, a township\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Delran, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Evesham, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (town), New York\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (village), New York\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Vermont\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (village), Vermont\nBULLET::::- Cambridge, Wisconsin\nBULLET::::- Cambridge City, Indiana\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Springs, Pennsylvania\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Township, Guernsey County, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Township, Henry County, Illinois\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Township, Michigan\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Township, Minnesota\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Township, Pennsylvania\n\nBULLET::::- 2531 Cambridge, a stony Main Belt asteroid in the Solar System\n\nBULLET::::- Alice Cambridge (1762 – 1829), early Irish Methodist preacher\nBULLET::::- Alyson Cambridge (born 1980), American operatic soprano and classical music, jazz, and American popular song singer\nBULLET::::- Asuka Cambridge (born 1993), a Japanese sprint athlete\nBULLET::::- Richard Owen Cambridge (1717–1802), a British poet\n\nBULLET::::- Duke of Cambridge\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge (cigarette)\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Audio, a manufacturer of audio equipment\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Glass, a glass company of Cambridge, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Cambridge SoundWorks, a manufacturer of audio equipment\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Theatre, a theatre in the West End of London\nBULLET::::- Cambridge University Press\n\nBULLET::::- Cambridge State University, US\nBULLET::::- The Cambridge School (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- University of Cambridge, UK\n\nBULLET::::- \"Cambridge\" (1825 ship)\nBULLET::::- \"Cambridge\" (book), 2005 book by Tim Rawle\nBULLET::::- Cambridge Circus (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "5688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5688", "title": "Colin Dexter", "text": "Colin Dexter\n\nNorman Colin Dexter (29 September 1930 – 21 March 2017) was an English crime writer known for his \"Inspector Morse\" series of novels, which were written between 1975 and 1999 and adapted as an ITV television series, \"Inspector Morse\", from 1987 to 2000. His characters have spawned a sequel series, \"Lewis\", and a prequel series, \"Endeavour\".\n\nDexter was born in Stamford, Lincolnshire, to Alfred and Dorothy Dexter. He had an elder brother, John, a fellow classicist, who taught Classics at The King's School, Peterborough, and a sister, Avril. Alfred ran a small garage and taxi company from premises in Scotgate, Stamford. Dexter was educated at St. John's Infants School, Bluecoat Junior School, from which he gained a scholarship to Stamford School, a boys' public school, where one of his contemporaries was the England international cricket captain and England international rugby player M. J. K. Smith.\n\nAfter leaving school, Dexter completed his national service with the Royal Corps of Signals and then read Classics at Christ's College, Cambridge, graduating in 1953 and receiving a master's degree in 1958.\n\nIn 1954, Dexter began his teaching career in the East Midlands, becoming assistant Classics master at Wyggeston School, Leicester. There he helped the Christian Union school society. However, in 2000 he stated that he shared the same views on politics and religion as Inspector Morse, who was portrayed in the final Morse novel, \"The Remorseful Day\", as an atheist.\n\nA post at Loughborough Grammar School followed in 1957 before he took up the position of senior Classics teacher at Corby Grammar School, Northamptonshire, in 1959. In 1956 he married Dorothy Cooper, and they had a daughter, Sally, and a son, Jeremy. In 1966, he was forced by the onset of deafness to retire from teaching and took up the post of senior assistant secretary at the University of Oxford Delegacy of Local Examinations (UODLE) in Oxford, a job he held until his retirement in 1988.\n\nIn November 2008, Dexter featured prominently in the BBC programme \"How to Solve a Cryptic Crossword\" as part of the \"Time Shift\" series, in which he recounted some of the crossword clues solved by Morse.\n\nThe initial books written by Dexter were general studies text books. He began writing mysteries in 1972 during a family holiday. \"Last Bus to Woodstock\" was published in 1975 and introduced the character of Inspector Morse, the irascible detective whose penchants for cryptic crosswords, English literature, cask ale, and Wagner reflect Dexter's own enthusiasms. Dexter's plots used false leads and other red herrings.\n\nThe success of the 33 two-hour episodes of the ITV television series \"Inspector Morse\", produced between 1987 and 2000, brought further attention to Dexter's writings. In the manner of Alfred Hitchcock, he also made a cameo appearance in almost all episodes. From 2006 to 2016, Morse's assistant Robbie Lewis featured in a 33-episode ITV series titled \"Lewis\" (\"Inspector Lewis\" in the United States). A prequel series, \"Endeavour\", featuring a young Morse and starring Shaun Evans and Roger Allam, began airing on the ITV network in 2012. Dexter was a consultant. As with \"Morse\", Dexter occasionally made cameo appearances in \"Lewis\" and \"Endeavour\".\n\nDexter received several Crime Writers' Association awards: two Silver Daggers for \"Service of All the Dead\" in 1979 and \"The Dead of Jericho\" in 1981; two Gold Daggers for \"The Wench is Dead\" in 1989 and \"The Way Through the Woods\" in 1992; and a Cartier Diamond Dagger for lifetime achievement in 1997. In 1996, Dexter received a Macavity Award for his short story \"Evans Tries an O-Level\". In 1980, he was elected a member of the by-invitation-only Detection Club. In 2005 Dexter became a Fellow by Special Election of St Cross College, Oxford.\n\nIn 2000 Dexter was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for services to literature. In 2001 he was awarded the Freedom of the City of Oxford. In September 2011, the University of Lincoln awarded Dexter an honorary Doctor of Letters degree.\n\nOn 21 March 2017 Dexter's publisher, Macmillan, said in a statement \"With immense sadness, Macmillan announces the death of Colin Dexter who died peacefully at his home in Oxford this morning.\"\n\nBULLET::::1. \"Last Bus to Woodstock\" (1975)\nBULLET::::2. \"Last Seen Wearing\" (1976)\nBULLET::::3. \"The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn\" (1977)\nBULLET::::4. \"Service of All the Dead\" (1979)\nBULLET::::5. \"The Dead of Jericho\" (1981)\nBULLET::::6. \"The Riddle of the Third Mile\" (1983)\nBULLET::::7. \"The Secret of Annexe 3\" (1986)\nBULLET::::8. \"The Wench is Dead\" (1989)\nBULLET::::9. \"The Jewel That Was Ours\" (1991)\nBULLET::::10. \"The Way Through the Woods\" (1992)\nBULLET::::11. \"The Daughters of Cain\" (1994)\nBULLET::::12. \"Death Is Now My Neighbour\" (1996)\nBULLET::::13. \"The Remorseful Day\" (1999)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Inside Story\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Neighbourhood Watch\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Morse's Greatest Mystery\" (1993); also published as \"As Good as Gold\"\nBULLET::::1. \"As Good as Gold\" (Morse)\nBULLET::::2. \"Morse's Greatest Mystery\" (Morse)\nBULLET::::3. \"Evans Tries an O-Level\"\nBULLET::::4. \"Dead as a Dodo\" (Morse)\nBULLET::::5. \"At the Lulu-Bar Motel\"\nBULLET::::6. \"Neighbourhood Watch\" (Morse)\nBULLET::::7. \"A Case of Mis-Identity\" (a Sherlock Holmes pastiche)\nBULLET::::8. \"The Inside Story\" (Morse)\nBULLET::::9. \"Monty's Revolver\"\nBULLET::::10. \"The Carpet-Bagger\"\nBULLET::::11. \"Last Call\" (Morse)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Burglar\" in \"You, The Mail on Sunday\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"The Double Crossing\" in \"Mysterious Pleasures\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Between the Lines\" in \"The Detection Collection\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Curious Quorum\" (featuring Inspector Lewis) in \"The Verdict of Us All\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"The Other Half\" in \"The Strand Magazine\" (February–May 2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Morse and the Mystery of the Drunken Driver\" in \"Daily Mail\" (December 2008)\nBULLET::::- \"Clued Up\" (a 4-page story featuring Lewis and Morse solving a crossword) in \"Cracking Cryptic Crosswords\" (2009)\n\nBULLET::::- Foreword to \"Chambers Crossword Manual\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Chambers Book of Morse Crosswords\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- Foreword to \"Oxford: A Cultural and Literary History\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Cracking Cryptic Crosswords: A Guide to Solving Cryptic Crosswords\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- Foreword to \"Oxford Through the Lens\" (2016)\n\nBULLET::::- Diogenes Small\n\n"}
{"id": "5689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5689", "title": "College", "text": "College\n\nA college (Latin: \"collegium\") is an educational institution or a constituent part of one. A college may be a degree-awarding tertiary educational institution, a part of a collegiate or federal university, an institution offering vocational education, or a secondary school.\n\nIn the United States, \"college\" may refer to a constituent part of a university or to a degree-awarding tertiary educational institution, but generally \"college\" and \"university\" are used interchangeably, whereas in the United Kingdom, Oceania, South Asia, Southern Africa, most of Europe and Africa, and Canada, \"college\" may refer to a secondary or high school, a college of further education, a training institution that awards trade qualifications, a higher education provider that does not have university status (often without its own degree-awarding powers), or a constituent part of a university (See this comparison of British and American English educational terminology for further information).\n\nIn ancient Rome a \"collegium\" was a club or society, a group of people living together under a common set of rules (\"con-\" = \"together\" + \"leg-\" = \"law\" or \"lego\" = \"I choose\" or \"I read\").\n\nAside from the modern educational context – nowadays the most common use of \"college\" – there are various other meanings also derived from the original Latin term, such as electoral college.\n\nWithin higher education, the term can be used to refer to:\nBULLET::::- a constituent part of a collegiate university, for example King's College, Cambridge, or of a federal university, for example King's College London\nBULLET::::- a liberal arts college, an independent institution of higher education focusing on undergraduate education, such as Williams College or Amherst College\nBULLET::::- a liberal arts division of a university whose undergraduate program does not otherwise follow a liberal arts model, such as the Yuanpei College at Peking University\nBULLET::::- an institute providing specialised training, such as a college of further education, for example Belfast Metropolitan College, a teacher training college, or an art college\nBULLET::::- In the United States, college is sometimes but rarely a synonym for a research university, such as Dartmouth College, one of the eight universities in the Ivy League\n\nA sixth form college or college of further education is an educational institution in England, Wales, Northern Ireland, Belize, the Caribbean, Malta, Norway, Brunei, or Southern Africa, among others, where students aged 16 to 19 typically study for advanced school-level qualifications, such as A-levels, BTEC, HND or its equivalent and the International Baccalaureate Diploma, or school-level qualifications such as GCSEs. In Singapore and India, this is known as a junior college. The municipal government of the city of Paris uses the phrase \"sixth form college\" as the English name for a lycée.\n\nIn some national education systems, secondary schools may be called \"colleges\" or have \"college\" as part of their title.\n\nIn Australia the term \"college\" is applied to any private or independent (non-government) primary and, especially, secondary school as distinct from a state school. Melbourne Grammar School, Cranbrook School, Sydney and The King's School, Parramatta are considered colleges.\n\nThere has also been a recent trend to rename or create government secondary schools as \"colleges\". In the state of Victoria, some state high schools are referred to as \"secondary colleges\", although the pre-eminent government secondary school for boys in Melbourne is still named Melbourne High School. In Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory, \"college\" is used in the name of all state high schools built since the late 1990s, and also some older ones. In New South Wales, some high schools, especially multi-campus schools resulting from mergers, are known as \"secondary colleges\". In Queensland some newer schools which accept primary and high school students are styled \"state college\", but state schools offering only secondary education are called \"State High School\". In Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory, \"college\" refers to the final two years of high school (years 11 and 12), and the institutions which provide this. In this context, \"college\" is a system independent of the other years of high school. Here, the expression is a shorter version of \"matriculation college\".\n\nIn a number of Canadian cities, many government-run secondary schools are called \"collegiates\" or \"collegiate institutes\" (C.I.), a complicated form of the word \"college\" which avoids the usual \"post-secondary\" connotation. This is because these secondary schools have traditionally focused on academic, rather than vocational, subjects and ability levels (for example, collegiates offered Latin while vocational schools offered technical courses). Some private secondary schools (such as Upper Canada College, Vancouver College) choose to use the word \"college\" in their names nevertheless. Some secondary schools elsewhere in the country, particularly ones within the separate school system, may also use the word \"college\" or \"collegiate\" in their names.\n\nIn New Zealand the word \"college\" normally refers to a secondary school for ages 13 to 17 and \"college\" appears as part of the name especially of private or integrated schools. \"Colleges\" most frequently appear in the North Island, whereas \"high schools\" are more common in the South Island.\n\nIn South Africa, some secondary schools, especially private schools on the English public school model, have \"college\" in their title. Thus no less than six of South Africa's Elite Seven high schools call themselves \"college\" and fit this description. A typical example of this category would be St John's College.\n\nPrivate schools that specialize in improving children's marks through intensive focus on examination needs are informally called \"cram-colleges\".\n\nIn Sri Lanka the word \"college\" (known as \"Vidyalaya\" in \"Sinhala\") normally refers to a secondary school, which usually signifies above the 5th standard. During the British colonial period a limited number of exclusive secondary schools were established based on English public school model (Royal College Colombo, S. Thomas' College, Mount Lavinia, Trinity College, Kandy) these along with several Catholic schools (St. Joseph's College, Colombo, St Anthony's College) traditionally carry their name as colleges. Following the start of free education in 1931 large group of central colleges were established to educate the rural masses. Since Sri Lanka gained Independence in 1948, many schools that have been established have been named as \"college\".\n\nAs well as an educational institution, the term can also refer, following its etymology, to any formal group of colleagues set up under statute or regulation; often under a Royal Charter. Examples are an electoral college, the College of Arms, a college of canons, and the College of Cardinals. Other collegiate bodies include professional associations, particularly in medicine and allied professions. In the UK these include the Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Physicians. Examples in the United States include the American College of Physicians, the American College of Surgeons, and the American College of Dentists. An example in Australia is the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners.\n\nIn Australia a college may be an institution of tertiary education that is smaller than a university, run independently or as part of a university. Following a reform in the 1980s many of the formerly independent colleges now belong to a larger universities.\n\nReferring to parts of a university, there are \"residential colleges\" which provide residence for students, both undergraduate and postgraduate, called university colleges. These colleges often provide additional tutorial assistance, and some host theological study. Many colleges have strong traditions and rituals, so are a combination of dormitory style accommodation and fraternity or sorority culture.\n\nMost technical and further education institutions (TAFEs), which offer certificate and diploma vocational courses, are styled \"TAFE colleges\" or \"Colleges of TAFE\".\n\nSome senior high schools are also referred to as colleges.\n\nIn Canadian English, the term \"college\" usually refers to a trades school, applied arts/science/technology/business/health school or community college. These are post-secondary institutions granting certificates, diplomas, associate's degree, and in some cases bachelor's degrees. In Quebec, the term is seldom used; with the French acronym for public colleges, CEGEP (\"Collège d'enseignement général et professionnel\", \"college of general and professional education\") is more commonly used. CEGEP is a collegiate level institutions in Quebec, that a student typically enrols in if they wish to continue onto university in the Quebec education system., or to learn a trade. In Ontario and Alberta, there are also institutions which are designated university colleges, as they only grant undergraduate degrees. This is to differentiate between universities, which have both undergraduate and graduate programs and those that do not.\n\nIn Canada, there is a strong distinction between \"college\" and \"university\". In conversation, one specifically would say either \"they are going to university\" (i.e., studying for a three- or four-year degree at a university) or \"they are going to college\" (i.e., studying at a technical/career training).\n\nThe term \"college\" also applies to distinct entities that formally act as an affiliated institution of the university, formally referred to as federated college, or affiliated colleges. A university may also formally include several constituent colleges, forming a collegiate university. Examples of collegiate universities in Canada include Trent University, and the University of Toronto. These types of institutions act independently, maintaining their own endowments, and properties. However, they remain either affiliated, or federated with the overarching university, with the overarching university being the institution that formally grants the degrees. For example, Trinity College was once an independent institution, but later became federated with the University of Toronto. Several centralized universities in Canada have mimicked the collegiate university model; although constituent colleges in a centralized university remains under the authority of the central administration. Centralized universities that have adopted the collegiate model to a degree includes the University of British Columbia, with Green College and St. John's College; and the Memorial University of Newfoundland, with Sir Wilfred Grenfell College.\n\nOccasionally, \"college\" refers to a subject specific faculty within a university that, while distinct, are neither \"federated\" nor \"affiliated\"—College of Education, College of Medicine, College of Dentistry, College of Biological Science among others.\n\nThe Royal Military College of Canada is a military college which trains officers for the Canadian Armed Forces. The institution is a full-fledged university, with the authority to issue graduate degrees, although it continues to word the term \"college\" in its name. The institution's sister schools, Royal Military College Saint-Jean also uses the term college in its name, although it academic offering is akin to a CEGEP institution in Quebec. A number of post-secondary art schools in Canada formerly used the word \"college\" in their names, despite formally being universities. However, most of these institutions were renamed, or re-branded in the early 21st century, omitting the word \"college\" from its name.\n\nThe word \"college\" continues to be used in the names public separate secondary schools in Ontario. A number of independent schools across Canada also use the word \"college\" in its name.\n\nPublic secular school boards in Ontario also refer to their secondary schools as \"collegiate institutes\". However, usage of the word \"collegiate institute\" varies between school boards. \"Collegiate institute\" is the predominant name for secondary schools in Lakehead District School Board, and Toronto District School Board, although most school boards in Ontario use \"collegiate institute\" alongside \"high school\", and \"secondary school\" in the names of their institutions. Similarly, secondary schools in Regina, and Saskatoon are referred to as \"Collegiate\".\n\nIn Chile, the term \"college\" is usually used in the name of some bilingual schools, like Santiago College, Saint George's College etc.\nSince 2009 the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile incorporated College as a bachelor degree, it has a Bachelor of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, a Bachelor of Social Science and a Bachelor of Arts and Humanities. It has the same system as the American universities, it combines majors and minors. And it let the students continue a higher degree in the same university once finished.\n\nKollegio (in Greek Κολλέγιο) refers to the Centers of Post-Lyceum Education (in Greek Κέντρο Μεταλυκειακής Εκπαίδευσης, abbreviated as KEME), which are principally private and belong to the Greek post-secondary education system. Some of them have links to EU or US higher education institutions or accreditation organizations, such as the NEASC. \"Kollegio\" (or \"Kollegia\" in plural) may also refer to private non-tertiary schools, such as the Athens College.\n\nIn Hong Kong, the term 'college' is used by tertiary institutions as either part of their names or to refer to a constituent part of the university, such as the colleges in the collegiate The Chinese University of Hong Kong; or to a residence hall of a university, such as St. John's College, University of Hong Kong. Many older secondary schools have the term 'college' as part of their names.\n\nThe modern system of education was heavily influenced by the British starting in 1835.\n\nIn India, the term \"college\" is commonly reserved for institutions that offer degrees at year 12 (\"\"Junior College\"\", similar to American \"high schools\"), and those that offer the bachelor's degree; some colleges, however, offer programmes up to PhD level. Generally, colleges are located in different parts of a state and all of them are affiliated to a regional university. The colleges offer programmes leading to degrees of that university. Colleges may be either Autonomous or non-autonomous. Autonomous Colleges are empowered to establish their own syllabus, and conduct and assess their own examinations; in non-autonomous colleges, examinations are conducted by the university, at the same time for all colleges under its affiliation. There are several hundred universities and each university has affiliated colleges, often a large number.\n\nThe first liberal arts and sciences college in India was C. M. S. College Kottayam, Kerala, established in 1817, and the Presidency College, Kolkata, also 1817, initially known as Hindu College. The first college for the study of Christian theology and ecumenical enquiry was Serampore College (1818). The first Missionary institution to impart Western style education in India was the Scottish Church College, Calcutta (1830). The first commerce and economics college in India was Sydenham College, Mumbai (1913).\n\nIn Ireland the term \"college\" is normally used to describe an institution of tertiary education. University students often say they attend \"college\" rather than \"university\". Until 1989, no university provided teaching or research directly; they were formally offered by a constituent college of the university.\n\nThere are number of secondary education institutions that traditionally used the word \"college\" in their names: these are either older, private schools (such as Belvedere College, Gonzaga College, Castleknock College, and St. Michael's College) or what were formerly a particular kind of secondary school. These secondary schools, formerly known as \"technical colleges,\" were renamed \"community colleges,\" but remain secondary schools.\n\nThe country's only ancient university is the University of Dublin. Created during the reign of Elizabeth I, it is modelled on the collegiate universities of Cambridge and Oxford. However, only one constituent college was ever founded, hence the curious position of Trinity College Dublin today; although both are usually considered one and the same, the University and College are completely distinct corporate entities with separate and parallel governing structures.\n\nAmong more modern foundations, the National University of Ireland, founded in 1908, consisted of constituent colleges and recognised colleges until 1997. The former are now referred to as constituent universities – institutions that are essentially universities in their own right. The National University can trace its existence back to 1850 and the creation of the Queen's University of Ireland and the creation of the Catholic University of Ireland in 1854. From 1880, the degree awarding roles of these two universities was taken over by the Royal University of Ireland, which remained until the creation of the National University in 1908 and Queen's University Belfast.\n\nThe state's two new universities, Dublin City University and University of Limerick, were initially National Institute for Higher Education institutions. These institutions offered university level academic degrees and research from the start of their existence and were awarded university status in 1989 in recognition of this.\n\nThird level technical education in the state has been carried out in the Institutes of Technology, which were established from the 1970s as Regional Technical Colleges. These institutions have \"delegated authority\" which entitles them to give degrees and diplomas from Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI) in their own names.\n\nA number of private colleges exist such as Dublin Business School, providing undergraduate and postgraduate courses validated by QQI and in some cases by other universities.\n\nOther types of college include colleges of education, such as the Church of Ireland College of Education. These are specialist institutions, often linked to a university, which provide both undergraduate and postgraduate academic degrees for people who want to train as teachers.\n\nA number of state-funded further education colleges exist – which offer vocational education and training in a range of areas from business studies and information and communications technology to sports injury therapy. These courses are usually one, two or less often three years in duration and are validated by QQI at Levels 5 or 6, or for the BTEC Higher National Diploma award, which is a Level 6/7 qualification, validated by Edexcel. There are numerous private colleges (particularly in Dublin and Limerick) which offer both further and higher education qualifications. These degrees and diplomas are often certified by foreign universities/international awarding bodies and are aligned to the National Framework of Qualifications at Levels 6, 7 and 8.\n\nIn Israel, any non university higher-learning facility is called a college. Institutions accredited by the Council for Higher Education in Israel (CHE) to confer a bachelor's degree are called \"Academic Colleges.\" These colleges (at least 4 for 2012) may also offer master's degrees and act as Research facilities. There are also over twenty teacher training colleges or seminaries, most of which may award only a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) degree.\n\nBULLET::::- Academic colleges: Any educational facility that had been approved to offer at least bachelor's degree is entitled by CHE to use the term academic college in its name.\nBULLET::::- Engineering academic college: Any academic facility that offer at least bachelor's degree and most of it faculties are providing an Engineering degree and Engineering license.\nBULLET::::- Educational academic college: After an educational facility that had been approved for \"Teachers seminar\" status is then approved to provide a Bachelor of Education, its name is changed to include \"Educational Academic college.\"\nBULLET::::- Technical college: A \"Technical college\" is an educational facility that is approved to allow to provide P.E degree (14'th class) or technician (טכנאי) (13'th class) diploma and licenses.\nBULLET::::- Training College: A \"Training College\" is an educational facility that provides basic training allowing a person to receive a working permit in a field such as alternative medicine, cooking, Art, Mechanical, Electrical and other professions. A trainee could receive the right to work in certain professions as apprentice (j. mechanic, j. Electrician etc.). After working in the training field for enough time an apprentice could have a license to operate (Mechanic, Electrician). This educational facility is mostly used to provide basic training for low tech jobs and for job seekers without any training that are provided by the nation's Employment Service ().\n\nFollowing the Portuguese usage, the term \"college\" (\"colégio\") in Macau has traditionally been used in the names for private (and non-governmental) pre-university educational institutions, which correspond to form one to form six level tiers. Such schools are usually run by the Roman Catholic church or missionaries in Macau. Examples include Chan Sui Ki Perpetual Help College, Yuet Wah College, and Sacred Heart Canossian College.\n\nThe constituent colleges of the former University of New Zealand (such as Canterbury University College) have become independent universities. Some halls of residence associated with New Zealand universities retain the name of \"college\", particularly at the University of Otago (which although brought under the umbrella of the University of New Zealand, already possessed university status and degree awarding powers). The institutions formerly known as \"Teacher-training colleges\" now style themselves \"College of education\".\n\nSome universities, such as the University of Canterbury, have divided their University into constituent administrative \"Colleges\" – the College of Arts containing departments that teach Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, College of Science containing Science departments, and so on. This is largely modelled on the Cambridge model, discussed above.\n\nLike the United Kingdom some professional bodies in New Zealand style themselves as \"colleges\", for example, the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, the Royal Australasian College of Physicians.\n\nSecondary school is often referred to as college and the term is used interchangeably with high school. This is reflected in the names of many secondary schools such as Rangitoto College, New Zealand's largest secondary.\n\nIn the Philippines, colleges usually refer to institutions of learning that grant degrees but whose scholastic fields are not as diverse as that of a university (University of Santo Tomas, University of the Philippines, Ateneo de Manila University, De La Salle University, Far Eastern University, and AMA University), such as the San Beda College which specializes in law, AMA Computer College whose campuses are spread all over the Philippines which specializes in information and computing technologies, and the Mapúa Institute of Technology which specializes in engineering, or to component units within universities that do not grant degrees but rather facilitate the instruction of a particular field, such as a College of Science and College of Engineering, among many other colleges of the University of the Philippines.\n\nA state college may not have the word \"college\" on its name, but may have several component colleges, or departments. Thus, the Eulogio Amang Rodriguez Institute of Science and Technology is a state college by classification.\n\nUsually, the term \"college\" is also thought of as a hierarchical demarcation between the term \"university\", and quite a number of colleges seek to be recognized as universities as a sign of improvement in academic standards (Colegio de San Juan de Letran, San Beda College), and increase in the diversity of the offered degree programs (called \"courses\"). For private colleges, this may be done through a survey and evaluation by the Commission on Higher Education and accrediting organizations, as was the case of Urios College which is now the Fr. Saturnino Urios University. For state colleges, it is usually done by a legislation by the Congress or Senate. In common usage, \"going to college\" simply means attending school for an undergraduate degree, whether it's from an institution recognized as a college or a university.\n\nWhen it comes to referring to the level of education, \"college\" is the term more used to be synonymous to tertiary or higher education. A student who is or has studied his/her undergraduate degree at either an institution with \"college\" or \"university\" in its name is considered to be going to or have gone to \"college\".\n\nPresently in Portugal, the term \"colégio\" (college) is normally used as a generic reference to a private (non-government) school that provides from basic to secondary education. Many of the private schools include the term \"colégio\" in their name. Some special public schools – usually of the boarding school type – also include the term in their name, with a notable example being the \"Colégio Militar\" (Military College). The term \"colégio interno\" (literally \"internal college\") is used specifically as a generic reference to a boarding school.\n\nUntil the 19th century, a \"colégio\" was usually a secondary or pre-university school, of public or religious nature, where the students usually lived together. A model for these colleges was the Royal College of Arts and Humanities, founded in Coimbra by King John III of Portugal in 1542.\n\nThe term \"college\" in Singapore is generally only used for pre-university educational institutions called \"Junior Colleges\", which provide the final two years of secondary education (equivalent to sixth form in British terms or grades 11–12 in the American system). Since 1 January 2005, the term also refers to the three campuses of the Institute of Technical Education with the introduction of the \"collegiate system\", in which the three institutions are called ITE College East, ITE College Central, and ITE College West respectively.\n\nThe term \"university\" is used to describe higher-education institutions offering locally conferred degrees. Institutions offering diplomas are called \"polytechnics\", while other institutions are often referred to as \"institutes\" and so forth.\n\nAlthough the term \"college\" is hardly used in any context at any university in South Africa, some non-university tertiary institutions call themselves colleges. These include teacher training colleges, business colleges and wildlife management colleges. See: List of universities in South Africa#Private colleges and universities; List of post secondary institutions in South Africa.\n\nThere are several professional and vocational institutions that offer post-secondary education without granting degrees that are referred to as \"colleges\". This includes the Sri Lanka Law College, the many Technical Colleges and Teaching Colleges.\n\nFurther education (FE) colleges and sixth form colleges are institutions providing further education to students over 16. Some of these also provide higher education courses (see below). In the context of secondary education, 'college' is used in the names of some private schools, e.g. Eton College and Winchester College.\n\nIn higher education, a college is normally a provider that does not hold university status, although it can also refer to a constituent part of a collegiate or federal university or a grouping of academic faculties or departments within a university. Traditionally the distinction between colleges and universities was that colleges did not award degrees while universities did, but this is no longer the case with NCG having gained taught degree awarding powers (the same as some universities) on behalf of its colleges, and many of the colleges of the University of London holding full degree awarding powers and being effectively universities. Most colleges, however, do not hold their own degree awarding powers and continue to offer higher education courses that are validated by universities or other institutions that can award degrees.\n\nIn England, , over 60% of the higher education providers directly funded by HEFCE (208/340) are sixth-form or further education colleges, often termed colleges of further and higher education, along with 17 colleges of the University of London, one university college, 100 universities, and 14 other providers (six of which use 'college' in their name). Overall, this means over two thirds of state-supported higher education providers in England are colleges of one form or another. Many private providers are also called colleges, e.g. the New College of the Humanities and St Patrick's College, London.\n\nColleges within universities vary immensely in their responsibilities. The large constituent colleges of the University of London are effectively universities in their own right; colleges in some universities, including those of the University of the Arts London and smaller colleges of the University of London, run their own degree courses but do not award degrees; those at the University of Roehampton provide accommodation and pastoral care as well as delivering the teaching on university courses; those at Oxford and Cambridge deliver some teaching on university courses as well as providing accommodation and pastoral care; and those in Durham, Kent, Lancaster and York provide accommodation and pastoral care but do not normally participate in formal teaching. The legal status of these colleges also varies widely, with University of London colleges being independent corporations and recognised bodies, Oxbridge colleges, colleges of the University of the Highlands and Islands (UHI) and some Durham colleges being independent corporations and listed bodies, most Durham colleges being owned by the university but still listed bodies, and those of other collegiate universities not having formal recognition. When applying for undergraduate courses through UCAS, University of London colleges are treated as independent providers, colleges of Oxford, Cambridge, Durham and UHI are treated as locations within the universities that can be selected by specifying a 'campus code' in addition to selecting the university, and colleges of other universities are not recognised.\n\nThe UHI and the University of Wales Trinity Saint David (UWTSD) both include further education colleges. However, while the UHI colleges integrate FE and HE provision, UWTSD maintains a separation between the university campuses (Lampeter, Carmarthen and Swansea) and the two colleges (\"Coleg Sir Gâr\" and \"Coleg Ceredigion\"; n.b. \"coleg\" is Welsh for college), which although part of the same group are treated as separate institutions rather than colleges within the university.\n\nA university college is an independent institution with the power to award taught degrees, but which has not been granted university status. University College is a protected title that can only be used with permission, although note that University College London, University College, Oxford and University College, Durham are colleges within their respective universities and not university colleges (in the case of UCL holding full degree awarding powers that set it above a university college), while University College Birmingham is a university in its own right and also not a university college.\n\nIn the United States, there are over 7021 colleges and universities. A \"college\" in the US formally denotes a constituent part of a university, but in popular usage, the word \"college\" is the generic term for any post-secondary undergraduate education. Americans \"go to college\" after high school, regardless of whether the specific institution is formally a college or a university. Some students choose to dual-enroll, by taking college classes while still in high school. The word and its derivatives are the standard terms used to describe the institutions and experiences associated with American post-secondary undergraduate education.\n\nStudents must pay for college before taking classes. Some borrow the money via loans, and some students fund their educations with cash, scholarships, or grants, or some combination of any two or more of those payment methods. In 2011, the state or federal government subsidized $8,000 to $100,000 for each undergraduate degree. For state-owned schools (called \"public\" universities), the subsidy was given to the college, with the student benefiting from lower tuition. The state subsidized on average 50% of public university tuition.\nColleges vary in terms of size, degree, and length of stay. Two-year colleges, also known as junior or community colleges, usually offer an associate's degree, and four-year colleges usually offer a bachelor's degree. Often, these are entirely undergraduate institutions, although some have graduate school programs.\n\nFour-year institutions in the U.S. that emphasize a liberal arts curriculum are known as liberal arts colleges. Until the 20th century, liberal arts, law, medicine, theology, and divinity were about the only form of higher education available in the United States. These schools have traditionally emphasized instruction at the undergraduate level, although advanced research may still occur at these institutions.\n\nWhile there is no national standard in the United States, the term \"university\" primarily designates institutions that provide undergraduate and graduate education. A university typically has as its core and its largest internal division an undergraduate college teaching a liberal arts curriculum, also culminating in a bachelor's degree. What often distinguishes a university is having, in addition, one or more graduate schools engaged in both teaching graduate classes and in research. Often these would be called a School of Law or School of Medicine, (but may also be called a college of law, or a faculty of law). An exception is Vincennes University, Indiana, which is styled and chartered as a \"university\" even though almost all of its academic programs lead only to two-year associate degrees. Some institutions, such as Dartmouth College and The College of William & Mary, have retained the term \"college\" in their names for historical reasons. In one unique case, Boston College and Boston University, the former located in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts and the latter located in Boston, Massachusetts, are completely separate institutions.\nUsage of the terms varies among the states. In 1996 for example, Georgia changed all of its four-year institutions previously designated as colleges to universities, and all of its vocational technology schools to technical colleges.\nThe terms \"university\" and \"college\" do not exhaust all possible titles for an American institution of higher education. Other options include \"Polytechnic\" (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute), \"Institute of Technology\" (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), \"academy\" (United States Military Academy), \"union\" (Cooper Union), \"conservatory\" (New England Conservatory), and \"school\" (Juilliard School). In colloquial use, they are still referred to as \"college\" when referring to their undergraduate studies.\n\nThe term \"college\" is also, as in the United Kingdom, used for a constituent semi-autonomous part of a larger university but generally organized on academic rather than residential lines. For example, at many institutions, the undergraduate portion of the university can be briefly referred to as the college (such as The College of the University of Chicago, Harvard College at Harvard, or Columbia College at Columbia) while at others, such as the University of California, Berkeley, each of the faculties may be called a \"college\" (the \"college of engineering\", the \"college of nursing\", and so forth). There exist other variants for historical reasons; for example, Duke University, which was called Trinity College until the 1920s, still calls its main undergraduate subdivision Trinity College of Arts and Sciences.\n\nSome American universities, such as Princeton, Rice, and Yale have established residential colleges (sometimes, as at Harvard, the first to establish such a system in the 1930s, known as houses) along the lines of Oxford or Cambridge. Unlike the Oxbridge colleges, but similarly to Durham, these residential colleges are not autonomous legal entities nor are they typically much involved in education itself, being primarily concerned with room, board, and social life. At the University of Michigan, University of California, San Diego and the University of California, Santa Cruz, however, each of the residential colleges does teach its own core writing courses and has its own distinctive set of graduation requirements.\n\nMany U.S. universities have placed increased emphasis on their residential colleges in recent years. This is exemplified by the creation of new colleges at Ivy League schools such as Yale University and Princeton University, and efforts to strengthen the contribution of the residential colleges to student education, including through a 2016 taskforce at Princeton on residential colleges.\n\nThe founders of the first institutions of higher education in the United States were graduates of the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge. The small institutions they founded would not have seemed to them like universities – they were tiny and did not offer the higher degrees in medicine and theology. Furthermore, they were not composed of several small colleges. Instead, the new institutions felt like the Oxford and Cambridge colleges they were used to – small communities, housing and feeding their students, with instruction from residential tutors (as in the United Kingdom, described above). When the first students graduated, these \"colleges\" assumed the right to confer degrees upon them, usually with authority—for example, The College of William & Mary has a Royal Charter from the British monarchy allowing it to confer degrees while Dartmouth College has a charter permitting it to award degrees \"as are usually granted in either of the universities, or any other college in our realm of Great Britain.\"\nThe leaders of Harvard College (which granted America's first degrees in 1642) might have thought of their college as the first of many residential colleges that would grow up into a New Cambridge university. However, over time, few new colleges were founded there, and Harvard grew and added higher faculties. Eventually, it changed its title to university, but the term \"college\" had stuck and \"colleges\" have arisen across the United States.\n\nIn U.S. usage, the word \"college\" embodies not only a particular type of school, but has historically been used to refer to the general concept of higher education when it is not necessary to specify a school, as in \"going to college\" or \"college savings accounts\" offered by banks.\n\nIn a survey of more than 2,000 college students in 33 states and 156 different campuses, the U.S. Public Interest Research Group found the average student spends as much as $1,200 each year on textbooks and supplies alone. By comparison, the group says that's the equivalent of 39 percent of tuition and fees at a community college, and 14 percent of tuition and fees at a four-year public university.\n\nIn addition to private colleges and universities, the U.S. also has a system of government funded, public universities. Many were founded under the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act of 1862. A movement had arisen to bring a form of more practical higher education to the masses, as \"...many politicians and educators wanted to make it possible for all young Americans to receive some sort of advanced education.\" The Morrill Act \"...made it possible for the new western states to establish colleges for the citizens.\" Its goal was to make higher education more easily accessible to the citizenry of the country, specifically to improve agricultural systems by providing training and scholarship in the production and sales of agricultural products, and to provide formal education in \"...agriculture, home economics, mechanical arts, and other professions that seemed practical at the time.\"\n\nThe act was eventually extended to allow all states that had remained with the Union during the American Civil War, and eventually all states, to establish such institutions. Most of the colleges established under the Morrill Act have since become full universities, and some are among the elite of the world.\n\nSelection of a four-year college as compared to a two-year junior college, even by marginal students such as those with a C+ grade average in high school and SAT scores in the mid 800s, increases the probability of graduation and confers substantial economic and social benefits.\n\nThe term college is mainly used by private or independent secondary schools with Advanced Level (Upper 6th formers) and also Polytechnic Colleges which confer diplomas only. A student can complete secondary education (International General Certificate of Secondary Education, IGCSE) at 16 years and proceed straight to a poly-technical college or they can proceed to Advanced level (16 to 19 years) and obtain a General Certificate of Education (GCE) certificate which enables them to enrol at a University, provided they have good grades. Alternatively, with lower grades the GCE certificate holders will have an added advantage over their GCSE counterparts if they choose to enrol at a Poly-technical College. Some schools in Zimbabwe choose to offer the International Baccalaureate studies as an alternative to the IGCSE and GCE.\n\nBULLET::::- Madrasa\n"}
{"id": "5690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5690", "title": "Chalmers University of Technology", "text": "Chalmers University of Technology\n\nChalmers University of Technology (, often shortened to Chalmers) is a Swedish university located in Gothenburg that focuses on research and education in technology, natural science, architecture, maritime and other management areas.\n\nThe university was founded in 1829 following a donation by William Chalmers, a director of the Swedish East India Company. He donated part of his fortune for the establishment of an \"industrial school\". Chalmers was run as a private institution until 1937, when the institute became a state-owned university. In 1994, the school was incorporated as an\naktiebolag under the control of the Swedish Government, the faculty and the Student Union. Chalmers is one of only three universities in Sweden which are named after a person, the other two being Karolinska Institutet and Linnaeus University.\n\nBeginning 1 May 2017, Chalmers has 13 departments.\nBULLET::::- Architecture and Civil Engineering\nBULLET::::- Biology and Biological Engineering\nBULLET::::- Chemistry and Chemical Engineering\nBULLET::::- Communication and Learning in Science\nBULLET::::- Computer Science and Engineering\nBULLET::::- Electrical Engineering\nBULLET::::- Industrial and Materials Science\nBULLET::::- Mathematical Sciences\nBULLET::::- Mechanics and Maritime Sciences\nBULLET::::- Microtechnology and Nanoscience\nBULLET::::- Physics\nBULLET::::- Space, Earth and Environment\nBULLET::::- Technology Management and Economics\n\nFurthermore, Chalmers is home to eight Areas of Advance and six national competence centers in key fields such as materials, mathematical modelling, environmental science, and vehicle safety.\n\nChalmers University of Technology's research infrastructure includes everything from advanced real or virtual labs to large databases, computer capacity for large-scale calculations and research facilities. \nBULLET::::- Chalmers Centre for Computational Science and Engineering, C3SE\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Mass Spectrometry Infrastructure, CMSI\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Power Central\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Materials Analysis Laboratory\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Simulator Centre\nBULLET::::- Chemical Imaging Infrastructure\nBULLET::::- Facility for Computational Systems Biology\nBULLET::::- HSB Living Lab\nBULLET::::- Nanofabrication Laboratory\nBULLET::::- Onsala Space Observatory\nBULLET::::- Revere – Chalmers Resource for Vehicle Research\nBULLET::::- The National laboratory in terahertz characterisation\n\nApproximately 40% of Sweden's graduate engineers and architects are educated at Chalmers. Each year, around 250 post graduate degrees are awarded as well as 850 graduate degrees. About 1,000 post-graduate students attend programmes at the university, and many students are taking Master of Science engineering programmes and the Master of Architecture programme. Since 2007, all master's programmes are taught in English for both national and international students. This was a result of the adaptation to the Bologna process that started in 2004 at Chalmers (as the first technical university in Sweden).\n\nCurrently, about 10% of all students at Chalmers come from countries outside Sweden to enroll in a master's or PhD program.\n\nAround 2,700 students also attend Bachelor of Science engineering programmes, merchant marine and other undergraduate courses at Campus Lindholmen. Chalmers also shares some students with Gothenburg University in the joint IT University project. The IT University focuses exclusively on information technology and offers bachelor's and master's programmes with degrees issued from either Chalmers or Gothenburg University, depending on the programme.\n\nChalmers confers honorary doctoral degrees to people outside the university who have shown great merit in their research or in society.\n\nChalmers is an aktiebolag with 100 shares à 1,000 SEK, all of which are owned by the Chalmers University of Technology Foundation, a private foundation, which appoints the university board and the president. The foundation has its members appointed by the Swedish government (4 to 8 seats), the departments appoints one member, the student union appoints one member and the president automatically gains one chair. Each department is led by a department head, usually a member of the faculty of that department. The faculty senate represents members of the faculty when decisions are taken.\n\nIn 1937, the school moved from the city center to the new Gibraltar Campus, named after the mansion which owned the grounds, where it is now located. The Lindholmen College Campus was created in the early 1990s and is located on the island Hisingen. Campus Johanneberg and Campus Lindholmen, as they are now called, are connected by bus lines.\n\nTraditions include the graduation ceremony and the Cortège procession, an annual public event.\n\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Students' Union\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Aerospace Club – founded in 1981. In Swedish frequently also referred to as \"Chalmers rymdgrupp\" (roughly \"Chalmers Space Group\"). Members of CAC led the ESA funded CACTEX (Chalmers Aerospace Club Thermal EXperiment) project where the thermal conductivity of alcohol at zero gravity was investigated using a sounding rocket.\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Alternative Sports – Student association organizing trips and other activities working to promote alternative sports. Every year the Chalmers Wake arranges a pond wakeboard contest in the fountain outside the architecture building at Chalmers.\nBULLET::::- Chalmersbaletten\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Ballong Corps\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Baroque Ensemble\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Business Society (CBS)\nBULLET::::- CETAC\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Choir\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Film and Photography Committee (CFFC)\nBULLET::::- Chalmersspexet – Amateur theater group which has produced new plays since 1948\nBULLET::::- Chalmers International Reception Committee (CIRC)\nBULLET::::- XP – Committee that is responsible for the experimental workshop, a workshop open for students\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Program Committee – PU\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Students for Sustainability (CSS) – promoting sustainable development among the students and runs projects, campaigns and lectures\nBULLET::::- Föreningen Chalmers Skeppsbyggare, Chalmers Naval Architecture Students' Society (FCS)\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Sailing Society\nBULLET::::- RANG – Chalmers Indian Association\nBULLET::::- Caster – Developing and operating a Driver in the Loop (DIL) simulator, which is used in various courses and projects\n\nChalmers has partnerships with major industries mostly in the Gothenburg region such as Ericsson, Volvo, and SKF.\nThe University has general exchange agreements with many European and U.S. universities and maintains a special exchange program agreement with National Chiao Tung University (NCTU) in Taiwan where the exchange students from the two universities maintains offices for, among other things, helping local students with applying and preparing for an exchange year as well as acting as representatives. It contributes also to the Top Industrial Managers for Europe (TIME) network.\n\nA close collaboration between the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Chalmers and ICVR at ETH Zurich is being established. As of 2014, Chalmers University of Technology is a member of the IDEA League network.\n\nSince 2012, Chalmers has been achieved the highest reputation for Swedish Universities by the Kantar Sifo's Reputation Index. According to the survey, Chalmers is the most well-known university in Sweden regarded as a successful and competitive high-class institution with large contribution in society and credibility in media.\n\nIn 2018, a benchmarking report from MIT ranked Chalmers top 10 in the world of engineering education. In 2019, the QS World University Rankings, placed Chalmers 93rd in the world in the field of engineering & technology and 86th in the world in graduate employability. \n\nIn 2020, the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, ranked Chalmers 71st in the world for engineering & technology, while, in 2018, the Academic Ranking of World Universities, placed Chalmers 51-75 in the world in the field of electrical & electronic engineering and 33rd in the world for telecommunication engineering.\n\nIn the 2011 International Professional Ranking of Higher Education Institutions, which is established on the basis of the number of alumni holding a post of Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or equivalent in one of the Fortune Global 500 companies, Chalmers University of Technology ranked 38th in the world, ranking 1st in Sweden and 15th in Europe.\n\nBULLET::::- Christopher Ahlberg, computer scientist and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- Rune Andersson, Swedish Industrialist, owner of Mellby Gård AB and billionaire\nBULLET::::- Abbas Anvari, former chancellor of Sharif University of Technology\nBULLET::::- Linn Berggren, artist and former member of Ace of Base\nBULLET::::- Gustaf Dalén, Nobel Prize in Physics\nBULLET::::- Sigfrid Edström, director ASEA, president IOC\nBULLET::::- Claes-Göran Granqvist, physicist\nBULLET::::- Margit Hall, first female architect in Sweden\nBULLET::::- Mats Hillert, metallurgist\nBULLET::::- Ivar Jacobson, computer scientist\nBULLET::::- Erik Johansson, photographic surrealist\nBULLET::::- Jan Johansson, jazz musician\nBULLET::::- Leif Johansson, former CEO Volvo\nBULLET::::- Olav Kallenberg, probability theorist\nBULLET::::- Hjalmar Kumlien, architect\nBULLET::::- Abraham Langlet, chemist\nBULLET::::- Martin Lorentzon, Spotify and TradeDoubler founder\nBULLET::::- Ingemar Lundström, physicist, chairman of the Nobel Committee for Physics\nBULLET::::- Carl Magnusson, industrial designer and inventor\nBULLET::::- Semir Mahjoub, businessman and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- Peter Nordin, computer scientist and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- Åke Öberg, biomedical scientist\nBULLET::::- Leif Östling, CEO Scania AB\nBULLET::::- PewDiePie (Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg), YouTuber (no degree)\nBULLET::::- Carl Abraham Pihl, engineer and director of first Norwegian railroad (Hovedbanen)\nBULLET::::- Richard Soderberg, businessman, inventor and professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology\nBULLET::::- Hans Stråberg, former President and CEO of Electrolux\nBULLET::::- Ludvig Strigeus, computer scientist and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- Per Håkan Sundell, computer scientist and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- Jan Wäreby, businessman\nBULLET::::- Gert Wingårdh, architect\n\nAlthough the official Swedish title for the head is \"rektor\", the university now uses \"President\" as the English translation.\n\nBULLET::::- University of Gothenburg (Göteborg University)\nBULLET::::- IT University of Göteborg\nBULLET::::- Chalmers School of Entrepreneurship\nBULLET::::- List of universities in Sweden\nBULLET::::- The International Science Festival in Gothenburg\n\nBULLET::::- Chalmers University of Technology – official site\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Student Union\nBULLET::::- Chalmers Alumni Association\n"}
{"id": "5691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5691", "title": "Codex", "text": "Codex\n\nA codex (plural codices (), is a book constructed of a number of sheets of paper, vellum, papyrus, or similar materials. The term is now usually only used of manuscript books, with hand-written contents, but describes the format that is now near-universal for printed books in the Western world. The book is usually bound by stacking the pages and fixing one edge to a spine, which may just be thicker paper (paperback or softback), or with stiff boards, called a hardback, or in elaborate historical examples a treasure binding.\n\nAt least in the Western world, the main alternative to the paged codex format for a long document is the continuous scroll, which was the dominant form of document in the Ancient World. Some codices are continuously folded like a concertina, in particular the Maya codices and Aztec codices, which are actually long sheets of paper or animal skin folded into pages. These do not really meet most current definitions of the \"codex\" form, but are so called by convention.\n\nThe Romans developed the form from wax tablets. The gradual replacement of the scroll by the codex has been called the most important advance in book making before the invention of the printing press. The codex transformed the shape of the book itself, and offered a form that has lasted to the present day (and continues to be used alongside e-paper). The spread of the codex is often associated with the rise of Christianity, which adopted the format for use with the Bible early on. First described by the 1st-century AD Roman poet Martial, who praised its convenient use, the codex achieved numerical parity with the scroll around 300 AD, and had completely replaced it throughout what was by then a Christianized Greco-Roman world by the 6th century.\n\nThe word codex comes from the Latin word \"caudex\", meaning \"trunk of a tree\", “block of wood” or “book”). The codex began to replace the scroll almost as soon as it was invented. In Egypt, by the fifth century, the codex outnumbered the scroll by ten to one based on surviving examples. By the sixth century, the scroll had almost vanished as a medium for literature. The change from rolls to codices roughly coincides with the transition from papyrus to parchment as the preferred writing material, but the two developments are unconnected. In fact, any combination of codices and scrolls with papyrus and parchment is technically feasible and common in the historical record.\n\nTechnically, even modern paperbacks are codices, but publishers and scholars reserve the term for manuscript (hand-written) books produced from Late antiquity until the Middle Ages. The scholarly study of these manuscripts from the point of view of the bookbinding craft is called codicology. The study of ancient documents in general is called paleography.\n\nThe codex provided considerable advantages over other book formats, primarily its compactness, sturdiness, economic use of materials by using both sides (recto and verso), and ease of reference (a codex accommodates random access, as opposed to a scroll, which uses sequential access.)\n\nThe Romans used precursors made of reusable wax-covered tablets of wood for taking notes and other informal writings. Two ancient polyptychs, a \"pentaptych\" and \"octoptych\", excavated at Herculaneum used a unique connecting system that presages later sewing on of thongs or cords. Julius Caesar may have been the first Roman to reduce scrolls to bound pages in the form of a note-book, possibly even as a papyrus codex. At the turn of the 1st century AD, a kind of folded parchment notebook called \"pugillares membranei\" in Latin became commonly used for writing in the Roman Empire. Theodore Cressy Skeat theorized that this form of notebook was invented in Rome and then spread rapidly to the Near East.\n\nCodices are described in certain works by the Classical Latin poet, Martial. He wrote a series of five couplets meant to accompany gifts of literature that Romans exchanged during the festival of Saturnalia. Three of these books are specifically described by Martial as being in the form of a codex; the poet praises the compendiousness of the form (as opposed to the scroll), as well the convenience with which such a book can be read on a journey. In another poem by Martial, the poet advertises a new edition of his works, specifically noting that it is produced as a codex, taking less space than a scroll and more comfortable to hold in one hand. According to Theodore Cressy Skeat, this might be the first recorded known case of an entire edition of a literary work (not just a single copy) being published in codex form, though it was likely an isolated case and was not a common practice until a much later time.\n\nIn his discussion of one of the earliest parchment codices to survive from Oxyrhynchus in Egypt, Eric Turner seems to challenge Skeat's notion when stating, “…its mere existence is evidence that this book form had a prehistory”, and that “early experiments with this book form may well have taken place outside of Egypt.” Early codices of parchment or papyrus appear to have been widely used as personal notebooks, for instance in recording copies of letters sent (Cicero \"Fam.\" 9.26.1). The parchment notebook pages were commonly washed or scraped for re-use (called a palimpsest) and consequently, writings in a codex were often considered informal and impermanent.\n\nAs early as the early 2nd century, there is evidence that a codex—usually of papyrus—was the preferred format among Christians. In the library of the Villa of the Papyri, Herculaneum (buried in AD 79), all the texts (of Greek literature) are scrolls (see Herculaneum papyri). However, in the Nag Hammadi library, hidden about AD 390, all texts (Gnostic Christian) are codices. Despite this comparison, a fragment of a non-Christian parchment codex of Demosthenes' \"De Falsa Legatione\" from Oxyrhynchus in Egypt demonstrates that the surviving evidence is insufficient to conclude whether Christians played a major or central role in the development of early codices—or if they simply adopted the format to distinguish themselves from Jews.\n\nThe earliest surviving fragments from codices come from Egypt, and are variously dated (always tentatively) towards the end of the 1st century or in the first half of the 2nd. This group includes the Rylands Library Papyrus P52, containing part of St John's Gospel, and perhaps dating from between 125 and 160.\nIn Western culture, the codex gradually replaced the scroll. Between the 4th century, when the codex gained wide acceptance, and the Carolingian Renaissance in the 8th century, many works that were not converted from scroll to codex were lost. The codex improved on the scroll in several ways. It could be opened flat at any page for easier reading, pages could be written on both front and back (recto and verso), and the protection of durable covers made it more compact and easier to transport.\n\nThe ancients stored codices with spines facing inward, and not always vertically. The spine could be used for the incipit, before the concept of a proper title developed in medieval times. Though most early codices were made of papyrus, papyrus was fragile and supplies from Egypt, the only place where papyrus grew and was made into paper, became scanty. The more durable parchment and vellum gained favor, despite the cost.\nThe codices of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica (Mexico and Central America) had the same form as the European codex, but were instead made with long folded strips of either fig bark (amatl) or plant fibers, often with a layer of whitewash applied before writing. New World codices were written as late as the 16th century (see Maya codices and Aztec codices). Those written before the Spanish conquests seem all to have been single long sheets folded concertina-style, sometimes written on both sides of the local \"amatl\" paper. There are significant codices produced in the colonial era, with pictorial and alphabetic texts in Spanish or an indigenous language such as Nahuatl.\n\nIn East Asia, the scroll remained standard for far longer than in the Mediterranean world. There were intermediate stages, such as scrolls folded concertina-style and pasted together at the back and books that were printed only on one side of the paper. This replaced traditional Chinese writing mediums such as bamboo and wooden slips, as well as silk and paper scrolls. The evolution of the codex in China began with folded-leaf pamphlets in the 9th century, during the late Tang Dynasty (618-907), improved by the 'butterfly' bindings of the Song dynasty (960-1279), the wrapped back binding of the Yuan dynasty (1271-1368), the stitched binding of the Ming (1368-1644) and Qing dynasties (1644-1912), and finally the adoption of Western-style bookbinding in the 20th century. The initial phase of this evolution, the accordion-folded palm-leaf-style book, most likely came from India and was introduced to China via Buddhist missionaries and scriptures.\n\nJudaism still retains the Torah scroll, at least for ceremonial use.\n\nAmong the experiments of earlier centuries, scrolls were sometimes unrolled horizontally, as a succession of columns. (The Dead Sea Scrolls are a famous example of this format.) This made it possible to fold the scroll as an accordion. The next step was then to cut the folios, sew and glue them at their centers, making it easier to use the papyrus or vellum recto-verso as with a modern book. Traditional bookbinders would call one of these assembled, trimmed and bound folios a \"codex\" to differentiate it from the \"case,\" which we now know as \"hard cover\". Binding the codex was clearly a different procedure from binding the case.\n\nThe first stage in creating a codex is to prepare the animal skin. The skin is washed with water and lime, but not together, and it has to soak in the lime for a couple of days. The hair is removed and the skin is dried by attaching it to a frame called a herse. The parchment maker attaches the skin at points around the circumference. The skin attaches to the herse by cords. To prevent tearing, the maker wraps the area of the skin attached to the cord around a pebble called a pippin. After completing that, the maker uses a crescent shaped knife called a \"lunarium\" or \"lunellum\" to remove any remaining hairs. Once the skin completely dries, the maker gives it a deep clean and processes it into sheets. The number of sheets from a piece of skin depends on the size of the skin and the final product dimensions. For example, the average calfskin can provide three and half medium sheets of writing material. This can be doubled when folded into two conjoint leaves, also known as a \"bifolium\". Historians have found evidence of manuscripts where the scribe wrote down the medieval instructions now followed by modern membrane makers. Defects can often be found in the membrane, whether from the original animal, human error during the preparation period, or from when the animal was killed. Defects can also appear during the writing process. Unless it is kept in perfect condition, defects can also appear later in the life of a manuscript.\n\nFirst the membrane must be prepared. The first step is to set up the quires. The quire is a group of several sheets put together. Raymond Clemens and Timothy Graham point out, in \"Introduction to Manuscript Studies\", that \"the quire was the scribe’s basic writing unit throughout the Middle Ages\": \"Pricking is the process of making holes in a sheet of parchment (or membrane) in preparation of it ruling. The lines were then made by ruling between the prick marks...The process of entering ruled lines on the page to serve as a guide for entering text. Most manuscripts were ruled with horizontal lines that served as the baselines on which the text was entered and with vertical bounding lines that marked the boundaries of the columns.\"\n\nFrom the Carolingian period and all the way up to the Middle Ages, different styles of folding the quire came about. For example, in mainland Europe throughout the Middle Ages, the quire was put into a system in which each side folded on to the same style. The hair side met the hair side and the flesh side to the flesh side. This was not the same style used in the British Isles, where the membrane was folded so that it turned out an eight-leaf quire, with single leaves in the third and sixth positions. The next stage was tacking the quire. Tacking is when the scribe would hold together the leaves in quire with thread. Once threaded together, the scribe would then sew a line of parchment up the \"spine\" of the manuscript, as to protect the tacking.\n\nBULLET::::- Aztec codices\nBULLET::::- History of books\nBULLET::::- History of scrolls\nBULLET::::- List of codices\nBULLET::::- List of florilegia and botanical codices\nBULLET::::- List of New Testament papyri\nBULLET::::- List of New Testament uncials\nBULLET::::- Maya codices\nBULLET::::- Traditional Chinese bookbinding\nBULLET::::- Volume (bibliography)\n\nBULLET::::- David Diringer, \"The Book Before Printing: Ancient, Medieval and Oriental\", Courier Dover Publications, New York 1982,\nBULLET::::- L. W. Hurtado, \"The Earliest Christian Artifacts: Manuscripts and Christian Origins\", Cambridge 2006.\n\nBULLET::::- Georgian Codex\nBULLET::::- Centre for the History of the Book\nBULLET::::- The Codex and Canon Consciousness – Draft paper by Robert Kraft on the change from scroll to codex\nBULLET::::- The Construction of the Codex In Classic- and Postclassic-Period Maya Civilization Maya Codex and Paper Making\nBULLET::::- Encyclopaedia Romana: \"Scroll and codex\"\nBULLET::::- K.C. Hanson, \"Catalogue of New Testament Papyri & Codices 2nd—10th Centuries\"\nBULLET::::- Medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, including Vulgates, Breviaries, Contracts, and Herbal Texts from 12 -17th century, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Libraries\n"}
{"id": "5692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5692", "title": "Calf", "text": "Calf\n\nA calf (plural calves) is a young domestic cattle. Calves are reared to become adult cattle or are slaughtered for their meat, called veal, and hide.\n\nThe term \"calf\" is also used for some other species. See \"Other animals\" below.\n\n\"Calf\" is the term used from birth to weaning, when it becomes known as a \"weaner\" or \"weaner calf\", though in some areas the term \"calf\" may be used until the animal is a yearling. The birth of a calf is known as \"calving\". A calf that has lost its mother is an orphan calf, also known as a \"poddy\" or \"poddy-calf\" in British English. \"Bobby calves\" are young calves which are to be slaughtered for human consumption. A \"vealer\" is a fat calf weighing less than about which is at about eight to nine months of age. A young female calf from birth until she has had a calf of her own is called a \"heifer\"\n(). In the American Old West, a motherless or small, runty calf was sometimes referred to as a \"dogie,\" (pronounced with a long \"o\").\n\nThe term \"calf\" is also used for some other species. See \"Other animals\" below.\n\nCalves may be produced by natural means, or by artificial breeding using artificial insemination or embryo transfer.\n\nCalves are born after a gestation of nine months. They usually stand within a few minutes of calving, and suckle within an hour. However, for the first few days they are not easily able to keep up with the rest of the herd, so young calves are often left hidden by their mothers, who visit them several times a day to suckle them. By a week old the calf is able to follow the mother all the time.\n\nSome calves are ear tagged soon after birth, especially those that are stud cattle in order to correctly identify their dams (mothers), or in areas (such as the EU) where tagging is a legal requirement for cattle. Typically when the calves are about two months old they are branded, ear marked, castrated and vaccinated.\n\nThe \"single suckler\" system of rearing calves is similar to that occurring naturally in wild cattle, where each calf is suckled by its own mother until it is weaned at about nine months old. This system is commonly used for rearing beef cattle throughout the world.\n\nCows kept on poor forage (as is typical in subsistence farming) produce a limited amount of milk. A calf left with such a mother all the time can easily drink all the milk, leaving none for human consumption. For dairy production under such circumstances, the calf's access to the cow must be limited, for example by penning the calf and bringing the mother to it once a day after partly milking her. The small amount of milk available for the calf under such systems may mean that it takes a longer time to rear, and in subsistence farming it is therefore common for cows to calve only in alternate years.\n\nIn more intensive dairy farming, cows can easily be bred and fed to produce far more milk than one calf can drink. In the \"multi-suckler\" system, several calves are fostered onto one cow in addition to her own, and these calves' mothers can then be used wholly for milk production. More commonly, calves of dairy cows are fed formula milk from soon after birth, usually from a bottle or bucket.\n\nPurebred female calves of dairy cows are reared as replacement dairy cows. Most purebred dairy calves are produced by artificial insemination (AI). By this method each bull can serve many cows, so only a very few of the purebred dairy male calves are needed to provide bulls for breeding. The remainder of the male calves may be reared for beef or veal; however, some extreme dairy breeds carry so little muscle that rearing the purebred male calves may be uneconomic, and in this case they are often killed soon after birth and disposed of. Only a proportion of purebred heifers are needed to provide replacement cows, so often some of the cows in dairy herds are put to a beef bull to produce crossbred calves suitable for rearing as beef.\n\nVeal calves may be reared entirely on milk formula and killed at about 18 or 20 weeks as \"white\" veal, or fed on grain and hay and killed at 22 to 35 weeks to produce red or pink veal.\n\nA commercial steer or bull calf is expected to put on about per month. A nine-month-old steer or bull is therefore expected to weigh about . Heifers will weigh at least at eight months of age.\n\nCalves are usually weaned at about eight to nine months of age, but depending on the season and condition of the dam, they might be weaned earlier. They may be paddock weaned, often next to their mothers, or weaned in stockyards. The latter system is preferred by some as it accustoms the weaners to the presence of people and they are trained to take feed other than grass. Small numbers may also be weaned with their dams with the use of weaning nose rings or nosebands which results in the mothers rejecting the calves' attempts to suckle. Many calves are also weaned when they are taken to the large weaner auction sales that are conducted in the south eastern states of Australia. Victoria and New South Wales have yardings of up to 8,000 weaners (calves) for auction sale in one day. The best of these weaners may go to the butchers. Others will be purchased by re-stockers to grow out and fatten on grass or as potential breeders. In the United States these weaners may be known as \"feeders\" and would be placed directly into feedlots.\n\nAt about 12 months old a beef heifer reaches puberty if she is well grown.\n\nCalves suffer from few congenital abnormalities but the Akabane virus is widely distributed in temperate to tropical regions of the world. The virus is a teratogenic pathogen which causes abortions, stillbirths, premature births and congenital abnormalities, but occurs only during some years.\n\nCalf meat for human consumption is called veal, and is usually produced from the male calves of Dairy cattle. Also eaten are calf's brains and calf liver. The hide is used to make calfskin, or tanned into leather and called calf leather, or sometimes in the US \"novillo\", the Spanish term. The fourth compartment of the stomach of slaughtered milk-fed calves is the source of rennet. The intestine is used to make Goldbeater's skin, and is the source of Calf Intestinal Alkaline Phosphatase (CIP).\n\nDairy cows can only produce milk after having calved, and dairy cows need to produce one calf each year in order to remain in production. Female calves will become a replacement dairy cow. Male dairy calves are generally reared for beef or veal; relatively few are kept for breeding purposes.\n\nIn English the term \"calf\" is used by extension for the young of various other large species of mammal. In addition to other bovid species (such as bison, yak and water buffalo), these include the young of camels, dolphins, elephants, giraffes, hippopotamuses, deer (such as moose, elk (wapiti) and red deer), rhinoceroses, porpoises, whales, walruses and larger seals. However, common domestic species tend to have their own specific names, such as foal and lamb.\n\nBULLET::::- Weaning-beef-calves\nBULLET::::- Calving on \"Ropin' the Web\", Agriculture and Food, Government of Alberta, Canada\nBULLET::::- Winter Feeding Sites and Calf Scours, Kansas State University\n"}
{"id": "5693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5693", "title": "Claude Shannon", "text": "Claude Shannon\n\nClaude Elwood Shannon (April 30, 1916 – February 24, 2001) was an American mathematician, electrical engineer, and cryptographer known as \"the father of information theory\". Shannon is noted for having founded information theory with a landmark paper, \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\", that he published in 1948.\n\nHe is also well known for founding digital circuit design theory in 1937, when—as a 21-year-old master's degree student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)—he wrote his thesis demonstrating that electrical applications of Boolean algebra could construct any logical numerical relationship. Shannon contributed to the field of cryptanalysis for national defense during World War II, including his fundamental work on codebreaking and secure telecommunications.\n\nThe Shannon family lived in Gaylord, Michigan, and Claude was born in a hospital in nearby Petoskey. His father, Claude, Sr. (1862–1934), a descendant of early settlers of New Jersey, was a self-made businessman, and for a while, a Judge of Probate. Shannon's mother, Mabel Wolf Shannon (1890–1945), was a language teacher, and also served as the principal of Gaylord High School.\n\nMost of the first 16 years of Shannon's life were spent in Gaylord, where he attended public school, graduating from Gaylord High School in 1932. Shannon showed an inclination towards mechanical and electrical things. His best subjects were science and mathematics. At home he constructed such devices as models of planes, a radio-controlled model boat and a barbed-wire telegraph system to a friend's house a half-mile away. While growing up, he also worked as a messenger for the Western Union company.\n\nHis childhood hero was Thomas Edison, who he later learned was a distant cousin. Both Shannon and Edison were descendants of John Ogden (1609–1682), a colonial leader and an ancestor of many distinguished people.\n\nShannon was apolitical and an atheist.\n\nIn 1932, Shannon entered the University of Michigan, where he was introduced to the work of George Boole. He graduated in 1936 with two bachelor's degrees: one in electrical engineering and the other in mathematics.\n\nIn 1936, Shannon began his graduate studies in electrical engineering at MIT, where he worked on Vannevar Bush's differential analyzer, an early analog computer. While studying the complicated \"ad hoc\" circuits of this analyzer, Shannon designed switching circuits based on Boole's concepts. In 1937, he wrote his master's degree thesis, \"A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits\". A paper from this thesis was published in 1938. In this work, Shannon proved that his switching circuits could be used to simplify the arrangement of the electromechanical relays that were used then in telephone call routing switches. Next, he expanded this concept, proving that these circuits could solve all problems that Boolean algebra could solve. In the last chapter, he presented diagrams of several circuits, including a 4-bit full adder.\n\nUsing this property of electrical switches to implement logic is the fundamental concept that underlies all electronic digital computers. Shannon's work became the foundation of digital circuit design, as it became widely known in the electrical engineering community during and after World War II. The theoretical rigor of Shannon's work superseded the \"ad hoc\" methods that had prevailed previously. Howard Gardner called Shannon's thesis \"possibly the most important, and also the most noted, master's thesis of the century.\"\n\nShannon received his PhD from MIT in 1940. Vannevar Bush had suggested that Shannon should work on his dissertation at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, in order to develop a mathematical formulation for Mendelian genetics. This research resulted in Shannon's PhD thesis, called \"An Algebra for Theoretical Genetics\".\n\nIn 1940, Shannon became a National Research Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. In Princeton, Shannon had the opportunity to discuss his ideas with influential scientists and mathematicians such as Hermann Weyl and John von Neumann, and he also had occasional encounters with Albert Einstein and Kurt Gödel. Shannon worked freely across disciplines, and this ability may have contributed to his later development of mathematical information theory.\n\nShannon then joined Bell Labs to work on fire-control systems and cryptography during World War II, under a contract with section D-2 (Control Systems section) of the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC).\n\nShannon is credited with the invention of signal-flow graphs, in 1942. He discovered the topological gain formula while investigating the functional operation of an analog computer.\n\nFor two months early in 1943, Shannon came into contact with the leading British mathematician Alan Turing. Turing had been posted to Washington to share with the U.S. Navy's cryptanalytic service the methods used by the British Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park to break the ciphers used by the Kriegsmarine U-boats in the north Atlantic Ocean. He was also interested in the encipherment of speech and to this end spent time at Bell Labs. Shannon and Turing met at teatime in the cafeteria. Turing showed Shannon his 1936 paper that defined what is now known as the \"Universal Turing machine\". This impressed Shannon, as many of its ideas complemented his own.\n\nIn 1945, as the war was coming to an end, the NDRC was issuing a summary of technical reports as a last step prior to its eventual closing down. Inside the volume on fire control, a special essay titled \"Data Smoothing and Prediction in Fire-Control Systems\", coauthored by Shannon, Ralph Beebe Blackman, and Hendrik Wade Bode, formally treated the problem of smoothing the data in fire-control by analogy with \"the problem of separating a signal from interfering noise in communications systems.\" In other words, it modeled the problem in terms of data and signal processing and thus heralded the coming of the Information Age.\n\nShannon's work on cryptography was even more closely related to his later publications on communication theory. At the close of the war, he prepared a classified memorandum for Bell Telephone Labs entitled \"A Mathematical Theory of Cryptography\", dated September 1945. A declassified version of this paper was published in 1949 as \"Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems\" in the \"Bell System Technical Journal\". This paper incorporated many of the concepts and mathematical formulations that also appeared in his \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\". Shannon said that his wartime insights into communication theory and cryptography developed simultaneously and that \"they were so close together you couldn’t separate them\". In a footnote near the beginning of the classified report, Shannon announced his intention to \"develop these results … in a forthcoming memorandum on the transmission of information.\"\n\nWhile he was at Bell Labs, Shannon proved that the cryptographic one-time pad is unbreakable in his classified research that was later published in October 1949. He also proved that any unbreakable system must have essentially the same characteristics as the one-time pad: the key must be truly random, as large as the plaintext, never reused in whole or part, and be kept secret.\n\nIn 1948, the promised memorandum appeared as \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\", an article in two parts in the July and October issues of the \"Bell System Technical Journal\". This work focuses on the problem of how best to encode the information a sender wants to transmit. In this fundamental work, he used tools in probability theory, developed by Norbert Wiener, which were in their nascent stages of being applied to communication theory at that time. Shannon developed information entropy as a measure of the information content in a message, which is a measure of uncertainty reduced by the message, while essentially inventing the field of information theory. In 1949 Claude Shannon and Robert Fano devised a systematic way to assign code words based on probabilities of blocks. This technique, known as Shannon–Fano coding, was first proposed in the 1948 article.\n\nThe book, co-authored with Warren Weaver, \"The Mathematical Theory of Communication\", reprints Shannon's 1948 article and Weaver's popularization of it, which is accessible to the non-specialist. Warren Weaver pointed out that the word \"information\" in communication theory is not related to what you do say, but to what you could say. That is, information is a measure of one's freedom of choice when one selects a message. Shannon's concepts were also popularized, subject to his own proofreading, in John Robinson Pierce's \"Symbols, Signals, and Noise\".\n\nInformation theory's fundamental contribution to natural language processing and computational linguistics was further established in 1951, in his article \"Prediction and Entropy of Printed English\", showing upper and lower bounds of entropy on the statistics of English – giving a statistical foundation to language analysis. In addition, he proved that treating whitespace as the 27th letter of the alphabet actually lowers uncertainty in written language, providing a clear quantifiable link between cultural practice and probabilistic cognition.\n\nAnother notable paper published in 1949 is \"Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems\", a declassified version of his wartime work on the mathematical theory of cryptography, in which he proved that all theoretically unbreakable ciphers must have the same requirements as the one-time pad. He is also credited with the introduction of sampling theory, which is concerned with representing a continuous-time signal from a (uniform) discrete set of samples. This theory was essential in enabling telecommunications to move from analog to digital transmissions systems in the 1960s and later.\n\nHe returned to MIT to hold an endowed chair in 1956.\n\nIn 1956 Shannon joined the MIT faculty to work in the Research Laboratory of Electronics (RLE). He continued to serve on the MIT faculty until 1978.\n\nShannon developed Alzheimer's disease and spent the last few years of his life in a nursing home in Massachusetts oblivious to the marvels of the digital revolution he had helped create. He died in 2001. He was survived by his wife, Mary Elizabeth Moore Shannon, his son, Andrew Moore Shannon, his daughter, Margarita Shannon, his sister, Catherine Shannon Kay, and his two granddaughters. His wife stated in his obituary that, had it not been for Alzheimer's disease, \"He would have been bemused\" by it all.\n\nOutside of Shannon's academic pursuits, he was interested in juggling, unicycling, and chess. He also invented many devices, including a Roman numeral computer called THROBAC, juggling machines, and a flame-throwing trumpet. One of his more humorous devices was a box kept on his desk called the \"Ultimate Machine\", based on an idea by Marvin Minsky. Otherwise featureless, the box possessed a single switch on its side. When the switch was flipped, the lid of the box opened and a mechanical hand reached out, flipped off the switch, then retracted back inside the box. In addition, he built a device that could solve the Rubik's Cube puzzle.\n\nShannon designed the Minivac 601, a digital computer trainer to teach business people about how computers functioned. It was sold by the Scientific Development Corp starting in 1961.\n\nHe is also considered the co-inventor of the first wearable computer along with Edward O. Thorp. The device was used to improve the odds when playing roulette.\n\nShannon married Norma Levor, a wealthy, Jewish, left-wing intellectual in January 1940. The marriage ended in divorce after about a year. Levor later married Ben Barzman.\n\nShannon met his second wife Betty Shannon (née Mary Elizabeth Moore) when she was a numerical analyst at Bell Labs. They were married in 1949. Betty assisted Claude in building some of his most famous inventions.\n\nClaude and Betty Shannon had three children, Robert James Shannon, Andrew Moore Shannon, and Margarita Shannon, and raised their family in Winchester, Massachusetts. Their oldest son, Robert Shannon, died in 1998 at the age of 45.\n\nAfter suffering the progressive declines of Alzheimer's disease over some years, Shannon died at the age of 84, on February 24, 2001.\n\nTo commemorate Shannon's achievements, there were celebrations of his work in 2001.\n\nThere are currently six statues of Shannon sculpted by Eugene Daub: one at the University of Michigan; one at MIT in the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems; one in Gaylord, Michigan; one at the University of California, San Diego; one at Bell Labs; and another at AT&T Shannon Labs. After the breakup of the Bell System, the part of Bell Labs that remained with AT&T Corporation was named Shannon Labs in his honor.\n\nAccording to Neil Sloane, an AT&T Fellow who co-edited Shannon's large collection of papers in 1993, the perspective introduced by Shannon's communication theory (now called information theory) is the foundation of the digital revolution, and every device containing a microprocessor or microcontroller is a conceptual descendant of Shannon's publication in 1948: \"He's one of the great men of the century. Without him, none of the things we know today would exist. The whole digital revolution started with him.\" The unit shannon is named after Claude Shannon.\n\n\"A Mind at Play\", a biography of Shannon written by Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman, was published in 2017.\n\nOn April 30, 2016 Shannon was honored with a Google Doodle to celebrate his life on what would have been his 100th birthday.\n\n\"Theseus\", created in 1950, was a magnetic mouse controlled by an electromechanical relay circuit that enabled it to move around a labyrinth of 25 squares. Its dimensions were the same as those of an average mouse. The maze configuration was flexible and it could be modified arbitrarily by rearranging movable partitions. The mouse was designed to search through the corridors until it found the target. Having travelled through the maze, the mouse could then be placed anywhere it had been before, and because of its prior experience it could go directly to the target. If placed in unfamiliar territory, it was programmed to search until it reached a known location and then it would proceed to the target, adding the new knowledge to its memory and learning new behavior. Shannon's mouse appears to have been the first artificial learning device of its kind.\n\nIn 1949 Shannon completed a paper (published in March 1950) which estimates the game-tree complexity of chess, which is approximately 10. This number is now often referred to as the \"Shannon number\", and is still regarded today as an accurate estimate of the game's complexity. The number is often cited as one of the barriers to solving the game of chess using an exhaustive analysis (i.e. brute force analysis).\n\nOn March 9, 1949, Shannon presented a paper called \"Programming a Computer for playing Chess.\" The paper was presented at the National Institute for Radio Engineers Convention in New York. He described how to program a computer to play chess based on position scoring and move selection. He proposed basic strategies for restricting the number of possibilities to be considered in a game of chess. In March 1950 it was published in Philosophical Magazine, and is considered one of the first articles published on the topic of programming a computer for playing chess, and using a computer to solve the game. His process for having the computer decide on which move to make was a minimax procedure, based on an evaluation function of a given chess position. Shannon gave a rough example of an evaluation function in which the value of the black position was subtracted from that of the white position. \"Material\" was counted according to the usual chess piece relative value (1 point for a pawn, 3 points for a knight or bishop, 5 points for a rook, and 9 points for a queen). He considered some positional factors, subtracting ½ point for each doubled pawn, backward pawn, and isolated pawn. Another positional factor in the evaluation function was \"mobility\", adding 0.1 point for each legal move available. Finally, he considered checkmate to be the capture of the king, and gave the king the artificial value of 200 points. Quoting from the paper:\n\nThe evaluation function was clearly for illustrative purposes, as Shannon stated. For example, according to the function, pawns that are doubled as well as isolated would have no value at all, which is clearly unrealistic.\n\nShannon formulated a version of Kerckhoffs' principle as \"The enemy knows the system\". In this form it is known as \"Shannon's maxim\".\n\nThe Shannon Centenary, 2016, marked the life and influence of Claude Elwood Shannon on the hundredth anniversary of his birth on April 30, 1916. It was inspired in part by the Alan Turing Year. An ad hoc committee of the IEEE Information Theory Society including Christina Fragouli, Rüdiger Urbanke, Michelle Effros, Lav Varshney and Sergio Verdú, coordinated worldwide events. The initiative was announced in the History Panel at the 2015 IEEE Information Theory Workshop Jerusalem and the IEEE Information Theory Society Newsletter.\n\nA detailed listing of confirmed events was available on the website of the IEEE Information Theory Society.\n\nSome of the planned activities included:\nBULLET::::- Bell Labs hosted the First Shannon Conference on the Future of the Information Age on April 28 – 29, 2016, in Murray Hill, New Jersey, to celebrate Claude Shannon and the continued impact of his legacy on society. The event includes keynote speeches by global luminaries and visionaries of the information age who will explore the impact of information theory on society and our digital future, informal recollections, and leading technical presentations on subsequent related work in other areas such as bioinformatics, economic systems, and social networks. There is also a student competition\nBULLET::::- Bell Labs launched a Web exhibit on April 30, 2016, chronicling Shannon's hiring at Bell Labs (under an NDRC contract with US Government), his subsequent work there from 1942 through 1957, and details of Mathematics Department. The exhibit also displayed bios of colleagues and managers during his tenure, as well as original versions of some of the technical memoranda which subsequently became well known in published form.\nBULLET::::- The Republic of Macedonia is planning a commemorative stamp. A USPS commemorative stamp is being proposed, with an active petition.\nBULLET::::- A documentary on Claude Shannon and on the impact of information theory, \"The Bit Player\", is being produced by Sergio Verdú and Mark Levinson.\nBULLET::::- A trans-Atlantic celebration of both George Boole's bicentenary and Claude Shannon's centenary that is being led by University College Cork and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A first event was a workshop in Cork, When Boole Meets Shannon, and will continue with exhibits at the Boston Museum of Science and at the MIT Museum.\nBULLET::::- Many organizations around the world are holding observance events, including the Boston Museum of Science, the Heinz-Nixdorf Museum, the Institute for Advanced Study, Technische Universität Berlin, University of South Australia (UniSA), Unicamp (Universidade Estadual de Campinas), University of Toronto, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Cairo University, Telecom ParisTech, National Technical University of Athens, Indian Institute of Science, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Nanyang Technological University of Singapore, University of Maryland, University of Illinois at Chicago, École Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, The Pennsylvania State University (Penn State), University of California Los Angeles, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, and University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.\nBULLET::::- A series of geocaches, dedicated to the work of Claude Shannon, will be deployed in Munich, Germany. The first cache has already been placed.\nBULLET::::- A logo that appears on this page was crowdsourced on Crowdspring.\nBULLET::::- The Math Encounters presentation of May 4, 2016, at the National Museum of Mathematics in New York, titled \"Saving Face: Information Tricks for Love and Life\", focused on Shannon's work in Information Theory. A video recording and other material are available.\n\nThe Claude E. Shannon Award was established in his honor; he was also its first recipient, in 1972.\nBULLET::::- Alfred Noble Prize, 1939 (award of civil engineering societies in the US)\nBULLET::::- Morris Liebmann Memorial Prize of the Institute of Radio Engineers, 1949\nBULLET::::- Yale University (Master of Science), 1954\nBULLET::::- Stuart Ballantine Medal of the Franklin Institute, 1955\nBULLET::::- United States National Academy of Sciences, 1956\nBULLET::::- Research Corporation Award, 1956\nBULLET::::- University of Michigan, honorary doctorate, 1961\nBULLET::::- Rice University Medal of Honor, 1962\nBULLET::::- Princeton University, honorary doctorate, 1962\nBULLET::::- Marvin J. Kelly Award, 1962\nBULLET::::- University of Edinburgh, honorary doctorate, 1964\nBULLET::::- University of Pittsburgh, honorary doctorate, 1964\nBULLET::::- Medal of Honor of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1966\nBULLET::::- National Medal of Science, 1966, presented by President Lyndon B. Johnson\nBULLET::::- Golden Plate Award, 1967\nBULLET::::- Northwestern University, honorary doctorate, 1970\nBULLET::::- Harvey Prize, the Technion of Haifa, Israel, 1972\nBULLET::::- Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), foreign member, 1975\nBULLET::::- University of Oxford, honorary doctorate, 1978\nBULLET::::- Joseph Jacquard Award, 1978\nBULLET::::- Harold Pender Award, 1978\nBULLET::::- University of East Anglia, honorary doctorate, 1982\nBULLET::::- Carnegie Mellon University, honorary doctorate, 1984\nBULLET::::- Audio Engineering Society Gold Medal, 1985\nBULLET::::- Kyoto Prize, 1985\nBULLET::::- Tufts University, honorary doctorate, 1987\nBULLET::::- Universitas Jember, diploma, 1990\nBULLET::::- University of Pennsylvania, honorary doctorate, 1991\nBULLET::::- Foreign Member of the Royal Society, 1991\nBULLET::::- Basic Research Award, Eduard Rhein Foundation, Germany, 1991\nBULLET::::- National Inventors Hall of Fame inducted, 2004\nBULLET::::- Claude E. Shannon: \"A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits\", master's thesis, MIT, 1937.\nBULLET::::- Claude E. Shannon: \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\", \"Bell System Technical Journal\", Vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 623–656, 1948 (abstract).\nBULLET::::- Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver: \"The Mathematical Theory of Communication.\" The University of Illinois Press, Urbana, Illinois, 1949.\n\nBULLET::::- Channel capacity\nBULLET::::- Claude E. Shannon Award\nBULLET::::- Confusion and diffusion\nBULLET::::- Information entropy\nBULLET::::- List of pioneers in computer science\nBULLET::::- Noisy channel coding theorem\nBULLET::::- Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem\nBULLET::::- One-time pad\nBULLET::::- Rate distortion theory\nBULLET::::- Shannon index\nBULLET::::- Shannon number\nBULLET::::- Shannon switching game\nBULLET::::- Shannon–Fano coding\nBULLET::::- Shannon–Hartley theorem\nBULLET::::- Shannon's expansion\nBULLET::::- Shannon's source coding theorem\nBULLET::::- Signal-flow graph\n\nBULLET::::- Rethnakaran Pulikkoonattu — Eric W. Weisstein: Mathworld biography of Shannon, Claude Elwood (1916–2001) Shannon, Claude Elwood (1916-2001) -- from Eric Weisstein's World of Scientific Biography\nBULLET::::- Claude E. Shannon: \"Programming a Computer for Playing Chess\", Philosophical Magazine, Ser.7, Vol. 41, No. 314, March 1950. (Available online under \"External links\" below)\nBULLET::::- David Levy: \"Computer Gamesmanship: Elements of Intelligent Game Design\", Simon & Schuster, 1983.\nBULLET::::- Mindell, David A., \"Automation's Finest Hour: Bell Labs and Automatic Control in World War II\", IEEE Control Systems, December 1995, pp. 72–80.\nBULLET::::- David Mindell, Jérôme Segal, Slava Gerovitch, \"From Communications Engineering to Communications Science: Cybernetics and Information Theory in the United States, France, and the Soviet Union\" in Walker, Mark (Ed.), \"Science and Ideology: A Comparative History\", Routledge, London, 2003, pp. 66–95.\nBULLET::::- Poundstone, William, \"Fortune's Formula\", Hill & Wang, 2005,\nBULLET::::- Gleick, James, \"\", Pantheon, 2011,\nBULLET::::- Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman, \"A Mind at Play: How Claude Shannon Invented the Information Age\", Simon and Schuster, 2017,\nBULLET::::- Nahin, Paul J., \"The Logician and the Engineer: How George Boole and Claude Shannon Create the Information Age\", Princeton University Press, 2013,\nBULLET::::- Everett M. Rogers, \" Claude Shannon's Cryptography Research During World War II and the Mathematical Theory of Communication\", 1994 Proceedings of IEEE International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, pp. 1–5, 1994. Claude Shannon's cryptography research during World War II and the mathematical theory of communication\n\nBULLET::::- Guide to the Claude Elwood Shannon papers at the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- Claude Elwood Shannon (1916–2001) at the \"Notices of the American Mathematical Society\"\n"}
{"id": "5694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5694", "title": "Cracking", "text": "Cracking\n\nCracking may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Cracking, the formation of a fracture or partial fracture in a solid material\nBULLET::::- Performing a sternotomy\nBULLET::::- Fluid catalytic cracking, a catalytic process widely used in oil refineries for cracking large hydrocarbon molecules into smaller molecules\nBULLET::::- Cracking (chemistry), the decomposition of complex organic molecules into smaller ones\nBULLET::::- Cracking joints, the practice of manipulating one's bone joints to make a sharp sound\nBULLET::::- Cracking codes, see cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Whip cracking\nBULLET::::- Safe cracking\nBULLET::::- \"Crackin\"', band featuring Lester Abrams\n\nIn computing:\nBULLET::::- Another name for security hacking; the practice of defeating computer security.\nBULLET::::- Password cracking, the process of discovering the plaintext of an encrypted computer password.\nBULLET::::- Software cracking, the defeating of software copy protection.\n\nBULLET::::- Crack (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Cracker (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Cracklings (solid material remaining after rendering fat)\nBULLET::::- Cracker (pejorative)\n"}
{"id": "5695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5695", "title": "Community", "text": "Community\n\nA community is a social unit (a group of living things) with commonality such as norms, religion, values, customs, or identity. Communities may share a sense of place situated in a given geographical area (e.g. a country, village, town, or neighbourhood) or in virtual space through communication platforms. Durable relations that extend beyond immediate genealogical ties also define a sense of community, important to their identity, practice, and roles in social institutions such as family, home, work, government, society, or humanity at large. Although communities are usually small relative to personal social ties, \"community\" may also refer to large group affiliations such as national communities, international communities, and virtual communities.\n\nThe English-language word \"community\" derives from the Old French \"comuneté\", which comes from the Latin \"communitas\" \"community\", \"public spirit\" (from Latin \"communis\", \"shared in common word\").\n\nHuman communities may share intent, belief, resources, preferences, needs, and risks in common, affecting the identity of the participants and their degree of cohesiveness.\n\nArchaeological studies of social communities use the term \"community\" in two ways, paralleling usage in other areas. The first is an informal definition of community as a place where people used to live. In this sense it is synonymous with the concept of an ancient settlement - whether a hamlet, village, town, or city. The second meaning resembles the usage of the term in other social sciences: a community is a group of people living near one another who interact socially. Social interaction on a small scale can be difficult to identify with archaeological data. Most reconstructions of social communities by archaeologists rely on the principle that social interaction in the past was conditioned by physical distance. Therefore, a small village settlement likely constituted a social community, and spatial subdivisions of cities and other large settlements may have formed communities. Archaeologists typically use similarities in material culture—from house types to styles of pottery—to reconstruct communities in the past. This classification method relies on the assumption that people or households will share more similarities in the types and styles of their material goods with other members of a social community than they will with outsiders.\n\nIn ecology, a community is an assemblage of populations of different species, interacting with one another. Community ecology is the branch of ecology that studies interactions between and among species. It considers how such interactions, along with interactions between species and the abiotic environment, affect community structure and species richness, diversity and patterns of abundance. Species interact in three ways: competition, predation and mutualism. Competition typically results in a double negative—that is both species lose in the interaction. Predation is a win/lose situation with one species winning. Mutualism, on the other hand, involves both species cooperating in some way, with both winning. The two main types of communities are major which are self-sustaining and self-regulating (such as a forest or a lake) and minor communities which rely on other communities (like fungi decomposing a log) and are the building blocks of major communities.\n\nIn \"Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft\" (1887), German sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies described two types of human association: \"Gemeinschaft\" (usually translated as \"community\") and \"Gesellschaft\" (\"society\" or \"association\"). Tönnies proposed the \"Gemeinschaft–Gesellschaft\" dichotomy as a way to think about social ties. No group is exclusively one or the other. \"Gemeinschaft\" stress personal social interactions, and the roles, values, and beliefs based on such interactions. \"Gesellschaft\" stress indirect interactions, impersonal roles, formal values, and beliefs based on such interactions.\n\nIn a seminal 1986 study, McMillan and Chavis identify four elements of \"sense of community\":\n\nBULLET::::1. membership: feeling of belonging or of sharing a sense of personal relatedness,\nBULLET::::2. influence: mattering, making a difference to a group and of the group mattering to its members\nBULLET::::3. reinforcement: integration and fulfillment of needs,\nBULLET::::4. shared emotional connection.\n\nA \"sense of community index\" (SCI) was developed by Chavis and colleagues, and revised and adapted by others. Although originally designed to assess sense of community in neighborhoods, the index has been adapted for use in schools, the workplace, and a variety of types of communities.\n\nStudies conducted by the APPA indicate that young adults who feel a sense of belonging in a community, particularly small communities, develop fewer psychiatric and depressive disorders than those who do not have the feeling of love and belonging.\n\nThe process of learning to adopt the behavior patterns of the community is called socialization. The most fertile time of socialization is usually the early stages of life, during which individuals develop the skills and knowledge and learn the roles necessary to function within their culture and social environment. For some psychologists, especially those in the psychodynamic tradition, the most important period of socialization is between the ages of one and ten. But socialization also includes adults moving into a significantly different environment, where they must learn a new set of behaviors.\n\nSocialization is influenced primarily by the family, through which children first learn community norms. Other important influences include schools, peer groups, people, mass media, the workplace, and government. The degree to which the norms of a particular society or community are adopted determines one's willingness to engage with others. The norms of tolerance, reciprocity, and trust are important \"habits of the heart,\" as de Tocqueville put it, in an individual's involvement in community.\n\nCommunity development is often linked with community work or community planning, and may involve stakeholders, foundations, governments, or contracted entities including non-government organisations (NGOs), universities or government agencies to progress the social well-being of local, regional and, sometimes, national communities. More grassroots efforts, called community building or community organizing, seek to empower individuals and groups of people by providing them with the skills they need to effect change in their own communities. These skills often assist in building political power through the formation of large social groups working for a common agenda. Community development practitioners must understand both how to work with individuals and how to affect communities' positions within the context of larger social institutions. Public administrators, in contrast, need to understand community development in the context of rural and urban development, housing and economic development, and community, organizational and business development.\n\nFormal accredited programs conducted by universities, as part of degree granting institutions, are often used to build a knowledge base to drive curricula in public administration, sociology and community studies. The General Social Survey from the National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago and the Saguaro Seminar at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University are examples of national community development in the United States. The Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University in New York State offers core courses in community and economic development, and in areas ranging from non-profit development to US budgeting (federal to local, community funds). In the United Kingdom, Oxford University has led in providing extensive research in the field through its \" Community Development Journal,\" used worldwide by sociologists and community development practitioners.\n\nAt the intersection between community \"development\" and community \"building\" are a number of programs and organizations with community development tools. One example of this is the program of the Asset Based Community Development Institute of Northwestern University. The institute makes available downloadable tools to assess community assets and make connections between non-profit groups and other organizations that can help in community building. The Institute focuses on helping communities develop by \"mobilizing neighborhood assets\" – building from the inside out rather than the outside in. In the disability field, community building was prevalent in the 1980s and 1990s with roots in John McKnight's approaches.\n\nIn \"The Different Drum: Community-Making and Peace\" (1987) Scott Peck argues that the almost accidental sense of community that exists at times of crisis can be consciously built. Peck believes that conscious community building is a process of deliberate design based on the knowledge and application of certain rules. He states that this process goes through four stages:\n\nBULLET::::1. Pseudocommunity: When people first come together, they try to be \"nice\" and present what they feel are their most personable and friendly characteristics.\nBULLET::::2. Chaos: People move beyond the inauthenticity of pseudo-community and feel safe enough to present their \"shadow\" selves.\nBULLET::::3. Emptiness: Moves beyond the attempts to fix, heal and convert of the chaos stage, when all people become capable of acknowledging their own woundedness and brokenness, common to human beings.\nBULLET::::4. True community: Deep respect and true listening for the needs of the other people in this community.\nIn 1991, Peck remarked that building a sense of community is easy but maintaining this sense of community is difficult in the modern world.\n\nThe three basic types of community organizing are grassroots organizing, coalition building, and \"institution-based community organizing,\" (also called \"broad-based community organizing,\" an example of which is faith-based community organizing, or Congregation-based Community Organizing).\n\nCommunity building can use a wide variety of practices, ranging from simple events (e.g., potlucks, small book clubs) to larger-scale efforts (e.g., mass festivals, construction projects that involve local participants rather than outside contractors).\n\nCommunity building that is geared toward citizen action is usually termed \"community organizing.\" In these cases, organized community groups seek accountability from elected officials and increased direct representation within decision-making bodies. Where good-faith negotiations fail, these constituency-led organizations seek to pressure the decision-makers through a variety of means, including picketing, boycotting, sit-ins, petitioning, and electoral politics. \n\nCommunity organizing can focus on more than just resolving specific issues. Organizing often means building a widely accessible power structure, often with the end goal of distributing power equally throughout the community. Community organizers generally seek to build groups that are open and democratic in governance. Such groups facilitate and encourage consensus decision-making with a focus on the general health of the community rather than a specific interest group.\n\nIf communities are developed based on something they share in common, whether location or values, then one challenge for developing communities is how to incorporate individuality and differences. Rebekah Nathan suggests in her book, \"My Freshman Year\", we are drawn to developing communities totally based on sameness, despite stated commitments to diversity, such as those found on university websites.\n\nSome communities have developed their own local exchange trading systems (LETS) and local currencies, such as the Ithaca Hours system, to encourage economic growth and an enhanced sense of community. Community currencies have recently proven valuable in meeting the needs of people living in various South American nations, particularly Argentina, that recently suffered as a result of the collapse of the Argentinian national currency.\n\nA number of ways to categorize types of community have been proposed. One such breakdown is as follows:\n\nBULLET::::1. Location-based Communities: range from the local neighbourhood, suburb, village, town or city, region, nation or even the planet as a whole. These are also called communities of place.\nBULLET::::2. Identity-based Communities: range from the local clique, sub-culture, ethnic group, religious, multicultural or pluralistic civilisation, or the global community cultures of today. They may be included as \"communities of need\" or \"identity\", such as disabled persons, or frail aged people.\nBULLET::::3. Organizationally based Communities: range from communities organized informally around family or network-based guilds and associations to more formal incorporated associations, political decision making structures, economic enterprises, or professional associations at a small, national or international scale.\n\nThe usual categorizations of community relations have a number of problems: (1) they tend to give the impression that a particular community can be defined as just this kind or another; (2) they tend to conflate modern and customary community relations; (3) they tend to take sociological categories such as ethnicity or race as given, forgetting that different ethnically defined persons live in different kinds of communities —grounded, interest-based, diasporic, etc.\n\nIn response to these problems, Paul James and his colleagues have developed a taxonomy that maps community relations, and recognizes that actual communities can be characterized by different kinds of relations at the same time:\n\nBULLET::::1. Grounded community relations. This involves enduring attachment to particular places and particular people. It is the dominant form taken by customary and tribal communities. In these kinds of communities, the land is fundamental to identity.\nBULLET::::2. Life-style community relations. This involves giving primacy to communities coming together around particular chosen ways of life, such as morally charged or interest-based relations or just living or working in the same location. Hence the following sub-forms:\nBULLET::::1. community-life as morally bounded, a form taken by many traditional faith-based communities.\nBULLET::::2. community-life as interest-based, including sporting, leisure-based and business communities which come together for regular moments of engagement.\nBULLET::::3. community-life as proximately-related, where neighbourhood or commonality of association forms a community of convenience, or a community of place (see below).\nBULLET::::3. Projected community relations. This is where a community is self-consciously treated as an entity to be projected and re-created. It can be projected as through thin advertising slogan, for example gated community, or can take the form of ongoing associations of people who seek political integration, communities of practice based on professional projects, associative communities which seek to enhance and support individual creativity, autonomy and mutuality. A nation is one of the largest forms of projected or imagined community.\n\nIn these terms, communities can be nested and/or intersecting; one community can contain another—for example a location-based community may contain a number of ethnic communities. Both lists above can used in a cross-cutting matrix in relation to each other.\n\nIn general, virtual communities value knowledge and information as currency or social resource. What differentiates virtual communities from their physical counterparts is the extent and impact of \"weak ties,\" which are the relationships acquaintances or strangers form to acquire information through online networks. Relationships among members in a virtual community tend to focus on information exchange about specific topics. A survey conducted by Pew Internet and The American Life Project in 2001 found those involved in entertainment, professional, and sports virtual groups focused their activities on obtaining information. \n\nAn epidemic of bullying and harassment has arisen from the exchange of information between strangers, especially among teenagers, in virtual communities. Despite attempts to implement anti-bullying policies, Sheri Bauman, professor of counselling at the University of Arizona, claims the \"most effective strategies to prevent bullying\" may cost companies revenue.\n\nBULLET::::- Circles of Sustainability\nBULLET::::- Communitarianism\nBULLET::::- Community theatre\nBULLET::::- Engaged theory\nBULLET::::- Outline of community\nBULLET::::- Wikipedia community\n\nBULLET::::- Barzilai, Gad. 2003. \"Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities.\" Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.\nBULLET::::- Beck, U. 1992. \"Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity.\" London: Sage: 2000. \"What is globalization?\" Cambridge: Polity Press.\nBULLET::::- Chavis, D.M., Hogge, J.H., McMillan, D.W., & Wandersman, A. 1986. \"Sense of community through Brunswick's lens: A first look.\" \"Journal of Community Psychology\", 14(1), 24–40.\nBULLET::::- Chipuer, H.M., & Pretty, G.M.H. (1999). A review of the Sense of Community Index: Current uses, factor structure, reliability, and further development. \"Journal of Community Psychology\", 27(6), 643–58.\nBULLET::::- Christensen, K., et al. (2003). \"Encyclopedia of Community.\" 4 volumes. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.\nBULLET::::- Cohen, A. P. 1985. \"The Symbolic Construction of Community.\" Routledge: New York.\nBULLET::::- Durkheim, Émile. 1950 [1895] \"The Rules of Sociological Method\". Translated by S.A. Solovay and J.H. Mueller. New York: The Free Press.\nBULLET::::- Cox, F., J. Erlich, J. Rothman, and J. Tropman. 1970. \"Strategies of Community Organization: A Book of Readings.\" Itasca, IL: F.E. Peacock Publishers.\nBULLET::::- Effland, R. 1998. The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations Mesa Community College.\nBULLET::::- Giddens, A. 1999. \"Risk and Responsibility\" \"Modern Law Review\" 62(1): 1–10.\nBULLET::::- Lenski, G. 1974. \"Human Societies: An Introduction to Macrosociology.\" New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.\nBULLET::::- Long, D.A., & Perkins, D.D. (2003). Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the Sense of Community Index and Development of a Brief SCI. \"Journal of Community Psychology\", 31, 279–96.\nBULLET::::- Lyall, Scott, ed. (2016). \"Community in Modern Scottish Literature\". Brill  Rodopi: Leiden  Boston.\nBULLET::::- Nancy, Jean-Luc. \"La Communauté désœuvrée\" – philosophical questioning of the concept of community and the possibility of encountering a non-subjective concept of it\nBULLET::::- Newman, D. 2005. \"Sociology: Exploring the Architecture of Everyday Life,\" Chapter 5. \"Building Identity: Socialization\" Pine Forge Press. Retrieved: 2006-08-05.\nBULLET::::- Putnam, R.D. 2000. \"Bowling Alone: The collapse and revival of American community.\" New York: Simon & Schuster\nBULLET::::- Sarason, S.B. 1974. \"The psychological sense of community: Prospects for a community psychology.\" San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 1986. \"Commentary: The emergence of a conceptual center.\" \"Journal of Community Psychology\", 14, 405–07.\nBULLET::::- Smith, M.K. 2001. Community. \"Encyclopedia of informal education\". Last updated: January 28, 2005. Retrieved: 2006-07-15.\n"}
{"id": "5696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5696", "title": "Community college", "text": "Community college\n\nA community college is a type of educational institution. The term can have different meanings in different countries: many community colleges have an \"open enrollment\" for students who have graduated from high school (also known as senior secondary school). The term usually refers to a higher educational institution that provides workforce education and college transfer academic programs. Some institutions maintain athletic teams and dormitories similar to their university counterparts.\n\nIn Australia, the term \"community college\" refers to small private businesses running short (e.g. 6 weeks) courses generally of a self-improvement or hobbyist nature. Equivalent to the American notion of community colleges are Tertiary and Further Education colleges or TAFEs; these are institutions regulated mostly at state and territory level. There are also an increasing number of private providers, which are colloquially called \"colleges\".\n\nTAFEs and other providers carry on the tradition of adult education, which was established in Australia around the mid-19th century, when evening classes were held to help adults enhance their numeracy and literacy skills. Most Australian universities can also be traced back to such forerunners, although obtaining a university charter has always changed their nature. In TAFEs and colleges today, courses are designed for personal development of an individual and/or for employment outcomes. Educational programs cover a variety of topics such as arts, languages, business and lifestyle. They usually are scheduled to run two, three or four days of the week, depending on the level of the course undertaken. A Certificate I may only run for 4 hours twice a week for a term of 9 weeks. A full-time Diploma course might have classes 4 days per week for a year (36 weeks). Some courses may be offered in the evenings or weekends to accommodate people working full-time. Funding for colleges may come from government grants and course fees. Many are not-for-profit organisations. Such TAFES are located in metropolitan, regional and rural locations of Australia.\n\nEducation offered by TAFEs and colleges has changed over the years. By the 1980s, many colleges had recognised a community need for computer training. Since then thousands of people have increased skills through IT courses. The majority of colleges by the late 20th century had also become Registered Training Organisations. They offer individuals a nurturing, non-traditional education venue to gain skills that better prepare them for the workplace and potential job openings. TAFEs and colleges have not traditionally offered bachelor's degrees, instead providing pathway arrangements with universities to continue towards degrees. The American innovation of the associate degree is being developed at some institutions. Certificate courses I to IV, diplomas and advanced diplomas are typically offered, the latter deemed equivalent to an undergraduate qualification, albeit typically in more vocational areas. Recently, some TAFE institutes (and private providers) have also become higher education providers in their own right and are now starting to offer bachelor's degree programs.\n\nIn Canada, colleges are adult educational institutions that provide higher education and tertiary education, and grant certificates and diplomas. As well, in Ontario, the 24 colleges of applied arts and technology have been mandated to offer their own stand-alone degrees as well as to offer joint degrees with universities through \"articulation agreements\" that often result in students emerging with both a diploma and a degree. Thus, for example, the University of Guelph \"twins\" with Humber College and York University does the same with Seneca College. More recently, however, colleges have been offering a variety of their own degrees, often in business and technical fields. The academic and economic value of the college degree is still being tested in the marketplace. Each province has its own educational system, as prescribed by the Canadian federalism model of governance. In the mid-1960s and early 1970s, most Canadian colleges began to provide practical education and training for the emerging baby boom generation, and for immigrants from around the world who were entering Canada in increasing numbers at that time. A formative trend was the merging of the then separate vocational training and adult education (night school) institutions.\n\nCanadian colleges are either publicly funded or private post-secondary institutions (run for profit). There are 150 institutions that are generally equivalent to the US community college in certain contexts. They are usually referred to simply as \"colleges\" since in common usage a degree-granting institution is almost exclusively a university.\n\nIn addition to graduate degrees, universities generally grant Associate's degrees and Bachelor's degrees, but in some regions and/or courses of study, colleges and universities collaborate so college students can earn transfer credits toward undergraduate university degrees.\n\nUniversity degrees are usually attained through four years of study. The term associate degree is used in western Canada to refer to a two-year college arts or science degree, similar to how the term is used in the United States. In other parts of Canada the term advanced degree is used to indicate a 3- or 4-year college program.\n\nIn the province of Quebec, three years is the norm for a university degree because a year of credit is earned in the CEGEP (college) system. Even when speaking in English, people often refer to all colleges as Cégeps, however the term is an acronym more correctly applied specifically to the French-language public system: Collège d'enseignement général et professionnel (CEGEP); in English: College of General and Vocational Education. The word College can also refer to a private High School in Quebec.\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian community college systems\nBULLET::::- List of colleges in Canada\nBULLET::::- Colleges and Institutes Canada (CICan) – publicly funded educational institutions; formerly the Association of Canadian Community Colleges (ACCC)\nBULLET::::- National Association of Career Colleges – privately funded educational institutions; formerly the Association of Canadian Career Colleges\n\nIn India, 98 community colleges are recognized by the University Grants Commission. The courses offered by these colleges are diplomas, advance diplomas and certificate courses. The duration of these courses usually ranges from six months to two years.\n\nCommunity colleges in Malaysia are a network of educational institutions whereby vocational and technical skills training could be provided at all levels for school leavers before they entered the workforce. The community colleges also provide an infrastructure for rural communities to gain skills training through short courses as well as providing access to a post-secondary education.\n\nAt the moment, most community colleges award qualifications up to Level 3 in the Malaysian Qualifications Framework (Certificate 3) in both the Skills sector (Sijil Kemahiran Malaysia or the Malaysian Skills Certificate) as well as the Vocational and Training sector but the number of community colleges that are starting to award Level 4 qualifications (Diploma) are increasing. This is two levels below a bachelor's degree (Level 6 in the MQF) and students within the system who intend to further their studies to that level will usually seek entry into Advanced Diploma programs in public universities, polytechnics or accredited private providers.\n\nIn the Philippines, a community school functions as elementary or secondary school at daytime and towards the end of the day convert into a community college. This type of institution offers night classes under the supervision of the same principal, and the same faculty members who are given part-time college teaching load.\n\nThe concept of community college dates back to the time of the former Minister of Education, Culture and Sports (MECS) that had under its wings the Bureaus of Elementary Education, Secondary Education, Higher Education and Vocational-Technical Education. MECS Secretary, Dr. Cecilio Putong, who in 1971 wrote that a community school is a school established in the community, by the community, and for the community itself. Dr. Pedro T. Orata of Pangasinan shared the same idea, hence the establishment of a community college, now called the City College of Urdaneta.\n\nA community college like the one in Abuyog, Leyte can operate with only a PHP 124,000 annual budget in a two-storey structure housing more than 700 students.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, except for Scotland, a community college is a school which not only provides education for the school-age population (11–18) of the locality, but also additional services and education to adults and other members of the community. This education includes but is not limited to sports, adult literacy and lifestyle education. Usually when students finish their secondary school studies at age 16, they move on to a sixth form college where they study for their A-levels (although some secondary schools have integrated sixth forms). After the two-year A-level period, they may proceed to a college of further education or a university. The former is also known as a technical college.\n\nIn the United States, community colleges, sometimes called junior colleges, technical colleges, two-year colleges, or city colleges, are primarily two-year public institutions providing lower-level tertiary education, also known as continuing education. They grant certificates, diplomas, and associate degrees. After graduating from a community college, most students transfer to a four-year liberal arts college or university for two to three years to complete a bachelor's degree.\n\nBefore the 1970s, community colleges in the United States were more commonly referred to as junior colleges. That term is still used at some institutions. However, the term \"junior college\" is generally applied to private two-year institutions, whereas the term \"community college\" is used to describe publicly funded two-year institutions. Community colleges primarily attract and accept students from the local community, and are often supported by local tax revenue. They may also work with local businesses to ensure students are being prepared for the local workforce.\n\nSome research organizations and publications focus upon the activities of community college, junior college, and technical college institutions. Many of these institutions and organizations present the most current research and practical outcomes at annual community college conferences.\nBULLET::::- The American Association of Community Colleges has provided oversight on community college research since the 1920s. AACC publishes a research journal called the Community College Journal.\nBULLET::::- The Community College Research Center (CCRC) at Teachers College, Columbia University, has been conducting research on community colleges since 1996 to identify barriers to students' post-secondary access and promising solutions. CCRC's publishes research reports, briefs, and resources geared toward a variety of community college stakeholders, including college and college system leaders, faculty and support staff, policymakers, and institutional researchers.\nBULLET::::- The Association of Community College Trustees (ACCT) has provided education for community college boards of directors and advocacy for community colleges since 1972. ACCT President and CEO J. Noah Brown published a book about the past, present, and future of community colleges, \"Charting a New Course for Community Colleges: Aligning Policies with Practice\".\nBULLET::::- The Center for Community College Student Engagement at the University of Texas at Austin administers surveys and provides data analysis support to member colleges regarding various factors of student engagement and involvement in community colleges in the United States and Canada.\nBULLET::::- The Office of Community College Research and Leadership at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign studies policies, programs, and practices designed to enhance outcomes for diverse youth and adults who seek to transition to and through college to employment. OCCRL's research spans the P-20 education continuum, with an intense focus on how community colleges impact education and employment outcomes for diverse learners. Results of OCCRL's studies of pathways and programs of study, extending from high school to community colleges and universities and to employment, are disseminated nationally and internationally. Reports and materials are derived from new knowledge captured and disseminated through OCCRL's website, scholarly publications, and other vehicles.\n\nSeveral peer-reviewed journals extensively publish research on community colleges:\nBULLET::::- \"Community College Journal of Research and Practice\"\nBULLET::::- \"New Directions for Community Colleges\"\nBULLET::::- \"Community College Review\"\nBULLET::::- \"Journal of Applied Research in the Community College\"\nBULLET::::- \"Journal of Transformative Leadership and Policy Studies\"\nBULLET::::- \"The College Quarterly\"\n\nBULLET::::- Junior college\nBULLET::::- Folk high school\nBULLET::::- Articulation (education)\nBULLET::::- Distance learning\nBULLET::::- E-learning\nBULLET::::- Lifelong learning\n\nBULLET::::- In Australia:\nBULLET::::- Technical and further education\nBULLET::::- Workers' Educational Association, also in the UK\n\nBULLET::::- In the Philippines:\nBULLET::::- Association of Local Colleges and Universities\nBULLET::::- Local college and university\n\nBULLET::::- In the UK:\nBULLET::::- Further education\n\nBULLET::::- Baker, G. A. III (1994). A handbook on the community college in America: Its history, mission, and management. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.\nBULLET::::- Cohen, A.M., Brawer, F.B. (2003) The American Community College, 4th edition. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.\nBULLET::::- Dougherty, K. J. (1994). The contradictory college: The conflicting origins, impacts, and futures of the community college. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.\nBULLET::::- Floyd, D.L., Skolnik, M.L., & Walker, K.P., eds. (2005). The Community College Baccalaureate: Emerging Trends and Policy Issues. Sterling VA: Stylus Publishing.\nBULLET::::- Frye, J. H. (1992). The vision of the public junior college, 1900–1940. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.\nBULLET::::- Kasper, H.T. (2002). The changing role of community college. Occupational Outlook Quarterly, 46(4), 14–21.\nBULLET::::- Murray, J.P. (2002). The current state of faculty development in two-year colleges. New Directions for Community Colleges, 118, 89–97.\nBULLET::::- Vaughan, George, Mellander, Gustavo, Beverly Blois (1997). The Community College Presidency. Washington,DC: The American Association of Community Colleges.\n\nBULLET::::- Community Colleges Australia\nBULLET::::- Community College Research Center, Teachers College, Columbia University\n"}
{"id": "5697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5697", "title": "Civil Rights Memorial", "text": "Civil Rights Memorial\n\nThe Civil Rights Memorial is a memorial in Montgomery, Alabama, to 41 people who were killed in the struggle for the equal and integrated treatment of all people, regardless of race, during the 1954-1968 civil rights movement in the United States. The memorial is sponsored by the Southern Poverty Law Center.\n\nThe names included in the memorial belong to those who were killed between 1954 and 1968. Those dates were chosen because in 1954 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that racial segregation in schools was unlawful and 1968 is the year of the assassination of Martin Luther King. The monument was created by Maya Lin, who is best known for creating the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. The Civil Rights Memorial was dedicated in 1989.\n\nThe concept of Lin's design is based on the soothing and healing effect of water. It was inspired by a passage from King's \"I Have a Dream\" speech \"...we will not be satisfied \"until justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mighty stream\"...\". The quotation in the passage, which is inscribed on the memorial, is a direct paraphrase of , as translated in the American Standard Version of the Bible. The memorial is a fountain in the form of an asymmetric inverted stone cone. A film of water flows over the base of the cone, which contains the 41 names included. It is possible to touch the smooth film of water and to alter it temporarily, which quickly returns to smoothness. As such, the memorial represents the aspirations of the civil rights movement to end legal racial segregation.\n\nThe memorial is in downtown Montgomery, at 400 Washington Avenue, in an open plaza in front of the Civil Rights Memorial Center, which was the offices of the Southern Poverty Law Center until it moved across the street into a new building in 2001. The memorial may be visited freely 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.\n\nThe Civil Rights Memorial Center offers guided group tours, lasting approximately one hour. Tours are available by appointment, Monday to Saturday.\n\nThe memorial is only a few blocks from other historic sites, including the Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, the Alabama State Capitol, the Alabama Department of Archives and History, the corners where Claudette Colvin and Rosa Parks boarded buses in 1955 on which they would later refuse to give up their seats, and the Rosa Parks Library and Museum.\n\nThe 41 names included in the Civil Rights Memorial are those of:\nBULLET::::- Louis Allen\nBULLET::::- Willie Brewster\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Brown\nBULLET::::- Johnnie Mae Chappell\nBULLET::::- James Chaney\nBULLET::::- Addie Mae Collins\nBULLET::::- Vernon Dahmer\nBULLET::::- Jonathan Daniels\nBULLET::::- Henry Hezekiah Dee\nBULLET::::- Roman Ducksworth Jr.\nBULLET::::- Willie Edwards\nBULLET::::- Medgar Evers\nBULLET::::- Andrew Goodman\nBULLET::::- Paul Guihard\nBULLET::::- Samuel Hammond Jr.\nBULLET::::- Jimmie Lee Jackson\nBULLET::::- Wharlest Jackson\nBULLET::::- Martin Luther King Jr.\nBULLET::::- Bruce W. Klunder\nBULLET::::- George W. Lee\nBULLET::::- Herbert Lee\nBULLET::::- Viola Liuzzo\nBULLET::::- Denise McNair\nBULLET::::- Delano Herman Middleton\nBULLET::::- Charles Eddie Moore\nBULLET::::- Oneal Moore\nBULLET::::- William Lewis Moore\nBULLET::::- Mack Charles Parker\nBULLET::::- Lemuel Penn\nBULLET::::- James Reeb\nBULLET::::- John Earl Reese\nBULLET::::- Carole Robertson\nBULLET::::- Michael Schwerner\nBULLET::::- Henry Ezekial Smith\nBULLET::::- Lamar Smith\nBULLET::::- Emmett Till\nBULLET::::- Clarence Triggs\nBULLET::::- Virgil Lamar Ware\nBULLET::::- Cynthia Wesley\nBULLET::::- Ben Chester White\nBULLET::::- Sammy Younge Jr.\n\"The Forgotten\" are 74 people who are identified in a display at the Civil Rights Memorial Center. These names were not inscribed on the Memorial because there was insufficient information about their deaths at the time the Memorial was created. However, it is thought that these people were killed as a result of racially motivated violence between 1952 and 1968.\nBULLET::::- Andrew Lee Anderson\nBULLET::::- Frank Andrews\nBULLET::::- Isadore Banks\nBULLET::::- Larry Bolden\nBULLET::::- James Brazier\nBULLET::::- Thomas Brewer\nBULLET::::- Hilliard Brooks\nBULLET::::- Charles Brown\nBULLET::::- Jessie Brown\nBULLET::::- Carrie Brumfield\nBULLET::::- Eli Brumfield\nBULLET::::- Silas (Ernest) Caston\nBULLET::::- Clarence Cloninger\nBULLET::::- Willie Countryman\nBULLET::::- Vincent Dahmon\nBULLET::::- Woodrow Wilson Daniels\nBULLET::::- Joseph Hill Dumas\nBULLET::::- Pheld Evans\nBULLET::::- J. E. Evanston\nBULLET::::- Mattie Greene\nBULLET::::- Jasper Greenwood\nBULLET::::- Jimmie Lee Griffith\nBULLET::::- A. C. Hall\nBULLET::::- Rogers Hamilton\nBULLET::::- Collie Hampton\nBULLET::::- Alphonso Harris\nBULLET::::- Izell Henry\nBULLET::::- Arthur James Hill\nBULLET::::- Ernest Hunter\nBULLET::::- Luther Jackson\nBULLET::::- Ernest Jells\nBULLET::::- Joe Franklin Jeter\nBULLET::::- Marshall Johnson\nBULLET::::- John Lee\nBULLET::::- Willie Henry Lee\nBULLET::::- Richard Lillard\nBULLET::::- George Love\nBULLET::::- Robert McNair\nBULLET::::- Maybelle Mahone\nBULLET::::- Sylvester Maxwell\nBULLET::::- Clinton Melton\nBULLET::::- James Andrew Miller\nBULLET::::- Booker T. Mixon\nBULLET::::- Nehemiah Montgomery\nBULLET::::- Frank Morris\nBULLET::::- James Earl Motley\nBULLET::::- Sam O'Quinn\nBULLET::::- Hubert Orsby\nBULLET::::- Larry Payne\nBULLET::::- C. H. Pickett\nBULLET::::- Albert Pitts\nBULLET::::- David Pitts\nBULLET::::- Ernest McPharland\nBULLET::::- Jimmy Powell\nBULLET::::- William Roy Prather\nBULLET::::- Johnny Queen\nBULLET::::- Donald Rasberry\nBULLET::::- Fred Robinson\nBULLET::::- Johnny Robinson\nBULLET::::- Willie Joe Sanford\nBULLET::::- Marshall Scott Jr.\nBULLET::::- Jessie James Shelby\nBULLET::::- W. G. Singleton\nBULLET::::- Ed Smith\nBULLET::::- Eddie James Stewart\nBULLET::::- Isaiah Taylor\nBULLET::::- Freddie Lee Thomas\nBULLET::::- Saleam Triggs\nBULLET::::- Hubert Varner\nBULLET::::- Clifton Walker\nBULLET::::- James Waymers\nBULLET::::- John Wesley Wilder\nBULLET::::- Rodell Williamson\nBULLET::::- Archie Wooden\nBULLET::::- Civil rights movement in popular culture\nBULLET::::- History of fountains in the United States\n\nBULLET::::- Official Site\nBULLET::::- Civil Rights Martyrs\n"}
{"id": "5698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5698", "title": "Charles Babbage", "text": "Charles Babbage\n\nCharles Babbage (; 26 December 1791 – 18 October 1871) was an English polymath. A mathematician, philosopher, inventor and mechanical engineer, Babbage originated the concept of a digital programmable computer.\n\nConsidered by some to be a \"father of the computer\", Babbage is credited with inventing the first mechanical computer that eventually led to more complex electronic designs, though all the essential ideas of modern computers are to be found in Babbage's Analytical Engine. His varied work in other fields has led him to be described as \"pre-eminent\" among the many polymaths of his century.\n\nParts of Babbage's incomplete mechanisms are on display in the Science Museum in London. In 1991, a functioning difference engine was constructed from Babbage's original plans. Built to tolerances achievable in the 19th century, the success of the finished engine indicated that Babbage's machine would have worked.\n\nBabbage's birthplace is disputed, but according to the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" he was most likely born at 44 Crosby Row, Walworth Road, London, England. A blue plaque on the junction of Larcom Street and Walworth Road commemorates the event.\n\nHis date of birth was given in his obituary in \"The Times\" as 26 December 1792; but then a nephew wrote to say that Babbage was born one year earlier, in 1791. The parish register of St. Mary's, Newington, London, shows that Babbage was baptised on 6 January 1792, supporting a birth year of 1791.\nBabbage was one of four children of Benjamin Babbage and Betsy Plumleigh Teape. His father was a banking partner of William Praed in founding Praed's & Co. of Fleet Street, London, in 1801. In 1808, the Babbage family moved into the old Rowdens house in East Teignmouth. Around the age of eight, Babbage was sent to a country school in Alphington near Exeter to recover from a life-threatening fever. For a short time he attended King Edward VI Grammar School in Totnes, South Devon, but his health forced him back to private tutors for a time.\n\nBabbage then joined the 30-student Holmwood Academy, in Baker Street, Enfield, Middlesex, under the Reverend Stephen Freeman. The academy had a library that prompted Babbage's love of mathematics. He studied with two more private tutors after leaving the academy. The first was a clergyman near Cambridge; through him Babbage encountered Charles Simeon and his evangelical followers, but the tuition was not what he needed. He was brought home, to study at the Totnes school: this was at age 16 or 17. The second was an Oxford tutor, under whom Babbage reached a level in Classics sufficient to be accepted by Cambridge.\n\nBabbage arrived at Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1810. He was already self-taught in some parts of contemporary mathematics; he had read in Robert Woodhouse, Joseph Louis Lagrange, and Marie Agnesi. As a result, he was disappointed in the standard mathematical instruction available at the university.\n\nBabbage, John Herschel, George Peacock, and several other friends formed the Analytical Society in 1812; they were also close to Edward Ryan. As a student, Babbage was also a member of other societies such as The Ghost Club, concerned with investigating supernatural phenomena, and the Extractors Club, dedicated to liberating its members from the madhouse, should any be committed to one.\n\nIn 1812 Babbage transferred to Peterhouse, Cambridge. He was the top mathematician there, but did not graduate with honours. He instead received a degree without examination in 1814. He had defended a thesis that was considered blasphemous in the preliminary public disputation; but it is not known whether this fact is related to his not sitting the examination.\n\nConsidering his reputation, Babbage quickly made progress. He lectured to the Royal Institution on astronomy in 1815, and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1816. After graduation, on the other hand, he applied for positions unsuccessfully, and had little in the way of career. In 1816 he was a candidate for a teaching job at Haileybury College; he had recommendations from James Ivory and John Playfair, but lost out to Henry Walter. In 1819, Babbage and Herschel visited Paris and the Society of Arcueil, meeting leading French mathematicians and physicists. That year Babbage applied to be professor at the University of Edinburgh, with the recommendation of Pierre Simon Laplace; the post went to William Wallace.\n\nWith Herschel, Babbage worked on the electrodynamics of Arago's rotations, publishing in 1825. Their explanations were only transitional, being picked up and broadened by Michael Faraday. The phenomena are now part of the theory of eddy currents, and Babbage and Herschel missed some of the clues to unification of electromagnetic theory, staying close to Ampère's force law.\n\nBabbage purchased the actuarial tables of George Barrett, who died in 1821 leaving unpublished work, and surveyed the field in 1826 in \"Comparative View of the Various Institutions for the Assurance of Lives\". This interest followed a project to set up an insurance company, prompted by Francis Baily and mooted in 1824, but not carried out. Babbage did calculate actuarial tables for that scheme, using Equitable Society mortality data from 1762 onwards.\n\nDuring this whole period Babbage depended awkwardly on his father's support, given his father's attitude to his early marriage, of 1814: he and Edward Ryan wedded the Whitmore sisters. He made a home in Marylebone in London, and founded a large family. On his father's death in 1827, Babbage inherited a large estate (value around £100,000, equivalent to £ or $ today), making him independently wealthy. After his wife's death in the same year he spent time travelling. In Italy he met Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany, foreshadowing a later visit to Piedmont. In April 1828 he was in Rome, and relying on Herschel to manage the difference engine project, when he heard that he had become professor at Cambridge, a position he had three times failed to obtain (in 1820, 1823 and 1826).\n\nBabbage was instrumental in founding the Royal Astronomical Society in 1820, initially known as the Astronomical Society of London. Its original aims were to reduce astronomical calculations to a more standard form, and to circulate data. These directions were closely connected with Babbage's ideas on computation, and in 1824 he won its Gold Medal, cited \"for his invention of an engine for calculating mathematical and astronomical tables\".\n\nBabbage's motivation to overcome errors in tables by mechanisation had been a commonplace since Dionysius Lardner wrote about it in 1834 in the \"Edinburgh Review\" (under Babbage's guidance). The context of these developments is still debated. Babbage's own account of the origin of the difference engine begins with the Astronomical Society's wish to improve \"The Nautical Almanac\". Babbage and Herschel were asked to oversee a trial project, to recalculate some part of those tables. With the results to hand, discrepancies were found. This was in 1821 or 1822, and was the occasion on which Babbage formulated his idea for mechanical computation. The issue of the \"Nautical Almanac\" is now described as a legacy of a polarisation in British science caused by attitudes to Sir Joseph Banks, who had died in 1820.\n\nBabbage studied the requirements to establish a modern postal system, with his friend Thomas Frederick Colby, concluding there should be a uniform rate that was put into effect with the introduction of the Uniform Fourpenny Post supplanted by the Uniform Penny Post in 1839 and 1840. Colby was another of the founding group of the Society. He was also in charge of the Survey of Ireland. Herschel and Babbage were present at a celebrated operation of that survey, the remeasuring of the Lough Foyle baseline.\n\nThe Analytical Society had initially been no more than an undergraduate provocation. During this period it had some more substantial achievements. In 1816 Babbage, Herschel and Peacock published a translation from French of the lectures of Sylvestre Lacroix, which was then the state-of-the-art calculus textbook.\n\nReference to Lagrange in calculus terms marks out the application of what are now called formal power series. British mathematicians had used them from about 1730 to 1760. As re-introduced, they were not simply applied as notations in differential calculus. They opened up the fields of functional equations (including the difference equations fundamental to the difference engine) and operator (D-module) methods for differential equations. The analogy of difference and differential equations was notationally changing Δ to D, as a \"finite\" difference becomes \"infinitesimal\". These symbolic directions became popular, as operational calculus, and pushed to the point of diminishing returns. The Cauchy concept of limit was kept at bay. Woodhouse had already founded this second \"British Lagrangian School\" with its treatment of Taylor series as formal.\n\nIn this context function composition is complicated to express, because the chain rule is not simply applied to second and higher derivatives. This matter was known to Woodhouse by 1803, who took from Louis François Antoine Arbogast what is now called Faà di Bruno's formula. In essence it was known to Abraham De Moivre (1697). Herschel found the method impressive, Babbage knew of it, and it was later noted by Ada Lovelace as compatible with the analytical engine. In the period to 1820 Babbage worked intensively on functional equations in general, and resisted both conventional finite differences and Arbogast's approach (in which Δ and D were related by the simple additive case of the exponential map). But via Herschel he was influenced by Arbogast's ideas in the matter of iteration, i.e. composing a function with itself, possibly many times. Writing in a major paper on functional equations in the \"Philosophical Transactions\" (1815/6), Babbage said his starting point was work of Gaspard Monge.\n\nFrom 1828 to 1839 Babbage was Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge. Not a conventional resident don, and inattentive to his teaching responsibilities, he wrote three topical books during this period of his life. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1832. Babbage was out of sympathy with colleagues: George Biddell Airy, his predecessor as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, thought an issue should be made of his lack of interest in lecturing. Babbage planned to lecture in 1831 on political economy. Babbage's reforming direction looked to see university education more inclusive, universities doing more for research, a broader syllabus and more interest in applications; but William Whewell found the programme unacceptable. A controversy Babbage had with Richard Jones lasted for six years. He never did give a lecture.\n\nIt was during this period that Babbage tried to enter politics. Simon Schaffer writes that his views of the 1830s included disestablishment of the Church of England, a broader political franchise, and inclusion of manufacturers as stakeholders. He twice stood for Parliament as a candidate for the borough of Finsbury. In 1832 he came in third among five candidates, missing out by some 500 votes in the two-member constituency when two other reformist candidates, Thomas Wakley and Christopher Temple, split the vote. In his memoirs Babbage related how this election brought him the friendship of Samuel Rogers: his brother Henry Rogers wished to support Babbage again, but died within days. In 1834 Babbage finished last among four. In 1832, Babbage, Herschel and Ivory were appointed Knights of the Royal Guelphic Order, however they were not subsequently made knights bachelor to entitle them to the prefix \"Sir\", which often came with appointments to that foreign order (though Herschel was later created a baronet).\n\nBabbage now emerged as a polemicist. One of his biographers notes that all his books contain a \"campaigning element\". His \"Reflections on the Decline of Science and some of its Causes\" (1830) stands out, however, for its sharp attacks. It aimed to improve British science, and more particularly to oust Davies Gilbert as President of the Royal Society, which Babbage wished to reform. It was written out of pique, when Babbage hoped to become the junior secretary of the Royal Society, as Herschel was the senior, but failed because of his antagonism to Humphry Davy. Michael Faraday had a reply written, by Gerrit Moll, as \"On the Alleged Decline of Science in England\" (1831). On the front of the Royal Society Babbage had no impact, with the bland election of the Duke of Sussex to succeed Gilbert the same year. As a broad manifesto, on the other hand, his \"Decline\" led promptly to the formation in 1831 of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS).\n\nThe \"Mechanics' Magazine\" in 1831 identified as Declinarians the followers of Babbage. In an unsympathetic tone it pointed out David Brewster writing in the \"Quarterly Review\" as another leader; with the barb that both Babbage and Brewster had received public money.\n\nIn the debate of the period on statistics (\"qua\" data collection) and what is now statistical inference, the BAAS in its Statistical Section (which owed something also to Whewell) opted for data collection. This Section was the sixth, established in 1833 with Babbage as chairman and John Elliot Drinkwater as secretary. The foundation of the Statistical Society followed. Babbage was its public face, backed by Richard Jones and Robert Malthus.\n\nBabbage published \"On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures\" (1832), on the organisation of industrial production. It was an influential early work of operational research. John Rennie the Younger in addressing the Institution of Civil Engineers on manufacturing in 1846 mentioned mostly surveys in encyclopaedias, and Babbage's book was first an article in the \"Encyclopædia Metropolitana\", the form in which Rennie noted it, in the company of related works by John Farey, Jr., Peter Barlow and Andrew Ure. From \"An essay on the general principles which regulate the application of machinery to manufactures and the mechanical arts\" (1827), which became the \"Encyclopædia Metropolitana\" article of 1829, Babbage developed the schematic classification of machines that, combined with discussion of factories, made up the first part of the book. The second part considered the \"domestic and political economy\" of manufactures.\n\nThe book sold well, and quickly went to a fourth edition (1836). Babbage represented his work as largely a result of actual observations in factories, British and abroad. It was not, in its first edition, intended to address deeper questions of political economy; the second (late 1832) did, with three further chapters including one on piece rate. The book also contained ideas on rational design in factories, and profit sharing.\n\nIn \"Economy of Machinery\" was described what is now called the \"Babbage principle\". It pointed out commercial advantages available with more careful division of labour. As Babbage himself noted, it had already appeared in the work of Melchiorre Gioia in 1815. The term was introduced in 1974 by Harry Braverman. Related formulations are the \"principle of multiples\" of Philip Sargant Florence, and the \"balance of processes\".\n\nWhat Babbage remarked is that skilled workers typically spend parts of their time performing tasks that are below their skill level. If the labour process can be divided among several workers, labour costs may be cut by assigning only high-skill tasks to high-cost workers, restricting other tasks to lower-paid workers. He also pointed out that training or apprenticeship can be taken as fixed costs; but that returns to scale are available by his approach of standardisation of tasks, therefore again favouring the factory system. His view of human capital was restricted to minimising the time period for recovery of training costs.\n\nAnother aspect of the work was its detailed breakdown of the cost structure of book publishing. Babbage took the unpopular line, from the publishers' perspective, of exposing the trade's profitability. He went as far as to name the organisers of the trade's restrictive practices. Twenty years later he attended a meeting hosted by John Chapman to campaign against the Booksellers Association, still a cartel.\n\nIt has been written that \"what Arthur Young was to agriculture, Charles Babbage was to the factory visit and machinery\". Babbage's theories are said to have influenced the layout of the 1851 Great Exhibition, and his views had a strong effect on his contemporary George Julius Poulett Scrope. Karl Marx argued that the source of the productivity of the factory system was exactly the combination of the division of labour with machinery, building on Adam Smith, Babbage and Ure. Where Marx picked up on Babbage and disagreed with Smith was on the motivation for division of labour by the manufacturer: as Babbage did, he wrote that it was for the sake of profitability, rather than productivity, and identified an impact on the concept of a trade.\n\nJohn Ruskin went further, to oppose completely what manufacturing in Babbage's sense stood for. Babbage also affected the economic thinking of John Stuart Mill. George Holyoake saw Babbage's detailed discussion of profit sharing as substantive, in the tradition of Robert Owen and Charles Fourier, if requiring the attentions of a benevolent captain of industry, and ignored at the time.\n\nWorks by Babbage and Ure were published in French translation in 1830; \"On the Economy of Machinery\" was translated in 1833 into French by Édouard Biot, and into German the same year by Gottfried Friedenberg. The French engineer and writer on industrial organisation Léon Lalanne was influenced by Babbage, but also by the economist Claude Lucien Bergery, in reducing the issues to \"technology\". William Jevons connected Babbage's \"economy of labour\" with his own labour experiments of 1870. The Babbage principle is an inherent assumption in Frederick Winslow Taylor's scientific management.\n\nMary Boole, the wife of Babbage's collaborator George Boole claimed that there was profound influence—via her uncle George Everest—of Indian thought in general and Indian logic, in particular, on him and on George Boole, as well as on Augustus De Morgan:\n\nThink what must have been the effect of the intense Hinduizing of three such men as Babbage, De Morgan, and George Boole on the mathematical atmosphere of 1830–65. What share had it in generating the Vector Analysis and the mathematics by which investigations in physical science are now conducted? \n\nIn 1837, responding to the series of eight \"Bridgewater Treatises\", Babbage published his \"Ninth Bridgewater Treatise\", under the title \"On the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, as manifested in the Creation\". In this work Babbage weighed in on the side of uniformitarianism in a current debate. He preferred the conception of creation in which a God-given natural law dominated, removing the need for continuous \"contrivance\".\n\nThe book is a work of natural theology, and incorporates extracts from related correspondence of Herschel with Charles Lyell. Babbage put forward the thesis that God had the omnipotence and foresight to create as a divine legislator. In this book, Babbage dealt with relating interpretations between science and religion; on the one hand, he insisted that \"\"there exists no fatal collision between the words of Scripture and the facts of nature;\"\" on the one hand, he wrote the Book of Genesis was not meant to be read literally in relation to scientific terms. Against those who said these were in conflict, he wrote \"\"that the contradiction they have imagined can have no real existence, and that whilst the testimony of Moses remains unimpeached, we may also be permitted to confide in the testimony of our senses.\"\"\n\nThe Ninth Bridgewater Treatise was quoted extensively in \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\". The parallel with Babbage's computing machines is made explicit, as allowing plausibility to the theory that transmutation of species could be pre-programmed.\nJonar Ganeri, author of \"Indian Logic\", believes Babbage may have been influenced by Indian thought; one possible route would be through Henry Thomas Colebrooke. Mary Everest Boole argues that Babbage was introduced to Indian thought in the 1820s by her uncle George Everest:\nSome time about 1825, [Everest] came to England for two or three years, and made a fast and lifelong friendship with Herschel and with Babbage, who was then quite young. I would ask any fair-minded mathematician to read Babbage's Ninth Bridgewater Treatise and compare it with the works of his contemporaries in England; and then ask himself whence came the peculiar conception of the nature of miracle which underlies Babbage's ideas of Singular Points on Curves (Chap, viii) – from European Theology or Hindu Metaphysic? Oh! how the English clergy of that day hated Babbage's book!\n\nBabbage was raised in the Protestant form of the Christian faith, his family having inculcated in him an orthodox form of worship. He explained:\n\nRejecting the Athanasian Creed as a \"direct contradiction in terms\", in his youth he looked to Samuel Clarke's works on religion, of which \"Being and Attributes of God\" (1704) exerted a particularly strong influence on him. Later in life, Babbage concluded that \"the true value of the Christian religion rested, not on speculative [theology] … but … upon those doctrines of kindness and benevolence which that religion claims and enforces, not merely in favour of man himself but of every creature susceptible of pain or of happiness.\"\n\nIn his autobiography (1864), Babbage wrote a whole chapter on the topic of religion, where he identified three sources of divine knowledge:\nBULLET::::1. \"A priori\" or mystical experience\nBULLET::::2. From Revelation\nBULLET::::3. From the examination of the works of the Creator\nHe stated, on the basis of the design argument, that studying the works of nature had been the more appealing evidence, and the one which led him to actively profess the existence of God. Advocating for natural theology, he wrote:\nLike Samuel Vince, Babbage also wrote a defence of the belief in divine miracles. Against objections previously posed by David Hume, Babbage advocated for the belief of divine agency, stating \"we must not measure the credibility or incredibility of an event by the narrow sphere of our own experience, nor forget that there is a Divine energy which overrides what we familiarly call the laws of nature.\" He alluded to the limits of human experience, expressing: \"all that we see in a miracle is an effect which is new to our observation, and whose cause is concealed. The cause may be beyond the sphere of our observation, and would be thus beyond the familiar sphere of nature; but this does not make the event a violation of any law of nature. The limits of man's observation lie within very narrow boundaries, and it would be arrogance to suppose that the reach of man's power is to form the limits of the natural world.\"\n\nThe British Association was consciously modelled on the Deutsche Naturforscher-Versammlung, founded in 1822. It rejected romantic science as well as metaphysics, and started to entrench the divisions of science from literature, and professionals from amateurs. Belonging as he did to the \"Wattite\" faction in the BAAS, represented in particular by James Watt the younger, Babbage identified closely with industrialists. He wanted to go faster in the same directions, and had little time for the more gentlemanly component of its membership. Indeed, he subscribed to a version of conjectural history that placed industrial society as the culmination of human development (and shared this view with Herschel). A clash with Roderick Murchison led in 1838 to his withdrawal from further involvement. At the end of the same year he sent in his resignation as Lucasian professor, walking away also from the Cambridge struggle with Whewell. His interests became more focussed, on computation and metrology, and on international contacts.\n\nA project announced by Babbage was to tabulate all physical constants (referred to as \"constants of nature\", a phrase in itself a neologism), and then to compile an encyclopaedic work of numerical information. He was a pioneer in the field of \"absolute measurement\". His ideas followed on from those of Johann Christian Poggendorff, and were mentioned to Brewster in 1832. There were to be 19 categories of constants, and Ian Hacking sees these as reflecting in part Babbage's \"eccentric enthusiasms\". Babbage's paper \"On Tables of the Constants of Nature and Art\" was reprinted by the Smithsonian Institution in 1856, with an added note that the physical tables of Arnold Henry Guyot \"will form a part of the important work proposed in this article\".\n\nExact measurement was also key to the development of machine tools. Here again Babbage is considered a pioneer, with Henry Maudslay, William Sellers, and Joseph Whitworth.\n\nThrough the Royal Society Babbage acquired the friendship of the engineer Marc Brunel. It was through Brunel that Babbage knew of Joseph Clement, and so came to encounter the artisans whom he observed in his work on manufactures. Babbage provided an introduction for Isambard Kingdom Brunel in 1830, for a contact with the proposed Bristol & Birmingham Railway. He carried out studies, around 1838, to show the superiority of the broad gauge for railways, used by Brunel's Great Western Railway.\n\nIn 1838, Babbage invented the pilot (also called a cow-catcher), the metal frame attached to the front of locomotives that clears the tracks of obstacles; he also constructed a dynamometer car. His eldest son, Benjamin Herschel Babbage, worked as an engineer for Brunel on the railways before emigrating to Australia in the 1850s.\n\nBabbage also invented an ophthalmoscope, which he gave to Thomas Wharton Jones for testing. Jones, however, ignored it. The device only came into use after being independently invented by Hermann von Helmholtz.\n\nBabbage achieved notable results in cryptography, though this was still not known a century after his death. Letter frequency was category 18 of Babbage's tabulation project. Joseph Henry later defended interest in it, in the absence of the facts, as relevant to the management of movable type.\n\nAs early as 1845, Babbage had solved a cipher that had been posed as a challenge by his nephew Henry Hollier, and in the process, he made a discovery about ciphers that were based on Vigenère tables. Specifically, he realised that enciphering plain text with a keyword rendered the cipher text subject to modular arithmetic. During the Crimean War of the 1850s, Babbage broke Vigenère's autokey cipher as well as the much weaker cipher that is called Vigenère cipher today. His discovery was kept a military secret, and was not published. Credit for the result was instead given to Friedrich Kasiski, a Prussian infantry officer, who made the same discovery some years later. However, in 1854, Babbage published the solution of a Vigenère cipher, which had been published previously in the \"Journal of the Society of Arts\". In 1855, Babbage also published a short letter, \"Cypher Writing\", in the same journal. Nevertheless, his priority was not established until 1985.\n\nBabbage involved himself in well-publicised but unpopular campaigns against public nuisances. He once counted all the broken panes of glass of a factory, publishing in 1857 a \"Table of the Relative Frequency of the Causes of Breakage of Plate Glass Windows\": Of 464 broken panes, 14 were caused by \"drunken men, women or boys\".\n\nBabbage's distaste for commoners (\"the Mob\") included writing \"Observations of Street Nuisances\" in 1864, as well as tallying up 165 \"nuisances\" over a period of 80 days. He especially hated street music, and in particular the music of organ grinders, against whom he railed in various venues. The following quotation is typical:\n\nBabbage was not alone in his campaign. A convert to the cause was the MP Michael Thomas Bass.\n\nIn the 1860s, Babbage also took up the anti-hoop-rolling campaign. He blamed hoop-rolling boys for driving their iron hoops under horses' legs, with the result that the rider is thrown and very often the horse breaks a leg. Babbage achieved a certain notoriety in this matter, being denounced in debate in Commons in 1864 for \"commencing a crusade against the popular game of tip-cat and the trundling of hoops.\"\n\nBabbage's machines were among the first mechanical computers. That they were not actually completed was largely because of funding problems and clashes of personality, most notably with Airy, the Astronomer Royal.\n\nBabbage directed the building of some steam-powered machines that achieved some modest success, suggesting that calculations could be mechanised. For more than ten years he received government funding for his project, which amounted to £17,000, but eventually the Treasury lost confidence in him.\n\nWhile Babbage's machines were mechanical and unwieldy, their basic architecture was similar to a modern computer. The data and program memory were separated, operation was instruction-based, the control unit could make conditional jumps, and the machine had a separate I/O unit.\n\nIn Babbage's time, printed mathematical tables were calculated by human computers; in other words, by hand. They were central to navigation, science and engineering, as well as mathematics. Mistakes were known to occur in transcription as well as calculation.\n\nAt Cambridge, Babbage saw the fallibility of this process, and the opportunity of adding mechanisation into its management. His own account of his path towards mechanical computation references a particular occasion: \n\nThere was another period, seven years later, when his interest was aroused by the issues around computation of mathematical tables. The French official initiative by Gaspard de Prony, and its problems of implementation, were familiar to him. After the Napoleonic Wars came to a close, scientific contacts were renewed on the level of personal contact: in 1819 Charles Blagden was in Paris looking into the printing of the stalled de Prony project, and lobbying for the support of the Royal Society. In works of the 1820s and 1830s, Babbage referred in detail to de Prony's project.\n\nBabbage began in 1822 with what he called the difference engine, made to compute values of polynomial functions. It was created to calculate a series of values automatically. By using the method of finite differences, it was possible to avoid the need for multiplication and division.\n\nFor a prototype difference engine, Babbage brought in Joseph Clement to implement the design, in 1823. Clement worked to high standards, but his machine tools were particularly elaborate. Under the standard terms of business of the time, he could charge for their construction, and would also own them. He and Babbage fell out over costs around 1831.\n\nSome parts of the prototype survive in the Museum of the History of Science, Oxford. This prototype evolved into the \"first difference engine.\" It remained unfinished and the finished portion is located at the Science Museum in London. This first difference engine would have been composed of around 25,000 parts, weighed fifteen tons (13,600 kg), and would have been tall. Although Babbage received ample funding for the project, it was never completed. He later (1847–1849) produced detailed drawings for an improved version,\"Difference Engine No. 2\", but did not receive funding from the British government. His design was finally constructed in 1989–1991, using his plans and 19th-century manufacturing tolerances. It performed its first calculation at the Science Museum, London, returning results to 31 digits.\n\nNine years later, in 2000, the Science Museum completed the printer Babbage had designed for the difference engine.\n\nThe Science Museum has constructed two Difference Engines according to Babbage's plans for the Difference Engine No 2. One is owned by the museum. The other, owned by the technology multimillionaire Nathan Myhrvold, went on exhibition at the Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California on 10 May 2008. The two models that have been constructed are not replicas; Myhrvold's engine is the first design by Babbage, and the Science Museum's is a later model.\n\nAfter the attempt at making the first difference engine fell through, Babbage worked to design a more complex machine called the Analytical Engine. He hired C. G. Jarvis, who had previously worked for Clement as a draughtsman. The Analytical Engine marks the transition from mechanised arithmetic to fully-fledged general purpose computation. It is largely on it that Babbage's standing as computer pioneer rests.\n\nThe major innovation was that the Analytical Engine was to be programmed using punched cards: the Engine was intended to use loops of Jacquard's punched cards to control a mechanical calculator, which could use as input the results of preceding computations. The machine was also intended to employ several features subsequently used in modern computers, including sequential control, branching and looping. It would have been the first mechanical device to be, in principle, Turing-complete. The Engine was not a single physical machine, but rather a succession of designs that Babbage tinkered with until his death in 1871.\nAda Lovelace, who corresponded with Babbage during his development of the Analytical Engine, is credited with developing an algorithm that would enable the Engine to calculate a sequence of Bernoulli numbers. Despite documentary evidence in Lovelace's own handwriting, some scholars dispute to what extent the ideas were Lovelace's own. For this achievement, she is often described as the first computer programmer; though no programming language had yet been invented.\n\nLovelace also translated and wrote literature supporting the project. Describing the engine's programming by punch cards, she wrote: \"We may say most aptly that the Analytical Engine weaves algebraical patterns just as the Jacquard loom weaves flowers and leaves.\"\n\nBabbage visited Turin in 1840 at the invitation of Giovanni Plana. In 1842 Charles Wheatstone approached Lovelace to translate a paper of Luigi Menabrea, who had taken notes of Babbage's Turin talks; and Babbage asked her to add something of her own. Fortunato Prandi who acted as interpreter in Turin was an Italian exile and follower of Giuseppe Mazzini.\n\nPer Georg Scheutz wrote about the difference engine in 1830, and experimented in automated computation. After 1834 and Lardner's \"Edinburgh Review\" article he set up a project of his own, doubting whether Babbage's initial plan could be carried out. This he pushed through with his son, Edvard Scheutz. Another Swedish engine was that of Martin Wiberg (1860).\n\nIn 2011, researchers in Britain proposed a multimillion-pound project, \"Plan 28\", to construct Babbage's Analytical Engine. Since Babbage's plans were continually being refined and were never completed, they intended to engage the public in the project and crowd-source the analysis of what should be built. It would have the equivalent of 675 bytes of memory, and run at a clock speed of about 7 Hz. They hope to complete it by the 150th anniversary of Babbage's death, in 2021.\n\nAdvances in MEMS and nanotechnology have led to recent high-tech experiments in mechanical computation. The benefits suggested include operation in high radiation or high temperature environments. These modern versions of mechanical computation were highlighted in \"The Economist\" in its special \"end of the millennium\" black cover issue in an article entitled \"Babbage's Last Laugh\".\n\nDue to his association with the town Babbage was chosen in 2007 to appear on the 5 Totnes pound note. An image of Babbage features in the British cultural icons section of the newly designed British passport in 2015.\n\nOn 25 July 1814, Babbage married Georgiana Whitmore at St. Michael's Church in Teignmouth, Devon; her sister Louisa married Edward Ryan. The couple lived at Dudmaston Hall, Shropshire (where Babbage engineered the central heating system), before moving to 5 Devonshire Street, London in 1815.\n\nCharles and Georgiana had eight children, but only four – Benjamin Herschel, Georgiana Whitmore, Dugald Bromhead and Henry Prevost – survived childhood. Charles' wife Georgiana died in Worcester on 1 September 1827, the same year as his father, their second son (also named Charles) and their newborn son Alexander.\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Herschel Babbage (1815–1878)\nBULLET::::- Charles Whitmore Babbage (1817–1827)\nBULLET::::- Georgiana Whitmore Babbage (1818–????)\nBULLET::::- Edward Stewart Babbage (1819–1821)\nBULLET::::- Francis Moore Babbage (1821–????)\nBULLET::::- Dugald Bromhead (Bromheald?) Babbage (1823–1901)\nBULLET::::- (Maj-Gen) Henry Prevost Babbage (1824–1918)\nBULLET::::- Alexander Forbes Babbage (1827–1827)\n\nHis youngest surviving son, Henry Prevost Babbage (1824–1918), went on to create six small demonstration pieces for Difference Engine No. 1 based on his father's designs, one of which was sent to Harvard University where it was later discovered by Howard H. Aiken, pioneer of the Harvard Mark I. Henry Prevost's 1910 Analytical Engine Mill, previously on display at Dudmaston Hall, is now on display at the Science Museum.\n\nBabbage lived and worked for over 40 years at 1 Dorset Street, Marylebone, where he died, at the age of 79, on 18 October 1871; he was buried in London's Kensal Green Cemetery. According to Horsley, Babbage died \"of renal inadequacy, secondary to cystitis.\" He had declined both a knighthood and baronetcy. He also argued against hereditary peerages, favouring life peerages instead.\n\nIn 1983 the autopsy report for Charles Babbage was discovered and later published by his great-great-grandson. A copy of the original is also available. Half of Babbage's brain is preserved at the Hunterian Museum in the Royal College of Surgeons in London. The other half of Babbage's brain is on display in the Science Museum, London.\n\nThere is a black plaque commemorating the 40 years Babbage spent at 1 Dorset Street, London. Locations, institutions and other things named after Babbage include:\nBULLET::::- The Moon crater Babbage\nBULLET::::- The Charles Babbage Institute, an information technology archive and research center at the University of Minnesota\nBULLET::::- British Rail named a locomotive after him in the 1990s\nBULLET::::- The Babbage Building at the University of Plymouth, where the university's school of computing is based\nBULLET::::- The Babbage programming language for GEC 4000 series minicomputers\nBULLET::::- \"Babbage\", \"The Economist\"s Science and Technology blog.\nBULLET::::- The former chain retail computer and video-games store \"Babbage's\" (now GameStop) was named after him.\n\nBabbage frequently appears in steampunk works; he has been called an iconic figure of the genre. Other works in which Babbage appears include:\nBULLET::::- As a Great Thinker, in the 2008 strategy video game \"Civilization Revolution\".\nBULLET::::- The 2008 short film \"Babbage\".\nBULLET::::- Sydney Padua created \"The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage\", a cartoon alternate history in which Babbage and Lovelace succeed in building the analytic engine. It quotes heavily from the writings of Lovelace, Babbage and their contemporaries.\nBULLET::::- Kate Beaton, cartoonist of webcomic \"Hark! A Vagrant\", devoted one of her comic strips to Charles and Georgiana Babbage.\nBULLET::::- The BBC series \"Victoria\" in Season 2, Episode 2 'The Green-Eyed Monster', portrayed by Jo Stone-Fewings.\n\nBULLET::::- (Reissued by Cambridge University Press 2009, .)\nBULLET::::- (The LOCOMAT site contains a reconstruction of this table.)\n\nBULLET::::- Babbage's congruence\nBULLET::::- List of pioneers in computer science\n\nBULLET::::- The Babbage Papers The papers held by the Science Museum Library and Archives which relate mostly to Babbage's automatic calculating engines\nBULLET::::- \"The Babbage Engine\": Computer History Museum, Mountain View CA, USA. Multi-page account of Babbage, his engines and his associates, including a video of the Museum's functioning replica of the Difference Engine No 2 in action\nBULLET::::- Analytical Engine Museum John Walker's (of AutoCAD fame) comprehensive catalogue of the complete technical works relating to Babbage's machine.\nBULLET::::- Charles Babbage A history at the School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews Scotland.\nBULLET::::- Mr. Charles Babbage: obituary from \"The Times\" (1871)\nBULLET::::- The Babbage Pages\nBULLET::::- Charles Babbage, The Online Books Page, University of Pennsylvania\nBULLET::::- The Babbage Difference Engine: an overview of how it works\nBULLET::::- \"On a Method of Expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery\", 1826. Original edition\nBULLET::::- Charles Babbage Institute: pages on \"Who Was Charles Babbage?\" including biographical note, description of Difference Engine No. 2, publications by Babbage, archival and published sources on Babbage, sources on Babbage and Ada Lovelace\nBULLET::::- \"Babbage's Ballet\" by Ivor Guest, Ballet Magazine, 1997\nBULLET::::- \"Babbage's Calculating Machine\" (1872) – full digital facsimile from Linda Hall Library\nBULLET::::- Author profile in the database zbMATH\nBULLET::::- The 'difference engine' built by Georg & Edvard Scheutz in 1843\n"}
{"id": "5700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5700", "title": "Cross-dressing", "text": "Cross-dressing\n\nCross-dressing is the act of wearing items of clothing and other accoutrements commonly associated with the opposite sex within a particular society. Cross-dressing has been used for purposes of disguise, comfort, and self-expression in modern times and throughout history.\n\nAlmost every human society throughout history has had expected norms for each gender relating to style, color, or type of clothing they are expected to wear, and likewise most societies have had a set of guidelines, views or even laws defining what type of clothing is appropriate for each gender.\n\nThe term \"cross-dressing\" refers to an action or a behavior, without attributing or implying any specific causes or motives for that behavior. Cross-dressing is not synonymous with being transgender.\n\nThe phenomenon of cross-dressing is an old recorded practice, being referred to as far back as Hebrew Bible. However, the terms to describe it change. The Anglo-Saxon \"cross-dresser\" has largely superseded the Latinate \"transvestite\", which has come to be seen as outdated and derogatory. This is because the latter was historically used to diagnose psychiatric disorders (e.g. transvestic fetishism), but the former was coined by the transgender community. The Oxford English Dictionary gives 1911 as the earliest citation, by Edward Carpenter: \"Cross-dressing must be taken as a general indication of, and a cognate phenomenon to, homosexuality\". In 1928 Havelock Ellis used the two terms, \"cross-dressing\" and \"transvestism\", interchangeably. The earliest citations for \"cross-dress\" and \"cross-dresser\" are 1966 and 1976 respectively.\n\nCross-dressing has been practiced throughout much of recorded history, in many societies, and for many reasons. Examples exist in Greek, Norse, and Hindu mythology. There is a rich history of cross-dressing found in folklore, literature, theater, and music, such as Kabuki and Korean shamanism. In the British and European context, theatrical troupes (\"playing companies\") were all-male, with the female parts undertaken by boy players.\n\nA wide variety of historical figures are known to have cross-dressed to varying degrees. Many women found they had to disguise themselves as men in order to participate in the wider world. For example, Margaret King cross-dressed in the early nineteenth century to attend medical school, as none would accept female students. A century later, Vita Sackville-West dressed as a young soldier in order to \"walk out\" with her girlfriend Violet Keppel, to avoid the street harassment that two women would have faced. The prohibition on women wearing male garb, once strictly applied, still has echoes today in some Western societies which require girls and women to wear skirts, for example as part of school uniform or office dress codes. In some countries, even in casual settings, women are still prohibited from wearing traditionally male clothing. Sometimes all trousers, no matter how loose and long, are automatically considered \"indecent\", which may render their wearer subject to severe punishment, as in the case of Lubna al-Hussein in Sudan in 2009.\n\nThere are many different kinds of cross-dressing and many different reasons why an individual might engage in cross-dressing behavior. Some people cross-dress as a matter of comfort or style, out of personal preference for clothing associated with the opposite sex. In this case, a person's cross-dressing may or may not be apparent to other people. Some people cross-dress to shock others or challenge social norms. Some people attempt to pass as a member of the opposite sex in order to gain access to places or resources they would not otherwise be able to reach.\n\nGender disguise has been used by women and girls to pass as male, and by men and boys to pass as female. Gender disguise has also been used as a plot device in storytelling, particularly in narrative ballads, and is a recurring motif in literature, theater, and film. Historically, some women have cross-dressed to take up male-dominated or male-exclusive professions, such as military service. Conversely, some men have cross-dressed to escape from mandatory military service or as a disguise to assist in political or social protest, as men in Wales did in the Rebecca Riots and when conducting Ceffyl Pren as a form of mob justice.\n\nUndercover journalism may require cross-dressing, as with Norah Vincent's project \"Self-Made Man\".\n\nSome girls in Afghanistan, long after the fall of the Taliban, are still disguised by their families as boys. This is known as \"bacha posh\".\n\nSingle-sex theatrical troupes often have some performers who cross-dress to play roles written for members of the opposite sex (travesti and trouser roles). Cross-dressing, particularly the depiction of males wearing dresses, is often used for comic effect onstage and on-screen.\n\nDrag is a special form of performance art based on the act of cross-dressing. A drag queen is usually a male-assigned person who performs as an exaggeratedly feminine character, in heightened costuming sometimes consisting of a showy dress, high-heeled shoes, obvious make-up, and wig. A drag queen may imitate famous female film or pop-music stars. A faux queen is a female-assigned person employing the same techniques. A drag king is a counterpart of the drag queen - a female-assigned person who adopts a masculine persona in performance or imitates a male film or pop-music star. Some female-assigned people undergoing gender reassignment therapy also self-identify as \"drag kings\" although this use of \"drag king\" would generally be considered inaccurate.\n\nThe modern activity of battle reenactments has raised the question of women passing as male soldiers. In 1989, Lauren Burgess dressed as a male soldier in a U.S. National Park Service reenactment of the Battle of Antietam, and was ejected after she was discovered to be a woman. Burgess sued the Park Service for sexual discrimination. The case spurred spirited debate among Civil War buffs. In 1993, a federal judge ruled in Burgess's favor.\n\n\"Wigging\" refers to the practice of male stunt doubles taking the place of an actress, parallel to \"paint downs\", where white stunt doubles are made up to resemble black actors. Female stunt doubles have begun to protest this norm of \"historical sexism\", saying that it restricts their already limited job possibilities\n\nA transvestic fetishist is a person who cross-dresses as part of a sexual fetish. According to the fourth edition of \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\", this fetishism was limited to heterosexual men; however, DSM-5 does not have this restriction, and opens it to women and men, regardless of their sexual orientation.\n\nThe term \"underdressing\" is used by male cross-dressers to describe wearing female undergarments such as panties under their male clothes. The famous low-budget film-maker Edward D. Wood, Jr. said he often wore women's underwear under his military uniform as a Marine during World War II. \"Female masking\" is a form of cross-dressing in which men wear masks that present them as female.\n\nSometimes either member of a heterosexual couple will cross-dress in order to arouse the other. For example, the male might wear skirts or lingerie and/or the female will wear boxers or other male clothing. (See also forced feminization)\n\nSome people who cross-dress may endeavor to project a complete impression of belonging to another gender, including mannerisms, speech patterns, and emulation of sexual characteristics. This is referred to as passing or \"trying to pass\" depending how successful the person is. An observer who sees through the cross-dresser's attempt to pass is said to have \"read\" or \"clocked\" them. There are videos, books, and magazines on how a man may look more like a woman.\n\nOthers may choose to take a mixed approach, adopting some feminine traits and some masculine traits in their appearance. For instance, a man might wear both a dress and a beard. This is sometimes known as \"genderfuck\". In a broader context, cross-dressing may also refer to other actions undertaken to pass as a particular sex, such as packing (accentuating the male crotch bulge) or, the opposite, tucking (concealing the male crotch bulge).\n\nThe actual determination of cross-dressing is largely socially constructed. For example, in Western society, trousers have long been adopted for usage by women, and it is no longer regarded as cross-dressing. In cultures where men have traditionally worn skirt-like garments such as the kilt or sarong, these are not seen as women's clothing, and wearing them is not seen as cross-dressing for men. As societies are becoming more global in nature, both men's and women's clothing are adopting styles of dress associated with other cultures.\nCosplaying may also involve cross-dressing, for some females may wish to dress as a male, and vice versa (see Crossplay). Breast binding (for females) is not uncommon and is one of the things likely needed to cosplay a male character.\n\nIn most parts of the world it remains socially disapproved for men to wear clothes traditionally associated with women. Attempts are occasionally made, e.g. by fashion designers, to promote the acceptance of skirts as everyday wear for men. Cross-dressers have complained that society permits women to wear pants or jeans and other masculine clothing, while condemning any man who wants to wear clothing sold for women.\n\nWhile creating a more feminine figure, male cross-dressers will often utilize different types and styles of breast forms, which are silicone prostheses traditionally used by women who have undergone mastectomies to recreate the visual appearance of a breast.\n\nWhile most male cross-dressers utilize clothing associated with modern women, some are involved in subcultures that involve dressing as little girls or in vintage clothing. Some such men have written that they enjoy dressing as femininely as possible, so they wear frilly dresses with lace and ribbons, bridal gowns complete with veils, as well as multiple petticoats, corsets, girdles and/or garter belts with nylon stockings.\n\nCross-dressers may begin wearing clothing associated with the opposite sex in childhood, using the clothes of a sibling, parent, or friend. Some parents have said they allowed their children to cross-dress and, in many cases, the child stopped when they became older. The same pattern often continues into adulthood, where there may be confrontations with a spouse, partner, family member or friend. Married cross-dressers can experience considerable anxiety and guilt if their spouse objects to their behavior.\n\nSometimes because of guilt or other reasons cross-dressers dispose of all their clothing, a practice called \"purging\", only to start collecting other gender's clothing again.\n\nCelebrations of cross-dressing occur in widespread cultures. The Abissa festival in Côte d'Ivoire, Ofudamaki in Japan, and Kottankulangara Festival in India are all examples of this.\n\nThe historical associations of maleness with power and femaleness with submission and frivolity mean that in the present time a woman dressing in men's clothing and a man dressing in women's clothing evoke very different responses. A woman dressing in men's clothing is considered to be a more acceptable activity.\n\nAdvocacy for social change has done much to relax the constrictions of gender roles on men and women, but they are still subject to prejudice from some people. It is noticeable that as 'transgender' is becoming more socially accepted as a normal human condition, the prejudices against cross-dressing are changing quite quickly, just as the similar prejudices against homosexuals have changed rapidly in recent decades.\n\nThe reason it is so hard to have statistics for female-assigned cross-dressers is that the line where cross-dressing stops and cross-dressing begins has become blurred, whereas the same line for men is as well defined as ever. This is one of the many issues being addressed by third wave feminism as well as the modern-day masculist movement.\n\nThe general culture has very mixed views about cross-dressing. A woman who wears her husband's shirt to bed is considered attractive while a man who wears his wife's nightgown to bed may be considered transgressive. Marlene Dietrich in a tuxedo was considered very erotic; Jack Lemmon in a dress was considered ridiculous. All this may result from an overall gender role rigidity for males; that is, because of the prevalent gender dynamic throughout the world, men frequently encounter discrimination when deviating from masculine gender norms, particularly violations of heteronormativity. A man's adoption of feminine clothing is often considered a going down in the gendered social order whereas a woman's adoption of what are traditionally men's clothing (at least in the English-speaking world) has less of an impact because women have been traditionally subordinate to men, unable to affect serious change through style of dress. Thus when a male cross-dresser puts on his clothes, he transforms into the quasi-female and thereby becomes an embodiment of the conflicted gender dynamic. Following the work of Butler, gender proceeds along through ritualized performances, but in male cross-dressing it becomes a performative \"breaking\" of the masculine and a \"subversive repetition\" of the feminine.\n\nPsychoanalysts today do not regard cross-dressing by itself as a psychological problem, unless it interferes with a person's life. \"For instance,\" said Dr. Joseph Merlino, senior editor of \"Freud at 150: 21st Century Essays on a Man of Genius\", \"[suppose that]...I'm a cross-dresser and I don't want to keep it confined to my circle of friends, or my party circle, and I want to take that to my wife and I don't understand why she doesn't accept it, or I take it to my office and I don't understand why they don't accept it, then it's become a problem because it's interfering with my relationships and environment.\"\n\nCross-dressing is a traditional popular trope in British comedy. The Pantomime dame in British pantomime dates from the 19th century, which is part of the theatrical tradition of female characters portrayed by male actors in drag. The Monty Python comedy troupe donned frocks and makeup, playing female roles themselves while speaking in falsetto. Character comics such as Benny Hill and Dick Emery drew upon several female identities. In the BBC’s long-running sketch show \"The Dick Emery Show\" (broadcast from 1963 to 1981), Emery played Mandy, a busty peroxide blonde whose catchphrase, \"Ooh, you are awful ... but I like you!\", was given in response to a seemingly innocent remark made by her interviewer, but perceived by her as ribald double entendre. The popular tradition of cross dressing in British comedy extended to the 1984 music video for Queen’s \"I Want to Break Free\" where the band parody several female characters from the soap opera \"Coronation Street\".\n\nWomen dressed as men, and less often men dressed as women, is a common trope in fiction and folklore. For example, in Norse myth, Thor disguised himself as Freya. These disguises were also popular in Gothic fiction, such as in works by Charles Dickens, Alexandre Dumas, père, and Eugène Sue, and in a number of Shakespeare's plays, such as \"Twelfth Night\". In \"The Wind in the Willows\", Toad dresses as a washerwoman, and in \"Lord of the Rings\", Éowyn pretends to be a man.\n\nIn science fiction, fantasy and women's literature, this literary motif is occasionally taken further, with literal transformation of a character from male to female or vice versa. Virginia Woolf's \"\" focuses on a man who becomes a woman, as does a warrior in Peter S. Beagle's \"The Innkeeper's Song\"; while in Geoff Ryman's \"The Warrior who Carried Life\", Cara magically transforms herself into a man.\n\nOther popular examples of gender disguise include \"Madame Doubtfire\" (published as \"Alias Madame Doubtfire\" in the United States) and its movie adaptation \"Mrs. Doubtfire\", featuring a man disguised as a woman. Similarly, the movie \"Tootsie\" features Dustin Hoffman disguised as a woman, while the movie \"The Associate\" features Whoopi Goldberg disguised as a man.\n\nThe 10th edition of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems lists \"dual-role transvestism\" (non-sexual cross-dressing) and \"fetishistic transvestism\" (cross-dressing for sexual pleasure) as disorders. Both listings were removed for the 11th edition. \nTransvestic fetishism is a paraphilia, and a psychiatric diagnosis in the DSM-5 version of the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.\n\nBULLET::::- Androgyny\nBULLET::::- Autogynephilia\nBULLET::::- Breeches role\nBULLET::::- Breeching (boys)\nBULLET::::- Cross dressing ball\nBULLET::::- Cross-dressing in film and television\nBULLET::::- Cross-dressing in literature\nBULLET::::- Cross-gender acting\nBULLET::::- En femme\nBULLET::::- En homme\nBULLET::::- The Famous Flower of Serving-Men\nBULLET::::- Feminization\nBULLET::::- Gender identity\nBULLET::::- Hijra (South Asia)\nBULLET::::- Kathoey\nBULLET::::- List of transgender-related topics\nBULLET::::- List of wartime crossdressers\nBULLET::::- \"Otokonoko\", male crossdressing in Japan\nBULLET::::- Passing (gender)\nBULLET::::- Sex and gender distinction\nBULLET::::- History of Drag\nBULLET::::- Sexual orientation hypothesis\nBULLET::::- Transvestism\nBULLET::::- Travesti (theatre)\nBULLET::::- Tri-Ess\nBULLET::::- Twelfth Night\nBULLET::::- Two-spirit\nBULLET::::- Womanless wedding\nBULLET::::- Anders, Charles. \"The Lazy Crossdresser\", Greenery Press, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Boyd, Helen. \"My Husband Betty\", Thunder's Mouth Press, 2003\nBULLET::::- Clute, John & Grant, John. \"The Encyclopedia of Fantasy\", Orbit Books, 1997.\nBULLET::::- Gravois, Valory. \"Cherry Single\", Alchemist/Light Publishing, 1997 (Available to read free, online),\nBULLET::::- \"Lynne\". \"A Cross-Dressing-Perspective\"\n\nBULLET::::- The Gender Centre (Australia)\nBULLET::::- Crossdressing Support Group (Canada)\n"}
{"id": "5702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5702", "title": "Channel Tunnel", "text": "Channel Tunnel\n\nThe Channel Tunnel (; also nicknamed the Chunnel) is a railway tunnel that connects Folkestone, Kent, in England, with Coquelles, Pas-de-Calais, near Calais in northern France, beneath the English Channel at the Strait of Dover. It is the only fixed link between the island of Great Britain and the European mainland. At its lowest point, it is deep below the sea bed and below sea level. At , the tunnel has the longest underwater section of any tunnel in the world (the Seikan Tunnel in Japan is both longer overall at and deeper at below sea level). The speed limit for trains through the tunnel is .\n\nThe tunnel carries high-speed Eurostar passenger trains, the Eurotunnel Shuttle for road vehicles—the largest such transport in the world—and international freight trains. The tunnel connects end-to-end with the high-speed railway lines of the LGV Nord and High Speed 1. In 2017, through rail services carried 10.3 million passengers and 1.22 million tonnes of freight, and the Shuttle carried 10.4 million passengers, 2.6 million cars, 51,000 coaches, and 1.6 million lorries (equivalent to 21.3 million tonnes of freight). This compares with 11.7 million passengers, 2.6 million lorries and 2.2 million cars through the Port of Dover.\n\nPlans to build a cross-Channel fixed link appeared as early as 1802, but British political and media pressure over the compromising of national security had disrupted attempts to build a tunnel. An early attempt at building a Channel Tunnel was made in the late 19th century, on the English side, \"in the hope of forcing the hand of the English Government\". The eventual successful project, organised by Eurotunnel, began construction in 1988 and opened in 1994. At £5.5 billion (1985 prices), it was at the time the most expensive construction project ever proposed. The cost finally amounted to £9 billion ($21 billion), well over its predicted budget.\n\nSince its construction, the tunnel has experienced a few mechanical problems. Both fires and cold weather have temporarily disrupted its operation.\n\nPeople have been attempting to use the tunnel to illegally travel to the UK since at least 1997, creating the ongoing issue of the migrants around Calais on the French side, causing both diplomatic disagreement and violence.\n\nIn 1802, Albert Mathieu-Favier, a French mining engineer, put forward a proposal to tunnel under the English Channel, with illumination from oil lamps, horse-drawn coaches, and an artificial island positioned mid-Channel for changing horses. Mathieu-Favier's design envisaged a bored two-level tunnel with the top tunnel used for transport and the bottom one for groundwater flows.\n\nIn 1839, Aimé Thomé de Gamond, a Frenchman, performed the first geological and hydrographical surveys on the Channel, between Calais and Dover. Thomé de Gamond explored several schemes and, in 1856, he presented a proposal to Napoleon III for a mined railway tunnel from Cap Gris-Nez to Eastwater Point with a port/airshaft on the Varne sandbank at a cost of 170 million francs, or less than £7 million.\n\nIn 1865, a deputation led by George Ward Hunt proposed the idea of a tunnel to the Chancellor of the Exchequer of the day, William Ewart Gladstone.\n\nAround 1866, William Low and Sir John Hawkshaw promoted ideas, but apart from preliminary geological studies none were implemented. An official Anglo-French protocol was established in 1876 for a cross-Channel railway tunnel. In 1881, the British railway entrepreneur Sir Edward Watkin and Alexandre Lavalley, a French Suez Canal contractor, were in the Anglo-French Submarine Railway Company that conducted exploratory work on both sides of the Channel. On the English side a diameter Beaumont-English boring machine dug a pilot tunnel from Shakespeare Cliff. On the French side, a similar machine dug from Sangatte. The project was abandoned in May 1882, owing to British political and press campaigns asserting that a tunnel would compromise Britain's national defences. These early works were encountered more than a century later during the TML project.\n\nA 1907 film, \"Tunnelling the English Channel\" by pioneer filmmaker Georges Méliès, depicts King Edward VII and President Armand Fallières dreaming of building a tunnel under the English Channel.\n\nIn 1919, during the Paris Peace Conference, the British prime minister, David Lloyd George, repeatedly brought up the idea of a Channel tunnel as a way of reassuring France about British willingness to defend against another German attack. The French did not take the idea seriously, and nothing came of Lloyd George's proposal.\n\nIn the 1920s, Winston Churchill had advocated for the Channel Tunnel, using that exact name in an essay entitled \"Should Strategists Veto The Tunnel?\" The essay was published on 27 July 1924 in the \"Weekly Dispatch\", and argued vehemently against the idea that the tunnel could be used by a Continental enemy in an invasion of Britain. Churchill expressed his enthusiasm for the project again in an article for the \"Daily Mail\" on 12 February 1936, \"Why Not A Channel Tunnel?\"\n\nThere was another proposal in 1929, but nothing came of this discussion and the idea was shelved. Proponents estimated the construction cost at US$150 million. The engineers had addressed the concerns of both nations' military leaders by designing two sumps—one near the coast of each country—that could be flooded at will to block the tunnel. But this did not appease military leaders, and other concerns about hordes of tourists who would disrupt English life. Military fears continued during the Second World War. After the fall of France, as Britain prepared for an expected German invasion, a Royal Navy officer in the Directorate of Miscellaneous Weapons Development calculated that Hitler could use slave labour to build two Channel tunnels in 18 months. The estimate caused rumours that Germany had already begun digging.\n\nA British film from Gaumont Studios, \"The Tunnel\" (also called \"TransAtlantic Tunnel\"), was released in 1935 as a futuristic science fiction project concerning the creation of a transatlantic tunnel. It referred briefly to its protagonist, a Mr. McAllan, as having completed a British Channel tunnel successfully in 1940, five years into the future of the film's release.\n\nBy 1955, defence arguments had become less relevant due to the dominance of air power, and both the British and French governments supported technical and geological surveys. In 1958 the 1881 workings were cleared in preparation for a £100,000 geological survey by the Channel Tunnel Study Group. 30% of the funding came from the Channel Tunnel Co Ltd, the largest shareholder of which was the British Transport Commission, as successor to the South Eastern Railway. A detailed geological survey was carried out in 1964 and 1965.\n\nAlthough the two countries agreed to build a tunnel in 1964, the phase 1 initial studies and signing of a second agreement to cover phase 2 took until 1973. Construction work of this government-funded project to create two tunnels designed to accommodate car shuttle wagons on either side of a service tunnel started on both sides of the Channel in 1974.\n\nOn 20 January 1975, to the dismay of their French partners, the now-governing Labour Party in Britain cancelled the project due to uncertainty about EEC membership, doubling cost estimates and the general economic crisis at the time. By this time the British tunnel boring machine was ready and the Ministry of Transport was able to do a experimental drive. This short tunnel was reused as the starting and access point for tunnelling operations from the British side. The cancellation costs were estimated to be £17 million. On the French side, a tunnel boring machine had been installed underground in a stub tunnel. It lay there for 14 years until 1988, when it was sold, dismantled, refurbished and shipped to Turkey where it was used to drive the Moda tunnel for the Istanbul Sewerage Scheme, designed and supervised by British Civil Engineers Binnie & Partners, and officially opened by Margaret Thatcher in 1989.\n\nIn 1979, the \"Mouse-hole Project\" was suggested when the Conservatives came to power in Britain. The concept was a single-track rail tunnel with a service tunnel, but without shuttle terminals. The British government took no interest in funding the project, but the British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher did not object to a privately funded project, although she said she assumed it would be for cars rather than trains. In 1981, Thatcher and the French president François Mitterrand agreed to establish a working group to evaluate a privately funded project. In June 1982 the Franco-British study group favoured a twin tunnel to accommodate conventional trains and a vehicle shuttle service. In April 1985 promoters were invited to submit scheme proposals. Four submissions were shortlisted:\n\nBULLET::::- Channel Tunnel, a rail proposal based on the 1975 scheme presented by Channel Tunnel Group/France–Manche (CTG/F–M).\nBULLET::::- Eurobridge, a suspension bridge with a series of spans with a roadway in an enclosed tube.\nBULLET::::- Euroroute, a tunnel between artificial islands approached by bridges.\nBULLET::::- Channel Expressway, a large diameter road tunnels with mid-channel ventilation towers.\n\nThe cross-Channel ferry industry protested under the name \"Flexilink\". In 1975 there was no campaign protesting against a fixed link, with one of the largest ferry operators (Sealink) being state-owned. Flexilink continued rousing opposition throughout 1986 and 1987. Public opinion strongly favoured a drive-through tunnel, but concerns about ventilation, accident management and driver mesmerisation led to the only shortlisted rail submission, CTG/F-M, being awarded the project in January 1986. Reasons given for the selection included that it caused least disruption to shipping in the Channel, least environmental disruption, was the best protected against terrorism, and was the most likely to attract sufficient private finance.\n\nThe British \"Channel Tunnel Group\" consisted of two banks and five construction companies, while their French counterparts, \"France–Manche\", consisted of three banks and five construction companies. The role of the banks was to advise on financing and secure loan commitments. On 2 July 1985, the groups formed Channel Tunnel Group/France–Manche (CTG/F–M). Their submission to the British and French governments was drawn from the 1975 project, including 11 volumes and a substantial environmental impact statement.\n\nThe design and construction was done by the ten construction companies in the CTG/F-M group. The French terminal and boring from Sangatte was done by the five French construction companies in the joint venture group \"GIE Transmanche Construction\". The English Terminal and boring from Shakespeare Cliff was done by the five British construction companies in the \"Translink Joint Venture\". The two partnerships were linked by a bi-national project organisation called TransManche Link (TML). The \"Maître d'Oeuvre\" was a supervisory engineering body employed by Eurotunnel under the terms of the concession that monitored the project and reported to the governments and banks.\n\nIn France, with its long tradition of infrastructure investment, the project had widespread approval. The French National Assembly approved it unanimously in April 1987, and after a public inquiry, the Senate approved it unanimously in June. In Britain, select committees examined the proposal, making history by holding hearings away from Westminster, in Kent. In February 1987, the third reading of the Channel Tunnel Bill took place in the House of Commons, and passed by 94 votes to 22. The Channel Tunnel Act gained Royal assent and passed into law in July. Parliamentary support for the project came partly from provincial members of Parliament on the basis of promises of regional Eurostar through train services that never materialised; the promises were repeated in 1996 when the contract for construction of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link was awarded.\n\nThe tunnel is a build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) project with a concession.<ref name=\"Flyvbjerg p. 96/97\">Flyvbjerg et al. pp. 96–97</ref> TML would design and build the tunnel, but financing was through a separate legal entity, Eurotunnel. Eurotunnel absorbed CTG/F-M and signed a construction contract with TML, but the British and French governments controlled final engineering and safety decisions, now in the hands of the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority. The British and French governments gave Eurotunnel a 55-year operating concession (from 1987; extended by 10 years to 65 years in 1993) to repay loans and pay dividends. A Railway Usage Agreement was signed between Eurotunnel, British Rail and SNCF guaranteeing future revenue in exchange for the railways obtaining half of the tunnel's capacity.\n\nPrivate funding for such a complex infrastructure project was of unprecedented scale. An initial equity of £45 million was raised by CTG/F-M, increased by £206 million private institutional placement, £770 million was raised in a public share offer that included press and television advertisements, a syndicated bank loan and letter of credit arranged £5 billion. Privately financed, the total investment costs at 1985 prices were £2.6 billion. At the 1994 completion actual costs were, in 1985 prices, £4.65 billion: an 80% cost overrun. The cost overrun was partly due to enhanced safety, security, and environmental demands. Financing costs were 140% higher than forecast.\n\nWorking from both the English side and the French side of the Channel, eleven tunnel boring machines or TBMs cut through chalk marl to construct two rail tunnels and a service tunnel. The vehicle shuttle terminals are at Cheriton (part of Folkestone) and Coquelles, and are connected to the English M20 and French A16 motorways respectively.\n\nTunnelling commenced in 1988, and the tunnel began operating in 1994. In 1985 prices, the total construction cost was £4.65 billion (equivalent to £ billion in 2015), an 80% cost overrun. At the peak of construction 15,000 people were employed with daily expenditure over £3 million. Ten workers, eight of them British, were killed during construction between 1987 and 1993, most in the first few months of boring.\n\nA two-inch (50-mm) diameter pilot hole allowed the service tunnel to break through without ceremony on 30 October 1990. On 1 December 1990, Englishman Graham Fagg and Frenchman Phillippe Cozette broke through the service tunnel with the media watching. Eurotunnel completed the tunnel on time. (A BBC TV television commentator called Graham Fagg \"the first man to cross the Channel by land for 8000 years\".)\n\nThe tunnel was officially opened, one year later than originally planned, by Queen Elizabeth II and the French president, François Mitterrand, in a ceremony held in Calais on 6 May 1994. The Queen travelled through the tunnel to Calais on a Eurostar train, which stopped nose to nose with the train that carried President Mitterrand from Paris. Following the ceremony President Mitterrand and the Queen travelled on Le Shuttle to a similar ceremony in Folkestone. A full public service did not start for several months. The first freight train, however, ran on 1 June 1994 and carried Rover and Mini cars being exported to Italy.\n\nThe Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL), now called High Speed 1, runs from St Pancras railway station in London to the tunnel portal at Folkestone in Kent. It cost £5.8 billion. On 16 September 2003 the prime minister, Tony Blair, opened the first section of High Speed 1, from Folkestone to north Kent. On 6 November 2007 the Queen officially opened High Speed 1 and St Pancras International station, replacing the original slower link to Waterloo International railway station. High Speed 1 trains travel at up to , the journey from London to Paris taking 2 hours 15 minutes, to Brussels 1 hour 51 minutes.\n\nIn 1994, the American Society of Civil Engineers elected the tunnel as one of the seven modern Wonders of the World. In 1995, the American magazine \"Popular Mechanics\" published the results.\n\nOpening was phased for various services offered as the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority, the IGC, gave permission for various services to begin at several dates over the period 1994/1995 but start up dates were a few days later.\n\n+Channel Tunnel start of traffic dates\n!Traffic flow\n!data-sort-type=date Start of service\n\nSurveying undertaken in the 20 years before construction confirmed earlier speculations that a tunnel could be bored through a chalk marl stratum. The chalk marl is conducive to tunnelling, with impermeability, ease of excavation and strength. The chalk marl runs along the entire length of the English side of the tunnel, but on the French side a length of has variable and difficult geology. The tunnel consists of three bores: two diameter rail tunnels, apart, in length with a diameter service tunnel in between. The three bores are connected by cross-passages and piston relief ducts. The service tunnel was used as a pilot tunnel, boring ahead of the main tunnels to determine the conditions. English access was provided at Shakespeare Cliff, French access from a shaft at Sangatte. The French side used five tunnel boring machines (TBMs), the English side six. The service tunnel uses Service Tunnel Transport System (STTS) and Light Service Tunnel Vehicles (LADOGS). Fire safety was a critical design issue.\n\nBetween the portals at Beussingue and Castle Hill the tunnel is long, with under land on the French side and on the UK side, and under sea. It is the third-longest rail tunnel in the world, behind the Gotthard Base Tunnel in Switzerland and the Seikan Tunnel in Japan, but with the longest under-sea section. The average depth is below the seabed. On the UK side, of the expected of spoil approximately was used for fill at the terminal site, and the remainder was deposited at Lower Shakespeare Cliff behind a seawall, reclaiming of land. This land was then made into the Samphire Hoe Country Park. Environmental impact assessment did not identify any major risks for the project, and further studies into safety, noise, and air pollution were overall positive. However, environmental objections were raised over a high-speed link to London.\n\nSuccessful tunnelling required a sound understanding of the topography and geology and the selection of the best rock strata through which to dig. The geology of this site generally consists of northeasterly dipping Cretaceous strata, part of the northern limb of the Wealden-Boulonnais dome. Characteristics include:\n\nBULLET::::- Continuous chalk on the cliffs on either side of the Channel containing no major faulting, as observed by Verstegan in 1605.\nBULLET::::- Four geological strata, marine sediments laid down 90–100 million years ago; pervious upper and middle chalk above slightly pervious lower chalk and finally impermeable Gault Clay. A sandy stratum, glauconitic marl (tortia), is in between the chalk marl and gault clay.\nBULLET::::- A layer of chalk marl (French: \"craie bleue\") in the lower third of the lower chalk appeared to present the best tunnelling medium. The chalk has a clay content of 30–40% providing impermeability to groundwater yet relatively easy excavation with strength allowing minimal support. Ideally the tunnel would be bored in the bottom of the chalk marl, allowing water inflow from fractures and joints to be minimised, but above the gault clay that would increase stress on the tunnel lining and swell and soften when wet.\n\nOn the English side, the stratum dip is less than 5°; on the French side this increases to 20°. Jointing and faulting are present on both sides. On the English side, only minor faults of displacement less than exist; on the French side, displacements of up to are present owing to the Quenocs anticlinal fold. The faults are of limited width, filled with calcite, pyrite and remoulded clay. The increased dip and faulting restricted the selection of route on the French side. To avoid confusion, microfossil assemblages were used to classify the chalk marl. On the French side, particularly near the coast, the chalk was harder, more brittle and more fractured than on the English side. This led to the adoption of different tunnelling techniques on the two sides.\n\nThe Quaternary undersea valley Fosse Dangaered, and Castle Hill landslip at the English portal, caused concerns. Identified by the 1964–65 geophysical survey, the Fosse Dangaered is an infilled valley system extending below the seabed, south of the tunnel route in mid-channel. A 1986 survey showed that a tributary crossed the path of the tunnel, and so the tunnel route was made as far north and deep as possible. The English terminal had to be located in the Castle Hill landslip, which consists of displaced and tipping blocks of lower chalk, glauconitic marl and gault debris. Thus the area was stabilised by buttressing and inserting drainage adits. The service tunnel acted as a pilot preceding the main ones, so that the geology, areas of crushed rock, and zones of high water inflow could be predicted. Exploratory probing took place in the service tunnel, in the form of extensive forward probing, vertical downward probes and sideways probing.\n\nMarine soundings and samplings by Thomé de Gamond were carried out during 1833–67, establishing the seabed depth at a maximum of and the continuity of geological strata (layers). Surveying continued over many years, with 166 marine and 70 land-deep boreholes being drilled and over 4,000-line-kilometres of marine geophysical survey completed. Surveys were undertaken in 1958–1959, 1964–1965, 1972–1974 and 1986–1988.\n\nThe surveying in 1958–59 catered for immersed tube and bridge designs as well as a bored tunnel, and thus a wide area was investigated. At this time, marine geophysics surveying for engineering projects was in its infancy, with poor positioning and resolution from seismic profiling. The 1964–65 surveys concentrated on a northerly route that left the English coast at Dover harbour; using 70 boreholes, an area of deeply weathered rock with high permeability was located just south of Dover harbour.\n\nGiven the previous survey results and access constraints, a more southerly route was investigated in the 1972–73 survey, and the route was confirmed to be feasible. Information for the tunnelling project also came from work before the 1975 cancellation. On the French side at Sangatte, a deep shaft with adits was made. On the English side at Shakespeare Cliff, the government allowed of diameter tunnel to be driven. The actual tunnel alignment, method of excavation and support were essentially the same as the 1975 attempt. In the 1986–87 survey, previous findings were reinforced, and the characteristics of the gault clay and the tunnelling medium (chalk marl that made up 85% of the route) were investigated. Geophysical techniques from the oil industry were employed.\n\nTunnelling was a major engineering challenge, with the only precedent being the undersea Seikan Tunnel in Japan, which opened in 1988. A serious health and safety hazard with building tunnels underwater is major water inflow due to the pressure from the sea above, under weak ground conditions. The tunnel also had the challenge of time: being privately funded, early financial return was paramount.\n\nThe objective was to construct two rail tunnels, apart, in length; a service tunnel between the two main ones; pairs of cross-passages linking the rail tunnels to the service one at spacing; piston relief ducts in diameter connecting the rail tunnels apart; two undersea crossover caverns to connect the rail tunnels, with the service tunnel always preceding the main ones by at least to ascertain the ground conditions. There was plenty of experience with excavating through chalk in the mining industry, while the undersea crossover caverns were a complex engineering problem. The French one was based on the Mount Baker Ridge freeway tunnel in Seattle; the UK cavern was dug from the service tunnel ahead of the main ones, to avoid delay.\n\nPrecast segmental linings in the main TBM drives were used, but two different solutions were used. On the French side, neoprene and grout sealed bolted linings made of cast iron or high-strength reinforced concrete were used; on the English side, the main requirement was for speed so bolting of cast-iron lining segments was only carried out in areas of poor geology. In the UK rail tunnels, eight lining segments plus a key segment were used; in the French side, five segments plus a key. On the French side, a diameter deep grout-curtained shaft at Sangatte was used for access. On the English side, a marshalling area was below the top of Shakespeare Cliff, the New Austrian Tunnelling method (NATM) was first applied in the chalk marl here. On the English side, the land tunnels were driven from Shakespeare Cliff – same place as the marine tunnels – not from Folkestone. The platform at the base of the cliff was not large enough for all of the drives and, despite environmental objections, tunnel spoil was placed behind a reinforced concrete seawall, on condition of placing the chalk in an enclosed lagoon, to avoid wide dispersal of chalk fines. Owing to limited space, the precast lining factory was on the Isle of Grain in the Thames estuary, which used Scottish granite aggregate delivered by ship from the Foster Yeoman coastal super quarry at Glensanda in Loch Linnhe on the west coast of Scotland.\n\nOn the French side, owing to the greater permeability to water, earth pressure balance TBMs with open and closed modes were used. The TBMs were of a closed nature during the initial , but then operated as open, boring through the chalk marl stratum. This minimised the impact to the ground, allowed high water pressures to be withstood and it also alleviated the need to grout ahead of the tunnel. The French effort required five TBMs: two main marine machines, one main land machine (the short land drives of allowed one TBM to complete the first drive then reverse direction and complete the other), and two service tunnel machines. On the English side, the simpler geology allowed faster open-faced TBMs. Six machines were used; all commenced digging from Shakespeare Cliff, three marine-bound and three for the land tunnels. Towards the completion of the undersea drives, the UK TBMs were driven steeply downwards and buried clear of the tunnel. These buried TBMs were then used to provide an electrical earth. The French TBMs then completed the tunnel and were dismantled. A gauge railway was used on the English side during construction.\n\nIn contrast to the English machines, which were given alphanumeric names, the French tunnelling machines were all named after women: Brigitte, Europa, Catherine, Virginie, Pascaline, Séverine.\n\nAt the end of the tunnelling, one machine was on display at the side of the M20 motorway in Folkestone until Eurotunnel sold it on eBay for £39,999 to a scrap metal merchant. Another machine (T4 \"Virginie\") still survives on the French side, adjacent to Junction 41 on the A16, in the middle of the D243E3/D243E4 roundabout. On it are the words \"hommage aux bâtisseurs du tunnel\", meaning \"tribute to the builders of the tunnel\".\n\nThe 11 TBM's were designed and manufactured through a joint venture between Robbins Company of Kent, Markham & Co. and Kawasaki Heavy Industries.\n\nThe loading gauge height is .\n\nThere are three communication systems: concession radio (CR) for mobile vehicles and personnel within Eurotunnel's Concession (terminals, tunnels, coastal shafts); track-to-train radio (TTR) for secure speech and data between trains and the railway control centre; Shuttle internal radio (SIR) for communication between shuttle crew and to passengers over car radios. This service was discontinued within one year of opening because of drivers' difficulty setting their radios to the correct frequency (88.8 MHz).\n\nPower is delivered to the locomotives via an overhead line (catenary) at . with a normal overhead clearance of . All tunnel services run on electricity, shared equally from English and French sources. There are two sub-stations fed at 400 kV at each terminal, but in an emergency the tunnel's lighting (about 20,000 light fittings) and plant can be powered solely from either England or France.\n\nThe traditional railway south of London uses a 750 V DC third rail to deliver electricity, but since the opening of High Speed 1 there is no longer any need for tunnel trains to use the third rail system. High Speed 1, the tunnel and the LGV Nord all have power provided via overhead catenary at 25 kV 50 Hz. The railways on \"classic\" lines in Belgium are also electrified by overhead wires, but at 3000 V DC.\n\nA cab signalling system gives information directly to train drivers on a display. There is a train protection system that stops the train if the speed exceeds that indicated on the in-cab display. TVM430, as used on LGV Nord and High Speed 1, is used in the tunnel. The TVM signalling is interconnected with the signalling on the high-speed lines either side, allowing trains to enter and exit the tunnel system without stopping. The maximum speed is .\n\nSignalling in the tunnel is coordinated from two control centres: The main control centre at the Folkestone terminal, and a backup at the Calais terminal, which is staffed at all times and can take over all operations in the event of a breakdown or emergency.\n\nConventional ballasted tunnel-track was ruled out owing to the difficulty of maintenance and lack of stability and precision. The Sonneville International Corporation's track system was chosen based on reliability and cost-effectiveness based on good performance in Swiss tunnels and worldwide. The type of track used is known as Low Vibration Track (LVT). Like ballasted track the LVT is of the free floating type, held in place by gravity and friction. Reinforced concrete blocks of 100 kg support the rails every 60 cm and are held by 12 mm thick closed cell polymer foam pads placed at the bottom of rubber boots. The latter separate the blocks' mass movements from the lean encasement concrete. Ballastless track provides extra overhead clearance necessary for the passage of larger trains. The corrugated rubber walls of the boots add a degree of isolation of horizontal wheel-rail vibrations, and are insulators of the track signal circuit in the humid tunnel environment. UIC60 (60 kg/m) rails of 900A grade rest on rail pads, which fit the RN/Sonneville bolted dual leaf-springs. The rails, LVT-blocks and their boots with pads were assembled outside the tunnel, in a fully automated process developed by the LVT inventor, Mr. Roger Sonneville. About 334,000 Sonneville blocks were made on the Sangatte site.\n\nMaintenance activities are less than projected. Initially the rails were ground on a yearly basis or after approximately 100MGT of traffic. Ride quality continues to be noticeably smooth and of low noise. Maintenance is facilitated by the existence of two tunnel junctions or crossover facilities, allowing for two-way operation in each of the six tunnel segments thereby created, and thus providing safe access for maintenance of one isolated tunnel segment at a time. The two crossovers are the largest artificial undersea caverns ever built; 150 m long, 10 m high and 18 m wide. The English crossover is from Shakespeare Cliff, and the French crossover is from Sangatte.\n\nThe ventilation system maintains the air pressure in the service tunnel higher than in the rail tunnels, so that in the event of a fire, smoke does not enter the service tunnel from the rail tunnels. Two cooling water pipes in each rail tunnel circulate chilled water to remove heat generated by the rail traffic. Pumping stations remove water in the tunnels from rain, seepage, and so on.\n\nInitially 38 Le Shuttle locomotives were commissioned, with one at each end of a shuttle train. The shuttles have two separate halves: single and double deck. Each half has two loading/unloading wagons and 12 carrier wagons. Eurotunnel's original order was for nine tourist shuttles.\n\nHeavy goods vehicle (HGV) shuttles also have two halves, with each half containing one loading wagon, one unloading wagon and 14 carrier wagons. There is a club car behind the leading locomotive. Eurotunnel originally ordered six HGV shuttle rakes.\n\nForty-six Class 92 locomotives for hauling freight trains and overnight passenger trains (the Nightstar project, which was abandoned) were commissioned, running on both overhead AC and third-rail DC power. However, RFF does not let these run on French railways, so there are plans to certify Alstom Prima II locomotives for use in the tunnel.\n\nThirty-one Eurostar trains, based on the French TGV, built to UK loading gauge with many modifications for safety within the tunnel, were commissioned, with ownership split between British Rail, French national railways (SNCF) and Belgian national railways (SNCB). British Rail ordered seven more for services north of London. Around 2010, Eurostar ordered ten trains from Siemens based on its Velaro product.\n\nGermany (DB) has since around 2005 tried to get permission to run train services to London. At the end of 2009, extensive fire-proofing requirements were dropped and DB received permission to run German Intercity-Express (ICE) test trains through the tunnel. In June 2013 DB was granted access to the tunnel. In June 2014 the plans were shelved, because there are special safety rules that requires custom made trains (DB calls them Class 407).\n\nDiesel locomotives for rescue and shunting work are Eurotunnel Class 0001 and Eurotunnel Class 0031.\n\nThe following chart presents the estimated number of passengers and tonnes of freight, respectively, annually transported through the Channel Tunnel since 1994, in millions:\n\nTransport services offered by the tunnel are as follows:\n\nBULLET::::- Eurotunnel Le Shuttle roll-on roll-off shuttle service for road vehicles and their drivers and passengers,\nBULLET::::- Eurostar passenger trains,\nBULLET::::- through freight trains.\n\nBoth the freight and passenger traffic forecasts that led to the construction of the tunnel were overestimated; in particular, Eurotunnel's commissioned forecasts were over-predictions. Although the captured share of Channel crossings was forecast correctly, high competition (especially from budget airlines which expanded rapidly in the 1990s and 2000s) and reduced tariffs led to low revenue. Overall cross-Channel traffic was overestimated.\n\nWith the EU's liberalisation of international rail services, the tunnel and High Speed 1 have been open to competition since 2010. There have been a number of operators interested in running trains through the tunnel and along High Speed 1 to London. In June 2013, after several years, DB obtained a licence to operate Frankfurt – London trains, not expected to run before 2016 because of delivery delays of the custom-made trains.\n\nCross-tunnel passenger traffic volumes peaked at 18.4 million in 1998, dropped to 14.9 million in 2003 and has increased substantially since then.\n\nAt the time of the decision about building the tunnel, 15.9 million passengers were predicted for Eurostar trains in the opening year. In 1995, the first full year, actual numbers were a little over 2.9 million, growing to 7.1 million in 2000, then dropping to 6.3 million in 2003. Eurostar was initially limited by the lack of a high-speed connection on the British side. After the completion of High Speed 1 in two stages in 2003 and 2007, traffic increased. In 2008, Eurostar carried 9,113,371 passengers, a 10% increase over the previous year, despite traffic limitations due to the 2008 Channel Tunnel fire. Eurostar passenger numbers continued to increase.\n\n!rowspan=\"2\"  Year\n!colspan=\"3\"  Passengers transported\n! Eurostar(\"actual ticket sales\")\n! Passenger Shuttles(\"estimated, millions\")\n! Total(\"estimated, millions\")\n2018\n11,000,000\n\nonly passengers taking Eurostar to cross the Channel\n\nFreight volumes have been erratic, with a major decrease during 1997 due to a closure caused by a fire in a freight shuttle. Freight crossings increased over the period, indicating the substitutability of the tunnel by sea crossings. The tunnel has achieved a market share close to or above Eurotunnel's 1980s predictions but Eurotunnel's 1990 and 1994 predictions were overestimates.\n\nFor through freight trains, the first year prediction was 7.2 million gross tonnes; the actual 1995 figure was 1.3M gross tonnes. Through freight volumes peaked in 1998 at 3.1M tonnes. This fell back to 1.21M tonnes in 2007, increasing slightly to 1.24M tonnes in 2008. Together with that carried on freight shuttles, freight growth has occurred since opening, with 6.4M tonnes carried in 1995, 18.4M tonnes recorded in 2003 and 19.6M tonnes in 2007. Numbers fell back in the wake of the 2008 fire.\n\n!rowspan=\"2\"  Year\n!colspan=\"3\"  Freight transported (\"tonnes\")\n! through freight trains\n! Eurotunnel Truck Shuttles (\"\")\n! Total (\"est.\")\n1,301,460\n\nEurotunnel's freight subsidiary is Europorte 2. In September 2006 EWS, the UK's largest rail freight operator, announced that owing to cessation of UK-French government subsidies of £52 million per annum to cover the tunnel \"Minimum User Charge\" (a subsidy of around £13,000 per train, at a traffic level of 4,000 trains per annum), freight trains would stop running after 30 November.\n\nShares in Eurotunnel were issued at £3.50 per share on 9 December 1987. By mid-1989 the price had risen to £11.00. Delays and cost overruns led to the price dropping; during demonstration runs in October 1994 it reached an all-time low. Eurotunnel suspended payment on its debt in September 1995 to avoid bankruptcy. In December 1997 the British and French governments extended Eurotunnel's operating concession by 34 years, to 2086. Financial restructuring of Eurotunnel occurred in mid-1998, reducing debt and financial charges. Despite the restructuring, \"The Economist\" reported in 1998 that to break even Eurotunnel would have to increase fares, traffic and market share for sustainability. A cost benefit analysis of the tunnel indicated that there were few impacts on the wider economy and few developments associated with the project, and that the British economy would have been better off if it had not been constructed.\n\nUnder the terms of the Concession, Eurotunnel was obliged to investigate a cross-Channel road tunnel. In December 1999 road and rail tunnel proposals were presented to the British and French governments, but it was stressed that there was not enough demand for a second tunnel. A three-way treaty between the United Kingdom, France and Belgium governs border controls, with the establishment of \"control zones\" wherein the officers of the other nation may exercise limited customs and law enforcement powers. For most purposes these are at either end of the tunnel, with the French border controls on the UK side of the tunnel and vice versa. For some city-to-city trains, the train is a control zone. A binational emergency plan coordinates UK and French emergency activities.\n\nIn 1999 Eurostar posted its first net profit, having made a loss of £925m in 1995. In 2005 Eurotunnel was described as being in a serious situation. In 2013, operating profits rose 4 per cent from 2012, to £54 million.\n\nThere is a need for full passport controls, since this is the border between the Schengen Area and the Common Travel Area. There are juxtaposed controls, meaning that passports are checked before boarding first by officials belonging to departing country and then officials of the destination country. These are placed only at the main Eurostar stations: French officials operate at London St Pancras, Ebbsfleet International and Ashford International, while British officials operate at Calais-Fréthun, Lille-Europe, Brussels-South and Paris-Gare du Nord. There are security checks before boarding as well. For the shuttle road-vehicle trains, there are juxtaposed passport controls before boarding the trains.\n\nFor Eurostar trains travelling from places south of Paris, there is no passport and security check before departure, and those trains must stop in Lille at least 30 minutes to allow all passengers to be checked. No checks are done on board. There have been plans for services from Amsterdam, Frankfurt and Cologne to London, but a major reason to cancel them was the need for a stop in Lille.\n\nThe reason for juxtaposed controls is a wish to prevent illegal immigration before reaching British soil, and because a check of all passengers on a train can take 30 minutes, which creates long queues if done at arrival.\n\nUnder a planned legislation which was published on 12 February 2019, it will give the UK and France time to renegotiate the terms under which the railway service operates. Trains will be permitted to use the Channel Tunnel for three months if the UK leaves the EU without a deal, under a proposed European Commission law.\n\nThe terminals' sites are at Cheriton (near Folkestone in the United Kingdom) and Coquelles (near Calais in France). The terminals are designed to transfer vehicles from the motorway onto trains at a rate of 700 cars and 113 heavy vehicles per hour. The UK site uses the M20 motorway for access. The terminals are organised with the frontier controls juxtaposed with the entry to the system to allow travellers to go onto the motorway at the destination country immediately after leaving the shuttle. The area of the UK site was severely constrained and the design was challenging.\n\nThe French layout was achieved more easily. To achieve design output, the shuttles accept cars on double-deck wagons; for flexibility, ramps were placed inside the shuttles to provide access to the top decks. At Folkestone there are of main-line track, 45 turnouts and eight platforms. At Calais there are of track and 44 turnouts. At the terminals the shuttle trains traverse a figure eight to reduce uneven wear on the wheels. There is a freight marshalling yard west of Cheriton at Dollands Moor Freight Yard.\n\nA 1996 report from the European Commission predicted that Kent and Nord-Pas de Calais had to face increased traffic volumes due to general growth of cross-Channel traffic and traffic attracted by the tunnel. In Kent, a high-speed rail line to London would transfer traffic from road to rail. Kent's regional development would benefit from the tunnel, but being so close to London restricts the benefits. Gains are in the traditional industries and are largely dependent on the development of Ashford International passenger station, without which Kent would be totally dependent on London's expansion. Nord-Pas-de-Calais enjoys a strong internal symbolic effect of the Tunnel which results in significant gains in manufacturing.\n\nThe removal of a bottleneck by means like the tunnel does not necessarily induce economic gains in all adjacent regions. The image of a region being connected to the European high-speed transport and active political response are more important for regional economic development. Some small-medium enterprises located in the immediate vicinity of the terminal have used the opportunity to re-brand the profile of their business with positive effect, such as \"The New Inn\" at Etchinghill which was able to commercially exploit its unique selling point as being 'the closest pub to the Channel Tunnel'. Tunnel-induced regional development is small compared to general economic growth. The South East of England is likely to benefit developmentally and socially from faster and cheaper transport to continental Europe, but the benefits are unlikely to be equally distributed throughout the region. The overall environmental impact is almost certainly negative.\n\nSince the opening of the tunnel, small positive impacts on the wider economy have been felt, but it is difficult to identify major economic successes directly attributed to the tunnel.<ref name=\"Flyvbjerg p. 68/69\">Flyvbjerg et al. p. 68–69</ref> The Eurotunnel does operate profitably, offering an alternative transportation mode unaffected by poor weather. High costs of construction did delay profitability, however, and companies involved in the tunnel's construction and operation early in operation relied on government aid to deal with debts amounted.\n\nIllegal immigrants and would-be asylum seekers have used the tunnel to attempt to enter Britain. By 1997, the problem had attracted international press attention, and by 1999, the French Red Cross opened the first migrant centre at Sangatte, using a warehouse once used for tunnel construction; by 2002, it housed up to 1,500 people at a time, most of them trying to get to the UK. In 2001, most came from Afghanistan, Iraq, and Iran, but African countries were also represented.\n\nEurotunnel, the company that operates the crossing, said that more than 37,000 migrants were intercepted between January and July 2015. Approximately 3,000 migrants, mainly from Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sudan and Afghanistan, were living in the temporary camps erected in Calais at the time of an official count in July 2015. An estimated 3,000 to 5,000 migrants were waiting in Calais for a chance to get to England.\n\nBritain and France operate a system of juxtaposed controls on immigration and customs, where investigations happen before travel. France is part of the Schengen Agreement, which has largely abolished border checks between member nations, but the United Kingdom is not.\n\nMost illegal immigrants and would-be asylum seekers who got into Britain found some way to ride a freight train. Trucks are loaded onto freight trains. In a few instances, groups of migrants were able to stow away in the cargo area of a tanker truck carrying liquid chocolate and managed to survive, though they did not enter the UK in one attempt. Although the facilities were fenced, airtight security was deemed impossible; migrants would even jump from bridges onto moving trains. In several incidents people were injured during the crossing; others tampered with railway equipment, causing delays and requiring repairs. Eurotunnel said it was losing £5m per month because of the problem.\n\nIn 2001 and 2002, several riots broke out at Sangatte, and groups of migrants (up to 550 in a December 2001 incident) stormed the fences and attempted to enter \"en masse\".\n\nOther migrants use the Eurostar passenger train. They arrive as legitimate Eurostar passengers, but without proper entry papers.\n\nLocal authorities in both France and the UK called for the closure of the Sangatte migrant camp, and Eurotunnel twice sought an injunction against the centre. The United Kingdom blamed France for allowing Sangatte to open, and France blamed both the UK for its lax asylum rules, and the EU for not having a uniform immigration policy. The \"cause célèbre\" nature of the problem even included journalists detained as they followed migrants onto railway property.\n\nIn 2002, after the European Commission told France that it was in breach of European Union rules on the free transfer of goods because of the delays and closures as a result of its poor security, a double fence was built at a cost of £5 million, reducing the numbers of migrants detected each week reaching Britain on goods trains from 250 to almost none. Other measures included CCTV cameras and increased police patrols. At the end of 2002, the Sangatte centre was closed after the UK agreed to absorb some migrants.\n\nOn 23 and 30 June 2015, striking workers associated with MyFerryLink damaged the sections of track by burning car tires, leading to all trains being cancelled and a backlog of vehicles. Hundreds seeking to reach Britain made use of the situation to attempt to stow away inside and underneath transport trucks destined for the United Kingdom. Extra security measures included a £2 million upgrade of detection technology, £1 million extra for dog searches, and £12 million (over three years) towards a joint fund with France for security surrounding the Port of Calais.\n\nMigrants take great risks to evade security precautions. In 2002, a dozen migrants died in crossing attempts. In the two months from June to July 2015, ten migrants died near the French tunnel terminal, during a period when 1,500 attempts to evade security precautions were being made each day.\n\nOn 6 July 2015, a migrant died while attempting to climb onto a freight train while trying to reach Britain from the French side of the Channel. The previous month an Eritrean man was killed under similar circumstances.\n\nDuring the night of 28 July 2015, one person, aged 25–30, was found dead after a night in which 1,500–2,000 migrants had attempted to enter the Eurotunnel terminal.\n\nOn 4 August 2015, a Sudanese migrant walked nearly the entire length of one of the tunnels. He was arrested close to the British side, after having walked about through the tunnel.\n\nOn 20 June 2017, a van driver was killed when migrants stopped vehicles on the A16 autoroute with a tree trunk, in order to stow away in the cargo area. The van, registered in Poland, hit a lorry and burst into flames, killing the van driver. Nine migrants from Eritrea have been arrested in connection with this incident.\n\nThere have been three fires in the tunnel, all on the heavy goods vehicle (HGV) shuttles, that were significant enough to close the tunnel, as well as other more minor incidents.\n\nOn 9 December 1994, during an \"invitation only\" testing phase, a fire broke out in a Ford Escort car whilst its owner was loading it onto the upper deck of a tourist shuttle. The fire started at about 10:00, with the shuttle train stationary in the Folkestone terminal and was put out about 40 minutes later with no passenger injuries.\n\nOn 18 November 1996, a fire broke out on an HGV shuttle wagon in the tunnel, but nobody was seriously hurt. The exact cause is unknown, although it was neither a Eurotunnel equipment nor rolling stock problem; it may have been due to arson of a heavy goods vehicle. It is estimated that the heart of the fire reached , with the tunnel severely damaged over , with some affected to some extent. Full operation recommenced six months after the fire.\n\nOn 21 August 2006, the tunnel was closed for several hours when a truck on an HGV shuttle train caught fire.\n\nOn 11 September 2008, a fire occurred in the Channel Tunnel at 13:57 GMT. The incident started on an HGV shuttle train travelling towards France. The event occurred from the French entrance to the tunnel. No one was killed but several people were taken to hospitals suffering from smoke inhalation, and minor cuts and bruises. The tunnel was closed to all traffic, with the undamaged South Tunnel reopening for limited services two days later. Full service resumed on 9 February 2009 after repairs costing €60 million.\n\nOn 29 November 2012, the tunnel was closed for several hours after a truck on an HGV shuttle caught fire.\n\nOn 17 January 2015, both tunnels were closed following a lorry fire which filled the midsection of Running Tunnel North with smoke. Eurostar cancelled all services. The shuttle train had been heading from Folkestone to Coquelles and stopped adjacent to cross-passage CP 4418 just before 12:30 UTC. Thirty-eight passengers and four members of Eurotunnel staff were evacuated into the service tunnel, and then transported to France using special STTS road vehicles in the Service Tunnel. The passengers and crew were taken to the Eurotunnel Fire/Emergency Management Centre close to the French portal.\n\nOn the night of 19/20 February 1996, about 1,000 passengers became trapped in the Channel Tunnel when Eurostar trains from London broke down owing to failures of electronic circuits caused by snow and ice being deposited and then melting on the circuit boards.\n\nOn 3 August 2007, an electrical failure lasting six hours caused passengers to be trapped in the tunnel on a shuttle.\n\nOn the evening of 18 December 2009, during the December 2009 European snowfall, five London-bound Eurostar trains failed inside the tunnel, trapping 2,000 passengers for approximately 16 hours, during the coldest temperatures in eight years. A Eurotunnel spokesperson explained that snow had evaded the train's winterisation shields, and the transition from cold air outside to the tunnel's warm atmosphere had melted the snow, resulting in electrical failures. One train was turned back before reaching the tunnel; two trains were hauled out of the tunnel by Eurotunnel Class 0001 diesel locomotives. The blocking of the tunnel led to the implementation of Operation Stack, the transformation of the M20 motorway into a linear car park.\n\nThe occasion was the first time that a Eurostar train was evacuated inside the tunnel; the failing of four at once was described as \"unprecedented\". The Channel Tunnel reopened the following morning. Nirj Deva, Member of the European Parliament for South East England, had called for Eurostar chief executive Richard Brown to resign over the incidents. An independent report by Christopher Garnett (former CEO of Great North Eastern Railway) and Claude Gressier (a French transport expert) on the 18/19 December 2009 incidents was issued in February 2010, making 21 recommendations.\n\nOn 7 January 2010, a Brussels–London Eurostar broke down in the tunnel. The train had 236 passengers on board and was towed to Ashford; other trains that had not yet reached the tunnel were turned back.\n\nThe Channel Tunnel Safety Authority is responsible for some aspects of safety regulation in the tunnel; it reports to the Intergovernmental Commission (IGC).\n\nThe service tunnel is used for access to technical equipment in cross-passages and equipment rooms, to provide fresh-air ventilation and for emergency evacuation. The Service Tunnel Transport System (STTS) allows fast access to all areas of the tunnel. The service vehicles are rubber-tyred with a buried wire guidance system. The 24 STTS vehicles are used mainly for maintenance but also for firefighting and in emergencies. \"Pods\" with different purposes, up to a payload of , are inserted into the side of the vehicles. The vehicles cannot turn around within the tunnel, and are driven from either end. The maximum speed is when the steering is locked. A fleet of 15 Light Service Tunnel Vehicles (LADOGS) was introduced to supplement the STTSs. The LADOGS have a short wheelbase with a turning circle, allowing two-point turns within the service tunnel. Steering cannot be locked like the STTS vehicles, and maximum speed is . Pods up to can be loaded onto the rear of the vehicles. Drivers in the tunnel sit on the right, and the vehicles drive on the left. Owing to the risk of French personnel driving on their native right side of the road, sensors in the vehicles alert the driver if the vehicle strays to the right side.\n\nThe three tunnels contain of air that needs to be conditioned for comfort and safety. Air is supplied from ventilation buildings at Shakespeare Cliff and Sangatte, with each building capable of providing 100% standby capacity. Supplementary ventilation also exists on either side of the tunnel. In the event of a fire, ventilation is used to keep smoke out of the service tunnel and move smoke in one direction in the main tunnel to give passengers clean air. The tunnel was the first main-line railway tunnel to have special cooling equipment. Heat is generated from traction equipment and drag. The design limit was set at , using a mechanical cooling system with refrigeration plants on both sides that run chilled water circulating in pipes within the tunnel.\n\nTrains travelling at high speed create piston-effect pressure changes that can affect passenger comfort, ventilation systems, tunnel doors, fans and the structure of the trains, and which drag on the trains. Piston relief ducts of diameter were chosen to solve the problem, with 4 ducts per kilometre to give close to optimum results. Unfortunately this design led to unacceptable lateral forces on the trains so a reduction in train speed was required and restrictors were installed in the ducts.\n\nThe safety issue of a possible fire on a passenger-vehicle shuttle garnered much attention, with Eurotunnel noting that fire was the risk attracting the most attention in a 1994 safety case for three reasons: the opposition of ferry companies to passengers being allowed to remain with their cars; Home Office statistics indicating that car fires had doubled in ten years; and the long length of the tunnel. Eurotunnel commissioned the UK Fire Research Station – now part of the Building Research Establishment – to give reports of vehicle fires, and liaised with Kent Fire Brigade to gather vehicle fire statistics over one year. Fire tests took place at the French Mines Research Establishment with a mock wagon used to investigate how cars burned. The wagon door systems are designed to withstand fire inside the wagon for 30 minutes, longer than the transit time of 27 minutes. Wagon air conditioning units help to purge dangerous fumes from inside the wagon before travel. Each wagon has a fire detection and extinguishing system, with sensing of ions or ultraviolet radiation, smoke and gases that can trigger halon gas to quench a fire. Since the HGV wagons are not covered, fire sensors are located on the loading wagon and in the tunnel. A water main in the service tunnel provides water to the main tunnels at intervals. The ventilation system can control smoke movement. Special arrival sidings accept a train that is on fire, as the train is not allowed to stop whilst on fire in the tunnel, unless continuing its journey would lead to a worse outcome. Eurotunnel has banned a wide range of hazardous goods from travelling in the tunnel. Two STTS (Service Tunnel Transportation System) vehicles with firefighting pods are on duty at all times, with a maximum delay of 10 minutes before they reach a burning train.\n\nIn 1999, the \"Kosovo Train for Life\" passed through the tunnel en route to Pristina, in Kosovo.\n\nIn 2009, former F1 racing champion John Surtees drove a Ginetta G50 EV electric sports car prototype from England to France, using the service tunnel, as part of a charity event. He was required to keep to the speed limit. To celebrate the 2014 Tour de France's transfer from its opening stages in Britain to France in July of that year, Chris Froome of Team Sky rode a bicycle through the service tunnel, becoming the first solo rider to do so. The Crossing took under an hour, reaching speeds of –faster than most cross-channel ferries.\n\nSince 2012, French operators Bouygues Telecom, Orange and SFR have covered Running Tunnel South, the tunnel bore normally used for travel from France to Britain.\n\nIn January 2014, UK operators EE and Vodafone signed ten-year contracts with Eurotunnel for Running Tunnel North. The agreements will enable both operators' subscribers to use 2G and 3G services. Both EE and Vodafone planned to offer LTE services on the route; EE said it expected to cover the route with LTE connectivity by summer 2014. EE and Vodafone will offer Channel Tunnel network coverage for travellers from the UK to France. Eurotunnel said it also held talks with Three UK but has yet to reach an agreement with the operator.\n\nIn May 2014, Eurotunnel announced that they had installed equipment from Alcatel-Lucent to cover Running Tunnel North and simultaneously to provide mobile service (GSM 900/1800 MHz and UMTS 2100 MHz) by EE, O and Vodafone. The service of EE and Vodafone commenced on the same date as the announcement. O service was expected to be available soon afterwards.\n\nIn November 2014, EE announced that it had previously switched on LTE earlier in September 2014. O turned on 2G, 3G and 4G services in November 2014, whilst Vodafone's 4G was due to go live later.\n\nAnother usage of the Channel Tunnel is the 1,000 MW high-voltage direct current ElecLink connecting the electrical grids of the two countries, scheduled for 2019 at a cost of €580m.\nThe foundation stone of the Folkestone Converter Station was laid in February 2017, by Jesse Norman, Minister for Industry and Energy.\n\nBULLET::::- British Rail Class 373\nBULLET::::- Irish Sea tunnel\nBULLET::::- Japan-Korea Undersea Tunnel\nBULLET::::- List of rail megaprojects\nBULLET::::- Marmaray Tunnel\nBULLET::::- Samphire Hoe\nBULLET::::- Strait of Gibraltar crossing\n\nBULLET::::- Article on a post-WW1 plan for a tunnel that was scrapped by the Great Depression. A total cost figure of 150 million was given in 1929\nBULLET::::- Autobiography of Sir John Stokes regarding 1882 deliberations\n\nBULLET::::- Official website at eurotunnel.com\nBULLET::::- Tribute website at chunnel.com\nBULLET::::- on OpenStreetMap wiki\n"}
{"id": "5703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5703", "title": "Cyberpunk", "text": "Cyberpunk\n\nCyberpunk is a subgenre of science fiction in a dystopian futuristic setting that tends to focus on a \"combination of low-life and high tech\" featuring advanced technological and scientific achievements, such as artificial intelligence and cybernetics, juxtaposed with a degree of breakdown or radical change in the social order. Much of cyberpunk is rooted in the New Wave science fiction movement of the 1960s and 1970s, when writers like Philip K. Dick, Roger Zelazny, John Brunner, J. G. Ballard, Philip José Farmer and Harlan Ellison examined the impact of drug culture, technology, and the sexual revolution while avoiding the utopian tendencies of earlier science fiction.\n\nComics exploring cyberpunk themes began appearing as early as Judge Dredd, first published in 1977. Released in 1984, William Gibson's influential debut novel \"Neuromancer\" would help solidify cyberpunk as a genre, drawing influence from punk subculture and early hacker culture. Other influential cyberpunk writers included Bruce Sterling and Rudy Rucker. The Japanese cyberpunk subgenre began in 1982 with the debut of Katsuhiro Otomo's manga series \"Akira\", with its 1988 anime film adaptation later popularizing the subgenre.\n\nEarly films in the genre include Ridley Scott's 1982 film \"Blade Runner\", one of several of Philip K. Dick's works that have been adapted into films. The films \"Johnny Mnemonic\" (1995) and \"New Rose Hotel\" (1998), both based upon short stories by William Gibson, flopped commercially and critically. \"The Matrix trilogy\" (1999-2003) were some of the most successful cyberpunk films. More recent additions to this genre include \"Blade Runner 2049\" (2017), a sequel to the original 1982 film, as well as \"Upgrade\" (2018), \"\" (2019) based on the 1990s Japanese manga \"Battle Angel Alita\", and the 2018 Netflix TV series \"Altered Carbon\".\n\nLawrence Person has attempted to define the content and ethos of the cyberpunk literary movement stating: \nCyberpunk plots often center on conflict among artificial intelligences, hackers, and megacorporations, and tend to be set in a near-future Earth, rather than in the far-future settings or galactic vistas found in novels such as Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" or Frank Herbert's \"Dune\". The settings are usually post-industrial dystopias but tend to feature extraordinary cultural ferment and the use of technology in ways never anticipated by its original inventors (\"the street finds its own uses for things\"). Much of the genre's atmosphere echoes film noir, and written works in the genre often use techniques from detective fiction. There are sources who view that cyberpunk has shifted from a literary movement to a mode of science fiction due to the limited number of writers and its transition to a more generalized cultural formation.\n\nThe origins of cyberpunk are rooted in the New Wave science fiction movement of the 1960s and 70s, where \"New Worlds\", under the editorship of Michael Moorcock, began inviting and encouraging stories that examined new writing styles, techniques, and archetypes. Reacting to conventional storytelling, New Wave authors attempted to present a world where society coped with a constant upheaval of new technology and culture, generally with dystopian outcomes. Writers like Roger Zelazny, J.G. Ballard, Philip Jose Farmer, and Harlan Ellison often examined the impact of drug culture, technology, and the sexual revolution with an avant-garde style influenced by the Beat Generation (especially William S. Burroughs' own SF), Dadaism, and their own ideas. Ballard attacked the idea that stories should follow the \"archetypes\" popular since the time of Ancient Greece, and the assumption that these would somehow be the same ones that would call to modern readers, as Joseph Campbell argued in \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\". Instead, Ballard wanted to write a new myth for the modern reader, a style with \"more psycho-literary ideas, more meta-biological and meta-chemical concepts, private time systems, synthetic psychologies and space-times, more of the sombre half-worlds one glimpses in the paintings of schizophrenics.\"\n\nThis had a profound influence on a new generation of writers, some of whom would come to call their movement \"Cyberpunk\". One, Bruce Sterling, later said:\nBallard, Zelazny, and the rest of New Wave was seen by the subsequent generation as delivering more \"realism\" to science fiction, and they attempted to build on this.\n\nSimilarly influential, and generally cited as proto-cyberpunk, is the Philip K. Dick novel \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep\", first published in 1968. Presenting precisely the general feeling of dystopian post-economic-apocalyptic future as Gibson and Sterling later deliver, it examines ethical and moral problems with cybernetic, artificial intelligence in a way more \"realist\" than the Isaac Asimov \"Robot\" series that laid its philosophical foundation. Dick's protege and friend K. W. Jeter wrote a very dark and imaginative novel called \"Dr. Adder\" in 1972 that, Dick lamented, might have been more influential in the field had it been able to find a publisher at that time. It was not published until 1984, after which Jeter made it the first book in a trilogy, followed by \"The Glass Hammer\" (1985) and \"Death Arms\" (1987). Jeter wrote other standalone cyberpunk novels before going on to write three authorized sequels to \"Do Androids Dream of electric sheep\", named \"Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human\" (1995), \"Blade Runner 3: Replicant Night\" (1996), and \"Blade Runner 4: Eye and Talon\".\n\n\"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep\" was made into the seminal movie \"Blade Runner\", released in 1982. This was one year after William Gibson's story, \"Johnny Mnemonic\" helped move proto-cyberpunk concepts into the mainstream. That story, which also became a film years later in 1995, involves another dystopian future, where human couriers deliver computer data, stored cybernetically in their own minds.\n\nIn 1983 a short story written by Bruce Bethke, called \"Cyberpunk\", was published in \"Amazing Stories\". The term was picked up by Gardner Dozois, editor of \"Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine\" and popularized in his editorials. Bethke says he made two lists of words, one for technology, one for troublemakers, and experimented with combining them variously into compound words, consciously attempting to coin a term that encompassed both punk attitudes and high technology.\n\nHe described the idea thus:\nAfterward, Dozois began using this term in his own writing, most notably in a \"Washington Post\" article where he said \"About the closest thing here to a self-willed esthetic “school” would be the purveyors of bizarre hard-edged, high-tech stuff, who have on occasion been referred to as “cyberpunks” — Sterling, Gibson, Shiner, Cadigan, Bear.\"\n\nAbout that time in 1984, William Gibson's novel \"Neuromancer\" was published, delivering a glimpse of a future encompassed by what became an archetype of cyberpunk \"virtual reality\", with the human mind being fed light-based worldscapes through a computer interface. Some, perhaps ironically including Bethke himself, argued at the time that the writers whose style Gibson's books epitomized should be called \"Neuromantics\", a pun on the name of the novel plus \"New Romantics\", a term used for a New Wave pop music movement that had just occurred in Britain, but this term did not catch on. Bethke later paraphrased Michael Swanwick's argument for the term: \"the movement writers should properly be termed neuromantics, since so much of what they were doing was clearly Imitation \"Neuromancer\"\".\n\nSterling was another writer who played a central role, often consciously, in the cyberpunk genre, variously seen as either keeping it on track, or distorting its natural path into a stagnant formula. In 1986 he edited a volume of cyberpunk stories called \"\", an attempt to establish what cyberpunk was, from Sterling's perspective.\n\nIn the subsequent decade, the motifs of Gibson's \"Neuromancer\" became formulaic, climaxing in the satirical extremes of Neal Stephenson's \"Snow Crash\" in 1992.\n\nBookending the Cyberpunk era, Bethke himself published a novel in 1995 called \"Headcrash\", like \"Snow Crash\" a satirical attack on the genre's excesses. Fittingly, it won an honor named after cyberpunk's spiritual founder, the Philip K. Dick Award.\n\nIt satirized the genre in this way:\nThe impact of cyberpunk, though, has been long-lasting. Elements of both the setting and storytelling have become normal in science fiction in general, and a slew of sub-genres now have -punk tacked onto their names, most obviously Steampunk, but also a host of other Cyberpunk derivatives.\n\nPrimary figures in the cyberpunk movement include William Gibson, Neal Stephenson, Bruce Sterling, Bruce Bethke, Pat Cadigan, Rudy Rucker, and John Shirley. Philip K. Dick (author of \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\", from which the film \"Blade Runner\" was adapted) is also seen by some as prefiguring the movement.\n\n\"Blade Runner\" can be seen as a quintessential example of the cyberpunk style and theme. Video games, board games, and tabletop role-playing games, such as \"Cyberpunk 2020\" and \"Shadowrun\", often feature storylines that are heavily influenced by cyberpunk writing and movies. Beginning in the early 1990s, some trends in fashion and music were also labeled as cyberpunk. Cyberpunk is also featured prominently in anime and manga (Japanese cyberpunk), with \"Akira\", \"Ghost in the Shell\" and \"Cowboy Bebop\" being among the most notable.\n\nCyberpunk writers tend to use elements from hardboiled detective fiction, film noir, and postmodernist prose to describe an often nihilistic underground side of an electronic society. The genre's vision of a troubled future is often called the antithesis of the generally utopian visions of the future popular in the 1940s and 1950s. Gibson defined cyberpunk's antipathy towards utopian SF in his 1981 short story \"The Gernsback Continuum,\" which pokes fun at and, to a certain extent, condemns utopian science fiction.\n\nIn some cyberpunk writing, much of the action takes place online, in cyberspace, blurring the line between actual and virtual reality. A typical trope in such work is a direct connection between the human brain and computer systems. Cyberpunk settings are dystopias with corruption, computers and internet connectivity. Giant, multinational corporations have for the most part replaced governments as centers of political, economic, and even military power.\n\nThe economic and technological state of Japan is a regular theme in the Cyberpunk literature of the '80s. Of Japan's influence on the genre, William Gibson said, \"Modern Japan simply was cyberpunk.\" Cyberpunk is often set in urbanized, artificial landscapes, and \"city lights, receding\" was used by Gibson as one of the genre's first metaphors for cyberspace and virtual reality. The cityscapes of Hong Kong and Shanghai have had major influences in the urban backgrounds, ambiance and settings in many cyberpunk works such as \"Blade Runner\" and \"Shadowrun\". Ridley Scott envisioned the landscape of cyberpunk Los Angeles in \"Blade Runner\" to be \"Hong Kong on a very bad day\". The streetscapes of \"Ghost in the Shell\" were based on Hong Kong. Its director Mamoru Oshii felt that Hong Kong's strange and chaotic streets where \"old and new exist in confusing relationships\", fit the theme of the film well. Hong Kong's Kowloon Walled City is particularly notable for its disorganized hyper-urbanization and breakdown in traditional urban planning to be an inspiration to cyberpunk landscapes.\n\nOne of the cyberpunk genre's prototype characters is Case, from Gibson's \"Neuromancer\". Case is a \"console cowboy,\" a brilliant hacker who has betrayed his organized criminal partners. Robbed of his talent through a crippling injury inflicted by the vengeful partners, Case unexpectedly receives a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to be healed by expert medical care but only if he participates in another criminal enterprise with a new crew.\n\nLike Case, many cyberpunk protagonists are manipulated, placed in situations where they have little or no choice, and although they might see things through, they do not necessarily come out any further ahead than they previously were. These anti-heroes—\"criminals, outcasts, visionaries, dissenters and misfits\"—call to mind the private eye of detective fiction. This emphasis on the misfits and the malcontents is the \"punk\" component of cyberpunk.\n\nCyberpunk can be intended to disquiet readers and call them to action. It often expresses a sense of rebellion, suggesting that one could describe it as a type of cultural revolution in science fiction. In the words of author and critic David Brin:\n\n...a closer look [at cyberpunk authors] reveals that they nearly always portray future societies in which governments have become wimpy and pathetic ...Popular science fiction tales by Gibson, Williams, Cadigan and others \"do\" depict Orwellian accumulations of power in the next century, but nearly always clutched in the secretive hands of a wealthy or corporate elite.\n\nCyberpunk stories have also been seen as fictional forecasts of the evolution of the Internet. The earliest descriptions of a global communications network came long before the World Wide Web entered popular awareness, though not before traditional science-fiction writers such as Arthur C. Clarke and some social commentators such as James Burke began predicting that such networks would eventually form.\n\nSome observers cite that cyberpunk tends to marginalize sectors of society such as women and Africans. For instance, it is claimed that cyberpunk depicts fantasies that ultimately empower masculinity using fragmentary and decentered aesthetic that culminate in a masculine genre populated by male outlaws. Critics also note the absence of any reference to Africa or an African-American character in the quintessential cyberpunk film \"Blade Runner\" while other films reinforce stereotypes.\n\nMinnesota writer Bruce Bethke coined the term in 1980 for his short story \"Cyberpunk,\" which was published in the November 1983 issue of \"Amazing Science Fiction Stories\". The term was quickly appropriated as a label to be applied to the works of William Gibson, Bruce Sterling, Pat Cadigan and others. Of these, Sterling became the movement's chief ideologue, thanks to his fanzine \"Cheap Truth.\" John Shirley wrote articles on Sterling and Rucker's significance. John Brunner's 1975 novel \"The Shockwave Rider\" is considered by many to be the first cyberpunk novel with many of the tropes commonly associated with the genre, some five years before the term was popularized by Dozois.\n\nWilliam Gibson with his novel \"Neuromancer\" (1984) is arguably the most famous writer connected with the term cyberpunk. He emphasized style, a fascination with surfaces, and atmosphere over traditional science-fiction tropes. Regarded as ground-breaking and sometimes as \"the archetypal cyberpunk work,\" \"Neuromancer\" was awarded the Hugo, Nebula, and Philip K. Dick Awards. \"Count Zero\" (1986) and \"Mona Lisa Overdrive\" (1988) followed after Gibson's popular debut novel. According to the Jargon File, \"Gibson's near-total ignorance of computers and the present-day hacker culture enabled him to speculate about the role of computers and hackers in the future in ways hackers have since found both irritatingly naïve and tremendously stimulating.\"\n\nEarly on, cyberpunk was hailed as a radical departure from science-fiction standards and a new manifestation of vitality. Shortly thereafter, however, some critics arose to challenge its status as a revolutionary movement. These critics said that the SF New Wave of the 1960s was much more innovative as far as narrative techniques and styles were concerned. Furthermore, while \"Neuromancer\"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s narrator may have had an unusual \"voice\" for science fiction, much older examples can be found: Gibson's narrative voice, for example, resembles that of an updated Raymond Chandler, as in his novel \"The Big Sleep\" (1939). Others noted that almost all traits claimed to be uniquely cyberpunk could in fact be found in older writers' works—often citing J. G. Ballard, Philip K. Dick, Harlan Ellison, Stanisław Lem, Samuel R. Delany, and even William S. Burroughs. For example, Philip K. Dick's works contain recurring themes of social decay, artificial intelligence, paranoia, and blurred lines between objective and subjective realities. The influential cyberpunk movie \"Blade Runner\" (1982) is based on his book, \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\". Humans linked to machines are found in Pohl and Kornbluth's \"Wolfbane\" (1959) and Roger Zelazny's \"Creatures of Light and Darkness\" (1968).\n\nIn 1994, scholar Brian Stonehill suggested that Thomas Pynchon's 1973 novel \"Gravity's Rainbow\" \"not only curses but precurses what we now glibly dub cyberspace.\" Other important predecessors include Alfred Bester's two most celebrated novels, \"The Demolished Man\" and \"The Stars My Destination\", as well as Vernor Vinge's novella \"True Names\".\n\nScience-fiction writer David Brin describes cyberpunk as \"the finest free promotion campaign ever waged on behalf of science fiction.\" It may not have attracted the \"real punks,\" but it did ensnare many new readers, and it provided the sort of movement that postmodern literary critics found alluring. Cyberpunk made science fiction more attractive to academics, argues Brin; in addition, it made science fiction more profitable to Hollywood and to the visual arts generally. Although the \"self-important rhetoric and whines of persecution\" on the part of cyberpunk fans were irritating at worst and humorous at best, Brin declares that the \"rebels did shake things up. We owe them a debt.\"\n\nFredric Jameson considers cyberpunk the \"supreme literary expression if not of postmodernism, then of late capitalism itself\".\n\nCyberpunk further inspired many professional writers who were not among the \"original\" cyberpunks to incorporate cyberpunk ideas into their own works, such as George Alec Effinger's \"When Gravity Fails\". \"Wired\" magazine, created by Louis Rossetto and Jane Metcalfe, mixes new technology, art, literature, and current topics in order to interest today's cyberpunk fans, which Paula Yoo claims \"proves that hardcore hackers, multimedia junkies, cyberpunks and cellular freaks are poised to take over the world.\"\n\nThe film \"Blade Runner\" (1982)—adapted from Philip K. Dick's \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\"—is set in 2019 in a dystopian future in which manufactured beings called replicants are slaves used on space colonies and are legal prey on Earth to various bounty hunters who \"retire\" (kill) them. Although \"Blade Runner\" was largely unsuccessful in its first theatrical release, it found a viewership in the home video market and became a cult film. Since the movie omits the religious and mythical elements of Dick's original novel (e.g. empathy boxes and Wilbur Mercer), it falls more strictly within the cyberpunk genre than the novel does. William Gibson would later reveal that upon first viewing the film, he was surprised at how the look of this film matched his vision for \"Neuromancer\", a book he was then working on. The film's tone has since been the staple of many cyberpunk movies, such as \"The Matrix trilogy\" (1999-2003), which uses a wide variety of cyberpunk elements.\n\nThe number of films in the genre or at least using a few genre elements has grown steadily since \"Blade Runner\". Several of Philip K. Dick's works have been adapted to the silver screen. The films \"Johnny Mnemonic\" and \"New Rose Hotel\", both based upon short stories by William Gibson, flopped commercially and critically. These box offices misses significantly slowed the development of cyberpunk as a literary or cultural form although a sequel to the 1982 film \"Blade Runner\" was released in October 2017 with Harrison Ford reprising his role from the original film.\n\nIn addition, \"tech-noir\" film as a hybrid genre, means a work of combining neo-noir and science fiction or cyberpunk. It includes many cyberpunk films such as \"Blade Runner\", \"Burst City\", \"Robocop\", \"12 Monkeys\", \"The Lawnmower Man\", \"Hackers\", \"Hardware\", and \"Strange Days.\"\n\nThe Japanese cyberpunk subgenre began in 1982 with the debut of Katsuhiro Otomo's manga series \"Akira\", with its 1988 anime film adaptation later popularizing the subgenre. \"Akira\" inspired a wave of Japanese cyberpunk works, including manga and anime series such as \"Ghost in the Shell\", \"Battle Angel Alita\", \"Cowboy Bebop\", and \"Serial Experiments Lain\". Other early Japanese cyberpunk works include the 1982 film \"Burst City\", the 1985 original video animation \"Megazone 23\", and the 1989 film \"\".\n\nCyberpunk themes are widely visible in anime and manga. In Japan, where cosplay is popular and not only teenagers display such fashion styles, cyberpunk has been accepted and its influence is widespread. William Gibson's \"Neuromancer,\" whose influence dominated the early cyberpunk movement, was also set in Chiba, one of Japan's largest industrial areas, although at the time of writing the novel Gibson did not know the location of Chiba and had no idea how perfectly it fit his vision in some ways. The exposure to cyberpunk ideas and fiction in the 1980s has allowed it to seep into the Japanese culture.\n\nCyberpunk anime and manga draw upon a futuristic vision which has elements in common with western science fiction and therefore have received wide international acceptance outside Japan. \"The conceptualization involved in cyberpunk is more of forging ahead, looking at the new global culture. It is a culture that does not exist right now, so the Japanese concept of a cyberpunk future, seems just as valid as a Western one, especially as Western cyberpunk often incorporates many Japanese elements.\" William Gibson is now a frequent visitor to Japan, and he came to see that many of his visions of Japan have become a reality:\nModern Japan simply was cyberpunk. The Japanese themselves knew it and delighted in it. I remember my first glimpse of Shibuya, when one of the young Tokyo journalists who had taken me there, his face drenched with the light of a thousand media-suns—all that towering, animated crawl of commercial information—said, \"You see? You see? It is \"Blade Runner\" town.\" And it was. It so evidently was.\n\nCyberpunk themes have appeared in many anime and manga, including the ground-breaking \"Appleseed\", \"Ghost in the Shell\", \"Ergo Proxy\", \"Megazone 23\", \"Neo Tokyo\", \"Goku Midnight Eye\", \"Cyber City Oedo 808\", \"Bubblegum Crisis\", \"\", \"Angel Cop\", \"Extra\", \"Blame!\", \"Armitage III\", \"Texhnolyze\", \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\" and \"Psycho-Pass\".\n\n\"Akira\" (1982 manga) and its 1988 anime film adaptation have influenced numerous works in animation, comics, film, music, television and video games. \"Akira\" has been cited as a major influence on Hollywood films such as \"The Matrix\", \"Chronicle\", \"Looper\", \"Midnight Special\", and \"Inception\", as well as cyberpunk-influenced video games such as Hideo Kojima's \"Snatcher\" and \"Metal Gear Solid\", Valve's \"Half-Life\" series and Dontnod Entertainment's \"Remember Me\". \"Akira\" has also influenced the work of musicians such as Kanye West, who paid homage to \"Akira\" in the \"Stronger\" music video, and Lupe Fiasco, whose album \"Tetsuo & Youth\" is named after Tetsuo Shima. The popular bike from the film, Kaneda's Motorbike, appears in \"Steven Spielberg\"'s film \"Ready Player One\", and CD Projekt's video game \"Cyberpunk 2077\".\n\n\"Ghost in the Shell\" (1989) influenced a number of prominent filmmakers. Its 1995 anime film adaptation inspired The Wachowskis to create \"The Matrix\" (1999) and its sequels. \"The Matrix\" series took several concepts from the film, including the Matrix digital rain, which was inspired by the opening credits of \"Ghost in the Shell\", and the way characters access the Matrix through holes in the back of their necks. Other parallels have been drawn to James Cameron's \"Avatar\", Steven Spielberg's \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\", and Jonathan Mostow's \"Surrogates\". James Cameron cited \"Ghost in the Shell\" as a source of inspiration, citing it as an influence on \"Avatar\".\n\nThe original video animation \"Megazone 23\" (1985) has a number of similarities to \"The Matrix\". \"Battle Angel Alita\" (1990) has had a notable influence on filmmaker James Cameron, who was planning to adapt it into a film since 2000. It was an influence on his TV series \"Dark Angel\", and he is the producer of the 2018 film adaptation \"\".\n\nThere are cyberpunk video games. Popular series include the \"Megami Tensei\" series, \"Metal Gear\" series, \"Final Fantasy VII\" and its spin-offs, \"Deus Ex\" series, \"Syndicate\" series, and \"System Shock\" and its sequel. Other games, like \"Blade Runner\", \"Ghost in the Shell\", and the \"Matrix\" series, are based upon genre movies, or role-playing games (for instance the various \"Shadowrun\" games).\n\nSeveral RPGs called \"Cyberpunk\" exist: \"Cyberpunk\", \"Cyberpunk 2020\" and \"Cyberpunk v3\", by R. Talsorian Games, and \"GURPS Cyberpunk\", published by Steve Jackson Games as a module of the GURPS family of RPGs. \"Cyberpunk 2020\" was designed with the settings of William Gibson's writings in mind, and to some extent with his approval, unlike the approach taken by FASA in producing the transgenre \"Shadowrun\" game. Both are set in the near future, in a world where cybernetics are prominent. In addition, Iron Crown Enterprises released an RPG named \"Cyberspace\", which was out of print for several years until recently being re-released in online PDF form. CD Projekt Red is currently developing \"Cyberpunk 2077,\" a cyberpunk first-person open world RPG video-game based on the tabletop RPG \"Cyberpunk 2020\".\nIn 1990, in a convergence of cyberpunk art and reality, the United States Secret Service raided Steve Jackson Games's headquarters and confiscated all their computers. Officials denied that the target had been the \"GURPS Cyberpunk\" sourcebook, but Jackson would later write that he and his colleagues \"were never able to secure the return of the complete manuscript; [...] The Secret Service at first flatly refused to return anything – then agreed to let us copy files, but when we got to their office, restricted us to one set of out-of-date files – then agreed to make copies for us, but said \"tomorrow\" every day from March 4 to March 26. On March 26 we received a set of disks which purported to be our files, but the material was late, incomplete and well-nigh useless.\" Steve Jackson Games won a lawsuit against the Secret Service, aided by the new Electronic Frontier Foundation. This event has achieved a sort of notoriety, which has extended to the book itself as well. All published editions of \"GURPS Cyberpunk\" have a tagline on the front cover, which reads \"The book that was seized by the U.S. Secret Service!\" Inside, the book provides a summary of the raid and its aftermath.\n\nCyberpunk has also inspired several tabletop, miniature and board games such as \"Necromunda\" by Games Workshop. \"Netrunner\" is a collectible card game introduced in 1996, based on the \"Cyberpunk 2020\" role-playing game. \"Tokyo NOVA\", debuting in 1993, is a cyberpunk role-playing game that uses playing cards instead of dice.\n\nSome musicians and acts have been classified as cyberpunk due to their aesthetic style and musical content. Often dealing with dystopian visions of the future or biomechanical themes, some fit more squarely in the category than others. Bands whose music has been classified as cyberpunk include Psydoll, Front Line Assembly, Clock DVA and Sigue Sigue Sputnik. Some musicians not normally associated with cyberpunk have at times been inspired to create concept albums exploring such themes. Albums such as Gary Numan's \"Replicas\", \"The Pleasure Principle\" and \"Telekon\" were heavily inspired by the works of Philip K. Dick. Kraftwerk's \"The Man-Machine\" and \"Computer World\" albums both explored the theme of humanity becoming dependent on technology. Nine Inch Nails' concept album \"Year Zero\" also fits into this category. Fear Factory concept albums are heavily based upon future dystopia, cybernetics, clash between man and machines, virtual worlds. Billy Idol's \"Cyberpunk\" drew heavily from cyberpunk literature and the cyberdelic counter culture in its creation. \"1. Outside\", a cyberpunk narrative fueled concept album by David Bowie, was warmly met by critics upon its release in 1995. Many musicians have also taken inspiration from specific cyberpunk works or authors, including Sonic Youth, whose albums \"Sister\" and \"Daydream Nation\" take influence from the works of Philip K. Dick and William Gibson respectively. Madonna's 2001 Drowned World Tour opened with a cyberpunk section, where costumes, asethetics and stage props were used to accentuate the dystopian nature of the theatrical concert. \n\nVaporwave and synthwave are also influenced by cyberpunk. The former has been interpreted as a dystopian critique of capitalism in the vein of cyberpunk and the latter as a nostalgic retrofuturistic revival of aspects of cyberpunk's origins.\n\nSome Neo-Futurism artworks and cityscapes have been influenced by cyberpunk, such as the Sony Center in the Potsdamer Platz public square of Berlin, Germany.\n\nSeveral subcultures have been inspired by cyberpunk fiction. These include the cyberdelic counter culture of the late 1980s and early 90s. Cyberdelic, whose adherents referred to themselves as \"cyberpunks\", attempted to blend the psychedelic art and drug movement with the technology of cyberculture. Early adherents included Timothy Leary, Mark Frauenfelder and R. U. Sirius. The movement largely faded following the dot-com bubble implosion of 2000.\n\nCybergoth is a fashion and dance subculture which draws its inspiration from cyberpunk fiction, as well as rave and Gothic subcultures. In addition, a distinct cyberpunk fashion of its own has emerged in recent years which rejects the raver and goth influences of cybergoth, and draws inspiration from urban street fashion, \"post apocalypse\", functional clothing, high tech sports wear, tactical uniform and multifunction. This fashion goes by names like \"tech wear\", \"goth ninja\" or \"tech ninja\". Important designers in this type of fashion are ACRONYM, Demobaza, Boris Bidjan Saberi, Rick Owens and Alexander Wang.\n\nThe Kowloon Walled City in Hong Kong (demolished in 1994) is often referenced as the model cyberpunk/dystopian slum as, given its poor living conditions at the time coupled with the city's political, physical, and economic isolation has caused many in academia to be fascinated by the ingenuity of its spawning.\n\nAs a wider variety of writers began to work with cyberpunk concepts, new subgenres of science fiction emerged, some of which could be considered as playing off the cyberpunk label, others which could be considered as legitimate explorations into newer territory. These focused on technology and its social effects in different ways. One prominent subgenre is \"steampunk,\" which is set in an alternate history Victorian era that combines anachronistic technology with cyberpunk's bleak film noir world view. The term was originally coined around 1987 as a joke to describe some of the novels of Tim Powers, James P. Blaylock, and K.W. Jeter, but by the time Gibson and Sterling entered the subgenre with their collaborative novel \"The Difference Engine\" the term was being used earnestly as well.\n\nAnother subgenre is \"biopunk\" (cyberpunk themes dominated by biotechnology) from the early 1990s, a derivative style building on biotechnology rather than informational technology. In these stories, people are changed in some way not by mechanical means, but by genetic manipulation. Paul Di Filippo is seen as the most prominent biopunk writer, including his half-serious ribofunk. Bruce Sterling's Shaper/Mechanist cycle is also seen as a major influence. In addition, some people consider works such as Neal Stephenson's \"The Diamond Age\" to be postcyberpunk.\n\nCyberpunk works have been described as well-situated within postmodern literature.\n\nRole playing game publisher R. Talsorian Games, owner of the \"Cyberpunk 2020\" franchise, trademarked the word \"Cyberpunk\" in the United States in 2012. Video game developer CD Projekt, which is developing \"Cyberpunk 2077\", bought the U.S. trademark from R. Talsorian Games, and has filed a trademark in the European Union.\n\nBULLET::::- Cyberpunk on The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\nBULLET::::- The Cyberpunk Directory—Comprehensive directory of cyberpunk resources\nBULLET::::- Cyberpunk Media Archive Archive of cyberpunk media\nBULLET::::- The Cyberpunk Project—A project dedicated toward maintaining a cyberpunk database, library, and other information\n"}
{"id": "5704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5704", "title": "Comic strip", "text": "Comic strip\n\nA comic strip is a sequence of drawings arranged in interrelated panels to display brief humor or form a narrative, often serialized, with text in balloons and captions. Traditionally, throughout the 20th century and into the 21st, these have been published in newspapers and magazines, with horizontal strips printed in black-and-white in daily newspapers, while Sunday newspapers offered longer sequences in special color comics sections. With the development of the internet, they began to appear online as webcomics. There were more than 200 different comic strips and daily cartoon panels in American newspapers alone each day for most of the 20th century, for a total of at least 7,300,000 episodes.\n\nStrips are written and drawn by a comics artist/cartoonist. As the name implies, comic strips can be humorous (for example, \"gag-a-day\" strips such as \"Blondie\", \"Bringing Up Father\", \"Marmaduke\", and \"Pearls Before Swine\").\nStarting in the late 1920s, comic strips expanded from their mirthful origins to feature adventure stories, as seen in \"Popeye\", \"Captain Easy\", \"Buck Rogers\", \"Tarzan\", and \"Terry and the Pirates\". Soap-opera continuity strips such as \"Judge Parker\" and \"Mary Worth\" gained popularity in the 1940s. All are called, generically, comic strips, though cartoonist Will Eisner has suggested that \"sequential art\" would be a better genre-neutral name.\n\nIn the UK and the rest of Europe, comic strips are also serialized in comic book magazines, with a strip's story sometimes continuing over three pages or more. Comic strips have appeared in American magazines such as \"Liberty\" and \"Boys' Life\" and also on the front covers of magazines, such as the \"Flossy Frills\" series on \"The American Weekly\" Sunday newspaper supplement.\n\nStorytelling using a sequence of pictures has existed through history. One medieval European example in textile form is the Bayeux Tapestry. Printed examples emerged in 19th-century Germany and in 18th-century England, where some of the first satirical or humorous sequential narrative drawings were produced. William Hogarth's 18th century English cartoons include both narrative sequences, such as \"A Rake's Progress\", and single panels.\n\nThe \"Biblia pauperum\" (\"Paupers' Bible\"), a tradition of picture Bibles beginning in the later Middle Ages, sometimes depicted Biblical events with words spoken by the figures in the miniatures written on scrolls coming out of their mouths—which makes them to some extent ancestors of the modern cartoon strips.\n\nIn China, with its traditions of block printing and of the incorporation of text with image, experiments with what became \"lianhuanhua\" date back to 1884.\n\nThe first newspaper comic strips appeared in North America in the late 19th century. \"The Yellow Kid\" is usually credited as one of the first newspaper strips. However, the art form combining words and pictures developed gradually and there are many examples which led up to the comic strip.\n\nSwiss author and caricature artist Rodolphe Töpffer (Geneva, 1799–1846) is considered the father of the modern comic strips. His illustrated stories such as \"Histoire de M. Vieux Bois\" (1827), first published in the USA in 1842 as \"The Adventures of Obadiah Oldbuck\" or \"Histoire de Monsieur Jabot\" (1831), inspired subsequent generations of German and American comic artists. In 1865, German painter, author, and caricaturist Wilhelm Busch created the strip \"Max and Moritz\", about two trouble-making boys, which had a direct influence on the American comic strip. \"Max and Moritz\" was a series of seven severely moralistic tales in the vein of German children's stories such as \"Struwwelpeter\" (\"Shockheaded Peter\"). In the story's final act, the boys, after perpetrating some mischief, are tossed into a sack of grain, run through a mill, and consumed by a flock of geese (without anybody mourning their demise). \"Max and Moritz\" provided an inspiration for German immigrant Rudolph Dirks, who created the \"Katzenjammer Kids\" in 1897 – a strip starring two German-American boys visually modelled on \"Max and Moritz\". Familiar comic-strip iconography such as stars for pain, sawing logs for snoring, speech balloons, and thought balloons originated in Dirks' strip.\n\nHugely popular, \"Katzenjammer Kids\" occasioned one of the first comic-strip copyright ownership suits in the history of the medium. When Dirks left William Randolph Hearst for the promise of a better salary under Joseph Pulitzer, it was an unusual move, since cartoonists regularly deserted Pulitzer for Hearst. In a highly unusual court decision, Hearst retained the rights to the name \"Katzenjammer Kids\", while creator Dirks retained the rights to the characters. Hearst promptly hired Harold Knerr to draw his own version of the strip. Dirks renamed his version \"Hans and Fritz\" (later, \"The Captain and the Kids\"). Thus, two versions distributed by rival syndicates graced the comics pages for decades. Dirks' version, eventually distributed by United Feature Syndicate, ran until 1979.\n\nIn the United States, the great popularity of comics sprang from the . \"The Little Bears\" (1893–96) was the first American comic strip with recurring characters, while the first color comic supplement was published by the \"Chicago Inter-Ocean\" sometime in the latter half of 1892, followed by the \"New York Journal\"'s first color Sunday comic pages in 1897. On January 31, 1912, Hearst introduced the nation's first full daily comic page in his \"New York Evening Journal\". The history of this newspaper rivalry and the rapid appearance of comic strips in most major American newspapers is discussed by Ian Gordon. Numerous events in newspaper comic strips have reverberated throughout society at large, though few of these events occurred in recent years, owing mainly to the declining use of continuous storylines on newspaper comic strips, which since the 1970s had been waning as an entertainment form.\n\nThe longest-running American comic strips are:\nBULLET::::1. \"The Katzenjammer Kids\" (1897–2006; 109 years)\nBULLET::::2. \"Gasoline Alley\" (1918–present)\nBULLET::::3. \"Ripley's Believe It or Not!\" (1918–present)\nBULLET::::4. \"Barney Google and Snuffy Smith\" (1919–present)\nBULLET::::5. \"Thimble Theater/Popeye\" (1919–present)\nBULLET::::6. \"Blondie\" (1930–present)\nBULLET::::7. \"Bringing Up Father\" (1913–2000; 87 years)\nBULLET::::8. \"Dick Tracy\" (1931–present)\nBULLET::::9. \"Alley Oop\" (1932–present)\nBULLET::::10. \"Little Orphan Annie\" (1924–2010; 86 years)\n\nMost newspaper comic strips are syndicated; a syndicate hires people to write and draw a strip and then distributes it to many newspapers for a fee. Some newspaper strips begin or remain exclusive to one newspaper. For example, the \"Pogo\" comic strip by Walt Kelly originally appeared only in the \"New York Star\" in 1948 and was not picked up for syndication until the following year.\n\nNewspaper comic strips come in two different types: daily strips and Sunday strips. In the United States, a daily strip appears in newspapers on weekdays, Monday through Saturday, as contrasted with a Sunday strip, which typically only appears on Sundays. Daily strips usually are printed in black and white, and Sunday strips are usually in color. However, a few newspapers have published daily strips in color, and some newspapers have published Sunday strips in black and white.\n\nWhile in the early 20th century comic strips were a frequent target for detractors of \"yellow journalism\", by the 1920s the medium became wildly popular. While radio, and later, television surpassed newspapers as a means of entertainment, most comic strip characters were widely recognizable until the 1980s, and the \"funny pages\" were often arranged in a way they appeared at the front of Sunday editions. In 1931, George Gallup's first poll had the comic section as the most important part of the newspaper, with additional surveys pointing out that the comic strips were the second most popular feature after the picture page. During the 1930s, many comic sections had between 12 and 16 pages, although in some cases, these had up to 24 pages. \n\nThe popularity and accessibility of strips meant they were often clipped and saved; authors including John Updike and Ray Bradbury have written about their childhood collections of clipped strips. Often posted on bulletin boards, clipped strips had an ancillary form of distribution when they were faxed, photocopied or mailed. The \"Baltimore Sun\"'s Linda White recalled, \"I followed the adventures of \"Winnie Winkle\", \"Moon Mullins\" and \"Dondi\", and waited each fall to see how Lucy would manage to trick Charlie Brown into trying to kick that football. (After I left for college, my father would clip out that strip each year and send it to me just to make sure I didn’t miss it.)\"\n\nThe two conventional formats for newspaper comics are strips and single gag panels. The strips are usually displayed horizontally, wider than they are tall. Single panels are square, circular or taller than they are wide. Strips usually, but not always, are broken up into several smaller panels with continuity from panel to panel. A horizontal strip can also be used for a single panel with a single gag, as seen occasionally in Mike Peters' \"Mother Goose and Grimm\".\n\nEarly daily strips were large, often running the entire width of the newspaper, and were sometimes three or more inches high. Initially, a newspaper page included only a single daily strip, usually either at the top or the bottom of the page. By the 1920s, many newspapers had a comics page on which many strips were collected together. During the 1930s, the original art for a daily strip could be drawn as large as 25 inches wide by six inches high. Over decades, the size of daily strips became smaller and smaller, until by 2000, four standard daily strips could fit in an area once occupied by a single daily strip. As strips have become smaller, the number of panels have been reduced.\n\nProof sheets were the means by which syndicates provided newspapers with black-and-white line art for the reproduction of strips (which they arranged to have colored in the case of Sunday strips). Michigan State University Comic Art Collection librarian Randy Scott describes these as \"large sheets of paper on which newspaper comics have traditionally been distributed to subscribing newspapers. Typically each sheet will have either six daily strips of a given title or one Sunday strip. Thus, a week of \"Beetle Bailey\" would arrive at the \"Lansing State Journal\" in two sheets, printed much larger than the final version and ready to be cut apart and fitted into the local comics page.\" Comic strip historian Allan Holtz described how strips were provided as mats (the plastic or cardboard trays in which molten metal is poured to make plates) or even plates ready to be put directly on the printing press. He also notes that with electronic means of distribution becoming more prevalent printed sheets \"are definitely on their way out.\"\n\nNEA Syndicate experimented briefly with a two-tier daily strip, \"Star Hawks\", but after a few years, \"Star Hawks\" dropped down to a single tier.\n\nIn Flanders, the two-tier strip is the standard publication style of most daily strips like \"Spike and Suzy\" and \"Nero\". They appear Monday through Saturday; until 2003 there were no Sunday papers in Flanders. In the last decades, they have switched from black and white to color.\n\nSingle panels usually, but not always, are not broken up and lack continuity. The daily \"Peanuts\" is a strip, and the daily \"Dennis the Menace\" is a single panel. J. R. Williams' long-run \"Out Our Way\" continued as a daily panel even after it expanded into a Sunday strip, \"Out Our Way with the Willets\". Jimmy Hatlo's \"They'll Do It Every Time\" was often displayed in a two-panel format with the first panel showing some deceptive, pretentious, unwitting or scheming human behavior and the second panel revealing the truth of the situation.\n\nSunday newspapers traditionally included a special color section. Early Sunday strips (known colloquially as \"the funny papers\", shortened to \"the funnies\"), such as \"Thimble Theatre\" and \"Little Orphan Annie\", filled an entire newspaper page, a format known to collectors as full page. Sunday pages during the 1930s and into the 1940s often carried a secondary strip by the same artist as the main strip. No matter whether it appeared above or below a main strip, the extra strip was known as the topper, such as \"The Squirrel Cage\" which ran along with \"Room and Board\", both drawn by Gene Ahern.\n\nDuring the 1930s, the original art for a Sunday strip was usually drawn quite large. For example, in 1930, Russ Westover drew his \"Tillie the Toiler\" Sunday page at a size of 17\" × 37\". In 1937, the cartoonist Dudley Fisher launched the innovative \"Right Around Home\", drawn as a huge single panel filling an entire Sunday page.\n\nFull-page strips were eventually replaced by strips half that size. Strips such as \"The Phantom\" and \"Terry and the Pirates\" began appearing in a format of two strips to a page in full-size newspapers, such as the \"New Orleans Times Picayune\", or with one strip on a tabloid page, as in the \"Chicago Sun-Times\". When Sunday strips began to appear in more than one format, it became necessary for the cartoonist to allow for rearranged, cropped or dropped panels. During World War II, because of paper shortages, the size of Sunday strips began to shrink. After the war, strips continued to get smaller and smaller because of increased paper and printing costs. The last full-page comic strip was the \"Prince Valiant\" strip for 11 April 1971.\n\nComic strips have also been published in Sunday newspaper magazines. Russell Patterson and Carolyn Wells' \"New Adventures of Flossy Frills\" was a continuing strip series seen on Sunday magazine covers. Beginning January 26, 1941, it ran on the front covers of Hearst's \"American Weekly\" newspaper magazine supplement, continuing until March 30 of that year. Between 1939 and 1943, four different stories featuring Flossy appeared on \"American Weekly\" covers.\n\nSunday comics sections employed offset color printing with multiple print runs imitating a wide range of colors. Printing plates were created with four or more colors—traditionally, the CMYK color model: cyan, magenta, yellow and \"K\" for black. With a screen of tiny dots on each printing plate, the dots allowed an image to be printed in a halftone that appears to the eye in different gradations. The semi-opaque property of ink allows halftone dots of different colors to create an optical effect of full-color imagery.\n\nThe decade of the 1960s saw the rise of underground newspapers, which often carried comic strips, such as \"Fritz the Cat\" and \"The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers\". \"Zippy the Pinhead\" initially appeared in underground publications in the 1970s before being syndicated. \"Bloom County\" and \"Doonesbury\" began as strips in college newspapers under different titles, and later moved to national syndication. Underground comic strips covered subjects that are usually taboo in newspaper strips, such as sex and drugs. Many underground artists, notably Vaughn Bode, Dan O'Neill, Gilbert Shelton, and Art Spiegelman went on to draw comic strips for magazines such as \"Playboy\", \"National Lampoon\", and Pete Millar's \"CARtoons\". Jay Lynch graduated from undergrounds to alternative weekly newspapers to \"Mad\" and children's books.\n\n\"Webcomics\", also known as \"online comics\" and \"internet comics\", are comics that are available to read on the Internet. Many are exclusively published online, but the majority of traditional newspaper comic strips have some Internet presence. King Features Syndicate and other syndicates often provide archives of recent strips on their websites. Some, such as Scott Adams, creator of \"Dilbert\", include an email address in each strip.\n\nMost comic strip characters do not age throughout the strip's life, but in some strips, like Lynn Johnston's award-winning \"For Better or For Worse\", the characters age as the years pass. The first strip to feature aging characters was \"Gasoline Alley\".\n\nThe history of comic strips also includes series that are not humorous, but tell an ongoing dramatic story. Examples include \"The Phantom\", \"Prince Valiant\", \"Dick Tracy\", \"Mary Worth\", \"Modesty Blaise\", \"Little Orphan Annie\", \"Flash Gordon\", and \"Tarzan\". Sometimes these are spin-offs from comic books, for example \"Superman\", \"Batman\", and \"The Amazing Spider-Man\".\n\nA number of strips have featured animals ('funny animals') as main characters. Some are non-verbal (\"Marmaduke\", \"The Angriest Dog in the World\"), some have verbal thoughts but are not understood by humans, (\"Garfield\", Snoopy in \"Peanuts\"), and some can converse with humans (\"Bloom County\", \"Calvin and Hobbes\", \"Mutts\", \"Citizen Dog\", \"Buckles\", \"Get Fuzzy\", \"Pearls Before Swine\", and \"Pooch Cafe\"). Other strips are centered entirely on animals, as in \"Pogo\" and \"Donald Duck\". Gary Larson's \"The Far Side\" was unusual, as there were no central characters. Instead \"The Far Side\" used a wide variety of characters including humans, monsters, aliens, chickens, cows, worms, amoebas, and more. John McPherson's \"Close to Home\" also uses this theme, though the characters are mostly restricted to humans and real-life situations. Wiley Miller not only mixes human, animal, and fantasy characters, but also does several different comic strip continuities under one umbrella title, \"Non Sequitur\". Bob Thaves's \"Frank & Ernest\" began in 1972 and paved the way for some of these strips, as its human characters were manifest in diverse forms — as animals, vegetables, and minerals.\n\nThe comics have long held a distorted mirror to contemporary society, and almost from the beginning have been used for political or social commentary. This ranged from the conservative slant of Harold Gray's \"Little Orphan Annie\" to the unabashed liberalism of Garry Trudeau's \"Doonesbury\". Al Capp's \"Li'l Abner\" espoused liberal opinions for most of its run, but by the late 1960s, it became a mouthpiece for Capp's repudiation of the counterculture.\n\n\"Pogo\" used animals to particularly devastating effect, caricaturing many prominent politicians of the day as animal denizens of Pogo's Okeefenokee Swamp. In a fearless move, Pogo's creator Walt Kelly took on Joseph McCarthy in the 1950s, caricaturing him as a bobcat named Simple J. Malarkey, a megalomaniac who was bent on taking over the characters' birdwatching club and rooting out all undesirables. Kelly also defended the medium against possible government regulation in the McCarthy era. At a time when comic books were coming under fire for supposed sexual, violent, and subversive content, Kelly feared the same would happen to comic strips. Going before the Congressional subcommittee, he proceeded to charm the members with his drawings and the force of his personality. The comic strip was safe for satire.\n\nDuring the early 20th century, comic strips were widely associated with publisher William Randolph Hearst, whose papers had the largest circulation of strips in the United States. Hearst was notorious for his practice of yellow journalism, and he was frowned on by readers of \"The New York Times\" and other newspapers which featured few or no comic strips. Hearst's critics often assumed that all the strips in his papers were fronts for his own political and social views. Hearst did occasionally work with or pitch ideas to cartoonists, most notably his continued support of George Herriman's \"Krazy Kat\". An inspiration for Bill Watterson and other cartoonists, \"Krazy Kat\" gained a considerable following among intellectuals during the 1920s and 1930s.\n\nSome comic strips, such as \"Doonesbury\" and \"Mallard Fillmore\", may be printed on the editorial or op-ed page rather than the comics page because of their regular political commentary. For example, the August 12, 1974 \"Doonesbury\" strip was awarded a 1975 Pulitzer Prize for its depiction of the Watergate scandal. \"Dilbert\" is sometimes found in the business section of a newspaper instead of the comics page because of the strip's commentary about office politics, and Tank McNamara often appears on the sports page because of its subject matter. Lynn Johnston's \"For Better or for Worse\" created an uproar when Lawrence, one of the strip's supporting characters, came out of the closet.\n\nThe world's longest comic strip is long and on display at Trafalgar Square as part of the London Comedy Festival. The London Cartoon Strip was created by 15 of Britain's best known cartoonists and depicts the history of London.\n\nThe Reuben, named for cartoonist Rube Goldberg, is the most prestigious award for U.S. comic strip artists. Reuben awards are presented annually by the National Cartoonists Society (NCS).\n\nIn 1995, the United States Postal Service issued a series of commemorative stamps, Comic Strip Classics, marking the comic-strip centennial.\n\nToday's strip artists, with the help of the NCS, enthusiastically promote the medium, which since the 1970s (and particularly the 1990s) has been considered to be in decline due to numerous factors such as changing tastes in humor and entertainment, the waning relevance of newspapers in general and the loss of most foreign markets outside English-speaking countries. One particularly humorous example of such promotional efforts is the Great Comic Strip Switcheroonie, held in 1997 on April Fool's Day, an event in which dozens of prominent artists took over each other's strips. \"Garfield\"’s Jim Davis, for example, switched with \"Blondie\"’s Stan Drake, while Scott Adams (\"Dilbert\") traded strips with Bil Keane (\"The Family Circus\").\n\nWhile the 1997 Switcheroonie was a one-time publicity stunt, an artist taking over a feature from its originator is an old tradition in newspaper cartooning (as it is in the comic book industry). In fact, the practice has made possible the longevity of the genre's more popular strips. Examples include \"Little Orphan Annie\" (drawn and plotted by Harold Gray from 1924 to 1944 and thereafter by a succession of artists including Leonard Starr and Andrew Pepoy), and \"Terry and The Pirates\", started by Milton Caniff in 1934 and picked up by George Wunder.\n\nA business-driven variation has sometimes led to the same feature continuing under a different name. In one case, in the early 1940s, Don Flowers' \"Modest Maidens\" was so admired by William Randolph Hearst that he lured Flowers away from the Associated Press and to King Features Syndicate by doubling the cartoonist's salary, and renamed the feature \"Glamor Girls\" to avoid legal action by the AP. The latter continued to publish \"Modest Maidens\", drawn by Jay Allen in Flowers' style.\n\nAs newspapers have declined, the changes have affected comic strips. Jeff Reece, lifestyle editor of \"The Florida Times-Union\", wrote, \"Comics are sort of the 'third rail' of the newspaper.\"\n\nIn the early decades of the 20th century, all Sunday comics received a full page, and daily strips were generally the width of the page. The competition between papers for having more cartoons than the rest from the mid-1920s, the growth of large-scale newspaper advertising during most of the thirties, paper rationing during World War II, the decline on news readership (as television newscasts began to be more common) and inflation (which has caused higher printing costs) beginning during the fifties and sixties led to Sunday strips being published on smaller and more diverse formats. As newspapers have reduced the page count of Sunday comic sections since the late 1990s (by the 2010s, most sections have only four pages, with the back page not always being destined for comics) has also led to further downsizes.\n\nDaily strips have suffered as well. Before the mid-1910s, there wasn't a \"standard\" size\", with strips running the entire width of a page or having more than one tier. By the 1920s, strips often covered six of the eight columns occupied by a traditional broadsheet paper. During the 1940s, strips were reduced to four columns wide (with a \"transition\" width of five columns). As newspapers became narrower beginning in the 1970s, strips have gotten even smaller, often being just three columns wide, a similar width to the one most daily panels occupied before the 1940s.\n\nIn an issue related to size limitations, Sunday comics are often bound to rigid formats that allow their panels to be rearranged in several different ways while remaining readable. Such formats usually include throwaway panels at the beginning, which some newspapers will omit for space. As a result, cartoonists have less incentive to put great efforts into these panels. \"Garfield\" and \"Mutts\" were known during the mid-to-late 80s and 1990s respectively for their throwaways on their Sunday strips, however both strips now run \"generic\" title panels.\n\nSome cartoonists have complained about this, with Walt Kelly, creator of \"Pogo,\" openly voicing his discontent about being forced to draw his Sunday strips in such rigid formats from the beginning. Kelly's heirs opted to end the strip in 1975 as a form of protest against the practice. Since then, \"Calvin and Hobbes\" creator Bill Watterson has written extensively on the issue, arguing that size reduction and dropped panels reduce both the potential and freedom of a cartoonist. After a lengthy battle with his syndicate, Watterson won the privilege of making half page-sized Sunday strips where he could arrange the panels any way he liked. Many newspaper publishers and a few cartoonists objected to this, and some papers continued to print \"Calvin and Hobbes\" at small sizes. \"Opus\" won that same privilege years after \"Calvin and Hobbes\" ended, while Wiley Miller circumvented further downsizes by making his \"Non Sequitur\" Sunday strip available only in a vertical arrangement. Actually, most strips created since 1990 are drawn in the unbroken \"third-page\" format. Few newspapers still run half-page strips, as with \"Prince Valiant\" and \"Hägar the Horrible\" in the front page of the \"Reading Eagle\" Sunday comics section until the mid-2010s. \n\nWith the success of \"The Gumps\" during the 1920s, it became commonplace for strips (comedy- and adventure-laden alike) to have lengthy stories spanning weeks or months. The \"Monarch of Medioka\" story in Floyd Gottfredson's \"Mickey Mouse\" comic strip ran from September 8, 1937 to May 2, 1938. Between the 1960s and the late 1980s, as television news relegated newspaper reading to an occasional basis rather than daily, syndicators were abandoning long stories and urging cartoonists to switch to simple daily gags, or week-long \"storylines\" (with six consecutive (mostly unrelated) strips following a same subject), with longer storylines being used mainly on adventure-based and dramatic strips. Strips begun during the mid-1980s or after (such as \"Get Fuzzy\", \"Over the Hedge\", \"Monty\", and others) are known for their heavy use of storylines, lasting between one and three weeks in most cases.\n\nThe writing style of comic strips changed as well after World War II. With an increase in the number of college-educated readers, there was a shift away from slapstick comedy and towards more cerebral humor. Slapstick and visual gags became more confined to Sunday strips, because as \"Garfield\" creator Jim Davis put it, \"Children are more likely to read Sunday strips than dailies.\"\n\nMany older strips are no longer drawn by the original cartoonist, who has either died or retired. Such strips are known as \"zombie strips\". A cartoonist, paid by the syndicate or sometimes a relative of the original cartoonist, continues writing the strip, a tradition that became commonplace in the early half of the 20th century. \"Hägar the Horrible\" and \"Frank and Ernest\" are both drawn by the sons of the creators. Some strips which are still in affiliation with the original creator are produced by small teams or entire companies, such as Jim Davis' \"Garfield\", however there is some debate if these strips fall in this category.\n\nThis act is commonly criticized by modern cartoonists including Watterson and \"Pearls Before Swine\"'s Stephan Pastis. The issue was addressed in six consecutive \"Pearls\" strips in 2005. Charles Schulz, of \"Peanuts\" fame, requested that his strip not be continued by another cartoonist after his death. He also rejected the idea of hiring an inker or letterer, comparing it to a golfer hiring a man to make his putts. Schulz's family has honored his wishes and refused numerous proposals by syndicators to continue \"Peanuts\" with a new author.\n\nSince the consolidation of newspaper comics by the first quarter of the 20th century, most cartoonists have used a group of assistants (with usually one of them credited). However, quite a few cartoonists (e.g.: George Herriman and Charles Schulz, among others) have done their strips almost completely by themselves; often criticizing the use of assistants for the same reasons most have about their editors hiring anyone else to continue their work after their retirement.\n\nHistorically, syndicates owned the creators' work, enabling them to continue publishing the strip after the original creator retired, left the strip, or died. This practice led to the term \"legacy strips,\" or more pejoratively \"zombie strips\"). Most syndicates signed creators to 10- or even 20-year contracts. (There have been exceptions, however, such as Bud Fisher's \"Mutt and Jeff\" being an early — if not the earliest — case in which the creator retained ownership of his work.) Both these practices began to change with the 1970 debut of Universal Press Syndicate, as the company gave cartoonists a 50-percent ownership share of their work. Creators Syndicate, founded in 1987, granted artists full rights to the strips, something that Universal Press did in 1990, followed by King Features in 1995. By 1999 both Tribune Media Services and United Feature had begun granting ownership rights to creators (limited to new and/or hugely popular strips).\n\nStarting in the late 1940s, the national syndicates which distributed newspaper comic strips subjected them to very strict censorship. \"Li'l Abner\" was censored in September 1947 and was pulled from the Pittsburg Press by Scripps-Howard. The controversy, as reported in \"Time\", centered on Capp's portrayal of the U.S. Senate. Said Edward Leech of Scripps, \"We don't think it is good editing or sound citizenship to picture the Senate as an assemblage of freaks and crooks... boobs and undesirables.\"\n\nAs comics are easier for children to access compared to other types of media, they have a significantly more rigid censorship code than other media. Stephan Pastis has lamented that the \"unwritten\" censorship code is still \"stuck somewhere in the 1950s\". Generally, comics are not allowed to include such words as \"damn\", \"sucks\", \"screwed\", and \"hell\", although there have been exceptions such as the September 22, 2010 \"Mother Goose and Grimm\" in which an elderly man says, \"This nursing home food sucks,\" and a pair of \"Pearls Before Swine\" comics from January 11, 2011 with a character named Ned using the word \"crappy\". Naked backsides and shooting guns cannot be shown, according to \"Dilbert\" cartoonist Scott Adams. Such comic strip taboos were detailed in Dave Breger's book \"But That's Unprintable\" (Bantam, 1955).\n\nMany issues such as sex, narcotics, and terrorism cannot or can very rarely be openly discussed in strips, although there are exceptions, usually for satire, as in \"Bloom County\". This led some cartoonists to resort to double entendre or dialogue children do not understand, as in Greg Evans' \"Luann\". Younger cartoonists have claimed commonplace words, images, and issues should be allowed in the comics, considering that the pressure on \"clean\" humor has been a chief factor for the declining popularity of comic strips since the 1990s (Aaron McGruder, creator of \"The Boondocks\", decided to end his strip partly because of censorship issues, while the \"Popeye\" daily comic strip ended in 1994 after newspapers objected to a storyline they considered to be a satire on abortion). Some of the taboo words and topics are mentioned daily on television and other forms of visual media. Webcomics and comics distributed primarily to college newspapers are much freer in this respect.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Biblia pauperum\"\nBULLET::::- Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum\nBULLET::::- Comic book\nBULLET::::- Comics studies\nBULLET::::- History of American comics\nBULLET::::- List of British comic strips\nBULLET::::- List of cartoonists\nBULLET::::- List of newspaper comic strips\nBULLET::::- Military humor comic strips\n\n\nBULLET::::- Blackbeard, Bill, ed. \"The Smithsonian Collection of Newspaper Comics\". (1977) Smithsonian Institution Press/Harry N. Abrams\nBULLET::::- Castelli, Alfredo. \"Here We Are Again\"\nBULLET::::- Gordon, Ian. \"Comic Strips and Consumer Culture\" (1998) Smithsonian Institution Press\nBULLET::::- Goulart, Ron. \"Encyclopedia of American Comics\"\nBULLET::::- Goulart, Ron. \"The Funnies\"\nBULLET::::- Goulart, Ron. \"The Adventurous Decade\"\nBULLET::::- Holtz, Allan. \"American Newspaper Comics: An Encyclopedic Reference Guide\". (2012) University of Michigan Press.\nBULLET::::- Horn, Maurice. \"The World Encyclopedia of Comics\". (1976) Chelsea House, (1982) Avon.\nBULLET::::- Horn, Maurice. \"The World Encyclopedia of Cartoons\" (Chelsea House, 1979) — 6 volumes\nBULLET::::- Horn, Maurice. \"100 Years of American Newspaper Comics\" (Gramercy Books, 1996)\nBULLET::::- Koenigsberg, Moses. \"King News\", Moses Koenigsberg\nBULLET::::- Mott, Frank Luther. \"American Journalism\"\nBULLET::::- Robbins, Trina. \"A Century of Women Cartoonists\"\nBULLET::::- Robbins, Trina and Yronwode, Cat. \"Women and the Comics\"\nBULLET::::- Robinson, Jerry. \"The Comics\"\nBULLET::::- Sheridan, Martin. \"Comics And Their Creators\"\nBULLET::::- Stein, Daniel and Jan-Noel Thon, eds. \"From Comic Strips to Graphic Novels. Contributions to the Theory and History of Graphic Narrative\". Berlin/Boston 2015.\nBULLET::::- Tebbell. \"The Compact History of the American Newspaper\"\nBULLET::::- Strickler, Dave. \"Syndicated Comic Strips and Artists\"\nBULLET::::- Watson, Elmo Scott. \"A History of Newspaper Syndicates in the United States\", Elmo Scott Watson\nBULLET::::- Waugh, Coulton. \"The Comics\"\n\nBULLET::::- National Cartoonists Society\nBULLET::::- Comic Art Collection at the University of Missouri\nBULLET::::- Billy Ireland Cartoon Library and Museum at Ohio State University\n"}
{"id": "5705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5705", "title": "Continuum hypothesis", "text": "Continuum hypothesis\n\nIn mathematics, the continuum hypothesis (abbreviated CH) is a hypothesis about the possible sizes of infinite sets. It states:\nThe continuum hypothesis was advanced by Georg Cantor in 1878, and\nestablishing its truth or falsehood is the first of Hilbert's 23 problems presented in 1900. Τhe answer to this problem is independent of ZFC set theory (that is, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice included), so that either the continuum hypothesis or its negation can be added as an axiom to ZFC set theory, with the resulting theory being consistent if and only if ZFC is consistent. This independence was proved in 1963 by Paul Cohen, complementing earlier work by Kurt Gödel in 1940.\n\nThe name of the hypothesis comes from the term \"the continuum\" for the real numbers.\n\nCantor believed the continuum hypothesis to be true and tried for many years to prove it, in vain . It became the first on David Hilbert's list of important open questions that was presented at the International Congress of Mathematicians in the year 1900 in Paris. Axiomatic set theory was at that point not yet formulated. \nKurt Gödel proved in 1940 that the negation of the continuum hypothesis, i.e., the existence of a set with intermediate cardinality, could not be proved in standard set theory. The second half of the independence of the continuum hypothesis – i.e., unprovability of the nonexistence of an intermediate-sized set – was proved in 1963 by Paul Cohen.\n\nTwo sets are said to have the same \"cardinality\" or \"cardinal number\" if there exists a bijection (a one-to-one correspondence) between them. Intuitively, for two sets \"S\" and \"T\" to have the same cardinality means that it is possible to \"pair off\" elements of \"S\" with elements of \"T\" in such a fashion that every element of \"S\" is paired off with exactly one element of \"T\" and vice versa. Hence, the set {banana, apple, pear} has the same cardinality as {yellow, red, green}.\n\nWith infinite sets such as the set of integers or rational numbers, the existence of a bijection between two sets becomes more difficult to demonstrate. The rational numbers seemingly form a counterexample to the continuum hypothesis: the integers form a proper subset of the rationals, which themselves form a proper subset of the reals, so intuitively, there are more rational numbers than integers and more real numbers than rational numbers. However, this intuitive analysis is flawed; it does not take proper account of the fact that all three sets are infinite. It turns out the rational numbers can actually be placed in one-to-one correspondence with the integers, and therefore the set of rational numbers is the same size (\"cardinality\") as the set of integers: they are both countable sets.\n\nCantor gave two proofs that the cardinality of the set of integers is strictly smaller than that of the set of real numbers (see Cantor's first uncountability proof and Cantor's diagonal argument). His proofs, however, give no indication of the extent to which the cardinality of the integers is less than that of the real numbers. Cantor proposed the continuum hypothesis as a possible solution to this question.\n\nThe continuum hypothesis states that the set of real numbers has minimal possible cardinality which is greater than the cardinality of the set of integers. That is, every set, \"S\", of real numbers can either be mapped one-to-one into the integers or the real numbers can be mapped one-to-one into \"S\". Using the fact that the real numbers are equinumerous with the powerset of the integers, the continuum hypothesis says that there is no set formula_1 for which formula_2\n\nAssuming the axiom of choice, there is a smallest cardinal number formula_3 greater than formula_4, and the continuum hypothesis is in turn equivalent to the equality formula_5\n\nThere is also a generalization of the continuum hypothesis called the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) which says that for every ordinal α, formula_6 That is, GCH asserts that the cardinality of the power set of each infinite set is the smallest cardinality greater than that of the set.\n\nThe independence of the continuum hypothesis (CH) from Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF) follows from combined work of Kurt Gödel and Paul Cohen.\n\nCohen (1963, 1964) showed that CH cannot be proven from the ZFC axioms, completing the overall independence proof. To prove his result, Cohen developed the method of forcing, which has become a standard tool in set theory. Essentially, this method begins with a model of ZF in which CH holds, and constructs another model which contains more sets than the original, in a way that CH does not hold in the new model. Cohen was awarded the Fields Medal in 1966 for his proof.\n\nThe independence proof just described shows that CH is independent of ZFC. Further research has shown that CH is independent of all known \"large cardinal axioms\" in the context of ZFC. () Moreover, it has been shown that the cardinality of the continuum can be any cardinal consistent with König's theorem. A result of Solovay, proved shortly after Cohen's result on the independence of the continuum hypothesis, shows that in any model of ZFC, if formula_7 is a cardinal of uncountable cofinality, then there is a forcing extension in which formula_8. However, per König's theorem, it is not consistent to assume formula_9 is formula_10 or formula_11 or any cardinal with cofinality formula_12.\n\nThe continuum hypothesis is closely related to many statements in analysis, point set topology and measure theory. As a result of its independence, many substantial conjectures in those fields have subsequently been shown to be independent as well.\n\nThe independence from ZFC means that proving or disproving the CH within ZFC is impossible. However, Gödel and Cohen's negative results are not universally accepted as disposing of all interest in the continuum hypothesis. Hilbert's problem remains an active topic of research; see and for an overview of the current research status.\n\nThe continuum hypothesis was not the first statement shown to be independent of ZFC. An immediate consequence of Gödel's incompleteness theorem, which was published in 1931, is that there is a formal statement (one for each appropriate Gödel numbering scheme) expressing the consistency of ZFC that is independent of ZFC, assuming that ZFC is consistent. The continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice were among the first mathematical statements shown to be independent of ZF set theory.\n\nGödel believed that CH is false, and that his proof that CH is consistent with ZFC only shows that the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms do not adequately characterize the universe of sets. Gödel was a platonist and therefore had no problems with asserting the truth and falsehood of statements independent of their provability. Cohen, though a formalist , also tended towards rejecting CH.\n\nHistorically, mathematicians who favored a \"rich\" and \"large\" universe of sets were against CH, while those favoring a \"neat\" and \"controllable\" universe favored CH. Parallel arguments were made for and against the axiom of constructibility, which implies CH. More recently, Matthew Foreman has pointed out that ontological maximalism can actually be used to argue in favor of CH, because among models that have the same reals, models with \"more\" sets of reals have a better chance of satisfying CH (Maddy 1988, p. 500).\n\nAnother viewpoint is that the conception of set is not specific enough to determine whether CH is true or false. This viewpoint was advanced as early as 1923 by Skolem, even before Gödel's first incompleteness theorem. Skolem argued on the basis of what is now known as Skolem's paradox, and it was later supported by the independence of CH from the axioms of ZFC since these axioms are enough to establish the elementary properties of sets and cardinalities. In order to argue against this viewpoint, it would be sufficient to demonstrate new axioms that are supported by intuition and resolve CH in one direction or another. Although the axiom of constructibility does resolve CH, it is not generally considered to be intuitively true any more than CH is generally considered to be false (Kunen 1980, p. 171).\n\nAt least two other axioms have been proposed that have implications for the continuum hypothesis, although these axioms have not currently found wide acceptance in the mathematical community. In 1986, Chris Freiling presented an argument against CH by showing that the negation of CH is equivalent to Freiling's axiom of symmetry, a statement about probabilities. Freiling believes this axiom is \"intuitively true\" but others have disagreed. A difficult argument against CH developed by W. Hugh Woodin has attracted considerable attention since the year 2000 (Woodin 2001a, 2001b). Foreman (2003) does not reject Woodin's argument outright but urges caution.\n\nSolomon Feferman (2011) has made a complex philosophical argument that CH is not a definite mathematical problem. He proposes a theory of \"definiteness\" using a semi-intuitionistic subsystem of ZF that accepts classical logic for bounded quantifiers but uses intuitionistic logic for unbounded ones, and suggests that a proposition formula_13 is mathematically \"definite\" if the semi-intuitionistic theory can prove formula_14. He conjectures that CH is not definite according to this notion, and proposes that CH should, therefore, be considered not to have a truth value. Peter Koellner (2011b) wrote a critical commentary on Feferman's article.\n\nJoel David Hamkins proposes a multiverse approach to set theory and argues that \"the continuum hypothesis is settled on the multiverse view by our extensive knowledge about how it behaves in the multiverse, and, as a result, it can no longer be settled in the manner formerly hoped for.\" (Hamkins 2012). In a related vein, Saharon Shelah wrote that he does \"not agree with the pure Platonic view that the interesting problems in set theory can be decided, that we just have to discover the additional axiom. My mental picture is that we have many possible set theories, all conforming to ZFC.\" (Shelah 2003).\n\nThe \"generalized continuum hypothesis\" (GCH) states that if an infinite set's cardinality lies between that of an infinite set \"S\" and that of the power set of \"S\", then it either has the same cardinality as the set \"S\" or the same cardinality as the power set of \"S\". That is, for any infinite cardinal formula_15 there is no cardinal formula_7 such that formula_17 GCH is equivalent to:\nThe beth numbers provide an alternate notation for this condition: formula_20 for every ordinal formula_19\n\nThis is a generalization of the continuum hypothesis since the continuum has the same cardinality as the power set of the integers. It was first suggested by . (For the early history of GCH, see ).\n\nLike CH, GCH is also independent of ZFC, but Sierpiński proved that ZF + GCH implies the axiom of choice (AC) (and therefore the negation of the axiom of determinacy, AD), so choice and GCH are not independent in ZF; there are no models of ZF in which GCH holds and AC fails. To prove this, Sierpiński showed GCH implies that every cardinality n is smaller than some Aleph number, and thus can be ordered. This is done by showing that n is smaller than formula_22 which is smaller than its own Hartogs number—this uses the equality formula_23; for the full proof, see Gillman (2002).\n\nKurt Gödel showed that GCH is a consequence of ZF + V=L (the axiom that every set is constructible relative to the ordinals), and is therefore consistent with ZFC. As GCH implies CH, Cohen's model in which CH fails is a model in which GCH fails, and thus GCH is not provable from ZFC. W. B. Easton used the method of forcing developed by Cohen to prove Easton's theorem, which shows it is consistent with ZFC for arbitrarily large cardinals formula_24 to fail to satisfy formula_25 Much later, Foreman and Woodin proved that (assuming the consistency of very large cardinals) it is consistent that formula_26 holds for every infinite cardinal formula_27 Later Woodin extended this by showing the consistency of formula_28 for every formula_7. showed that, for each \"n\" ≥ 1, it is consistent with ZFC that for each κ, 2 is the \"n\"th successor of κ. On the other hand, proved, that if γ is an ordinal and for each infinite cardinal κ, 2 is the γth successor of κ, then γ is finite.\n\nFor any infinite sets A and B, if there is an injection from A to B then there is an injection from subsets of A to subsets of B. Thus for any infinite cardinals A and B, formula_30 . If A and B are finite, the stronger inequality formula_31 holds. GCH implies that this strict, stronger inequality holds for infinite cardinals as well as finite cardinals.\n\nAlthough the generalized continuum hypothesis refers directly only to cardinal exponentiation with 2 as the base, one can deduce from it the values of cardinal exponentiation formula_32 in all cases. GCH implies that (see: Hayden & Kennison (1968), page 147, exercise 76):\n\nBULLET::::- Aleph number\nBULLET::::- Beth number\nBULLET::::- Cardinality\nBULLET::::- Ω-logic\nBULLET::::- Wetzel's problem\n\nBULLET::::- Gödel, K.: \"What is Cantor's Continuum Problem?\", reprinted in Benacerraf and Putnam's collection \"Philosophy of Mathematics\", 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, 1983. An outline of Gödel's arguments against CH.\nBULLET::::- Joel David Hamkins. The set-theoretic multiverse. Rev. Symb. Log. 5 (2012), no. 3, 416–449.\nBULLET::::- Seymour Hayden and John F. Kennison: \"Zermelo–Fraenkel Set Theory\" (1968), Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, Columbus, Ohio.\nBULLET::::- Martin, D. (1976). \"Hilbert's first problem: the continuum hypothesis,\" in \"Mathematical Developments Arising from Hilbert's Problems,\" Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics XXVIII, F. Browder, editor. American Mathematical Society, 1976, pp. 81–92.\n\nBULLET::::- German literature\n"}
{"id": "5706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5706", "title": "Çevik Bir", "text": "Çevik Bir\n\nÇevik Bir (born 1939) is a retired Turkish army general. He was a member of the Turkish General Staff in the 1990s. He took a major part in several important international missions in the Middle East and North Africa. He was born in Buca, Izmir Province, in 1939 and is married with one child. Çevik Bir is of Albanian origin.\n\nHe graduated from the Turkish Military Academy as an engineer officer in 1958, from the Army Staff College in 1970 and from the Armed Forces College in 1971. He graduated from NATO Defense College, Rome, Italy in 1973.\n\nFrom 1973 to 1985, he served at SHAPE, NATO's headquarters in Belgium. He was promoted to brigadier general and commanded an armed brigade and division in Turkey. From 1987 to 1991, he served as major general, and then was promoted to lieutenant general.\n\nAfter the dictator Siad Barre’s ousting, conflicts between the General Mohammed Farah Aidid party and other clans in Somalia had led to famine and lawlessness throughout the country. An estimated 300,000 people had died from starvation. A combined military force of United States and United Nations (under the name \"UNOSOM\") were deployed to Mogadishu, to monitor the ceasefire and deliver food and supplies to the starving people of Somali. Çevik Bir, who was then a lieutenant-general of Turkey, became the force commander of UNOSOM II in April 1993. Despite the retreat of US and UN forces after several deaths due to local hostilities mainly led by Aidid, the introduction of a powerful military force opened the transportation routes, enabling the provision of supplies and ended the famine quickly. He was succeeded as Force Commander by a Malaysian general in January 1994.\n\nHe became a four-star general and served three years as vice chairman of the Turkish Armed Forces, then appointed commander of the Turkish First Army, in Istanbul. While he was vice chairman of the TAF, he signed the Turkish-Israeli Military Coordination agreement in 1996.\n\nÇevik Bir became the Turkish army's deputy chief of general staff shortly after the Somali operation and played a vital role in establishing a Turkish-Israeli entente.\nÇevik Bir retired from the army on August 30, 1999. He is a former member of the Association for the Study of the Middle East and Africa (ASMEA).\n\nOn April 12, 2012, Bir and 30 other officers were taken in custody for their role in the 1997 military memorandum that forced the then Turkish government, led by the Refah Partisi (Welfare Party), to step down.\n\nÇevik Bir, one of the generals who planned the process, said \"In Turkey we have a marriage of Islam and democracy. (…) The child of this marriage is secularism. Now this child gets sick from time to time. The Turkish Armed Forces is the doctor which saves the child. Depending on how sick the kid is, we administer the necessary medicine to make sure the child recuperates\".\n\nBULLET::::- United Nations Medal (1994)\nBULLET::::- US Medal of Merit (1994)\nBULLET::::- Turkish Armed Forces Medal of Distinguished Service (1995)\nBULLET::::- German Medal of Honor (1996)\nBULLET::::- Turkish Armed Forces Medal of Merit (1996)\nBULLET::::- United Kingdom Distinguished Achievement Medal (1997)\nBULLET::::- United Kingdom Distinguished Service Medal (1997)\nBULLET::::- Jordanian Medal of Istihkak (1998)\nBULLET::::- French Medal of Merit (1999)\n\n \n"}
{"id": "5708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5708", "title": "Collectivism", "text": "Collectivism\n\nCollectivism is a value that is characterized by emphasis on cohesiveness among individuals and prioritization of the group over the self. Individuals or groups that subscribe to a collectivist worldview tend to find common values and goals as particularly salient and demonstrate greater orientation toward in-group than toward out-group. The term \"in-group\" is thought to be more diffusely defined for collectivist individuals to include societal units ranging from the nuclear family to a religious or racial/ethnic group. \n\nThe German sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies described an early model of collectivism and individualism using the terms \"Gemeinschaft\" (community) and \"Gesellschaft\" (society). \"Gemeinschaft\" relationships, in which communalism is prioritized, were thought to be characteristic of small, rural village communities. An anthropologist, Redfield (1941) echoed this notion in work contrasting folk society with urban society.\n\nMax Weber (1930) contrasted collectivism and individualism through the lens of religion, believing that Protestants were more individualistic and self-reliant compared to Catholics, who endorsed hierarchical, interdependent relationships among people. Hofstede (1980) was highly influential in ushering in an era of cross-cultural research making comparisons along the dimension of collectivism versus individualism. Hofstede conceptualized collectivism and individualism as part of a single continuum, with each cultural construct representing an opposite pole. The author characterized individuals that endorsed a high degree of collectivism as being embedded in their social contexts and prioritizing communal goals over individual goals.\n\nThe construct of collectivism is represented in empirical literature under several different names. Most commonly, the term interdependent self-construal is used. Other phrases used to describe the concept of collectivism-individualism include allocentrism-idiocentrism, collective-private self, as well as subtypes of collectivism-individualism (meaning, vertical and horizontal subtypes). Inconsistent terminology is thought to account for some of the difficulty in effectively synthesizing the empirical literature on collectivism.\n\nIn one critical model of collectivism, Markus and Kitayama describe the interdependent (i.e., collectivistic) self as fundamentally connected to the social context. As such, one's sense of self depends on and is defined in part by those around them and is primarily manifested in public, overt behavior. As such, the organization of the self is guided by using others as a reference. That is, an interdependent individual uses the unexpressed thoughts, feelings, and beliefs of another person with whom they have a relationship, as well as the other person's behaviors, to make decisions about their own internal attributes and actions.\n\nMarkus and Kitayama also contributed to the literature by challenging Hofstede's unidimensional model of collectivism-individualism. The authors conceptualized these two constructs bidimensionally, such that both collectivism and individualism can be endorsed independently and potentially to the same degree. This notion has been echoed by other prominent theorists in the field.\n\nSome researchers have expanded the collectivism-individualism framework to include a more comprehensive view. Specifically, Triandis and colleagues introduced a theoretical model that incorporates the notion of relational contexts. The authors argue that the domains of collectivism and individualism can be further described by horizontal and vertical relationships. Horizontal relationships are believed to be status-equal whereas vertical relationships are characterized as hierarchical and status-unequal. As such, horizontal collectivism is manifested as an orientation in which group harmony is highly valued and in-group members are perceived to experience equal standing. Vertical collectivism involves the prioritization of group goals over individual goals, implying a hierarchical positioning of the self in relation to the overarching in-group. The horizontal-vertical individualism-collectivism model has received empirical support and has been used to explore patterns within cultures.\n\nOriginated by W. E. B. DuBois, some researchers have adopted a historical perspective on the emergence of collectivism among some cultural groups. DuBois and others argued that oppressed minority groups contend with internal division, meaning that the development of self-identity for individuals from these groups involves the integration of one's own perceptions of their group as well as typically negative, societal views of their group. This division is thought to impact goal formation such that people from marginalized groups tend to emphasize collectivistic over individualistic values.\n\nSome organizational research has found different variations of collectivism. These include institutional collectivism and in-group collectivism. Institutional collectivism is the idea that a work environment creates a sense of collectivist nature due to similar statuses and similar rewards, such as earning the same salary. In-group collectivism is the idea that an individual's chosen group of people, such as family or friend groups, create a sense of collectivist nature. In-group collectivism can be referred to as family collectivism.\n\nCultural views are believed to have a reciprocal relationship with macro-level processes such as economics, social change, and politics. Societal changes in the People's Republic of China exemplifies this well. Beginning in the early 1980s, China experienced dramatic expansion of economic and social structures, resulting in greater income inequality between families, less involvement of the government in social welfare programs, and increased competition for employment. Corresponding with these changes was a shift in ideology among Chinese citizens, especially among those who were younger, away from collectivism (the prevailing cultural ideology) toward individualism. China also saw this shift reflected in educational policies, such that teachers were encouraged to promote the development of their students’ individual opinions and self-efficacy, which prior to the aforementioned economic changes, was not emphasized in Chinese culture.\n\nAttempts to study the association of collectivism and political views and behaviors has largely occurred at the aggregate national level. However, more isolated political movements have also adopted a collectivistic framework. For example, collectivist anarchism is a revolutionary anarchist doctrine that advocates the abolition of both the state and private ownership of the means of production. It instead envisions the means of production being owned collectively and controlled and managed by the producers themselves.\n\nBULLET::::- Collective guilt\nBULLET::::- Collective identity\nBULLET::::- Collective leadership\nBULLET::::- Collective narcissism\nBULLET::::- Collective responsibility\nBULLET::::- Communitarianism\nBULLET::::- Corporatism\nBULLET::::- Cultural conservatism\nBULLET::::- Enclosure\nBULLET::::- Interdependence\nBULLET::::- Nationalism\nBULLET::::- Social solidarity\n"}
{"id": "5711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5711", "title": "Nepeta", "text": "Nepeta\n\nNepeta is a genus of flowering plants in the family Lamiaceae. The genus name is reportedly in reference to Nepete, an ancient Etruscan city. There are about 250 species.\n\nThe genus is native to Europe, Asia, and Africa, and has also naturalized in North America.\n\nSome members of this group are known as catnip or catmint because of their effect on house cats – the nepetalactone contained in some \"Nepeta\" species binds to the olfactory receptors of cats, typically resulting in temporary euphoria.\n\nMost of the species are herbaceous perennial plants, but some are annuals. They have sturdy stems with opposite heart-shaped, green to gray-green leaves. \"Nepeta\" plants are usually aromatic in foliage and flowers.\n\nThe tubular flowers can be lavender, blue, white, pink, or lilac, and spotted with tiny lavender-purple dots. The flowers are located in verticillasters grouped on spikes; or the verticillasters are arranged in opposite cymes, racemes, or panicles – toward the tip of the stems.\n\nThe calyx is tubular or campanulate, they are slightly curved or straight, and the limbs are often 2-lipped with five teeth. The lower lip is larger, with 3-lobes, and the middle lobe is the largest. The flowers have 4 hairless stamens that are nearly parallel, and they ascend under the upper lip of the corolla. Two stamen are longer and stamens of pistillate flowers are rudimentary. The style protrudes outside of the mouth of the flowers.\n\nThe fruits are nutlets, which are oblong-ovoid, ellipsoid, ovoid, or obovoid in shape. The surfaces of the nutlets can be slightly ribbed, smooth or warty.\n\nBULLET::::- Some species formerly classified as \"Nepeta\" are now in the genera \"Dracocephalum\", \"Glechoma\", and \"Calamintha\" .\n\nSpecies include:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta adenophyta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta agrestis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta alaghezi\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta alatavica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta algeriensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta amicorum\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta amoena\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta anamurensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta annua\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta apuleji\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta argolica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta assadii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta assurgens\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta astorensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta atlantica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta autraniana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta azurea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta badachschanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bakhtiarica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ballotifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta balouchestanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta barfakensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta baytopii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bazoftica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bellevii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta betonicifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta binaloudensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bodeana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta × boissieri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bokhonica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bombaiensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bornmuelleri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta botschantzevii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta brachyantha\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bracteata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta brevifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta bucharica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta caerulea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta caesarea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta campestris\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta camphorata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta × campylantha\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta cataria\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta cephalotes\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta chionophila\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ciliaris\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta cilicica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta clarkei\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta coerulescens\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta concolor\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta conferta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta congesta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta connata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta consanguinea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta crinita\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta crispa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta curviflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta cyanea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta cyrenaica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta czegemensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta daenensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta deflersiana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta densiflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta dentata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta denudata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta dirmencii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta discolor\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta distans\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta duthiei\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta elliptica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta elymaitica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta erecta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta eremokosmos\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta eremophila\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta eriosphaera\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta eriostachya\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ernesti-mayeri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta everardii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta × faassenii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta flavida\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta floccosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta foliosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta fordii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta formosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta freitagii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta glechomifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta gloeocephala\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta glomerata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta glomerulosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta glutinosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta gontscharovii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta govaniana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta graciliflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta granatensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta grandiflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta grata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta griffithii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta heliotropifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta hemsleyana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta henanensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta hindostana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta hispanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta hormozganica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta humilis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta hymenodonta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta isaurica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ispahanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta italica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta jakupicensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta jomdaensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta juncea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta knorringiana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta koeieana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta kokamirica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta kokanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta komarovii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta kotschyi\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta kurdica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta kurramensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ladanolens\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta laevigata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta lagopsis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta lamiifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta lamiopsis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta lasiocephala\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta latifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta leucolaena\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta linearis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta lipskyi\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta longibracteata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta longiflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta longituba\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ludlow-hewittii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta macrosiphon\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta mahanensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta manchuriensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta mariae\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta maussarifii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta melissifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta membranifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta menthoides\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta meyeri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta micrantha\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta minuticephala\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta mirzayanii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta mollis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta monocephala\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta monticola\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta multibracteata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta multicaulis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta multifida\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta natanzensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nawarica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nepalensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nepetella\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nepetellae\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nepetoides\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nervosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta nuda\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta obtusicrena\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta odorifera\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta olgae\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta orphanidea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pabotii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta paktiana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pamirensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta parnassica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta paucifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta persica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta petraea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta phyllochlamys\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pilinux\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta podlechii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta podostachys\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pogonosperma\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta polyodonta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta praetervisa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta prattii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta prostrata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pseudokokanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pubescens\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta pungens\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta racemosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta raphanorhiza\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta rechingeri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta rivularis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta roopiana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta rtanjensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta rubella\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta rugosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta saccharata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta santoana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta saturejoides\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta schiraziana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta schmidii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta schugnanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta scordotis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta septemcrenata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sessilis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta shahmirzadensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sheilae\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sibirica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sorgerae\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sosnovskyi\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta souliei\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta spathulifera\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sphaciotica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta spruneri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta stachyoides\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta staintonii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta stenantha\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta stewartiana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta straussii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta stricta\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta suavis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta subcaespitosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta subhastata\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta subincisa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta subintegra\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta subsessilis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sudanica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sulfuriflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sulphurea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta sungpanensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta supina\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta taxkorganica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta tenuiflora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta tenuifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta teucriifolia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta teydea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta tibestica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta × tmolea\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta trachonitica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta transiliensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta trautvetteri\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta trichocalyx\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta tuberosa\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta tytthantha\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta uberrima\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta ucranica\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta veitchii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta velutina\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta viscida\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta vivianii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta wettsteinii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta wilsonii\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta woodiana\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta yanthina\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta yesoensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta zandaensis\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta zangezura\"\n\nSome \"Nepeta\" species are cultivated as ornamental plants. They can be drought tolerant – water conserving, often deer repellent, with long bloom periods from late spring to autumn. Some species also have repellent properties to insect pests, including aphids and squash bugs, when planted in a garden.\n\n\"Nepeta\" species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species including \"Coleophora albitarsella\", and as nectar sources for pollinators, such as honey bees and hummingbirds.\n\nBULLET::::- Selected ornamental species\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta cataria\" (catnip, catswort) – the \"true catnip\", cultivated as an ornamental plant, has become an invasive species in some habitats.\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta grandiflora\" (giant catmint, Caucasus catmint) – lusher than true catnip and has dark green leaves and dark blue flowers.\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta\" × \"faassenii\" (garden catmint) – a hybrid of garden source with gray-green foliage and lavender flowers. It is drought-tolerant and deer-resistant. The cultivar 'Walker's Low' was named Perennial of the Year for 2007 by the Perennial Plant Association.\nBULLET::::- \"Nepeta racemosa\" (raceme catnip) – commonly used in landscaping. It is hardy, rated for USDA hardiness zone 5b.\n\n\nBULLET::::- GRIN Species Records of \"Nepeta\"\nBULLET::::- Flora of Nepal: \"Nepeta'\nBULLET::::- Drugs.com: Catnip\nBULLET::::- \"Nepetalactone: What is in catnip anyway?\"\nBULLET::::- HowStuffWorks, Inc.: \"How does catnip work?\"\nBULLET::::- Sciencedaily.com: \"Catnip Repels Mosquitoes More Effectively Than DEET\" – \"reported at the 2001 American Chemical Society meeting\".\n"}
{"id": "5714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5714", "title": "Cornish Nationalist Party", "text": "Cornish Nationalist Party\n\nThe Cornish Nationalist Party (CNP; ) is a political party, founded by Dr James Whetter, who campaigned for independence for Cornwall. It was formed by people who left Cornwall's main nationalist party Mebyon Kernow on 28 May 1975, but it is no longer for independence.\n\nA separate party with a similar name (Cornish National Party) existed from 1969.\n\nThe split with Mebyon Kernow was based on the same debate that was occurring in most of the other political parties campaigning for autonomy from the United Kingdom at the time (such as the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru): whether to be a centre-left party, appealing to the electorate on a social democratic line, or whether to appeal emotionally on a centre-right cultural line. Originally, another subject of the split was whether to embrace devolution as a first step to full independence (or as the sole step if this was what the electorate wished) or for it to be \"all or nothing\".\n\nThe CNP essentially represented a more right-wing outlook from those who disagree that economic arguments were more likely to win votes than cultural. The CNP worked to preserve the Celtic identity of Cornwall and improve its economy, and encouraged links with Cornish people overseas and with other regions with distinct identities. It also gave support to the Cornish language and commemorated Thomas Flamank, a leader of the Cornish Rebellion in 1497, at an annual ceremony at Bodmin on 27 June each year.\n\nThe Policy Statement and Programme of the CNP were published in 1975 and included the following points:\n\nBULLET::::- To look after the interests of Cornish people.\nBULLET::::- To preserve and enhance the identity of Kernow, an essentially Celtic identity.\nBULLET::::- To achieve self-government for Kernow.\nBULLET::::- Total sovereignty will be exercised by the Cornish state over the land within its traditional border.\nBULLET::::- Kernow's official language will be Cornish.\nBULLET::::- Better job prospects for Cornish people.\nBULLET::::- Reduction of unemployment to an acceptable level (2.5%).\nBULLET::::- The protection of the self-employed and small businesses in Cornwall.\nBULLET::::- Cheaper housing and priority for Cornish people.\nBULLET::::- Discouragement of second homes.\nBULLET::::- Controls over tourism.\nBULLET::::- The Cornish state will have control over the number and nature of immigrants.\nBULLET::::- The establishment of a Cornish economic department to aid the basic industries of farming, fishing, china clay and mining and secondary industries developing from these.\nBULLET::::- Improved transport facilities in Cornwall with greater scope for private enterprise to operate.\nBULLET::::- Existing medical and welfare services for Cornish people will be developed and improved.\nBULLET::::- Protection of Cornish natural resources, including offshore resources.\nBULLET::::- Conservation of the Cornish landscape and the unique Cornish environment, culture and identity.\nBULLET::::- Courses on Cornish language and history should be made available in schools for those who want them.\nBULLET::::- Recognition of the Cornish flag of St Piran and the retention of the Tamar border with England.\nBULLET::::- The rule of law will be upheld by the Cornish state and the judiciary will be separate from the legislative and executive functions of the state.\nBULLET::::- The Cornish state will create a home defence force, linked to local communities and civil units of administration.\nBULLET::::- Young Cornish people will be given instruction as to world religions and secular philosophies but the greatest attention will be given to Christianity and early Celtic beliefs.\nBULLET::::- A far greater say in government for Cornish people (by referenda if necessary) and the decentralisation of considerable powers to a Cornish nation within a united Europe - special links being established with our Celtic brothers and sisters in Scotland, Ireland, Isle of Man, Wales and Brittany.\n\nWhile the CNP is not a racist organisation, there was a perceived image problem from the similarly-styled BNP and NF (the nativist British National Party and National Front), and during the 1970s letters were published in the party magazine \"The Cornish Banner\" (\"An Baner Kernewek\") sympathetic to the NF and critical of \"Zionist\" politicians.The CNP also formed a controversial uniformed wing known as the \"Greenshirts\" led by the CNP Youth Movement leader and Public Relations Officer, Wallace Simmons who also founded the pro-NF \"Cornish Front\". (Although the CNP and CF were sympathetic to Irish republicanism while the NF was supportive of Ulster loyalism, with the exception of leading NF figures like Patrick Harrington, who refused to condemn the IRA during an interview for the Channel 4 TV documentary \"Disciples of Chaos\"). \n\nThe CNP was for some time seen as more of a pressure group, as it did not put up candidates for any elections, although its visibility and influence within Cornwall is negligible. , it is now registered on the UK political parties register, and so Mebyon Kernow is no longer the only registered political party based in Cornwall. In April 2009, a news story reported that the CNP had re-formed following a conference in Bodmin; however, it did not contest any elections that year.\n\nThe CNP polled 227 (0.4) votes in Truro during the 1979 UK General Election, 364 (0.67) in North Cornwall in the 1983 UK General Election, and 1,892 (1.0) at the European Parliament elections in the Cornwall and Plymouth constituency in 1984. The candidate on all three occasions was the founder and first leader of the CNP, Dr James Whetter.\n\nDr Whetter was the founder and editor of the CNP quarterly journal, \"The Cornish Banner\" (\"An Baner Kernewek\"), within the actions of the Roseland Institute. Since his death in 2018 the CNP has been led by Androw Hawke.\n\nA newspaper article and a revamp of the party website in October 2014 state that the party is now to contest elections once more.\nJohn Le Bretton, vice-chairman of the party, said: \"The CNP supports the retention of Cornwall Council as a Cornwall-wide authority running Cornish affairs and we call for the British government in Westminster to devolve powers to the council so that decisions affecting Cornwall can be made in Cornwall\".\n\nThe party's policies include the following:\n\nBULLET::::- Calling for more legislative powers to be given to Cornwall Council. The authority should effectively become the Cornish government, with town and parish councils acting as local government.\nBULLET::::- Cornwall council should have a reduction in councillors, with standardisation of electoral areas and constituencies in throughout Cornwall.\nBULLET::::- The Westminster government should appoint a Minister for Cornwall and confirm there will be no further plans to have any parliamentary constituency covering part of Cornwall and Devon.\nThe CNP has one parish councillor, CNP leader Androw Hawke who was elected to Polperro Community Council for the second time on 4 May 2017.\n\nThe reformed party was registered with the Electoral Commission in 2014, but ceased to be registered in 2017.\nThe CNP now operates as more of a pressure group standing candidates as Independents in local elections in Cornwall.\n\nBULLET::::- List of topics related to Cornwall\nBULLET::::- Cornish self-government movement\nBULLET::::- Constitutional status of Cornwall\nBULLET::::- Mebyon Kernow\n\nBULLET::::- The CNP at the Roseland Institute\nBULLET::::- CNP Twitter page\nBULLET::::- The Cornish Banner website\nBULLET::::- 2017 Spectator magazine article about Cornish Nationalism, Mebyon Kernow and the CNP\n"}
{"id": "5715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5715", "title": "Cryptanalysis", "text": "Cryptanalysis\n\nCryptanalysis (from the Greek \"kryptós\", \"hidden\", and \"analýein\", \"to loosen\" or \"to untie\") is the study of analyzing information systems in order to study the hidden aspects of the systems. Cryptanalysis is used to breach cryptographic security systems and gain access to the contents of encrypted messages, even if the cryptographic key is unknown.\n\nIn addition to mathematical analysis of cryptographic algorithms, cryptanalysis includes the study of side-channel attacks that do not target weaknesses in the cryptographic algorithms themselves, but instead exploit weaknesses in their implementation.\n\nEven though the goal has been the same, the methods and techniques of cryptanalysis have changed drastically through the history of cryptography, adapting to increasing cryptographic complexity, ranging from the pen-and-paper methods of the past, through machines like the British Bombes and Colossus computers at Bletchley Park in World War II, to the mathematically advanced computerized schemes of the present. Methods for breaking modern cryptosystems often involve solving carefully constructed problems in pure mathematics, the best-known being integer factorization.\n\nGiven some encrypted data (\"\"ciphertext\"\"), the goal of the \"cryptanalyst\" is to gain as much information as possible about the original, unencrypted data (\"\"plaintext\"\"). It is useful to consider two aspects of achieving this. The first is \"breaking\" the system — that is discovering how the encipherment process works. The second is \"solving\" the key that is unique for a particular encrypted message or group of messages.\n\nAttacks can be classified based on what type of information the attacker has available. As a basic starting point it is normally assumed that, for the purposes of analysis, the general algorithm is known; this is Shannon's Maxim \"the enemy knows the system\" — in its turn, equivalent to Kerckhoffs' principle. This is a reasonable assumption in practice — throughout history, there are countless examples of secret algorithms falling into wider knowledge, variously through espionage, betrayal and reverse engineering. (And on occasion, ciphers have been broken through pure deduction; for example, the German Lorenz cipher and the Japanese Purple code, and a variety of classical schemes):\nBULLET::::- \"Ciphertext-only\": the cryptanalyst has access only to a collection of ciphertexts or codetexts.\nBULLET::::- \"Known-plaintext\": the attacker has a set of ciphertexts to which he knows the corresponding plaintext.\nBULLET::::- \"Chosen-plaintext\" (\"chosen-ciphertext\"): the attacker can obtain the ciphertexts (plaintexts) corresponding to an arbitrary set of plaintexts (ciphertexts) of his own choosing.\nBULLET::::- \"Adaptive chosen-plaintext\": like a chosen-plaintext attack, except the attacker can choose subsequent plaintexts based on information learned from previous encryptions. Similarly \"Adaptive chosen ciphertext attack\".\nBULLET::::- \"Related-key attack\": Like a chosen-plaintext attack, except the attacker can obtain ciphertexts encrypted under two different keys. The keys are unknown, but the relationship between them is known; for example, two keys that differ in the one bit.\n\nAttacks can also be characterised by the resources they require. Those resources include:\n\nBULLET::::- Time — the number of \"computation steps\" (e.g., test encryptions) which must be performed.\nBULLET::::- Memory — the amount of \"storage\" required to perform the attack.\nBULLET::::- Data — the quantity and type of \"plaintexts and ciphertexts\" required for a particular approach.\n\nIt's sometimes difficult to predict these quantities precisely, especially when the attack isn't practical to actually implement for testing. But academic cryptanalysts tend to provide at least the estimated \"order of magnitude\" of their attacks' difficulty, saying, for example, \"SHA-1 collisions now 2.\"\n\nBruce Schneier notes that even computationally impractical attacks can be considered breaks: \"Breaking a cipher simply means finding a weakness in the cipher that can be exploited with a complexity less than brute force. Never mind that brute-force might require 2 encryptions; an attack requiring 2 encryptions would be considered a break...simply put, a break can just be a certificational weakness: evidence that the cipher does not perform as advertised.\"\n\nThe results of cryptanalysis can also vary in usefulness. For example, cryptographer Lars Knudsen (1998) classified various types of attack on block ciphers according to the amount and quality of secret information that was discovered:\nBULLET::::- \"Total break\" — the attacker deduces the secret key.\nBULLET::::- \"Global deduction\" — the attacker discovers a functionally equivalent algorithm for encryption and decryption, but without learning the key.\nBULLET::::- \"Instance (local) deduction\" — the attacker discovers additional plaintexts (or ciphertexts) not previously known.\nBULLET::::- \"Information deduction\" — the attacker gains some Shannon information about plaintexts (or ciphertexts) not previously known.\nBULLET::::- \"Distinguishing algorithm\" — the attacker can distinguish the cipher from a random permutation.\n\nAcademic attacks are often against weakened versions of a cryptosystem, such as a block cipher or hash function with some rounds removed. Many, but not all, attacks become exponentially more difficult to execute as rounds are added to a cryptosystem, so it's possible for the full cryptosystem to be strong even though reduced-round variants are weak. Nonetheless, partial breaks that come close to breaking the original cryptosystem may mean that a full break will follow; the successful attacks on DES, MD5, and SHA-1 were all preceded by attacks on weakened versions.\n\nIn academic cryptography, a \"weakness\" or a \"break\" in a scheme is usually defined quite conservatively: it might require impractical amounts of time, memory, or known plaintexts. It also might require the attacker be able to do things many real-world attackers can't: for example, the attacker may need to choose particular plaintexts to be encrypted or even to ask for plaintexts to be encrypted using several keys related to the secret key. Furthermore, it might only reveal a small amount of information, enough to prove the cryptosystem imperfect but too little to be useful to real-world attackers. Finally, an attack might only apply to a weakened version of cryptographic tools, like a reduced-round block cipher, as a step towards breaking of the full system.\n\nCryptanalysis has coevolved together with cryptography, and the contest can be traced through the history of cryptography—new ciphers being designed to replace old broken designs, and new cryptanalytic techniques invented to crack the improved schemes. In practice, they are viewed as two sides of the same coin: secure cryptography requires design against possible cryptanalysis.\n\nAlthough the actual word \"\"cryptanalysis\"\" is relatively recent (it was coined by William Friedman in 1920), methods for breaking codes and ciphers are much older. David Kahn notes in \"The Codebreakers\" that Arab scholars were the first people to systematically document cryptanalytic methods.\n\nThe first known recorded explanation of cryptanalysis was given by Al-Kindi (c. 801–873, also known as \"Alkindus\" in Europe), a 9th-century Arab polymath, in \"Risalah fi Istikhraj al-Mu'amma\" (\"A Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages\"). This treatise contains the first description of the method of frequency analysis. Al-Kindi is thus regarded as the first codebreaker in history. His breakthrough work was influenced by Al-Khalil (717–786), who wrote the \"Book of Cryptographic Messages\", which contains the first use of permutations and combinations to list all possible Arabic words with and without vowels.\n\nFrequency analysis is the basic tool for breaking most classical ciphers. In natural languages, certain letters of the alphabet appear more often than others; in English, \"E\" is likely to be the most common letter in any sample of plaintext. Similarly, the digraph \"TH\" is the most likely pair of letters in English, and so on. Frequency analysis relies on a cipher failing to hide these statistics. For example, in a simple substitution cipher (where each letter is simply replaced with another), the most frequent letter in the ciphertext would be a likely candidate for \"E\". Frequency analysis of such a cipher is therefore relatively easy, provided that the ciphertext is long enough to give a reasonably representative count of the letters of the alphabet that it contains.\n\nAl-Kindi's invention of the frequency analysis technique for breaking monoalphabetic substitution ciphers was the most significant cryptanalytic advance until World War II. Al-Kindi's \"Risalah fi Istikhraj al-Mu'amma\" described the first cryptanalytic techniques, including some for polyalphabetic ciphers, cipher classification, Arabic phonetics and syntax, and most importantly, gave the first descriptions on frequency analysis. He also covered methods of encipherments, cryptanalysis of certain encipherments, and statistical analysis of letters and letter combinations in Arabic. An important contribution of Ibn Adlan (1187–1268) was on sample size for use of frequency analysis.\n\nIn Europe, Italian scholar Giambattista della Porta (1535-1615) was the author of a seminal work on cryptanalysis, \"De Furtivis Literarum Notis\".\n\nSuccessful cryptanalysis has undoubtedly influenced history; the ability to read the presumed-secret thoughts and plans of others can be a decisive advantage. For example, in England in 1587, Mary, Queen of Scots was tried and executed for treason as a result of her involvement in three plots to assassinate Elizabeth I of England. The plans came to light after her coded correspondence with fellow conspirators was deciphered by Thomas Phelippes.\n\nIn Europe during the 15th and 16th centuries, the idea of a polyalphabetic substitution cipher was developed, among others by the French diplomat Blaise de Vigenère (1523–96). For some three centuries, the Vigenère cipher, which uses a repeating key to select different encryption alphabets in rotation, was considered to be completely secure (\"le chiffre indéchiffrable\"—\"the indecipherable cipher\"). Nevertheless, Charles Babbage (1791–1871) and later, independently, Friedrich Kasiski (1805–81) succeeded in breaking this cipher. During World War I, inventors in several countries developed rotor cipher machines such as Arthur Scherbius' Enigma, in an attempt to minimise the repetition that had been exploited to break the Vigenère system.\n\nIn World War I, the breaking of the Zimmermann Telegram was instrumental in bringing the United States into the war. In World War II, the Allies benefitted enormously from their joint success cryptanalysis of the German ciphers — including the Enigma machine and the Lorenz cipher — and Japanese ciphers, particularly 'Purple' and JN-25. 'Ultra' intelligence has been credited with everything between shortening the end of the European war by up to two years, to determining the eventual result. The war in the Pacific was similarly helped by 'Magic' intelligence.\n\nCryptanalysis of enemy messages played a significant part in the Allied victory in World War II. F. W. Winterbotham, quoted the western Supreme Allied Commander, Dwight D. Eisenhower, at the war's end as describing Ultra intelligence as having been \"decisive\" to Allied victory. Sir Harry Hinsley, official historian of British Intelligence in World War II, made a similar assessment about Ultra, saying that it shortened the war \"by not less than two years and probably by four years\"; moreover, he said that in the absence of Ultra, it is uncertain how the war would have ended.\n\nIn practice, frequency analysis relies as much on linguistic knowledge as it does on statistics, but as ciphers became more complex, mathematics became more important in cryptanalysis. This change was particularly evident before and during World War II, where efforts to crack Axis ciphers required new levels of mathematical sophistication. Moreover, automation was first applied to cryptanalysis in that era with the Polish Bomba device, the British Bombe, the use of punched card equipment, and in the Colossus computers — the first electronic digital computers to be controlled by a program.\n\nWith reciprocal machine ciphers such as the Lorenz cipher and the Enigma machine used by Nazi Germany during World War II, each message had its own key. Usually, the transmitting operator informed the receiving operator of this message key by transmitting some plaintext and/or ciphertext before the enciphered message. This is termed the \"indicator\", as it indicates to the receiving operator how to set his machine to decipher the message.\n\nPoorly designed and implemented indicator systems allowed first Polish cryptographers and then the British cryptographers at Bletchley Park to break the Enigma cipher system. Similar poor indicator systems allowed the British to identify \"depths\" that led to the diagnosis of the Lorenz SZ40/42 cipher system, and the comprehensive breaking of its messages without the cryptanalysts seeing the cipher machine.\n\nSending two or more messages with the same key is an insecure process. To a cryptanalyst the messages are then said to be \"\"in depth.\"\" This may be detected by the messages having the same \"indicator\" by which the sending operator informs the receiving operator about the key generator initial settings for the message.\n\nGenerally, the cryptanalyst may benefit from lining up identical enciphering operations among a set of messages. For example, the Vernam cipher enciphers by bit-for-bit combining plaintext with a long key using the \"exclusive or\" operator, which is also known as \"modulo-2 addition\" (symbolized by ⊕ ):\nDeciphering combines the same key bits with the ciphertext to reconstruct the plaintext:\n(In modulo-2 arithmetic, addition is the same as subtraction.) When two such ciphertexts are aligned in depth, combining them eliminates the common key, leaving just a combination of the two plaintexts:\nThe individual plaintexts can then be worked out linguistically by trying \"probable words\" (or phrases), also known as \"\"cribs,\"\" at various locations; a correct guess, when combined with the merged plaintext stream, produces intelligible text from the other plaintext component:\nThe recovered fragment of the second plaintext can often be extended in one or both directions, and the extra characters can be combined with the merged plaintext stream to extend the first plaintext. Working back and forth between the two plaintexts, using the intelligibility criterion to check guesses, the analyst may recover much or all of the original plaintexts. (With only two plaintexts in depth, the analyst may not know which one corresponds to which ciphertext, but in practice this is not a large problem.) When a recovered plaintext is then combined with its ciphertext, the key is revealed:\nKnowledge of a key of course allows the analyst to read other messages encrypted with the same key, and knowledge of a set of related keys may allow cryptanalysts to diagnose the system used for constructing them.\n\nGovernments have long recognized the potential benefits of cryptanalysis for intelligence, both military and diplomatic, and established dedicated organizations devoted to breaking the codes and ciphers of other nations, for example, GCHQ and the NSA, organizations which are still very active today.\n\nEven though computation was used to great effect in the cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher and other systems during World War II, it also made possible new methods of cryptography orders of magnitude more complex than ever before. Taken as a whole, modern cryptography has become much more impervious to cryptanalysis than the pen-and-paper systems of the past, and now seems to have the upper hand against pure cryptanalysis. The historian David Kahn notes:\n\nKahn goes on to mention increased opportunities for interception, bugging, side channel attacks, and quantum computers as replacements for the traditional means of cryptanalysis. In 2010, former NSA technical director Brian Snow said that both academic and government cryptographers are \"moving very slowly forward in a mature field.\"\n\nHowever, any postmortems for cryptanalysis may be premature. While the effectiveness of cryptanalytic methods employed by intelligence agencies remains unknown, many serious attacks against both academic and practical cryptographic primitives have been published in the modern era of computer cryptography:\n\nBULLET::::- The block cipher Madryga, proposed in 1984 but not widely used, was found to be susceptible to ciphertext-only attacks in 1998.\nBULLET::::- FEAL-4, proposed as a replacement for the DES standard encryption algorithm but not widely used, was demolished by a spate of attacks from the academic community, many of which are entirely practical.\nBULLET::::- The A5/1, A5/2, CMEA, and DECT systems used in mobile and wireless phone technology can all be broken in hours, minutes or even in real-time using widely available computing equipment.\nBULLET::::- Brute-force keyspace search has broken some real-world ciphers and applications, including single-DES (see EFF DES cracker), 40-bit \"export-strength\" cryptography, and the DVD Content Scrambling System.\nBULLET::::- In 2001, Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), a protocol used to secure Wi-Fi wireless networks, was shown to be breakable in practice because of a weakness in the RC4 cipher and aspects of the WEP design that made related-key attacks practical. WEP was later replaced by Wi-Fi Protected Access.\nBULLET::::- In 2008, researchers conducted a proof-of-concept break of SSL using weaknesses in the MD5 hash function and certificate issuer practices that made it possible to exploit collision attacks on hash functions. The certificate issuers involved changed their practices to prevent the attack from being repeated.\n\nThus, while the best modern ciphers may be far more resistant to cryptanalysis than the Enigma, cryptanalysis and the broader field of information security remain quite active.\n\nIn 2004, it was reported that the United States had broken Iranian ciphers. It is unknown, however, whether this was pure cryptanalysis, or whether other factors were involved.\n\nBULLET::::- Boomerang attack\nBULLET::::- Brute-force attack\nBULLET::::- Davies' attack\nBULLET::::- Differential cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Impossible differential cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Improbable differential cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Integral cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Linear cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Meet-in-the-middle attack\nBULLET::::- Mod-n cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Related-key attack\nBULLET::::- Sandwich attack\nBULLET::::- Slide attack\nBULLET::::- XSL attack\n\nAsymmetric cryptography (or public key cryptography) is cryptography that relies on using two (mathematically related) keys; one private, and one public. Such ciphers invariably rely on \"hard\" mathematical problems as the basis of their security, so an obvious point of attack is to develop methods for solving the problem. The security of two-key cryptography depends on mathematical questions in a way that single-key cryptography generally does not, and conversely links cryptanalysis to wider mathematical research in a new way.\n\nAsymmetric schemes are designed around the (conjectured) difficulty of solving various mathematical problems. If an improved algorithm can be found to solve the problem, then the system is weakened. For example, the security of the Diffie–Hellman key exchange scheme depends on the difficulty of calculating the discrete logarithm. In 1983, Don Coppersmith found a faster way to find discrete logarithms (in certain groups), and thereby requiring cryptographers to use larger groups (or different types of groups). RSA's security depends (in part) upon the difficulty of integer factorization — a breakthrough in factoring would impact the security of RSA.\n\nIn 1980, one could factor a difficult 50-digit number at an expense of 10 elementary computer operations. By 1984 the state of the art in factoring algorithms had advanced to a point where a 75-digit number could be factored in 10 operations. Advances in computing technology also meant that the operations could be performed much faster, too. Moore's law predicts that computer speeds will continue to increase. Factoring techniques may continue to do so as well, but will most likely depend on mathematical insight and creativity, neither of which has ever been successfully predictable. 150-digit numbers of the kind once used in RSA have been factored. The effort was greater than above, but was not unreasonable on fast modern computers. By the start of the 21st century, 150-digit numbers were no longer considered a large enough key size for RSA. Numbers with several hundred digits were still considered too hard to factor in 2005, though methods will probably continue to improve over time, requiring key size to keep pace or other methods such as elliptic curve cryptography to be used.\n\nAnother distinguishing feature of asymmetric schemes is that, unlike attacks on symmetric cryptosystems, any cryptanalysis has the opportunity to make use of knowledge gained from the public key.\n\nBULLET::::- Birthday attack\nBULLET::::- Hash function security summary\nBULLET::::- Rainbow table\n\nBULLET::::- Black-bag cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Man-in-the-middle attack\nBULLET::::- Power analysis\nBULLET::::- Replay attack\nBULLET::::- Rubber-hose cryptanalysis\nBULLET::::- Timing analysis\n\nQuantum computers, which are still in the early phases of research, have potential use in cryptanalysis. For example, Shor's Algorithm could factor large numbers in polynomial time, in effect breaking some commonly used forms of public-key encryption.\n\nBy using Grover's algorithm on a quantum computer, brute-force key search can be made quadratically faster. However, this could be countered by doubling the key length.\n\nBULLET::::- Economics of security\nBULLET::::- Global surveillance\nBULLET::::- Information assurance, a term for information security often used in government\nBULLET::::- Information security, the overarching goal of most cryptography\nBULLET::::- National Cipher Challenge\nBULLET::::- Security engineering, the design of applications and protocols\nBULLET::::- Security vulnerability; vulnerabilities can include cryptographic or other flaws\nBULLET::::- Topics in cryptography\nBULLET::::- Zendian Problem\n\nBULLET::::- Conel Hugh O'Donel Alexander\nBULLET::::- Charles Babbage\nBULLET::::- Lambros D. Callimahos\nBULLET::::- Joan Clarke\nBULLET::::- Alastair Denniston\nBULLET::::- Agnes Meyer Driscoll\nBULLET::::- Elizebeth Friedman\nBULLET::::- William F. Friedman\nBULLET::::- Meredith Gardner\nBULLET::::- Friedrich Kasiski\nBULLET::::- Al-Kindi\nBULLET::::- Dilly Knox\nBULLET::::- Solomon Kullback\nBULLET::::- Marian Rejewski\nBULLET::::- Joseph Rochefort, whose contributions affected the outcome of the Battle of Midway\nBULLET::::- Frank Rowlett\nBULLET::::- Abraham Sinkov\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Soro, the Renaissance's first outstanding cryptanalyst\nBULLET::::- John Tiltman\nBULLET::::- Alan Turing\nBULLET::::- William T. Tutte\nBULLET::::- John Wallis - 17th-century English mathematician\nBULLET::::- William Stone Weedon - worked with Fredson Bowers in World War II\nBULLET::::- Herbert Yardley\n\nBULLET::::- Ibrahim A. Al-Kadi,\"The origins of cryptology: The Arab contributions\", \"Cryptologia\", 16(2) (April 1992) pp. 97–126.\nBULLET::::- Friedrich L. Bauer: \"Decrypted Secrets\". Springer 2002.\nBULLET::::- Helen Fouché Gaines, \"Cryptanalysis\", 1939, Dover.\nBULLET::::- David Kahn, \"The Codebreakers - The Story of Secret Writing\", 1967.\nBULLET::::- Lars R. Knudsen: Contemporary Block Ciphers. Lectures on Data Security 1998: 105-126\nBULLET::::- Abraham Sinkov, \"Elementary Cryptanalysis: A Mathematical Approach\", Mathematical Association of America, 1966.\nBULLET::::- Christopher Swenson, Modern Cryptanalysis: Techniques for Advanced Code Breaking,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F., Military Cryptanalysis, Part I,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F., Military Cryptanalysis, Part II,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F., Military Cryptanalysis, Part III, Simpler Varieties of Aperiodic Substitution Systems,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F., Military Cryptanalysis, Part IV, Transposition and Fractionating Systems,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F. and Lambros D. Callimahos, Military Cryptanalytics, Part I, Volume 1,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F. and Lambros D. Callimahos, Military Cryptanalytics, Part I, Volume 2,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F. and Lambros D. Callimahos, Military Cryptanalytics, Part II, Volume 1,\nBULLET::::- Friedman, William F. and Lambros D. Callimahos, Military Cryptanalytics, Part II, Volume 2,\nBULLET::::- in\nBULLET::::- Transcript of a lecture given by Prof. Tutte at the University of Waterloo\n\n\nBULLET::::- Basic Cryptanalysis (files contain 5 line header, that has to be removed first)\nBULLET::::- Distributed Computing Projects\nBULLET::::- List of tools for cryptanalysis on modern cryptography\nBULLET::::- Simon Singh's crypto corner\nBULLET::::- The National Museum of Computing\nBULLET::::- UltraAnvil tool for attacking simple substitution ciphers\nBULLET::::- How Alan Turing Cracked The Enigma Code Imperial War Museums\n"}
{"id": "5716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5716", "title": "Chicano", "text": "Chicano\n\nChicano, or Chicana, is a chosen identity of some Mexican Americans in the United States. \"Chicano\" or \"Xicano\" are sometimes used interchangeably with \"Mexican-American\" and both names exist as chosen identities within the Mexican-American community in the United States.\n\nAlthough \"Chicano\" had negative connotations as a term of denigration prior to the Chicano Movement, it was reclaimed in the 1960s and 1970s by Mexican Americans to express self-determination and solidarity in a shared cultural, ethnic, and communal identity while openly rejecting assimilation. Chicano identity hit a low point in the 1980s and 1990s, as assimilation and economic mobility became a goal of many middle-class Mexican Americans who instead adopted the terms Hispanic and Latino.\n\nBy the end of the 1990s a shift in Chicano identity, initiated by Xicana feminists and others, supporting the adoption of Xicana/o identity occurred among some members of the community. In the 2010s, there has been a resurgence of Chicana/o/x and Xicana/o/x identity, some even referring to it as a renaissance, centered on ethnic pride, Indigenous consciousness, cultural expression, defense of immigrants, and the rights of women and queer Latinx people.\n\nThe town of \"Chicana\" was shown on the Gutiérrez 1562 New World map near the mouth of the Colorado River, and is probably pre-Columbian in origin.\n\nIn 1857, a gunboat, the \"Chicana\", was sold to Jose Maria Carvajal to ship arms on the Rio Grande. The King and Kenedy firm submitted a voucher to the Joint Claims Commission of the United States in 1870 to cover the costs of this gunboat's conversion from a passenger steamer. No explanation for the boat's name is known.\n\nThe Chicano poet and writer Tino Villanueva traced the first documented use of the term as an ethnonym to 1911, as referenced in a then-unpublished essay by University of Texas anthropologist José Limón.\n\nLinguists Edward R. Simmen and Richard F. Bauerle report the use of the term in an essay by Mexican-American writer, Mario Suárez, published in the \"Arizona Quarterly\" in 1947. There is ample literary evidence to substantiate that \"Chicano\" is a long-standing endonym, as a large body of Chicano literature pre-dates the 1950s.\n\nThe etymology of the term \"Chicano\" is not definitive and has been debated by historians, scholars, and activists. Although there has been controversy over the origins of \"Chicano\", community conscience reportedly remains strong among those who claim the identity.\n\n\"Chicano\" is believed by some scholars to be a Spanish language derivative of an older Nahuatl word Mexitli (\"Meh-shee-tlee\"). Mexitli formed part of the expression \"Huitzilopochtlil Mexitli\"—a reference to the historic migration of the Mexica people from their homeland of Aztlán to the Oaxaca Valley. Mexitli is the linguistic progenitor or root of the word \"Mexica,\" referring to the Mexica people, and its singular form \"Mexicatl\" (\"Me-hee-cah-no\"). The word \"Mexico\" actually derives from \"Méjicano,\" a mispronunciation of the term \"Mexicatl\" by the Spanish in the early 16th century, with the \"x\" in Mexicatl being pronounced by the Spanish with an \"h\" sound and the glottal stop at the end of the Nahuatl word disappearing completely. The word \"Chicano\" therefore more directly derives from the loss of the initial syllable of \"Mexicano\" (Mexican). According to Villanueva, \"given that the velar (x) is a palatal phoneme (S) with the spelling (sh),\" in accordance with the Indigenous phonological system of the Mexicas (\"Meshicas\"), it would become \"Meshicano\" or \"Mechicano.\" Some Chicanos further replace the \"ch\" with the letter \"x\", forming \"Xicano\", as a means of reclaiming and reverting to the Nahuatl use of the letter \"x.\" The first two syllables of \"Xicano\" are therefore in Nahuatl while the last syllable is Castillian.\n\nIn Mexico's Indigenous regions, mestizos and Westernized natives are referred to as \"mexicanos\", referring to the modern nation, rather than the ' (village or tribal) identification of the speaker, be it Mayan, Zapotec, Mixtec, Huasteco, or any of hundreds of other indigenous groups. Thus, a newly emigrated Nahuatl speaker in an urban center might referred to his cultural relatives in this country, different from himself, as ', shortened to \"Chicanos\".\n\n\"The New Handbook of Texas\" (1996) combines the two ideas:According to one explanation, the pre-Colombian tribes in Mexico called themselves Meshicas, and the Spaniards, employing the letter x (which at that time represented a and []), spelled it \"Mexicas\". The Indians later referred to themselves as Meshicanos and even as Shicanos, thus giving birth to the term Chicano.\n\nChicano identity was originally reclaimed in the 1960s and 1970s by Mexican Americans as a means of asserting their own ethnic, political, and cultural identity while rejecting and resisting assimilation into whiteness, systematic racism and stereotypes, colonialism, and the American nation-state. Chicano identity was also founded on the need to create alliances with other oppressed ethnic and third world peoples while protesting U.S. imperialism. The notion of Aztlán, a mythical homeland which was claimed to be located in the southwestern United States, was critical in mobilizing many Mexican Americans to take social and political action. Chicano identity was organized around seven objectives: unity, economy, education, institutions, self-defense, culture, and political liberation, in an effort to bridge regional and class divisions among Mexican Americans. Chicanos originally espoused the belief in a unifying \"mestizo\" identity and also centered their platform in the masculine body.\n\nIn the 1970s, Chicano identity became further defined under a reverence for machismo while also maintaining the values of their original platform, exemplified via the language employed in court cases such as Montez v. Superior Court, 1970, which defined the Chicano community as unified under \"a commonality of ideals and \"costumbres\" with respect to masculinity (machismo), family roles, child discipline, [and] religious values.\" Oscar Zeta Acosta defined machismo as the source of Chicano identity, claiming that this \"instinctual and mystical source of manhood, honor and pride... alone justifies all behavior.\" Armando Rendón wrote in \"Chicano Manifesto\" (1971) that machismo was \"in fact an underlying drive of the gathering identification of Mexican Americans... the essence of \"machismo\", of being \"macho\", is as much a symbolic principle for the Chicano revolt as it is a guideline for family life.\"\n\nFrom the beginning of the Chicano Movement, Chicana activists and scholars have \"criticized the conflation of revolutionary commitment with manliness or machismo\" and questioned \"whether machismo is indeed a genuinely Mexican cultural value or a kind of distorted view of masculinity generated by the psychological need to compensate for the indignities suffered by Chicanos in a white supremacist society,\" as noted by José-Antonio Orosco. Academic Angie Chabram-Dernersesian indicates in her study of literary texts which were formative in the Chicano movement that most of the stories focus on men and boys and none focus on Chicanas. The omission of Chicanas and the masculine-focused foundations of Chicano identity, created a shift in consciousness among some Chicanas/os by the 1990s.\n\n\"Xicanisma\" was coined by Chicana Feminist writer Ana Castillo in \"Massacre of the Dreamers: Essays on Xicanisma\" (1994) as a recognition of the shift in consciousness since the Chicano Movement. In the 1990s and early 2000s, Xicana/o activists and scholars, including Guillermo Gómez-Peña, were beginning to form a new ideological notion of Xicanisma: \"a call for a return to the Amerindian roots of most Latinos as well as a call for a strategic alliance to give agency to Native American groups,\" reasserting the need to form coalitions with other oppressed ethnic groups, which was foundational in the formation of Chicano identity. Juan Velasco states that \"implicit in the 'X' of more recent configurations of 'Xicano' and 'Xicanisma' is a criticism not only of the term 'Hispanic' but of the racial poetics of the 'multiracial' within Mexican and American culture.\" While still recognizing many of the foundational elements of Chicano identity, some Xicana feminists have preferred to identify as Xicana because of the masculine-focused foundations of Chicano identity and the patriarchal biases inherent in the Spanish language.\n\nScholar Francesca A. López notes that \"\"Chicanismo\" has evolved into Xicanismo and even Xicanisma and other variations, but however it is spelled, it is based on the idea that to be Xican@ means to be proud of your Mexican Indigenous roots and committed to the struggle for liberation of all oppressed people.\" While adopting Chicano identity was a means of rejecting conformity to the dominant system as well as Hispanic identity, Xicano identity was adopted to emphasize a diasporic Indigenous American identity through being ancestrally connected to the land.\n\nDylan Miner has noted how the emergence of Xicano identity emphasizes an \"Indigenous and indigenist turn\" which recognizes the Indigenous roots of Xicana/o/x people by explicitly referencing Nahuatl language and using an 'x' to signify a \"lost or colonized history.\" While \"Chicano\" identity has been noted by scholars such as Francisco Rios as being limited by its focus on \"race and ethnicity with strong male overtones,\" \"Xicanismo\" has been referred to as elastic enough to recognize the \"intersecting nature of identities\" (race/ethnicity and gender, class and sexual orientation) as well as transnational roots \"from Mexico as well as those with roots centered in Central and South America.\"\n\nChicanos, like many Mexicans, are Mestizos who have heritage of both indigenous American cultures and European, mainly Spanish, through colonization and immigration. The term \"Latino\" refers to a native or inhabitant of Latin America or a person of Latin American origin living in the United States.\n\n\"Hispanic\" literally refers to Spain, but, in effect, to those of Spanish-speaking descent; therefore, the two terms are misnomers inasmuch as they apply only by extension to Chicanos, who may identify primarily as Amerindian or simply Mexican, and who may speak Amerindian languages (and English) as well as Spanish. The term was first brought up in the 1970s but it was not until the 1990s that the term was used on the U.S. Census. Since then it has widely been used by politicians and the media. For this reason, many Chicanos reject the term \"Hispanic\".\n\nWhile some Mexican-Americans may embrace the term \"Chicano\", others prefer to identify themselves as:\n\nBULLET::::- Mexican American; American of Mexican descent.\nBULLET::::- Hispanic; Hispanic American; \".\nBULLET::::- Latino/a, also mistranslated/pseudo-etymologically anglicized as \"Latin\".\nBULLET::::- American Latino/Latina.\nBULLET::::- Latin American (especially if immigrant).\nBULLET::::- Mexican; \"\nBULLET::::- \"Brown\"\nBULLET::::- Mestizo; [insert racial identity ] ' (e.g. '); \".\nBULLET::::- ' (or ') / '; '; \".\nBULLET::::- Part/member of \"\". (Various definitions exist of what would be such a \"universal race\".)\nBULLET::::- Americans, solely.\n\n\"Chicano\" existed as a disparaging term, yet transformed from a class-based label of derision to one of ethnic pride and general usage within Mexican-American communities with the rise of the Chicano Movement. Prior to the 1960s, it was used as a racial slur by non-Mexican Americans to refer to Mexican American people in Spanish-speaking neighborhoods. In his essay \"Chicanismo\" in \"The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures\" (2002), José Cuéllar, a professor of Chicano studies at San Francisco State University, dates the transition from derisive to positive to the late 1950s, with a usage by young Mexican-American high school students.\n\nIn Mexico, which by American standards would be considered class discrimination or racist, \"chicano\" is associated with a Mexican-American person of low importance class and poor morals (similarly to the Spanish terms Cholo, Chulo and Majo). \"Chicano\" is widely known and used in Mexico. The Mexican archeologist and anthropologist Manuel Gamio reported in 1930 that the term \"chicamo\" (with an \"m\") was used as a derogatory term used by Hispanic Texans for recently arrived Mexican immigrants displaced during the Mexican Revolution in the beginning of the early 20th century. At this time, the term \"Chicano\" began to reference those who resisted total assimilation, while the term \"Pochos\" referred (often pejoratively) to those who strongly advocated assimilation.\n\nVicki Ruíz and Virginia Sánchez report that demographic differences in the adoption of the term existed; because of the prior vulgar connotations, it was more likely to be used by males than females, and as well, less likely to be used among those in a higher socioeconomic status. Usage was also generational, with the more assimilated third-generation members (again, more likely male) likely to adopt the usage. This group was also younger, of more radical persuasion, and less connected to a Mexican cultural heritage.\n\nOutside of Mexican-American communities, the term might assume a negative meaning if it is used in a manner that embodies the prejudices and bigotries long directed at Mexican and Mexican-American people in the United States. For example, in one case, Ana Castillo has indicated the following subjective meaning through her creative work: \"[a] marginalized, brown woman who is treated as a foreigner and is expected to do menial labor and ask nothing of the society in which she lives.\" Castillo herself considers \"chicano\" to be a positive one of self-determination and political solidarity.\n\nThe term's meanings are flexible. Reclaiming its usage as a term of derision, self-described Chicanos view the identity as a positive self-identifying social construction meant to assert certain notions of ethnic, cultural, political, and Indigenous consciousness. Chicano identity usually consists of incorporating some notion of hybridity. For Chicanos, the identity has been defined as being \"neither from here, nor from there\" in reference to the US and Mexico. As a mixture of cultures from both countries, being Chicano represents the struggle of being institutionally acculturated into the Anglo-dominated society of the United States, while maintaining the cultural sense developed as a Latin-American cultured, U.S.-born Mexican child.\n\nThe identity may hold different meanings for different Chicanos. Armando Rendón wrote in the \"Chicano Manifesto\" (1971), \"I am Chicano. What it means to me may be different than what it means to you.\" In the 1990s, Chicano writer Benjamin Alire Sáenz wrote \"There is no such thing as the Chicano voice: there are only Chicano and Chicana \"voices\".\" Juan Bruce-Novoa, a professor of Spanish and Portuguese at University of California, Irvine, wrote in 1990: \"A Chicano lives in the space between the hyphen in Mexican-American.\" The identity thus may be understood as somewhat ambiguous (e.g. in the 1991 Culture Clash play \"A Bowl of Beings\", in response to Che Guevara's demand for a definition of \"Chicano,\" an \"armchair activist\" cries out, \"I still don't know!\"). However, as substantiated by Chicano activists, artists, writers, and scholars since the inception of the Chicano Movement, many Chicanos gravitate around the following conceptualizations of ethnic, political, cultural, and Indigenous identity:\n\nFrom a popular perspective, the term \"Chicano\" became widely visible outside of Chicano communities during the American civil rights movement. It was commonly used during the mid-1960s by Mexican-American activists such as Rodolfo \"Corky\" Gonzales, who was one of the first to reclaim the term, in an attempt to assert their civil rights and rid the word of its polarizing negative connotations. \"Chicano\" soon became an identity for Mexican Americans to assert their ethnic pride, proudly identifying themselves as \"Chicanos\" and also asserting a notion of \"Brown Pride\", drawing on the \"\"Black is Beautiful\"\" movement, inverting phrases of insult into forms of ethnic empowerment.\n\nFollowing this reclamation, Chicano identity soon became a celebration of non-whiteness, both within and external to the Mexican-American community. Chicano ethnic identity worked against the state-sanctioned census categories of \"Whites with Spanish Surnames,\" originally promulgated on the 1950 U.S. census, and \"Mexican-American,\" which Chicanos felt encouraged assimilation. Chicanos thus asserted their non-Europeaness during a time when Mexican assimilation into whiteness was being promoted by the federal government, which, as noted by Ian Haney López, was done in order \"serve Anglo self-interest,\" who would use it to deny discrimination against Mexicans.\n\nThe United States Census Bureau provided no clear way for Mexican Americans or other Latino Americans to officially identify as a racial/ethnic category prior to 1980, when the broader-than-Mexican term \"Hispanic\" was first available as a self-identification in census forms. While \"Chicano\" also appeared on the 1980 census, indicating the success of the Chicano Movement in gaining some federal recognition, it was only permitted to be selected as a subcategory underneath Spanish/Hispanic descent, which erased the visibility of Amerindian and African ancestries among Chicanos and populations throughout Latin America and the Caribbean.\n\nChicano writers have described how Chicano ethnic identity is born out of colonial encounters between Europe and the Americas. Alfred Arteaga writes how the Chicano arose as a result of the violence of colonialism, emerging as a hybrid ethnicity or race from European colonizers and Amerindian Indigenous peoples. Arteaga acknowledges how this ethnic and racial hybridity among Chicanos is highly complex and extends beyond a previously generalized \"Aztec\" ancestry, as originally asserted during the formative years of the Chicano Movement, sometimes involves more than Spanish ancestry, and also may include African ancestry, largely as a result of Spanish slavery or runaway slaves from Anglo-Americans. Arteaga therefore concludes that \"the physical manifestation of the Chicano, is itself a product of hybridity.\"\n\nChicano political identity has been cited as having developed out of a glorification of pachuco/a resistance to assimilation in the 1940s and 1950s. Pachucos were negatively perceived by white European American society. As stated by Luis Valdéz: \"Pachuco determination and pride grew through the 1950s and gave impetus to the Chicano movement of the 1960s. [...] By then the political consciousness stirred by the 1943 Zoot Suit Riots had developed into a movement that would soon issue the Chicano Manifesto – a detailed platform of political activism.\" Pachuco political action has been documented by some as a precursor to the Chicano Movement. By the late 1960s, according to Catherine S. Ramírez, the Pachuco figure \"had emerged as an icon of resistance in much Chicano cultural production,\" despite the absence of similar portrayals of the pachuco in Mexican-American literature and art prior to the Chicano Movement as well as the omission of the same reverence for the pachuca figure, which Ramírez credits with the pachuca's embodiment of \"dissident femininity, female masculinity, and, in some instances, lesbian sexuality.\"\n\nBy the 1960s, Chicano identity was consolidating around several key political positions: rejecting assimilation into white American society, resisting systematic racism, colonialism, and the American nation-state, and affirming the need to create alliances with other oppressed ethnic and third world peoples. Political liberation was a founding principle of Chicano identity. Chicano nationalism called for the creation of a Chicano subject whose political identity was separate from the U.S. nation-state which Chicanos recognized had impoverished, oppressed, and destroyed their communities. As stated by scholar Alberto Varon, Chicano nationalism \"created enduring social improvement for the lives of Mexican Americans and others\" through the political action of Chicanos. At the same time, this brand of Chicano nationalism focused on the masculinist subject in its calls for political resistance, which has since been insightfully and powerfully critiqued by Chicana feminists.\n\nChicano political activist groups such as the Brown Berets (1967-1972; 1992–Present), originally founded by David Sánchez in East Los Angeles as the Young Chicanos for Community Action, quickly gained support for their political objectives of protesting educational inequalities and demanding an end to police brutality. Paralleling with groups such as the Black Panthers and Young Lords, which were founded in 1966 and 1968 respectively, membership in the Brown Berets was estimated to have reached five thousand in over eighty chapters mostly centered in California and Texas. The Brown Berets were critical in organizing the Chicano Blowouts of 1968 and the National Chicano Moratorium, which protested the high number of Chicano casualties in the Vietnam War. Continued police harassment, infiltration by federal agents provacateur via COINTELPRO, and internal disputes led to the decline and disbandment of the Berets in 1972. Sánchez, then a professor at East Los Angeles College, revived the Brown Berets in 1992 after being prompted by the high number of Chicano homicides is Los Angeles County, seeking to supplant the structure of the gang as family with the Brown Berets.\n\nAt certain points in the 1970s, \"Chicano\" was the preferred term for reference to Mexican Americans, particularly in scholarly literature. However, even though the term is politicized, its use fell out of favor as a means of referring to the entire population due to ignorance and due to the majority's attempt to impose Latino and Hispanic as misnomers. Because of this, \"Chicano\" has tended to refer to participants in Mexican-American activism. Sabine Ulibarrí, an author from Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico, once labeled \"Chicano\" as a politically \"loaded\" term, though later recanted that assessment.\n\nReies Tijerina (who died on January 19, 2015) was a vocal claimant to the rights of Latin Americans and Mexican Americans, and he remains a major figure of the early Chicano Movement. Of the term, he wrote: \"The Anglo press degradized the word 'Chicano'. They use it to divide us. We use it to unify ourselves with our people and with Latin America.\"\n\nSince the Chicano Movement, \"Chicano\" has been reclaimed by Mexican-Americans to denote a hybrid cultural identity that is neither American or Mexican. Chicano cultural identity is commonly defined as embodying the \"in-between\" nature of hybridity. Rather than existing as a \"subculture\" of European American culture, Chicano culture has been positioned by Alicia Gasper de Alba as an \"\"alter-Native\" culture, an Other American culture indigenous to the land base now known as the West and Southwest of the United States.\" While influenced by settler-imposed systems and structures, Chicano culture is referred to as \"not immigrant but native, not foreign but colonized, not alien but different from the overarching hegemony of white America.\"\n\nAt least as early as the 1930s, the precursors to Chicano cultural identity largely developed in Los Angeles and the Southwest. In the early 20th century, former zootsuiter Salvador \"El Chava\" reflects how \"racism and poverty created [Mexican-American] gangs; we had to protect ourselves.\" Racism forced Mexican Americans to congregate in areas separated from Anglo Americans. \"Barrios\" and \"colonias\" (rural \"barrios\") were founded throughout Southern California and elsewhere in neglected districts of cities and outlying areas which exacerbated social and cultural issues within Mexican-American communities. Along with alienation from public institutions, some Chicano youth became susceptible to gang channels in a search for self-identity, allured by the rigid hierarchal structure and assigned roles amidst a world of state-sanctioned disorder. \"The pull of urban culture, with its rigidly defined hierarchy, prescribed member roles and activities, and symbols of group and cultural identity, can be particularly alluring for vulnerable youth,\" as noted by academic Kurt C. Organista.\n\nPachuco/a culture in Los Angeles developed in the 1940s and 1950s and has been credited as a precursor to the consolidation of Chicano cultural identity. Chicano zoot suiters on the West Coast were influenced by Black American zoot suiters and the jazz and swing music scene on the East Coast. In Los Angeles, Chicano zoot suiters developed their own cultural identity, as noted by Charles \"Chaz\" Bojórquez, \"with their hair done in big pompadours, and 'draped' in tailor-made suits, they were swinging to their own styles. They spoke Cálo, their own language, a cool jive of half-English, half-Spanish rhythms. [...] Out of the zootsuiter experience came lowrider cars and culture, clothes, music, tag names, and, again, its own graffiti language.\"\n\nMany aspects forming Chicano cultural identity, such as lowrider culture, have been stigmatized and policed by white European Americans who perceived all Chicanos as \"juvenile delinquents or gang members\" for their embrace of nonwhite style and cultures, many of which were influenced by and adjacent to Black American urban culture. These negative perceptions were amplified by media outlets such as the Los Angeles Times. Luis Alvarez remarks how this affected the policing of Black and Brown male bodies in particular: \"Popular discourse characterizing nonwhite youth as animal-like, hypersexual, and criminal marked their bodies as 'other' and, when coming from city officials and the press, served to help construct for the public a social meaning of African Americans and Mexican American youth. In these ways, the physical and discursive bodies of nonwhite youth were the sites upon which their dignity was denied.\"\n\nWith mass media, Chicano culture became popular in both the United States and internationally. In Japan, the highlights of Chicano culture include the music, lowrider community, and the arts. Chicano Culture took hold in Japan in the 1980s and continues to grow with contributions from people such as Shin Miyata, Junichi Shimodaira, Miki Style, Night Tha Funksta, and MoNa (Sad Girl). The introduction of Chicano culture in Japan has caused thousands of individuals to engage in Chicano culture. The Chicano fashion trends have also made its way to japan, with it inspiring many of the younger generations of japan.There has been debate over whether this should be termed cultural appropriation, with some arguing that it is appreciation rather than appropriation.\n\nThe identity has been perceived as a means of reclaiming Indigenous ancestry and forming an identity distinct from a European identity, despite partial European descent. As exemplified through its extensive use within el Plan de Santa Bárbara, one of the primary documents responsible for the genesis of M.E.Ch.A. (Movimiento Estudiantil Chicanx de Aztlán), \"Chicano\" was used by many as a reference to their Indigenous ancestry and roots. As Mexican-American journalist Rubén Salazar put it in \"Who is a Chicano? And what is it the Chicanos want?\", a 1970 \"Los Angeles Times\" piece: \"A Chicano is a Mexican-American with a non-Anglo image of himself.\" Leo Limón, an artist and community activist in Los Angeles states, \"...a Chicano is ... an indigenous Mexican American.\"\n\nScholar Patrisia Gonzales analyzes how Chicanx people are descendants of the Indigenous peoples of Mexico and have been displaced because of colonial violence which positions them among \"detribalized Indigenous peoples and communities.\" Journalist and academic Roberto Cintli Rodríguez describes Chicanos as \"de-Indigenized,\" which he remarks occurred \"in part due to religious indoctrination and a violent uprooting from the land,\" which detached them from maíz-based cultures throughout the greater Mesoamerican region. Rodríguez examines how and why \"peoples who are clearly red or brown and undeniably Indigenous to this continent have allowed ourselves, historically, to be framed by bureaucrats and the courts, by politicians, scholars, and the media as alien, illegal, and less than human.\"\n\nGloria E. Anzaldúa has addressed detribalization, stating \"In the case of Chicanos, being 'Mexican' is not a tribe. So in a sense Chicanos and Mexicans are 'detribalized'. We don't have tribal affiliations but neither do we have to carry ID cards establishing tribal affiliation.\" Anzaldúa also recognizes that \"Chicanos, people of color, and 'whites',\" have often chosen \"to ignore the struggles of Native people even when it's right in our \"caras\" (faces),\" expressing disdain for this \"willful ignorance.\" She concludes that \"though both 'detribalized urban mixed bloods' and Chicanas/os are recovering and reclaiming, this society is killing off urban mixed bloods through cultural genocide, by not allowing them equal opportunities for better jobs, schooling, and health care.\"\n\nWhile some Chicanos have asserted an identification with a generalized Indigenous ancestry and the mythical Aztec homeland of Aztlán, which has been noted by J. Jorge Klor de Alva as a useful political maneuver for mobilizing support for the Chicano Movement and rejecting assimilation, the appropriation of a pre-contact Aztec culture has since been reexamined by some Chicanos who recognize a need to affirm the diversity of the Indigenous peoples of Mexico and of Indigenous ancestry among Chicanos. As a result, some Chicanos have argued there has emerged a need to reconstruct the place of Aztlán and Indigeneity in relation to Chicano identity. The beginnings of this movement in revising Chicano Indigenous consciousness may be exemplified in the removal of \"Aztlán\" from M.E.Ch.A. in 2019.\n\nAcademic Inés Hernández-Ávila has emphasized how Chicanos reconnecting with their roots \"respectfully and humbly\" while validating \"those peoples who still maintain their identity as original peoples of this continent\" will serve as a means of creating radical change capable of \"transforming our world, our universe, and our lives.\"\n\nChicana women frequently confront objectification, being perceived as \"exotic,\" \"lascivious,\" and \"hot\" at a very young age while also facing denigration as \"barefoot,\" \"pregnant,\" \"dark,\" and \"low-class.\" These perceptions in society engender numerous negative sociological and psychological effects, such as excessive dieting and eating disorders. Social media has also enhanced these perceptions/stereotypes of Chicana women. In addition, numerous studies have found that Chicanas experience elevated levels of stress as a result of sexual expectations by their parents and families. Although many Chicana youth desire open conversation regarding gendered and sexual expectations, as well as mental health, these issues are often not discussed openly in families, which perpetuates unsafe and destructive practices. While young Chicana women are objectified, middle-aged Chicanas often discuss feelings of being invisible. Chicana women at this age report feeling trapped in balancing family obligations to their parents and children while attempting to create a space for their own sexual desires. The cultural expectation that Chicana women should be \"protected\" by Chicano men also constricts the agency and mobility of Chicana women.\n\nEarly in their social development, Chicano men develop their gendered identity as men within the context of marginalization. Some authors argue that \"Mexican men and their Chicano brothers suffer from an inferiority complex due to the conquest and genocide inflicted upon their indigenous ancestors,\" which leaves many Chicano men feeling trapped between identifying with the \"superior\" European conqueror and the \"inferior\" indigenous ancestor. As a result, the psychological pain this conflict along with marginalization creates is reported to manifest itself in the form of hypermasculinity, in which there occurs a \"quest for power and control over others in order to feel better\" about oneself. This can result in abusive behavior, developing an impenetrable cold persona, alcohol abuse, and other destructive behaviors. The lack of discussion of sexuality between Chicano men and their fathers, other Chicano men, or their mothers. Chicano men tend to learn about sex from their peers as well as older male family members who perpetuate the idea that as men they have \"a right to engage in sexual activity without commitment.\" The looming threat of being labeled a \"joto\" (gay) for not engaging in sexual activity also conditions many Chicano men to \"use\" women for their own sexual desires.\n\nChicana/o queer people often seek refuge in their families because it is difficult for them to find spaces where they feel safe in the dominant and hostile white culture which surrounds them, yet may be excluded because of hypermasculinity and homophobia. Gabriel S. Estrada describes how \"the overarching structures of capitalist white (hetero)sexism,\" including higher levels of criminalization directed towards Chicanos, have proliferated \"further homophobia\" especially among Chicano boys and men who may adopt \"hypermasculine personas that can include sexual violence directed at others.\" Estrada notes that not only does this constrict \"the formation of a balanced Indigenous sexuality for anyone[,] but especially... for those who do identify\" as part of the queer community to reject the \"Judeo-Christian mandates against homosexuality that are not native to their own ways,\" recognizing how many precolonial Indigenous societies in Mexico and elsewhere accepted homosexuality openly.\n\nChicanos, regardless of their generational status, may seek both Western biomedical healthcare and Indigenous health practices when dealing with trauma or illness. The effects of colonization and conquest have been proven to produce psychological distress among Indigenous communities. Similarly, intergenerational trauma along with racism and institutionalized systems of oppression which emerged from colonization have been shown to adversely impact the mental health of Chicanos and Latinos. Mexican Americans are three times more likely than European Americans to live in poverty. However, the utilization rate of mental health services is lower and lower levels of psychiatric distress were reported among Chicanos. Similar studies demonstrate lower comparative levels of distress in regard to physical health as well. Some scholars have cited strong family connections, lower levels of smoking/drinking, and adherence to traditional values as possible sources for this difference.\n\nAmong Mexican immigrants who have lived in the United States for less than thirteen years, lower rates of mental health disorders were found in comparison to Mexican-Americans and Chicanos born in the United States. Scholar Yvette G. Flores concludes that these studies demonstrate that \"factors associated with living in the United States are related to an increased risk of mental disorders.\" Risk factors for negative mental health include historical and contemporary trauma stemming from colonization, marginalization, discrimination, and devaluation. The disconnection of Chicanos from their Indigeneity has been cited as a cause of trauma and negative mental health:Loss of language, cultural rituals, and spiritual practices creates shame and despair. The loss of culture and language often goes unmourned, because it is silenced and denied by those who occupy, conquer, or dominate. Such losses and their psychological and spiritual impact are passed down across generations, resulting in depression, disconnection, and spiritual distress in subsequent generations, which are manifestations of historical or intergenerational trauma.Psychological distress may emerge from Chicanos being \"othered\" in society since childhood and is linked to psychiatric disorders and symptoms which are culturally bound – \"susto\" (fright), \"nervios\" (nerves), \"mal de ojo\" (evil eye), and \"ataque de nervios\" (an attack of nerves resembling a panic attack).\n\nMany currents came together to produce the revived Chicano political movement of the 1960s and 1970s. Early struggles were against school segregation, but the Mexican-American cause, or \"\" as it was called, soon came under the banner of the United Farm Workers and César Chávez. However, Corky Gonzales and Reies Tijerina stirred up old tensions about New Mexican land claims with roots going back to before the Mexican–American War. Simultaneous movements like the Young Lords, to empower youth, question patriarchy, democratize the Church, end police brutality, and end the Vietnam War, all intersected with other ethnic nationalist, peace, countercultural, and feminist movements.\n\nSince Chicanismo covers a wide array of political, religious and ethnic beliefs, and not everybody agrees with what exactly a Chicano is, most new Latino immigrants see it as a lost cause, as a lost culture, because Chicanos do not identify with Mexico or wherever their parents migrated from as new immigrants do. Chicanoism is an appreciation of a historical movement, but also is used by many to bring a new revived politicized feeling to voters young and old in the defense of Mexican and Mexican-American rights. People descended from Aztlan (both in the contemporary U.S. and in Mexico) use the Chicano ideology to create a platform for fighting for immigration reform and equality for all people.\n\nFor some, Chicano ideals involve a rejection of borders. The 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo transformed the Rio Grande region from a rich cultural center to a rigid border poorly enforced by the United States government. At the end of the Mexican–American War, 80,000 Spanish-Mexican-Indian people were forced into sudden U.S. habitation. As a result, Chicano identification is aligned with the idea of Aztlán, which extends to the Aztec period of Mexico, celebrating a time preceding land division.\n\nPaired with the dissipation of militant political efforts of the Chicano movement in the 1960s was the emergence of the Chicano generation. Like their political predecessors, the Chicano generation rejects the \"immigrant/foreigner\" categorization status. Chicano identity has expanded from its political origins to incorporate a broader community vision of social integration and nonpartisan political participation.\n\nThe shared Spanish language, Catholic faith, close contact with their political homeland (Mexico) to the south, a history of labor segregation, ethnic exclusion and racial discrimination encourage a united \"Chicano\" or Mexican folkloric tradition in the United States. Ethnic cohesiveness is a resistance strategy to assimilation and the accompanying cultural dissolution.\n\nMexican nationalists in Mexico, however, condemn the advocates of Chicanoism for attempting to create a new identity for the Mexican-American population, distinct from that of the Mexican nation. Chicanoism is embraced through personal identity especially within small rural communities that integrate the American culture connected to the Mexican heritage practiced in different parts of Mexico.\n\nThe term \"Chicano\" is also used to describe the literary, artistic, and musical movements that emerged with the Chicano Movement.\n\nChicana/o film is rooted in economic, social, and political oppression and has therefore been marginalized since its inception. Scholar Charles Ramírez Berg has suggested that Chicana/o cinema has progressed through three fundamental stages since its establishment in the 1960s. The first wave occurred from 1969 to 1976 and was characterized by the creation of radical documentaries which chronicled \"the cinematic expression of a cultural nationalist movement, it was politically contestational and formally oppositional.\" Some films of this era include El Teatro Campesino's \"Yo Soy Joaquín\" (1969) and Luis Valdez's \"El Corrido\" (1976). These films were focused on documenting the systematic oppression of Chicanas/os in the United States.\n\nThe second wave of Chicana/o film, according to Ramírez Berg, developed out of portraying anger against oppression faced in society, highlighting immigration issues, and re-centering the Chicana/o experience, yet channeling this in more accessible forms which were not as outright separatist as the first wave of films. Docudramas like Esperanza Vasquez's \"\" (1977), Jesús Salvador Treviño's \"Raíces de Sangre\" (1977), and Robert M. Young's \"¡Alambrista!\" (1977) served as transitional works which would inspire full-length narrative films. Early narrative films of the second wave include Valdez's \"Zoot Suit\" (1981), Young's \"The Ballad of Gregorio Cortez\" (1982), Gregory Nava's, \"My Family/Mi familia\" (1995) and \"Selena\" (1997), and Josefina López's \"Real Women Have Curves\", originally a play which premiered in 1990 and was later released as a film in 2002.\n\nThe second wave of Chicana/o film is still ongoing and overlaps with the third wave, the latter of which gained noticeable momentum in the 1990s and does not emphasize oppression, exploitation, or resistance as central themes. According to Ramírez Berg, third wave films \"do not accentuate Chicano oppression or resistance; ethnicity in these films exists as one fact of several that shape characters' lives and stamps their personalities.\"\n\nChicano literature tends to focus on themes of identity, discrimination, and culture, with an emphasis on validating Mexican-American and Chicano culture in the United States. Rodolfo \"Corky\" Gonzales's \"Yo Soy Joaquin\" is one of the first examples of explicitly Chicano poetry, while José Antonio Villarreal's \"Pocho\" (1959) is widely recognized as the first major Chicano novel.\n\nThe novel \"Chicano\", by Richard Vasquez, was the first novel about Mexican Americans to be released by a major publisher (Doubleday, 1970). It was widely read in high schools and universities during the 1970s and is now recognized as a breakthrough novel. Vasquez's social themes have been compared with those found in the work of Upton Sinclair and John Steinbeck.\n\nChicana writers have tended to focus on themes of identity, questioning how identity is constructed, who constructs it, and for what purpose in a racist, classist, and patriarchal structure. Characters in books such as Victuum (1976) by Isabella Ríos, \"The House on Mango Street\" (1983) by Sandra Cisneros, \"Loving in the War Years: lo que nunca pasó por sus labios\" (1983) by Cherríe Moraga, \"The Last of the Menu Girls\" (1986) by Denise Chávez, \"Margins\" (1992) by Terri de la Peña, and \"Gulf Dreams\" (1996) by Emma Pérez have also been read regarding how they intersect with themes of gender and sexuality. Academic Catrióna Rueda Esquibel performs a queer reading of Chicana literature in her work \"With Her Machete in Her Hand: Reading Chicana Lesbians\" (2006), demonstrating how some of the intimate relationships between girls and women in these works contributes to a discourse on homoeroticism and nonnormative sexuality in Chicana/o literature.\n\nChicano writers have tended to gravitate toward themes of cultural, racial, and political tensions in their work, while not explicitly focusing on issues of identity or gender and sexuality, in comparison to the work of Chicana writers. Chicanos who were marked as overtly gay in early Chicana/o literature, from 1959 to 1972, tended to be removed from the Mexican-American \"barrio\" and were typically portrayed with negative attributes, as examined by Daniel Enrique Pérez, such as the character of \"Joe Pete\" in \"Pocho\" and the unnamed protagonist of John Rechy's \"City of Night\" (1963). However, other characters in the Chicano canon may also be read as queer, such as the unnamed protagonist of Tomás Rivera's \"...y no se lo tragó la tierra\" (1971), and \"Antonio Márez\" in Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima (1972), since, according to Pérez, \"these characters diverge from heteronormative paradigms and their identities are very much linked to the rejection of heteronormativity.\"\n\nAs noted by scholar Juan Bruce-Novoa, Chicano novels allowed for androgynous and complex characters \"to emerge and facilitate a dialogue on nonnormative sexuality\" and that homosexuality was \"far from being ignored during the 1960s and 1970s\" in Chicano literature, although homophobia may have curtailed portrayals of openly gay characters during this era. Given this representation in early Chicano literature, Bruce-Novoa concludes, \"we can say our community is less sexually repressive than we might expect.\"\n\nOther major names in Chicana/o literature include Norma Elia Cantú, Gary Soto, Sergio Troncoso, Rigoberto González, Raul Salinas, Daniel Olivas, Benjamin Alire Sáenz, Luís Alberto Urrea, Dagoberto Gilb, Alicia Gaspar de Alba, Luis J. Rodriguez and Pat Mora.\n\nLalo Guerrero has been lauded as the \"father of Chicano music\". Beginning in the 1930s, he wrote songs in the big band and swing genres that were popular at the time. He expanded his repertoire to include songs written in traditional genres of Mexican music, and during the farmworkers' rights campaign, wrote music in support of César Chávez and the United Farm Workers.\n\nJeffrey Lee Pierce of The Gun Club often spoke about being half Mexican and growing up with the Chicano culture.\n\nOther Chicano/Mexican-American singers include Selena, who sang a mixture of Mexican, Tejano, and American popular music, but died in 1995 at the age of 23; Zack de la Rocha, lead vocalist of Rage Against the Machine and social activist; and Los Lonely Boys, a Texas-style country rock band who have not ignored their Mexican-American roots in their music. In recent years, a growing Tex-Mex polka band trend influenced by the ' and ' music of Mexican immigrants, has in turn influenced much new Chicano folk music, especially on large-market Spanish language radio stations and on television music video programs in the U.S. Some of these artists, like the band Quetzal, are known for the political content of political songs.\n\nThe Chicano Movement was affected not only those in the United States and Mexico but the Chicano culture has also gone abroad to countries such as Japan. Influencers such as Shin Miyata raised the awareness of Chicano culture in Japan. Miyata owns a record label, Gold Barrio Records, that re-releases Chicano music in Japan from Chicano soul to Chicano rap.\n\nIn the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, a wave of Chicano pop music surfaced through innovative musicians Carlos Santana, Johnny Rodriguez, Ritchie Valens and Linda Ronstadt. Joan Baez, who was also of Mexican-American descent, included Hispanic themes in some of her protest folk songs. Chicano rock is rock music performed by Chicano groups or music with themes derived from Chicano culture.\n\nThere are two undercurrents in Chicano rock. One is a devotion to the original rhythm and blues roots of Rock and roll including Ritchie Valens, Sunny and the Sunglows, and ? and the Mysterians. Groups inspired by this include Sir Douglas Quintet, Thee Midniters, Los Lobos, War, Tierra, and El Chicano, and, of course, the Chicano Blues Man himself, the late Randy Garribay.\n\nThe second theme is the openness to Latin American sounds and influences. Trini Lopez, Santana, Malo, Azteca, Toro, Ozomatli and other Chicano Latin rock groups follow this approach. Chicano rock crossed paths of other Latin rock genres (Rock en español) by Cubans, Puerto Ricans, such as Joe Bataan and Ralphi Pagan and South America (Nueva canción). Rock band The Mars Volta combines elements of progressive rock with traditional Mexican folk music and Latin rhythms along with Cedric Bixler-Zavala's Spanglish lyrics.\n\nChicano punk is a branch of Chicano rock. There were many bands that emerged from the California punk scene, including The Zeros, Bags, Los Illegals, The Brat, The Plugz, Manic Hispanic, and the Cruzados; as well as others from outside of California including Mydolls from Houston, Texas and Los Crudos from Chicago, Illinois. Some music historians argue that Chicanos of Los Angeles in the late 1970s might have independently co-founded punk rock along with the already-acknowledged founders from British-European sources when introduced to the US in major cities. The rock band ? and the Mysterians, which was composed primarily of Mexican-American musicians, was the first band to be described as punk rock. The term was reportedly coined in 1971 by rock critic Dave Marsh in a review of their show for \"Creem\" magazine.\n\nAlthough Latin jazz is most popularly associated with artists from the Caribbean (particularly Cuba) and Brazil, young Mexican Americans have played a role in its development over the years, going back to the 1930s and early 1940s, the era of the zoot suit, when young Mexican-American musicians in Los Angeles and San Jose, such as Jenni Rivera, began to experiment with \"\", a jazz-like fusion genre that has grown recently in popularity among Mexican Americans.\n\nHip hop culture, which is cited as having formed in the 1980s street culture of African American, West Indian (especially Jamaican), and Puerto Rican New York City Bronx youth and characterized by DJing, rap music, graffiti, and breakdancing, was adopted by many Chicano youth by the 1980s as its influence moved westward across the United States. By the 1980s on the West Coast, Chicano artists were beginning to develop their own style of hip hop. Rappers such as Ice-T and Easy-E shared their music and commercial insights with Chicano rappers in the late 1980s. Chicano rapper Kid Frost, who is often cited as \"the godfather of Chicano rap\" was highly influenced by Ice-T and was even cited as his protégé.\n\nChicano rap is a unique style of hip hop music which started with Kid Frost, who saw some mainstream exposure in the early 1990s. While Mellow Man Ace was the first mainstream rapper to use Spanglish, Frost's song \"La Raza\" paved the way for its use in American hip hop. Chicano rap tends to discuss themes of importance to young urban Chicanos. Some of today's Chicano artists include A.L.T., Lil Rob, Psycho Realm, Baby Bash, Serio, A Lighter Shade of Brown, and Funky Aztecs Sir Dyno, Chingo bling.\n\nChicano rap has also reached overseas in Japan. MoNa (Sad Girl) is a Chicano-style rapper based in Japan who creates new rap music based on Chicano culture. MoNa is well known in Japan as well as cities such as San Diego and Los Angeles where Chicano culture thrives in.\n\nPaula DeAnda, Frankie J, and Victor Ivan Santos (early member of the Kumbia Kings and associated with Baby Bash).\n\nIn the visual arts, works by Chicanos address similar themes as works in literature. The preferred media for Chicano art are murals, graphic arts, and graffiti art. Scholar Guisela Latorre refers to Chicana/o murals as \"a unique and effective tool with which to assert agency from the margins.\" San Diego's Chicano Park, located in Barrio Logan, is home to the largest collection of Chicano murals in the world and was created as an outgrowth of the city's political movement by Chicanos. Rasquache art is a unique style subset of the Chicano Arts movement.\n\nArtists like Charles \"Chaz\" Bojórquez developed an original style of graffiti art known as West Coast Cholo style influenced by Mexican murals and \"placas\" (tags which indicate territorial boundaries) in the mid-20th century. Bojórquez remarks how paint brushes were used prior to the introduction of spray cans in the early 1950s. Some sources say Mexican-American graffiti culture in Los Angeles was already \"in full bloom\" in the 1930s, stretching as far back as to when \"shoeshine boys marked their names on the walls with their daubers to stake out their spots on the sidewalk\" in the early 20th century.\n\nChicano art emerged in the mid-60s as a necessary component to the urban and agrarian civil rights movement in the Southwest, known as ', ', or the Chicano Renaissance. The artistic spirit, based on historical and traditional cultural evolution, within the movement has continued into the present millennium. There are artists, for example, who have chosen to do work within ancestral/historical references or who have mastered traditional techniques. Some artists and crafters have transcended the motifs, forms, functions, and context of Chicano references in their work but still acknowledge their identity as Chicano. These emerging artists are incorporating new materials to present mixed-media, digital media, and transmedia works.\n\nChicano performance art blends humor and pathos for tragicomic effect as shown by Los Angeles' comedy troupe Culture Clash and Mexican-born performance artist Guillermo Gómez-Peña and Nao Bustamante is a Chicana artist known internationally for her conceptual art pieces and as a participant in \"\", produced by Sarah Jessica Parker. Lalo Alcaraz often depicts the issues of Chicanos in his cartoon series called \"La Cucaracha.\"\n\nOne of the most powerful and far-reaching cultural aspects of Chicano culture is the Indigenous current that strongly roots Chicano culture to the American continent. It also unifies ' within the larger Pan-Indian Movement. Since its arrival in 1974, an art movement known as ' in the U.S., (and known by several names in its homeland of the central States of Mexico: ', ', \"\", and so on.) has had a deep impact in Chicano muralism, graphic design, tattoo art (flash), poetry, music, and literature. Lowrider cars also figure prominently as functional art in the Chicano community.\n\nChicano art has also been trending in Japan especially among the youth. The capital for Chicano art in Japan is located in Osaka, Japan. Night Tha Funksta is one of the leading figures of Chicano art and provided his own take for his artwork. Chicano culture is often associated with the gangs and cholos which appeals to the Japanese youth with the idea of rebellion. Instead of focusing on the images of gangs, Night focuses his art on the more positive images of the Chicano culture and its roots. Chicano art in Japan revolves around the theme or family and belonging in a community and avoids gang-related activities such as drugs and violence.\n\nBULLET::::- History of Mexican Americans\nBULLET::::- Caló (Chicano)\nBULLET::::- Casta\nBULLET::::- Chicanismo\nBULLET::::- Chicano Movement\nBULLET::::- Chicano Moratorium\nBULLET::::- Chicano nationalism\nBULLET::::- Chicano rap\nBULLET::::- Cholo\nBULLET::::- Chileans (and Chilean American)\nBULLET::::- Cosmic race\nBULLET::::- Hispanos (and Spanish American)\nBULLET::::- Tejano\nBULLET::::- Ethnicity (United States Census)\nBULLET::::- Latino punk\nBULLET::::- List of Mexican Americans\nBULLET::::- Los Siete de la Raza\nBULLET::::- Mestizo\nBULLET::::- Mestizos in the United States\nBULLET::::- Mexican Americans\nBULLET::::- Murals, i.e. Chicano Park, San Diego\nBULLET::::- Pachuco\nBULLET::::- Pocho\nBULLET::::- Plaza de César Chávez\nBULLET::::- Race (U.S. Census)\nBULLET::::- Josefa Segovia\n\nBULLET::::- Rodolfo Acuna, \"Occupied America: A History of Chicanos\", Longman, 2006.\nBULLET::::- John R. Chavez, \"The Chicano Image and the Myth of Aztlan Rediscovered\", in Patrick Gerster and Nicholas Cords (eds.), \"Myth America: A Historical Anthology\", Volume II. St. James, New York: Brandywine Press, 1997.\nBULLET::::- John R. Chavez, \"The Lost Land: A Chicano Image of the American Southwest\", Las Cruces: New Mexico State University Publications, 1984.\nBULLET::::- Ignacio López-Calvo, \"Latino Los Angeles in Film and Fiction: The Cultural Production of Social Anxiety\". University of Arizona Press, 2011.\nBULLET::::- Natalia Molina, \"Fit to Be Citizens?: Public Health and Race in Los Angeles, 1879–1940\". Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Michael A. Olivas, \"Colored Men and Hombres Aquí: Hernandez V. Texas and the Emergence of Mexican American Lawyering.\" Arte Público Press, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Randy J. Ontiveros, \"In the Spirit of a New People: The Cultural Politics of the Chicano Movement\". New York University Press, 2014.\nBULLET::::- Gregorio Riviera and Tino Villanueva (eds.), \"MAGINE: Literary Arts Journal\". Special Issue on Chicano Art. Vol. 3, Nos. 1 & 2. Boston: Imagine Publishers. 1986.\nBULLET::::- F. Arturo Rosales, \"Chicano! The History of the Mexican American Civil Rights Movement\". Houston, Texas: Arte Publico Press, 1996.\n\nBULLET::::- California Ethnic and Multicultural Archives – In the Chicano/Latino Collections\nBULLET::::- California Ethnic and Multicultural Archives – Digital Chicano Art\nBULLET::::- ImaginArte – Interpreting and Re-imaging Chican@Art\nBULLET::::- Chicano tattoo gallery\n"}
{"id": "5717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5717", "title": "Canary Islands", "text": "Canary Islands\n\nThe Canary Islands (; , ) are a Spanish archipelago and the southernmost autonomous community of Spain located in the Atlantic Ocean, west of Morocco at the closest point. The Canary Islands, which are also known informally as \"the Canaries\", are among the outermost regions (OMR) of the European Union proper. It is also one of eight regions with special consideration of historical nationality as recognized by the Spanish Government. The Canary Islands belong to the African Plate like the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla, the two on the African mainland.\n\nThe eight main islands are (from largest to smallest in area) Tenerife, Fuerteventura, Gran Canaria, Lanzarote, La Palma, La Gomera, El Hierro and La Graciosa. The archipelago includes many smaller islands and islets: Alegranza, Isla de Lobos, Montaña Clara, Roque del Oeste and Roque del Este. It also includes a series of adjacent roques (those of Salmor, Fasnia, Bonanza, Garachico and Anaga). In ancient times, the island chain was often referred to as \"the Fortunate Isles\". The Canary Islands are the most southerly region of Spain and the largest and most populated archipelago of the Macaronesia region. Historically, the Canary Islands have been considered a bridge between four continents: Africa, North America, South America and Europe.\n\nThe Canary Islands currently have a population of 2,127,685 inhabitants and a density of 283.08 inhabitants/km², being the eighth most populous autonomous community. The population of the archipelago is mostly concentrated in the two capital islands, around 43% on the island of Tenerife and 40% on the island of Gran Canaria.\n\nThe archipelago's beaches, climate and important natural attractions, especially Maspalomas in Gran Canaria and Teide National Park and Mount Teide (a World Heritage Site) in Tenerife (the third tallest volcano in the world measured from its base on the ocean floor), make it a major tourist destination with over 12 million visitors per year, especially Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura and Lanzarote. The islands have a subtropical climate, with long hot summers and moderately warm winters. The precipitation levels and the level of maritime moderation vary depending on location and elevation. Green areas as well as desert exist on the archipelago. Due to their location above the temperature inversion layer, the high mountains of these islands are ideal for astronomical observation. For this reason, two professional observatories, Teide Observatory on the island of Tenerife and Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on the island of La Palma, have been built on the islands.\n\nIn 1927, the Province of Canary Islands was split into two provinces. The autonomous community of the Canary Islands was established in 1982. Its capital is shared by the cities of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, which in turn are the capitals of the provinces of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria has been the largest city in the Canaries since 1768, except for a brief period in the 1910s. Between the 1833 territorial division of Spain and 1927 Santa Cruz de Tenerife was the sole capital of the Canary Islands. In 1927 a decree ordered that the capital of the Canary Islands be shared, as it remains at present. The third largest city of the Canary Islands is San Cristóbal de La Laguna (a World Heritage Site) on Tenerife. This city is also home to the \"Consejo Consultivo de Canarias\", which is the supreme consultative body of the Canary Islands.\n\nDuring the time of the Spanish Empire, the Canaries were the main stopover for Spanish galleons on their way to the Americas, which came south to catch the prevailing north-easterly trade winds.\n\nThe name \"Islas Canarias\" is likely derived from the Latin name \"Canariae Insulae\", meaning \"Islands of the Dogs\", a name that was applied only to Gran Canaria. According to the historian Pliny the Elder, the Mauretanian king Juba II named the island \"Canaria\" because it contained \"vast multitudes of dogs of very large size\".\n\nAlternatively, it is said that the original inhabitants of the island, Guanches, used to worship dogs, mummified them and generally treated them as holy animals. Some hypothesize that the Canary Islands' dog-worship and the ancient Egyptian cult of the dog-headed god Anubis are closely connected but there is no explanation given as to which one was first.\n\nOther theories speculate that the name comes from the Nukkari Berber tribe living in the Moroccan Atlas, named in Roman sources as \"Canarii\", though Pliny again mentions the relation of this term with dogs.\n\nThe connection to dogs is retained in their depiction on the islands' coat-of-arms.\n\nIt is considered that the aborigines of Gran Canaria called themselves \"Canarios\". It is possible that after being conquered, this name was used in plural in Spanish, i.e., as to refer to all of the islands as the Canarii-as.\n\nWhat is certain is that the name of the islands does not derive from the canary bird; rather, the birds are named after the islands.\n\nTenerife is the largest and most populous island of the archipelago. Gran Canaria, with 865,070 inhabitants, is both the Canary Islands' second most populous island, and the third most populous one in Spain after Majorca and Tenerife. The island of Fuerteventura is the second largest in the archipelago and located from the African coast.\n\nThe islands form the Macaronesia ecoregion with the Azores, Cape Verde, Madeira, and the Savage Isles. The Canary Islands is the largest and most populated archipelago of the Macaronesia region. The archipelago consists of seven large and several smaller islands, all of which are volcanic in origin.\n\nAccording to the position of the islands with respect to the north-east trade winds, the climate can be mild and wet or very dry. Several native species form laurisilva forests.\n\nAs a consequence, the individual islands in the Canary archipelago tend to have distinct microclimates. Those islands such as El Hierro, La Palma and La Gomera lying to the west of the archipelago have a climate which is influenced by the moist Canary Current. They are well vegetated even at low levels and have extensive tracts of sub-tropical laurisilva forest. As one travels east toward the African coast, the influence of the current diminishes, and the islands become increasingly arid. Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, the islands which are closest to the African mainland, are effectively desert or semi desert. Gran Canaria is known as a \"continent in miniature\" for its diverse landscapes like Maspalomas and Roque Nublo. In terms of its climate Tenerife is particularly interesting. The north of the island lies under the influence of the moist Atlantic winds and is well vegetated, while the south of the island around the tourist resorts of Playa de las Americas and Los Cristianos is arid. The island rises to almost above sea level, and at altitude, in the cool relatively wet climate, forests of the endemic pine \"Pinus canariensis\" thrive. Many of the plant species in the Canary Islands, like the Canary Island pine and the dragon tree, \"Dracaena draco\" are endemic, as noted by Sabin Berthelot and Philip Barker Webb in their epic work, \"L'Histoire Naturelle des Îles Canaries\" (1835–50).\n\nThe climate is tropical and desertic, moderated by the sea and in summer by the trade winds. There are a number of microclimates and the classifications range mainly from semi-arid to desert. According to the Köppen climate classification, the majority of the Canary Islands have a hot desert climate represented as BWh. There also exists a subtropical humid climate which is very influenced by the ocean in the middle of the islands of La Gomera, Tenerife and La Palma; where the laurisilva forests grow.\n\nThe seven major islands, one minor island, and several small islets were originally volcanic islands, formed by the Canary hotspot. The Canary Islands is the only place in Spain where volcanic eruptions have been recorded during the Modern Era, with some volcanoes still active (El Hierro, 2011).\nVolcanic islands such as those in the Canary chain often have steep ocean cliffs caused by catastrophic debris avalanches and landslides.\n\nThe Teide volcano on Tenerife is the highest mountain in Spain, and the third tallest volcano on Earth on a volcanic ocean island. All the islands except La Gomera have been active in the last million years; four of them (Lanzarote, Tenerife, La Palma and El Hierro) have historical records of eruptions since European discovery. The islands rise from Jurassic oceanic crust associated with the opening of the Atlantic. Underwater magmatism commenced during the Cretaceous, and reached the ocean's surface during the Miocene. The islands are considered as a distinct physiographic section of the Atlas Mountains province, which in turn is part of the larger African Alpine System division.\n\nIn the summer of 2011 a series of low-magnitude earthquakes occurred beneath El Hierro. These had a linear trend of northeast-southwest. In October a submarine eruption occurred about south of Restinga. This eruption produced gases and pumice, but no explosive activity was reported.\n\nThe following table shows the highest mountains in each of the islands:\n\n!rowspan=2 Mountain\n!colspan=2 Elevation\n!rowspan=2 Island\n! m\n! ft\n\nThe official natural symbols associated with Canary Islands are the bird \"Serinus canaria\" (canary) and the \"Phoenix canariensis\" palm.\n\nFour of Spain's thirteen national parks are located in the Canary Islands, more than any other autonomous community. Two of these have been declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites and the other two are part of Biosphere Reserves. The parks are:\n\n! class=unsortablePark !! class=unsortableIsland !! Area !! Year of Designation !! class=unsortableUNESCO Status\n\nTeide National Park is the oldest and largest national park in the Canary Islands and one of the oldest in Spain. Located in the geographic centre of the island of Tenerife, it is the most visited national park in Spain. In 2010, it became the most visited national park in Europe and second worldwide. The park's highlight is the Teide volcano; standing at an altitude of , it is the highest elevation of the country and the third largest volcano on Earth from its base. In 2007, the Teide National Park was declared one of the 12 Treasures of Spain.\n\nThe islands have 13 seats in the Spanish Senate. Of these, 11 seats are directly elected, 3 for Gran Canaria, 3 for Tenerife, 1 for each other island; 2 seats are indirectly elected by the regional Autonomous Government. The local government is presided over by Ángel Víctor Torres, the current President of the Canary Islands.\n\nThe Autonomous Community of the Canary Islands consists of two provinces (\"provincias\"), Las Palmas and Santa Cruz de Tenerife, whose capitals (Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and Santa Cruz de Tenerife) are capitals of the autonomous community. Each of the seven major islands is ruled by an island council named \"Cabildo Insular\". Each island is subdivided into smaller municipalities (\"municipios\"); Las Palmas is divided into 34 municipalities, and Santa Cruz de Tenerife is divided into 54 municipalities.\n\nThe international boundary of the Canaries is the subject of dispute between Spain and Morocco. Morocco's official position is that international laws regarding territorial limits do not authorise Spain to claim seabed boundaries based on the territory of the Canaries, since the Canary Islands enjoy a large degree of autonomy. In fact, the islands do not enjoy any special degree of autonomy as each one of the Spanish regions is considered an autonomous community with equal status to the European ones. \n\nThe boundary determines the ownership of seabed oil deposits and other ocean resources. Morocco and Spain have been unable to agree on a compromise regarding the territorial boundary, since neither nation wants to cede its claimed right to the vast resources whose ownership depends upon the boundary. In 2002, for example, Morocco rejected a unilateral Spanish proposal.\n\nThere are some pro-independence political parties, like the National Congress of the Canaries (CNC) and the Popular Front of the Canary Islands, but these parties are non-violent, and their popular support is almost insignificant, with no presence in either the autonomous parliament or the \"cabildos insulares\".\n\nAccording to a 2012 study by the Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas, when asked about national identity, the majority of respondents from the Canary Islands (49.3%) consider themselves Spanish and Canarian in equal measures, followed by 37.1% who consider themselves more Canarian than Spanish. Only 6.1% of the respondents consider themselves only Canarian.\n\n+ National Sentiment in the Canary Islands\n\nBefore the arrival of humans, the Canaries were inhabited by prehistoric animals; for example, the giant lizard (\"Gallotia goliath\"), the Tenerife and Gran Canaria giant rats, and giant prehistoric tortoises, \"Geochelone burchardi\" and \"Geochelone vulcanica\".\n\nThe islands may have been visited by the Phoenicians, the Greeks, and the Carthaginians. King Juba II, Caesar Augustus's Numidian protégé, is credited with discovering the islands for the Western world. According to Pliny the Elder, Juba found the islands uninhabited, but found \"a small temple of stone\" and \"some traces of buildings\". Juba dispatched a naval contingent to re-open the dye production facility at Mogador in what is now western Morocco in the early first century AD. That same naval force was subsequently sent on an exploration of the Canary Islands, using Mogador as their mission base.\n\n+ Roman names for individual islands\n!Roman name(s)  Modern name\nWhen the Europeans began to explore the islands in the late Middle Ages, they encountered several indigenous peoples living at a Neolithic level of technology. Although the prehistory of the settlement of the Canary Islands is still unclear, linguistic and genetic analyses seem to indicate that at least some of these inhabitants shared a common origin with the Berbers on the nearby North African coast. The precolonial inhabitants came to be known collectively as the Guanches, although \"Guanches\" had been the name for only the indigenous inhabitants of Tenerife. From the 14th century onward, numerous visits were made by sailors from Majorca, Portugal and Genoa. Lancelotto Malocello settled on Lanzarote in 1312. The Majorcans established a mission with a bishop in the islands that lasted from 1350 to 1400.\n\nIn 1402, the Castilian conquest of the islands began, with the expedition of the French explorers Jean de Béthencourt and Gadifer de la Salle, nobles and vassals of Henry III of Castile, to Lanzarote. From there, they went on to conquer Fuerteventura (1405) and El Hierro. Béthencourt received the title King of the Canary Islands, but still recognised King Henry III as his overlord. It was not a simple military enterprise, given the aboriginal resistance on some islands. Neither was it politically, since the particular interests of the nobility (determined to strengthen their economic and political power through the acquisition of the islands) conflicted with those of the states, particularly Castile, which were in the midst of territorial expansion and in a process of strengthening of the Crown against the nobility.\nHistorians distinguish two periods in the conquest of the Canary Islands:\n\nAristocratic conquest (\"Conquista señorial\"). This refers to the early conquests carried out by the nobility, for their own benefit and without the direct participation of the Crown of Castile, which merely granted rights of conquest in exchange for pacts of vassalage between the noble conqueror and the Crown. One can identify within this period an early phase known as the Betancurian or Norman Conquest, carried out by Jean de Bethencourt (who was originally from Normandy) and Gadifer de la Salle between 1402 and 1405, which involved the islands of Lanzarote, El Hierro and Fuerteventura. The subsequent phase is known as the Castilian Conquest, carried out by Castilian nobles who acquired, through purchases, assignments and marriages, the previously conquered islands and also incorporated the island of La Gomera around 1450.\n\nRoyal conquest (\"Conquista realenga\"). This defines the conquest between 1478 and 1496, carried out directly by the Crown of Castile, during the reign of the Catholic Monarchs, who armed and partly financed the conquest of those islands which were still unconquered: Gran Canaria, La Palma and Tenerife. This phase of the conquest came to an end in the year 1496, with the dominion of the island of Tenerife, bringing the entire Canarian Archipelago under the control of the Crown of Castile.\nBéthencourt also established a base on the island of La Gomera, but it would be many years before the island was fully conquered. The natives of La Gomera, and of Gran Canaria, Tenerife, and La Palma, resisted the Castilian invaders for almost a century. In 1448 Maciot de Béthencourt sold the lordship of Lanzarote to Portugal's Prince Henry the Navigator, an action that was accepted by neither the natives nor the Castilians. Despite Pope Nicholas V ruling that the Canary Islands were under Portuguese control, the crisis swelled to a revolt which lasted until 1459 with the final expulsion of the Portuguese. In 1479, Portugal and Castile signed the Treaty of Alcáçovas, which settled disputes between Castile and Portugal over the control of the Atlantic. This treaty recognized Castilian control of the Canary Islands but also confirmed Portuguese possession of the Azores, Madeira, and the Cape Verde islands, and gave the Portuguese rights to any further islands or lands in the Atlantic that might be discovered.\n\nThe Castilians continued to dominate the islands, but due to the topography and the resistance of the native Guanches, they did not achieve complete control until 1496, when Tenerife and La Palma were finally subdued by Alonso Fernández de Lugo. After that, the Canaries were incorporated into the Kingdom of Castile.\n\nAfter the conquest, the Castilians imposed a new economic model, based on single-crop cultivation: first sugarcane; then wine, an important item of trade with England. In this era, the first institutions of colonial government were founded. Gran Canaria, a colony of the Crown of Castile since 6 March 1480 (from 1556, of Spain), and Tenerife, a Spanish colony since 1495, each had its own governor. There has been speculation that the abundance of roccella tinctoria on the Canary Islands offered a profit motive for Jean de Béthencourt during his conquest of the islands. Lichen has been used for centuries to make dyes. This includes royal purple colors derived from roccella tinctoria, also known as orseille.\n\nThe cities of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria became a stopping point for the Spanish conquistadors, traders, and missionaries on their way to the New World. This trade route brought great prosperity to some of the social sectors of the islands. The islands became quite wealthy and soon were attracting merchants and adventurers from all over Europe. Magnificent palaces and churches were built on La Palma during this busy, prosperous period. The Church of El Salvador survives as one of the island's finest examples of the architecture of the 16th century. Civilian architecture survives in forms such as Casas de los Sánchez-Ochando or Casa Quintana.\n\nThe Canaries' wealth invited attacks by pirates and privateers. Ottoman Turkish admiral and privateer Kemal Reis ventured into the Canaries in 1501, while Murat Reis the Elder captured Lanzarote in 1585.\n\nThe most severe attack took place in 1599, during the Dutch Revolt. A Dutch fleet of 74 ships and 12,000 men, commanded by Pieter van der Does, attacked the capital Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (the city had 3,500 of Gran Canaria's 8,545 inhabitants). The Dutch attacked the Castillo de la Luz, which guarded the harbor. The Canarians evacuated civilians from the city, and the Castillo surrendered (but not the city). The Dutch moved inland, but Canarian cavalry drove them back to Tamaraceite, near the city.\n\nThe Dutch then laid siege to the city, demanding the surrender of all its wealth. They received 12 sheep and 3 calves. Furious, the Dutch sent 4,000 soldiers to attack the Council of the Canaries, who were sheltering in the village of Santa Brígida. 300 Canarian soldiers ambushed the Dutch in the village of Monte Lentiscal, killing 150 and forcing the rest to retreat. The Dutch concentrated on Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, attempting to burn it down. The Dutch pillaged Maspalomas, on the southern coast of Gran Canaria, San Sebastián on La Gomera, and Santa Cruz on La Palma, but eventually gave up the siege of Las Palmas and withdrew.\n\nIn 1618 the Barbary pirates attacked Lanzarote and La Gomera taking 1000 captives to be sold as slaves. Another noteworthy attack occurred in 1797, when Santa Cruz de Tenerife was attacked by a British fleet under Horatio Nelson on 25 July. The British were repulsed, losing almost 400 men. It was during this battle that Nelson lost his right arm.\n\nThe sugar-based economy of the islands faced stiff competition from Spain's Caribbean colonies. Low prices in the sugar market in the 19th century caused severe recessions on the islands. A new cash crop, cochineal (\"cochinilla\"), came into cultivation during this time, saving the islands' economy. During this time the Canarian-American trade was developed, in which Canarian products such as cochineal, sugarcane and rum are sold in American ports, such as Veracruz, Campeche, La Guaira and Havana among others.\n\nBy the end of the 18th century, Canary Islanders had already emigrated to Spanish American territories, such as Havana, Veracruz, Santo Domingo, San Antonio, Texas and St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana. These economic difficulties spurred mass emigration, primarily to the Americas, during the 19th and first half of the 20th century. Between 1840 and 1890 as many as 40,000 Canary Islanders emigrated to Venezuela. Also, thousands of Canarians moved to Puerto Rico where the Spanish monarchy felt that Canarians would adapt to island life better than other immigrants from the mainland of Spain. Deeply entrenched traditions, such as the Mascaras Festival in the town of Hatillo, Puerto Rico, are an example of Canarian culture still preserved in Puerto Rico. Similarly, many thousands of Canarians emigrated to the shores of Cuba. During the Spanish–American War of 1898, the Spanish fortified the islands against a possible American attack, but no such event took place.\n\nSirera and Renn (2004) distinguish two different types of expeditions, or voyages, during the period 1770–1830, which they term \"the Romantic period\":\n\nFirst are \"expeditions financed by the States, closely related with the official scientific Institutions. characterised by having strict scientific objectives (and inspired by) the spirit of Illustration and progress\". In this type of expedition, Sirera and Renn include the following travellers:\nBULLET::::- J. Edens, whose 1715 ascent and observations of Mt. Teide influenced many subsequent expeditions.\nBULLET::::- Louis Feuillée (1724), who was sent to measure the meridian of El Hierro and to map the islands.\nBULLET::::- Jean-Charles de Borda (1771, 1776) who more accurately measured the longitudes of the islands and the height of Mount Teide\nBULLET::::- the Baudin-Ledru expedition (1796) which aimed to recover a valuable collection of natural history objects.\n\nThe second type of expedition identified by Sirera and Renn is one that took place starting from more or less private initiatives. Among these, the key exponents were the following:\nBULLET::::- Alexander von Humboldt (1799)\nBULLET::::- Buch and Smith (1815)\nBULLET::::- Broussonet\nBULLET::::- Webb\nBULLET::::- Sabin Berthelot.\n\nSirera and Renn identify the period 1770–1830 as one in which \"In a panorama dominated until that moment by France and England enters with strength and brio Germany of the Romantic period whose presence in the islands will increase\".\n\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the British introduced a new cash-crop, the banana, the export of which was controlled by companies such as Fyffes.\n\nThe rivalry between the elites of the cities of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and Santa Cruz de Tenerife for the capital of the islands led to the division of the archipelago into two provinces in 1927. This has not laid to rest the rivalry between the two cities, which continues to this day.\n\nDuring the time of the Second Spanish Republic, Marxist and anarchist workers' movements began to develop, led by figures such as Jose Miguel Perez and Guillermo Ascanio. However, outside of a few municipalities, these organisations were a minority and fell easily to Nationalist forces during the Spanish Civil War.\n\nIn 1936, Francisco Franco was appointed General Commandant of the Canaries. He joined the military revolt of 17 July which began the Spanish Civil War. Franco quickly took control of the archipelago, except for a few points of resistance on La Palma and in the town of Vallehermoso, on La Gomera. Though there was never a war in the islands, the post-war suppression of political dissent on the Canaries was most severe.\n\nDuring the Second World War, Winston Churchill prepared plans for the British seizure of the Canary Islands as a naval base, in the event of Gibraltar being invaded from the Spanish mainland.\n\nOpposition to Franco's regime did not begin to organise until the late 1950s, which experienced an upheaval of parties such as the Communist Party of Spain and the formation of various nationalist, leftist parties.\n\nAfter the death of Franco, there was a pro-independence armed movement based in Algeria, the Movement for the Independence and Self-determination of the Canaries Archipelago (MAIAC). In 1968, the Organisation of African Unity recognized the MAIAC as a legitimate African independence movement, and declared the Canary Islands as an African territory still under foreign rule.\n\nAfter the establishment of a democratic constitutional monarchy in Spain, autonomy was granted to the Canaries via a law passed in 1982, with a newly established autonomous devolved government and parliament. In 1983, the first autonomous elections were held. The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) won. In the 2007 elections, the PSOE gained a plurality of seats, but the nationalist Canarian Coalition and the conservative Partido Popular (PP) formed a ruling coalition government.\n\nAt present, the Canary Islands is the only autonomous community in Spain that has two capitals: Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, since the Statute of Autonomy of the Canary Islands was created in 1982.\n\nThe political capital of the archipelago did not exist as such until the nineteenth century. The first cities founded by the Europeans at the time of the conquest of the Canary Islands in the 15th century were: Telde (in Gran Canaria), San Marcial del Rubicón (in Lanzarote) and Betancuria (in Fuerteventura). These cities boasted the first European institutions present in the archipelago, including Catholic bishoprics. Although, because the period of splendor of these cities developed before the total conquest of the archipelago and its incorporation into the Crown of Castile never had a political and real control of the entire Canary archipelago.\n\nThe function of a Canarian city with full jurisdiction for the entire archipelago only exists after the conquest of the Canary Islands, although originally \"De facto\", that is, without legal and real meaning and linked to the headquarters of the Canary Islands General Captaincy.\n\nLas Palmas de Gran Canaria was the first city that exercised this function. This is because the residence of the Captain General of the Canary Islands was in this city during part of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In May 1661, the Captain General of the Canary Islands, Jerónimo de Benavente y Quiñones, moved the headquarters of the captaincy to the city of San Cristóbal de La Laguna on the island of Tenerife. This was due to the fact that this island since the conquest was the most populated, productive and with the highest economic expectations. La Laguna would be considered the \"De facto\" capital of the archipelago until mid the official status of the capital of Canary Islands in the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife was confirmed in the 19th century, due in part to the constant controversies and rivalries between the bourgeoisies of San Cristóbal de La Laguna and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria for the economic, political and institutional hegemony of the archipelago.\n\nAlready in 1723, the Captain General of the Canary Islands Lorenzo Fernandez de Villavicencio had moved the headquarters of the General Captaincy of the Canary Islands from San Cristóbal de La Laguna to Santa Cruz de Tenerife. This decision continued without pleasing the society of the island of Gran Canaria. It would be after the creation of the Province of Canary Islands in November 1833 in which Santa Cruz would become the first fully official capital of the Canary Islands (\"De jure\" and not of \"De facto\" as happened previously). Santa Cruz de Tenerife would be the capital of the Canary archipelago until during the Government of General Primo de Rivera in 1927 the Province of Canary Islands was split in two provinces: Las Palmas with capital in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, and Santa Cruz de Tenerife with capital in the homonymous city.\n\nFinally, with the Statute of Autonomy of the Canary Islands in 1982 and the creation of the Autonomous Community of the Canary Islands, the capital of the archipelago between Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and Santa Cruz de Tenerife is fixed, which is how it remains today.\n\nThe Canary Islands have a population of 2,127,685 inhabitants (2018), making it the eighth most populous of Spain's autonomous communities, with a density of 282.6 inhabitants per square kilometre. The total area of the archipelago is .\n! colspan=3 style=\"background:lavender; text-align:center;\" Demographics ofthe Canary Islands – 2014\n! style=\"text-align:center; border-bottom:1px solid #aaa;\" Country of birth\n! style=\"text-align:center; border-bottom:1px solid #aaa;\" Population\n! style=\"text-align:center; border-bottom:1px solid #aaa;\" Percent\n! style=\"text-align:center;\"Spain style=\"text-align:right;\"1.726.927style=\"text-align:right;\"82.5%\n! style=\"text-align:center; border-top:1px solid #aaa;\"Total style=\"text-align:right; border-top:1px solid #aaa;\"2,104,815style=\"text-align:right; border-top:1px solid #aaa;\"100%\nThe Canarian population includes long-tenured residents and new waves of mainland Spanish immigrants, as well as Moroccan, Colombian, Venezuelan and Portuguese. Of the total Canarian population in 2009 (2,098,593) 1,799,373 were Spanish and 299,220 foreigners. Of these, the majority from the Americas, mainly Colombians (34,210), Venezuelans (31,468), Cubans (11,098) and Dominicans (10,159). There are also 51,136 African residents, mostly Moroccans (39,847).\n\nThe population of the islands according to the 2018 data are:\nBULLET::::- Tenerife – 904,713\nBULLET::::- Gran Canaria – 846,717\nBULLET::::- Lanzarote – 149,183 (including the population of La Graciosa)\nBULLET::::- Fuerteventura – 113,275\nBULLET::::- La Palma – 81,863\nBULLET::::- La Gomera – 21,136\nBULLET::::- El Hierro – 10,798\n\nThe Roman Catholic branch of Christianity has been the majority religion in the archipelago for more than five centuries, ever since the Conquest of the Canary Islands. There are also several other religious communities.\n\nThe overwhelming majority of native Canarians are Roman Catholic (85%) with various smaller foreign-born populations of other Christian beliefs such as Protestants from northern Europe.\n\nThe appearance of the Virgin of Candelaria (Patron of Canary Islands) was credited with moving the Canary Islands toward Christianity. Two Catholic saints were born in the Canary Islands: Peter of Saint Joseph de Betancur and José de Anchieta. Both born on the island of Tenerife, they were respectively missionaries in Guatemala and Brazil.\n\nThe Canary Islands are divided into two Catholic dioceses, each governed by a bishop:\nBULLET::::- Diócesis Canariense: Includes the islands of the Eastern Province: Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura and Lanzarote. Its capital was San Marcial El Rubicón (1404) and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (1483–present). There was a previous bishopric which was based in Telde, but it was later abolished.\nBULLET::::- Diócesis Nivariense: Includes the islands of the western province: Tenerife, La Palma, La Gomera and El Hierro. Its capital is San Cristóbal de La Laguna (1819–present).\n\nSeparate from the overwhelming Christian majority are a minority of Muslims. Among the followers of Islam, the Islamic Federation of the Canary Islands exists to represent the Islamic community in the Canary Islands as well as to provide practical support to members of the Islamic community.\n\nOther religious faiths represented include Jehovah's Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as well as Hinduism. Minority religions are also present such as the Church of the Guanche People which is classified as a neo-pagan native religion. Also present are Buddhism, Judaism, Baha'i, Afro-American religion, and Chinese religions.\n\nThe distribution of beliefs in 2012 according to the CIS Barometer Autonomy was as follows:\nBULLET::::- Catholic 84.9%\nBULLET::::- Atheist/Agnostic/Unbeliever 12.3%\nBULLET::::- Other religions 1.7%\n\nOrdered from west to east, the Canary Islands are El Hierro, La Palma, La Gomera, Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura, Lanzarote and La Graciosa. In addition, north of Lanzarote are the islets of Montaña Clara, Alegranza, Roque del Este and Roque del Oeste, belonging to the Chinijo Archipelago, and northeast of Fuerteventura is the islet of Lobos. There are also a series of small adjacent rocks in the Canary Islands: the Roques de Anaga, Garachico and Fasnia in Tenerife, and those of Salmor and Bonanza in El Hierro.\n\nEl Hierro, the westernmost island, covers , making it the smallest of the major islands, and the least populous with 10,798 inhabitants. The whole island was declared Reserve of the Biosphere in 2000. Its capital is Valverde. Also known as Ferro, it was once believed to be the westernmost land in the world.\n\nFuerteventura, with a surface of , is the second-most extensive island of the archipelago. It has been declared a Biosphere reserve by Unesco. It has a population of 113,275. Being also the most ancient of the islands, it is the one that is more eroded: its highest point is the Peak of the Bramble, at a height of . Its capital is Puerto del Rosario.\n\nGran Canaria has 846,717 inhabitants. The capital, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (377,203 inhabitants), is the most populous city and shares the status of capital of the Canaries with Santa Cruz de Tenerife. Gran Canaria's surface area is . In center of the island lie the Roque Nublo and Pico de las Nieves (\"Peak of Snow\") . In the south of island are the Maspalomas Dunes (Gran Canaria), these are the biggest tourist attractions.\n\nLa Gomera has an area of and is the second least populous island with 21,136 inhabitants. Geologically it is one of the oldest of the archipelago. The insular capital is San Sebastian de La Gomera. Garajonay's National Park is located on the island.\n\nLanzarote is the easternmost island and one of the most ancient of the archipelago, and it has shown evidence of recent volcanic activity. It has a surface of , and a population of 149,183 inhabitants, including the adjacent islets of the Chinijo Archipelago. The capital is Arrecife, with 56,834 inhabitants.\n\nThe Chinijo Archipelago includes the islands La Graciosa, Alegranza, Montaña Clara, Roque del Este and Roque del Oeste. It has a surface of , and a population of 658 inhabitants all of them on La Graciosa. With , La Graciosa, is the smallest inhabited island of the Canaries, and the major island of the Chinijo Archipelago.\n\nLa Palma, with 81,863 inhabitants covering an area of , is in its entirety a biosphere reserve. It shows no recent signs of volcanic activity, even though the volcano Teneguía entered into eruption last in 1971. In addition, it is the second-highest island of the Canaries, with the Roque de los Muchachos as highest point. Santa Cruz de La Palma (known to those on the island as simply \"Santa Cruz\") is its capital.\n\nTenerife is, with its area of , the most extensive island of the Canary Islands. In addition, with 904,713 inhabitants it is the most populated island of the archipelago and Spain. Two of the islands' principal cities are located on it: The capital, Santa Cruz de Tenerife and San Cristóbal de La Laguna (a World Heritage Site). San Cristóbal de La Laguna, the second city of the island is home to the oldest university in the Canary Islands, the University of La Laguna. The Teide, with its is the highest peak of Spain and also a World Heritage Site. Tenerife is the site of the worst air disaster in the history of aviation, in which 583 people were killed in the collision of two Boeing 747s on 27 March 1977.\n\nGraciosa Island or commonly La Graciosa is a volcanic island in the Canary Islands of Spain, located 2 km (1.2 mi) north of the island of Lanzarote across the Strait of El Río. It was formed by the Canary hotspot. The island is part of the Chinijo Archipelago and the Chinijo Archipelago Natural Park (Parque Natural del Archipiélago Chinijo). It is administrated by the municipality of Teguise. In 2018 La Graciosa officially became the eighth Canary Island. It is the smallest and least populated of the main islands, with a population of about 700 people.\n\n!Flag!!Coat of arms!!Island!!Capital!!Area (km)!!Population (2010)!!Population Density (people/km)\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\"El Hierro\nalign=\"center\"Valverde\nalign=\"center\"268.71\nalign=\"center\"10,960\nalign=\"center\"40.79\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\"Fuerteventura\nalign=\"center\"Puerto del Rosario\nalign=\"center\"1,660\nalign=\"center\"103,492\nalign=\"center\"62.34\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\" Gran Canaria\nalign=\"center\"Las Palmas de Gran Canaria\nalign=\"center\"1,560.1\nalign=\"center\"845,676\nalign=\"center\"542.07\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\"La Gomera\nalign=\"center\"San Sebastián\nalign=\"center\"369.76\nalign=\"center\"22,776\nalign=\"center\"61.6\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\" Lanzarote\nalign=\"center\"Arrecife\nalign=\"center\"845.94\nalign=\"center\"141,437\nalign=\"center\"167.2\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\" La Palma\nalign=\"center\"Santa Cruz de La Palma\nalign=\"center\"708.32\nalign=\"center\"86,324\nalign=\"center\"121.87\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"center\"\nalign=\"left\" Tenerife\nalign=\"center\"Santa Cruz de Tenerife\nalign=\"center\"2,034.38\nalign=\"center\"906,854\nalign=\"center\"445.76\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"left\" La Graciosa\nalign=\"center\"Caleta de Sebo\nalign=\"center\"29.05\nalign=\"center\"658\nalign=\"center\"22.65\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"left\" Alegranza\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"10.3\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"left\" Isla de Lobos\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"4.5\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"left\" Montaña Clara\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"1.48\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"left\" Roque del Este\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"0.06\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"left\" Roque del Oeste\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"0.015\nalign=\"center\"–\nalign=\"center\"–\n\n+ Tourism in the Canary Islands\n! style=\"text-align:center;border-bottom:1px #aaa solid;\" Year\n! style=\"text-align:center;border-bottom:1px #aaa solid;\" Visitors\n! style=\"text-align:center;border-top:1px #aaa solid;\" Largest byCountry \n! style=\"text-align:center;border-top:1px #aaa solid;\" Population\n\nThe economy is based primarily on tourism, which makes up 32% of the GDP. The Canaries receive about 12 million tourists per year. Construction makes up nearly 20% of the GDP and tropical agriculture, primarily bananas and tobacco, are grown for export to Europe and the Americas. Ecologists are concerned that the resources, especially in the more arid islands, are being overexploited but there are still many agricultural resources like tomatoes, potatoes, onions, cochineal, sugarcane, grapes, vines, dates, oranges, lemons, figs, wheat, barley, maize, apricots, peaches and almonds.\n\nThe economy is € 25 billion (2001 GDP figures). The islands experienced continuous growth during a 20-year period, up until 2001, at a rate of approximately 5% annually. This growth was fueled mainly by huge amounts of Foreign Direct Investment, mostly to develop tourism real estate (hotels and apartments), and European Funds (near €11 billion in the period from 2000 to 2007), since the Canary Islands are labelled Region Objective 1 (eligible for euro structural funds). Additionally, the EU allows the Canary Islands Government to offer special tax concessions for investors who incorporate under the Zona Especial Canaria (ZEC) regime and create more than five jobs.\n\nSpain gave permission in August 2014 for Repsol and its partners to explore oil and gas prospects off the Canary Islands, involving an investment of €7.5 billion over four years, to commence at the end of 2016. Repsol at the time said the area could ultimately produce 100,000 barrels of oil a day, which would meet 10 percent of Spain's energy needs. However, the analysis of samples obtained did not show the necessary volume nor quality to consider future extraction, and the project was scrapped.\n\nThe Canary Islands have great natural attractions, climate and beaches make the islands a major tourist destination, being visited each year by about 12 million people (11,986,059 in 2007, noting 29% of Britons, 22% of Spanish, not residents of the Canaries, and 21% of Germans). Among the islands, Tenerife has the largest number of tourists received annually, followed by Gran Canaria and Lanzarote. The archipelago's principal tourist attraction is the Teide National Park (in Tenerife) where the highest mountain in Spain and third largest volcano in the world (Mount Teide), receives over 2.8 million visitors annually.\n\nThe combination of high mountains, proximity to Europe, and clean air has made the Roque de los Muchachos peak (on La Palma island) a leading location for telescopes like the Grantecan.\n\nThe islands, as an autonomous region of Spain, are in the European Union and the Schengen Area. They are in the European Union Customs Union but outside the VAT area, Instead of VAT there is a local Sales Tax (IGIC) which has a general rate of 7%, an increased tax rate of 13.5%, a reduced tax rate of 3% and a zero tax rate for certain basic need products and services. Consequently, some products are subject to additional VAT if being exported from the islands into mainland Spain or the rest of the EU.\n\nCanarian time is Western European Time (WET) (or GMT; in summer one hour ahead of GMT). So Canarian time is one hour behind that of mainland Spain and the same as that of the UK, Ireland and mainland Portugal all year round.\n\nIn 2017, 15,976,000 tourists visited the Canary Islands. The statistics per destination island were: \n+Number of tourists who visited the Canary Islands by air in 2017, by island of destination\n!Rank\n!Island\n!Number of Visitors\n1\nTenerife\n5,928,000\n2\nGran Canaria\n4,478,000\n3\nLanzarote\n2,929,000\n4\nFuerteventura \n2,219,000\n5\nLa Palma\n294,000\n6\nLa Gomera and El Hierro\n128,000\n\nThe Canary Islands have eight airports altogether, two of the main ports of Spain, and an extensive network of autopistas (highways) and other roads. For a road map see multimap.\n\nThere are large ferry boats that link islands as well as fast ferries linking most of the islands. Both types can transport large numbers of passengers and cargo (including vehicles). Fast ferries are made of aluminium and powered by modern and efficient diesel engines, while conventional ferries have a steel hull and are powered by heavy oil. Fast ferries travel relatively quickly (in excess of ) and are a faster method of transportation than the conventional ferry (some ). A typical ferry ride between La Palma and Tenerife may take up to eight hours or more while a fast ferry takes about two and a half hours and between Tenerife and Gran Canaria can be about one hour.\n\nThe largest airport is the Gran Canaria Airport. Tenerife has two airports, Tenerife North Airport and Tenerife South Airport. The island of Tenerife gathers the highest passenger movement of all the Canary Islands through its two airports. The two main islands (Tenerife and Gran Canaria) receive the greatest number of passengers. Tenerife 6,204,499 passengers and Gran Canaria 5,011,176 passengers.\n\nThe port of Las Palmas is first in freight traffic in the islands, while the port of Santa Cruz de Tenerife is the first fishing port with approximately 7,500 tons of fish caught, according to the Spanish government publication Statistical Yearbook of State Ports. Similarly, it is the second port in Spain as regards ship traffic, only surpassed by the Port of Algeciras Bay. The port's facilities include a border inspection post (BIP) approved by the European Union, which is responsible for inspecting all types of imports from third countries or exports to countries outside the European Economic Area. The port of Los Cristianos (Tenerife) has the greatest number of passengers recorded in the Canary Islands, followed by the port of Santa Cruz de Tenerife. The Port of Las Palmas is the third port in the islands in passengers and first in number of vehicles transported.\n\nThe SS America was beached at the Canary islands, in the nineties. However, the ocean liner broke apart after the course of several years and eventually sank beneath the surface.\n\nThe Tenerife Tram opened in 2007 and is currently the only one in the Canary Islands, travelling between the cities of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and San Cristóbal de La Laguna.\n\nThree more railway lines are being planned for the Canary Islands:\n! Line\n! Island\n! Terminus A\n! Terminus B\n\nBULLET::::- Tenerife South Airport – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Tenerife North Airport – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- César Manrique-Lanzarote Airport – Lanzarote\nBULLET::::- Fuerteventura Airport – Fuerteventura\nBULLET::::- Gran Canaria Airport – Gran Canaria\nBULLET::::- La Palma Airport – La Palma\nBULLET::::- La Gomera Airport – La Gomera\nBULLET::::- El Hierro Airport – El Hierro\n\nBULLET::::- Port of Puerto del Rosario – Fuerteventura\nBULLET::::- Port of Arrecife – Lanzarote\nBULLET::::- Port of Playa Blanca—Lanzarote\nBULLET::::- Port of Santa Cruz de La Palma – La Palma\nBULLET::::- Port of San Sebastián de La Gomera – La Gomera\nBULLET::::- Port of La Estaca – El Hierro\nBULLET::::- Port of Las Palmas – Gran Canaria\nBULLET::::- Port of Agaete – Gran Canaria\nBULLET::::- Port of Los Cristianos – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Port of Santa Cruz de Tenerife – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Port of Garachico – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Port of Granadilla – Tenerife\n\nThe \"Servicio Canario de Salud\" is an autonomous body of administrative nature attached to the Ministry responsible for Health of the Government of the Canary Islands. The majority of the archipelago's hospitals belong to this organization:\n\nBULLET::::- Hospital Nuestra Señora de los Reyes – El Hierro\nBULLET::::- Hospital General de La Palma – La Palma\nBULLET::::- Hospital Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe – La Gomera\nBULLET::::- Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Hospital Universitario de Canarias – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Hospital del Sur de Tenerife – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Hospital del Norte de Tenerife – Tenerife\nBULLET::::- Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Doctor Negrín – Gran Canaria\nBULLET::::- Hospital Universitario Insular de Gran Canaria – Gran Canaria\nBULLET::::- Hospital General de Lanzarote Doctor José Molina Orosa – Lanzarote\nBULLET::::- Hospital General de Fuerteventura – Fuerteventura\n\nBefore the arrival of the Aborigines, the Canary Islands was inhabited by endemic animals, such as some extinct; giant lizards (\"Gallotia goliath\"), giant rats (\"Canariomys bravoi\" and \"Canariomys tamarani\") and giant tortoises (\"Geochelone burchardi\" and \"Geochelone vulcanica\"), among others.\n\nWith a range of habitats, the Canary Islands exhibit diverse plant species. The bird life includes European and African species, such as the black-bellied sandgrouse; and a rich variety of endemic (local) taxa including the:\nBULLET::::- Canary\nBULLET::::- Graja, a subspecies of red-billed chough endemic to La Palma\nBULLET::::- Blue chaffinch (endemic to Tenerife and Gran Canaria)\nBULLET::::- Canary Islands chiffchaff\nBULLET::::- Fuerteventura chat\nBULLET::::- Tenerife goldcrest\nBULLET::::- La Palma chaffinch\nBULLET::::- Canarian Egyptian vulture\nBULLET::::- Bolle's pigeon\nBULLET::::- Laurel pigeon\nBULLET::::- Plain swift\nBULLET::::- Houbara bustard\nBULLET::::- Spiders\nBULLET::::- Snakes\nBULLET::::- Scorpions\nBULLET::::- Canary Islands oystercatcher (extinct)\n\nTerrestrial fauna includes geckos, wall lizards, and three endemic species of recently rediscovered and critically endangered giant lizard: the El Hierro giant lizard (or Roque Chico de Salmor giant lizard), La Gomera giant lizard, and La Palma giant lizard. Mammals include the Canarian shrew, Canary big-eared bat, the Algerian hedgehog (which may have been introduced) and the more recently introduced mouflon. Some endemic mammals, the lava mouse, Tenerife giant rat and Gran Canaria giant rat, are extinct, as are the Canary Islands quail, long-legged bunting, the eastern Canary Islands chiffchaff and the giant prehistoric tortoises; Geochelone burchardi and Geochelone vulcanica.\n\nThe marine life found in the Canary Islands is also varied, being a combination of North Atlantic, Mediterranean and endemic species. In recent years, the increasing popularity of both scuba diving and underwater photography have provided biologists with much new information on the marine life of the islands.\n\nFish species found in the islands include many species of shark, ray, moray eel, bream, jack, grunt, scorpionfish, triggerfish, grouper, goby, and blenny. In addition, there are many invertebrate species, including sponge, jellyfish, anemone, crab, mollusc, sea urchin, starfish, sea cucumber and coral.\n\nThere are a total of five different species of marine turtle that are sighted periodically in the islands, the most common of these being the endangered loggerhead sea turtle. The other four are the green sea turtle, hawksbill sea turtle, leatherback sea turtle and Kemp's ridley sea turtle. Currently, there are no signs that any of these species breed in the islands, and so those seen in the water are usually migrating. However, it is believed that some of these species may have bred in the islands in the past, and there are records of several sightings of leatherback sea turtle on beaches in Fuerteventura, adding credibility to the theory.\n\nMarine mammals include the large varieties of cetaceans including rare and not well-known species (see more details in the \"Marine life of the Canary Islands\"). Hooded seals have also been known to be vagrant in the Canary Islands every now and then. The Canary Islands were also formerly home to a population of the rarest pinniped in the world, the Mediterranean monk seal.\n\nSome holidays of those celebrated in the Canary Islands are international and national, others are regional holidays and others are of insular character. The official day of the autonomous community is Canary Islands Day on 30 May. The anniversary of the first session of the Parliament of the Canary Islands, based in the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, held on 30 May 1983, is commemorated with this day.\n\nThe common festive calendar throughout the Canary Islands is as follows:\n! width=\"120\" Date\n! width=\"70\" Name\n! width=\"250\" Data\n\nIn addition, each of the islands has an island festival in which it is a holiday only on that island in question. These are the festivities of island patrons saints of each island. Organized chronologically are:\n! width=\"120\" Date\n! width=\"70\" Island\n! width=\"250\" Saint/Virgin\n\nThe most famous festivals of the Canary Islands is the carnival. It is the most famous and international festival of the archipelago. The carnival is celebrated in all the islands and all its municipalities, perhaps the two busiest are those of the two Canarian capitals; the Carnival of Santa Cruz de Tenerife (\"Tourist Festival of International Interest\") and the Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria. It is celebrated on the streets between the months of February and March. But the rest of the islands of the archipelago have their carnivals with their own traditions among which stand out: The Festival of the Carneros of El Hierro, the Festival of the Diabletes of Teguise in Lanzarote, Los Indianos de La Palma, the Carnival of San Sebastián de La Gomera and the Carnival of Puerto del Rosario in Fuerteventura.\n\nIn the 1960s, Gran Canaria was selected as the location for one of the 14 ground stations in the Manned Space Flight Network (MSFN) to support the NASA space program. Maspalomas Station, located in the south of the island, took part in a number of space missions including the Apollo 11 Moon landings and Skylab. Today it continues to support satellite communications as part of the ESA network.\n\nBecause of the remote location, a number of astronomical observatories are located in the archipelago, including the Teide Observatory on Tenerife, the Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on La Palma, and the Temisas Astronomical Observatory on Gran Canaria.\n\nA unique form of wrestling known as Canarian wrestling (\"lucha canaria\") has opponents stand in a special area called a \"terrero\" and try to throw each other to the ground using strength and quick movements.\n\nAnother sport is the \"game of the sticks\" where opponents fence with long sticks. This may have come about from the shepherds of the islands who would challenge each other using their long walking sticks.\n\nFurthermore, there is the shepherd's jump (\"salto del pastor\"). This involves using a long stick to vault over an open area. This sport possibly evolved from the shepherd's need to occasionally get over an open area in the hills as they were tending their sheep.\n\nThe two main football teams in the archipelago are: the CD Tenerife (founded in 1912) and UD Las Palmas (founded in 1949). As if the 2018/2019 season, both Tenerife and Las Palmas play in Liga Adelante. When in the same division, the clubs contest the Canary Islands derby. There are smaller clubs also playing in the mainland Spanish football league system, most notably UD Lanzarote and CD Laguna, although no other Canarian clubs have played in the top flight.\n\nThe mountainous terrain of the Canary Islands also caters to the growing popularity of ultra running and ultramarathons as host of annual competitive long-distance events including Transvulcania on La Palma, Transgrancanaria on Gran Canaria and the Half Marathon des Sables on Fuerteventura. A yearly Ironman Triathlon has been taking place on Lanzarote since 1992.\n\nBULLET::::- Nicolás García Hemme, born 20 June 1988 in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands, 2012 London Olympics, Taekwondo Silver Medalist in Men's Welterweight category (−80 kg).\nBULLET::::- Alfredo Cabrera, (1881–1964); shortstop for the St. Louis Cardinals in 1913\nBULLET::::- Sergio Rodríguez, born in San Cristóbal de La Laguna in 1986, played point guard for the Portland Trail Blazers, Sacramento Kings, and New York Knicks\nBULLET::::- David Silva, born in Arguineguín in 1986, plays association football for Manchester City, member of the 2010 FIFA World Cup champion Spain national football team\nBULLET::::- Juan Carlos Valerón, born in Arguineguín in 1975, played association football for Deportivo la Coruna and Las Palmas\nBULLET::::- Pedro, born in Santa Cruz de Tenerife in 1987, plays association football for Chelsea, member of the 2010 FIFA World Cup champion Spain national football team\nBULLET::::- Carla Suárez Navarro, born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria in 1988, professional tennis player\nBULLET::::- Paola Tirados, born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria in 1980, synchronized swimmer, who participated in the Olympic Games of 2000, 2004 and 2008. She won the silver medal in Beijing in 2008 in the team competition category.\nBULLET::::- Jesé, born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria in 1993, plays association football for Paris Saint-Germain\nBULLET::::- Christo Bezuidenhout, born in Tenerife in 1970, played rugby union for Gloucester and South Africa.\n\nBULLET::::- Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife (1797)\nBULLET::::- First Battle of Acentejo\nBULLET::::- Pyramids of Güímar\nBULLET::::- Second Battle of Acentejo\nBULLET::::- Tanausu\nBULLET::::- Tenerife airport disaster; prior to the September 11 attacks, the deadliest commercial aviation disaster in history.\n\nBULLET::::- Cumbre Vieja, a volcano on La Palma\nBULLET::::- Guatiza (Lanzarote)\nBULLET::::- La Matanza de Acentejo\nBULLET::::- Los Llanos de Aridane\nBULLET::::- Orotava Valley\nBULLET::::- San Andrés\n\nBULLET::::- Canarian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Canarian Spanish\nBULLET::::- Religion in Canary Islands\nBULLET::::- Isleños\nBULLET::::- Military of the Canary Islands\nBULLET::::- Music of the Canary Islands\nBULLET::::- Silbo Gomero, a whistled language, is an indigenous variant of Spanish\nBULLET::::- Virgin of Candelaria (Patron saint of Canary Islands)\n\nBULLET::::- Alfred Crosby, \"Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900–1900\" (Cambridge University Press)\nBULLET::::- Felipe Fernández-Armesto, \"The Canary Islands after the Conquest: The Making of a Colonial Society in the Early-Sixteenth Century\", Oxford U. Press, 1982. ;\nBULLET::::- Sergio Hanquet, \"Diving in Canaries\", Litografía A. ROMERO, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Martin Wiemers: \"The butterflies of the Canary Islands. – A survey on their distribution, biology and ecology (Lepidoptera: Papilionoidea and Hesperioidea)\" – Linneana Belgica 15 (1995): 63–84 & 87–118\n\nBULLET::::- Borgesen, F. 1929. Marine algae from the Canary Islands. III Rhodophyceae. Part II. Cryptonemiales, Gigartinales, and Rhodymeniales. \"Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskabs Biologiske Meddelelser.\" 8: 1 – 97.\nBULLET::::- Gill R and M Thirlwall (2012) \"Tenerife, Canary Islands\". Geologists' Association Guide No.49.\nBULLET::::- Greensmith T (2000) \"Lanzarote, Canary Islands\". Geologists' Association Guide No.62.\nBULLET::::- Paegelow, Claus: Bibliography Canary Islands, 2009,\n\nBULLET::::- Canary Islands Government\nBULLET::::- Official Tourism Website of the Canary Islands\n"}
{"id": "5718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5718", "title": "Chuck D", "text": "Chuck D\n\nCarlton Douglas Ridenhour (born August 1, 1960), known professionally as Chuck D, is an American rapper, author, and producer. As the leader of the rap group Public Enemy, he helped create politically and socially conscious hip hop music in the mid-1980s. \"The Source\" ranked him at No. 12 on their list of the Top 50 Hip-Hop Lyricists of All Time.\nRidenhour was born in Queens, New York. He began writing rhymes after the New York City blackout of 1977. After graduating from Roosevelt Junior-Senior High School, he went to Adelphi University on Long Island to study graphic design, where he met William Drayton (Flavor Flav). He received a B.F.A. from Adelphi in 1984 and later received an honorary doctorate from Adelphi in 2013.\n\nWhile at Adelphi, Ridenhour co-hosted hip hop radio show the \"Super Spectrum Mix Hour\" as Chuck D on Saturday nights at Long Island rock radio station WLIR, designed flyers for local hip-hop events, and drew a cartoon called \"Tales of the Skind\" for Adelphi student newspaper \"The Delphian\".\n\nUpon hearing Ridenhour's demo track \"Public Enemy Number One\", fledgling producer/upcoming music-mogul Rick Rubin insisted on signing him to his Def Jam label.\n\nTheir major label albums were \"Yo! Bum Rush the Show\" (1987), \"It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back\" (1988), \"Fear of a Black Planet\" (1990), \"Apocalypse 91... The Enemy Strikes Black\" (1991), \"Greatest Misses\" (1992), and \"Muse Sick-n-Hour Mess Age\" (1994). They also released a full-length album soundtrack for the film \"He Got Game\" in 1998. Ridenhour also contributed (as Chuck D) to several episodes of the PBS documentary series \"The Blues\". He has appeared as a featured artist on many other songs and albums, having collaborated with artists such as Janet Jackson, Kool Moe Dee, The Dope Poet Society, Run–D.M.C., Ice Cube, Boom Boom Satellites, Rage Against the Machine, Anthrax, John Mellencamp and many others. In 1990, he appeared on \"Kool Thing\", a song by the alternative rock band Sonic Youth, and along with Flavor Flav, he sang on George Clinton's song \"Tweakin'\", which appears on his 1989 album \"The Cinderella Theory\". In 1993, he executive produced \"Got 'Em Running Scared\", an album by Ichiban Records group Chief Groovy Loo and the Chosen Tribe.\n\nIn 1996, Ridenhour released \"Autobiography of Mistachuck\" on Mercury Records. Chuck D made a rare appearance at the 1998 MTV Video Music Awards, presenting the Video Vanguard Award to the Beastie Boys, whilst commending their musicianship. In November 1998, he settled out of court with Christopher \"The Notorious B.I.G.\" Wallace's estate over the latter's sampling of his voice in the song \"Ten Crack Commandments\". The specific sampling is Ridenhour counting off the numbers one to nine on the track \"Shut 'Em Down\". He later described the decision to sue as \"stupid\".\n\nIn September 1999, he launched a multi-format \"supersite\" on the web site Rapstation.com. The site includes a TV and radio station with original programming, prominent hip hop DJs, celebrity interviews, free MP3 downloads (the first was contributed by multi-platinum rapper Coolio), downloadable ringtones by ToneThis, social commentary, current events, and regular features on turning rap careers into a viable living. Since 2000, he has been one of the most vocal supporters of peer-to-peer file sharing in the music industry.\n\nHe loaned his voice to \"\" as DJ Forth Right MC for the radio station Playback FM. In 2000, he collaborated with Public Enemy's Gary G-Whiz and MC Lyte on the theme music to the television show \"Dark Angel\". He appeared with Henry Rollins in a cover of Black Flag's \"Rise Above\" for the album \"\". In 2003, he was featured in the PBS documentary in which he recorded a version of Muddy Waters' song \"Mannish Boy\" with Common, Electrik Mud Cats, and Kyle Jason. He was also featured on Z-Trip's album \"Shifting Gears\" on a track called \"Shock and Awe\"; a 12-inch of the track was released featuring artwork by Shepard Fairey. In 2008 he contributed a chapter to \"Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and Culture\" (The MIT Press, 2008) edited by Paul D. Miller a.k.a. DJ Spooky, and also turned up on The Go! Team's album \"Proof of Youth\" on the track \"Flashlight Fight.\" He also fulfilled his childhood dreams of being a sports announcer by performing the play-by-play commentary in the video game \"\" on Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3.\n\nIn 2009, Ridenhour wrote the foreword to the book \"The Love Ethic: The Reason Why You Can't Find and Keep Beautiful Black Love\" by Kamau and Akilah Butler. He also appeared on Brother Ali's album, \"Us\".\n\nIn March 2011, Chuck D re-recorded vocals with The Dillinger Escape Plan for a cover of \"Fight the Power\".\n\nChuck D duetted with Rock singer Meat Loaf on his 2011 album \"Hell in a Handbasket\" on the song \"Mad Mad World/The Good God Is a Woman and She Don't Like Ugly\".\n\nIn 2016 Chuck D joined the band Prophets of Rage along with B-Real and former members of Rage Against the Machine.\n\nIn July 2019, Ridenhour sued Terrordome Music Publishing and Reach Music Publishing for $1 million for withholding royalties.\n\nChuck D is known for his powerful rapping. \"How to Rap\" says he \"has a powerful, resonant voice that is often acclaimed as one of the most distinct and impressive in hip-hop\". Chuck says this was based on listening to Melle Mel and sportscasters such as Marv Albert.\n\nChuck often comes up with a title for a song first. He writes on paper, though sometimes edits using a computer. He prefers to not punch in or overdub vocals.\n\nChuck listed his favourite rap albums in \"Hip Hop Connection\": 10. N.W.A, \"Straight Outta Compton\" 9. Boogie Down Productions, \"Criminal Minded\" 8. Run-DMC, \"Tougher Than Leather\" 7. Big Daddy Kane, \"Looks Like a Job For...\" 6. Stetsasonic, \"In Full Gear\" 5. Ice Cube, \"AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted\" 4. Dr. Dre, \"The Chronic\" 3. De La Soul, \"3 Feet High and Rising\" 2. Eric B. & Rakim, \"Follow the Leader\" 1. Run-DMC, \"Raising Hell\" (\"It was the first record that made me realise this was an album-oriented genre\")\n\nChuck D identifies as Black, as opposed to African or African-American. In a 1993 issue of DIRT Magazine covering a taping of In the Mix hosted by Alimi Ballard at the Apollo, Dan Field writes, \"At one point, Chuck bristles a bit at the term \"African-American.\" He thinks of himself as Black and sees nothing wrong with the term. Besides, he says, having been born in the United States and lived his whole life here, he doesn't consider himself African. Being in Public Enemy has given him the chance to travel around the world, an experience that really opened his eyes and his mind. He says visiting Africa and experiencing life on a continent where the majority of people are Black gave him a new perspective and helped him get in touch with his own history. He also credits a trip to the ancient Egyptian pyramids at Giza with helping him appreciate the relative smallness of man.\" Ridenhour is politically active; he co-hosted \"Unfiltered\" on Air America Radio, testified before Congress in support of peer-to-peer MP3 sharing, and was involved in a 2004 rap political convention. He has continued to be an activist, publisher, lecturer, and producer. \n\nAddressing the negative views associated with rap music, he co-wrote the essay book \"Fight the Power: Rap, Race, and Reality\" with Yusuf Jah. He argues that \"music and art and culture is escapism, and escapism sometimes is healthy for people to get away from reality\", but sometimes the distinction is blurred and that's when \"things could lead a young mind in a direction.\" He also founded the record company Slam Jamz and acted as narrator in Kareem Adouard's short film \"Bling: Consequences and Repercussions\", which examines the role of conflict diamonds in bling fashion. Despite Chuck D and Public Enemy's success, Chuck D claims that popularity or public approval was never a driving motivation behind their work. He is admittedly skeptical of celebrity status, revealing in a 1999 interview with \"BOMB Magazine\" that, \"The key for the record companies is to just keep making more and more stars, and make the ones who actually challenge our way of life irrelevant. The creation of celebrity has clouded the minds of most people in America, Europe and Asia. It gets people off the path they need to be on as individuals.\"\n\nIn an interview with \"Le Monde\" published January 29, 2008, Chuck D stated that rap is devolving so much into a commercial enterprise, that the relationship between the rapper and the record label is that of slave to a master. He believes that nothing has changed for African-Americans since the debut of Public Enemy and, although he thinks that an Obama-Clinton alliance is great, he does not feel that the establishment will allow anything of substance to be accomplished. He stated that French President Nicolas Sarkozy is like any other European elite: he has profited through the murder, rape, and pillaging of those less fortunate and he refuses to allow equal opportunity for those men and women from Africa. In this article, he defended a comment made by Professor Griff in the past that he says was taken out of context by the media. The real statement was a critique of the Israeli government and its treatment of the Palestinian people. Chuck D stated that it is Public Enemy's belief that all human beings are equal.\n\nIn an interview with the magazine \"N'Digo\" published in June 2008, he spoke of today's mainstream urban music seemingly relishing the addictive euphoria of materialism and sexism, perhaps being the primary cause of many people harboring resentment towards the genre and its future. However, he has expressed hope for its resurrection, saying \"It's only going to be dead if it doesn't talk about the messages of life as much as the messages of death and non-movement\", citing artists such as NYOil, M.I.A. and The Roots as socially conscious artists who push the envelope creatively. \"A lot of cats are out there doing it, on the Web and all over. They're just not placing their career in the hands of some major corporation.\"\n\nIn 2010, Chuck D released a track, \"Tear Down That Wall\". He said, \"I talked about the wall not only just dividing the U.S. and Mexico but the states of California, New Mexico and Texas. But Arizona, it's like, come on. Now they're going to enforce a law that talks about basically racial profiling.\"\n\nHe is on the board of the TransAfrica Forum, a Pan African organization that is focused on African, Caribbean and Latin American issues.\n\nHe is a pescetarian.\n\nBULLET::::- Narrated and appeared on-camera for the 2005 PBS documentary \"Harlem Globetrotters: The Team That Changed the World\".\nBULLET::::- Appeared on-camera for the PBS program \"Independent Lens: Hip-Hop: Beyond Beats and Rhymes\".\nBULLET::::- Appeared in an episode of \"NewsRadio\" as himself.\nBULLET::::- He appeared on \"The Henry Rollins Show\".\nBULLET::::- He was a featured panelist (with Lars Ulrich) on the May 12, 2000 episode of the \"Charlie Rose\" show. Host Charlie Rose was discussing the Internet, copyright infringement, Napster Inc., and the future of the music industry.\nBULLET::::- He appeared on an episode of \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\" with Pat Boone. While there, Space Ghost tried (and failed) to show he was \"hip\" to rap, saying his favorite rapper was M. C. Escher.\nBULLET::::- He appeared on an episode of \"Johnny Bravo\".\nBULLET::::- He appeared via satellite to the UK, as a panelist on BBC's \"Newsnight\" on January 20, 2009, following Barack Obama's Inauguration.\nBULLET::::- He appeared on a Christmas episode of Adult Swim's \"Aqua Teen Hunger Force\".\nBULLET::::- He Appeared on \"VH1 Ultimate Albums Blood Sugar Sex Magik\" talking about the Red Hot Chili Peppers.\nBULLET::::- He appeared on \"\" in the New York City episode talking about the beginnings of the NYC Hip-Hop scene\n\nBULLET::::- He is featured in the 1997 documentary \"Rhyme & Reason\".\nBULLET::::- He appeared in the 1998 comedy film \"\".\nBULLET::::- He is featured in the documentary , directed by Marc Levin, as part of the PBS series \"The Blues\".\nBULLET::::- He played a bank robber, Malcolm Y, in an unused plotline for the 2004 comedy film \"\", which was eventually released straight-to-DVD as \"\".\nBULLET::::- He is the narrator of the 2006 documentary \"Quilombo Country\", directed by Leonard Abrams.\nBULLET::::- He is featured in the 2006 documentary \"The Rap Report - Part 2',' produced by Rex Barnett.\nBULLET::::- He is featured in the 2006 documentary \"Hip Hop: Beyond Beats and Rhymes\", directed by Byron Hurt.\nBULLET::::- He is featured in the 2008 documentary \"The Black Candle\", directed by M.K. Asante, Jr. and narrated by Maya Angelou.\nBULLET::::- He is featured in the 2012 documentary \"\".\nBULLET::::- He has a cameo playing a lawyer, Charles McD, in the 2016 comedy film, \"The Bet\".\n\nBULLET::::- In 1991, Chuck featured on Sonic Youth single \"Kool Thing\".\nBULLET::::- In 1993, Chuck rapped on \"New Agenda\" from Janet Jackson's \"janet.\" \"I loved his work, but I'd never met him…\" said Jackson. \"I called Chuck up and told him how much I admired their work. When I hear Chuck, it's like I'm hearing someone teaching, talking to a whole bunch of people. And instead of just having the rap in the bridge, as usual, I wanted him to do stuff all the way through. I sent him a tape. He said he loved the song, but he was afraid he was going to mess it up. I said, 'Are you kidding?'\"\nBULLET::::- In 2001, Chuck D appeared on Japanese electronic duo Boom Boom Satellites track \"Your Reality's A Fantasy But Your Fantasy Is Killing Me,\" off the album \"Umbra\".\nBULLET::::- In 2010, Chuck D made an appearance on the track \"Transformação\" (Portuguese for \"Transformation\") from Brazilian rapper MV Bill's album \"Causa E Efeito\" (\"\", meaning \"Cause And Effect\").\nBULLET::::- In 2003 he was featured on the track \"Access to the Excess\" in Junkie XL's album .\nBULLET::::- In 2011 Chuck D made an appearance on the track \"Blue Sky / Mad Mad World / The Good God Is A Woman And She Don't Like Ugly\" from Meat Loaf's 2011 album Hell In A Handbasket.\nBULLET::::- In 2013, he has appeared in Mat Zo's single, \"Pyramid Scheme.\"\nBULLET::::- In 2013 he performed at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Music Masters concert tribute to the Rolling Stones.\nBULLET::::- In 2014 he performed with Jahi on \"People Get Ready\" and \"Yo!\" from the first album by Public Enemy spin-off project PE 2.0\nBULLET::::- In 2016 he appeared in ASAP Ferg's album \"Always Strive and Prosper\" on the track \"Beautiful People\".\nBULLET::::- In 2017 he was featured on the track \"America\" on Logic's album \"Everybody\".\nBULLET::::- In 2019, he appeared on \"Story of Everything\", a song on \"Threads\", the final album by Sheryl Crow. The track also features Andra Day and Gary Clark Jr.\n\nStudio albums\nBULLET::::- \"Yo! Bum Rush the Show\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- \"It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Fear of a Black Planet\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Apocalypse 91... The Enemy Strikes Black\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Muse Sick-n-Hour Mess Age\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"He Got Game\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"There's a Poison Goin' On\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Revolverlution\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"New Whirl Odor\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"How You Sell Soul to a Soulless People Who Sold Their Soul?\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Most of My Heroes Still Don't Appear on No Stamp\" (2012)\nBULLET::::- \"The Evil Empire of Everything\" (2012)\nBULLET::::- \"Man Plans God Laughs\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Nothing Is Quick in the Desert\" (2017)\n\nStudio albums\nBULLET::::- \"Objects in the Mirror Are Closer Than They Appear\" (2000)\n\nStudio albums\nBULLET::::- \"Prophets of Rage\" (2017)\n\nStudio EPs\nBULLET::::- \"The Party's Over\" (2016)\n\nStudio albums\nBULLET::::- \"Autobiography of Mistachuck\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"The Black in Man\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- \"If I Can't Change the People Around Me I Change the People Around Me\" (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"Celebration of Ignorance\" (2018)\n\nCompilation albums\nBULLET::::- \"Action\" (DJ Matheos Worldwide International Remix) - Most*hifi (featuring Chuck D. and Huggy) (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Don't Rhyme for the Sake of Riddlin\"' (as Mistachuck) (2012)\n\nBULLET::::- Public Enemy\nBULLET::::- RAPstation\nBULLET::::- Entry on Chuck D at \"Rolling Stone\"'s website\nBULLET::::- How to Stomp the Blues and Funk at \"Fine Print Mag\"'s website\nBULLET::::- Chuck D and DMC on Hip Hop and America at The Real News Network\n"}
{"id": "5719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5719", "title": "Cutaway (filmmaking)", "text": "Cutaway (filmmaking)\n\nIn film and video, a cutaway shot is the interruption of a continuously filmed action by inserting a view of something else. It is usually followed by a cut back to the first shot, when the cutaway avoids a jump cut. The animated television show Family Guy is well known for this practice for their comedy and humor. The cutaway shot does not necessarily contribute any dramatic content of its own, but is used to help the editor assemble a longer sequence. For this reason, editors choose cutaway shots related to the main action, such as another action or object in the same location. For example, if the main shot is of a man walking down an alley, possible cutaways may include a shot of a cat on a nearby dumpster or a shot of a person watching from a window overhead.\n\nSimilarly, a cutaway scene is the interruption of a scene with the insertion of another scene, generally unrelated or only peripherally related to the original scene. The interruption is usually quick, and is usually, although not always, ended by a return to the original scene. The effect is of commentary to the original scene, frequently comic in nature.\n\nThe most common use of cutaway shots in dramatic films is to adjust the pace of the main action, to conceal the deletion of some unwanted part of the main shot, or to allow the joining of parts of two versions of that shot. For example, a scene may be improved by cutting a few frames out of an actor's pause; a brief view of a listener can help conceal the break. Or the actor may fumble some of his lines in a group shot; rather than discarding a good version of the shot, the director may just have the actor repeat the lines for a new shot, and cut to that alternate view when necessary.\n\nCutaways are also used often in older horror films in place of special effects. For example, a shot of a zombie getting its head cut off may, for instance, start with a view of an axe being swung through the air, followed by a close-up of the actor swinging it, then followed by a cut back to the now severed head. George A. Romero, creator of the Dead Series, and Tom Savini pioneered effects that removed the need for cutaways in horror films. 30 Rock would often use cutaway scenes to create visual humor, the Werewolf Bar Mitzvah scene taking three days to create for only five seconds of screen time. The animated television show \"Family Guy\" is best known for the use of cutaway gags as humor.\n\nIn news broadcasting and documentary work, the cutaway is used much as it would be in fiction. On location, there is usually just one camera to film an interview, and it's usually trained on the interviewee. Often there is also only one microphone. After the interview, the interviewer will usually repeat his questions while he himself is being filmed, with pauses as they act as if to listen to the answers. These shots can be used as cutaways. Cutaways to the interviewer, called noddies, can also be used to cover cuts.\n\nBULLET::::- Buffer shot\nBULLET::::- Cross-cutting\nBULLET::::- Dissolve (filmmaking)\nBULLET::::- Fast cutting\nBULLET::::- Flashback\n\nBULLET::::- Jump cut\nBULLET::::- L cut\nBULLET::::- Match cut\nBULLET::::- Shot reverse shot\nBULLET::::- Slow cutting\nBULLET::::- Cutscene\n"}
{"id": "5721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5721", "title": "Coma", "text": "Coma\n\nA coma is a deep state of prolonged unconsciousness in which a person cannot be awakened; fails to respond normally to painful stimuli, light, or sound; lacks a normal wake-sleep cycle; and does not initiate voluntary actions. Coma patients exhibit a complete absence of wakefulness and are unable to consciously feel, speak or move. Comas can be derived by natural causes, or can be medically induced.\n\nClinically, a coma can be defined as the inability to consistently follow a one-step command. It can also be defined as a score of ≤ 8 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) lasting ≥ 6 hours. For a patient to maintain consciousness, the components of \"wakefulness\" and \"awareness\" must be maintained. Wakefulness describes the quantitative degree of consciousness, whereas awareness relates to the qualitative aspects of the functions mediated by the cortex, including cognitive abilities such as attention, sensory perception, explicit memory, language, the execution of tasks, temporal and spatial orientation and reality judgment. From a neurological perspective, consciousness is maintained by the activation of the cerebral cortex—the gray matter that forms the outer layer of the brain and by the reticular activating system (RAS), a structure located within the brainstem.\n\nThe term ‘coma’, from the Greek \"koma\", meaning deep sleep, had already been used in the Hippocratic corpus (\"Epidemica\") and later by Galen (second century AD). Subsequently, it was hardly used in the known literature up to the middle of the 17th century. The term is found again in Thomas Willis’ (1621–1675) influential \"De anima brutorum\" (1672), where lethargy (pathological sleep), ‘coma’ (heavy sleeping), \"carus\" (deprivation of the senses) and apoplexy (into which \"carus\" could turn and which he localized in the white matter) are mentioned. The term \"carus\" is also derived from Greek, where it can be found in the roots of several words meaning soporific or sleepy. It can still be found in the root of the term ‘carotid’. Thomas Sydenham (1624–89) mentioned the term ‘coma’ in several cases of fever (Sydenham, 1685).\n\nGeneral symptoms of a person in a comatose state are:\n\nBULLET::::- Inability to voluntarily open the eyes\nBULLET::::- A non-existent sleep-wake cycle\nBULLET::::- Lack of response to physical (painful) or verbal stimuli\nBULLET::::- Depressed brainstem reflexes, such as pupils not responding to light\nBULLET::::- Irregular breathing\nBULLET::::- Scores between 3 and 8 on the Glasgow Coma Scale\n\nMany types of problems can cause coma. Forty percent of comatose states result from drug poisoning. Drugs damage or weaken the synaptic functioning in the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) and keep the system from properly functioning to arouse the brain. Secondary effects of drugs, which include abnormal heart rate and blood pressure, as well as abnormal breathing and sweating, may also indirectly harm the functioning of the ARAS and lead to a coma. Given that drug poisoning is the cause for a large portion of patients in a coma, hospitals first test all comatose patients by observing pupil size and eye movement, through the vestibular-ocular reflex. (see \"Diagnosis\" below).\n\nThe second most common cause of coma, which makes up about 25% of cases, is lack of oxygen, generally resulting from cardiac arrest. The Central Nervous System (CNS) requires a great deal of oxygen for its neurons. Oxygen deprivation in the brain, also known as hypoxia, causes sodium and calcium from outside of the neurons to decrease and intracellular calcium to increase, which harms neuron communication. Lack of oxygen in the brain also causes ATP exhaustion and cellular breakdown from cytoskeleton damage and nitric oxide production.\n\nTwenty percent of comatose states result from the side effects of a stroke. During a stroke, blood flow to part of the brain is restricted or blocked. An ischemic stroke, brain hemorrhage, or tumor may cause restriction of blood flow. Lack of blood to cells in the brain prevent oxygen from getting to the neurons, and consequently causes cells to become disrupted and die. As brain cells die, brain tissue continues to deteriorate, which may affect the functioning of the ARAS.\n\nThe remaining 15% of comatose cases result from trauma, excessive blood loss, malnutrition, hypothermia, hyperthermia, abnormal glucose levels, and many other biological disorders. Furthermore, studies show that 1 out of 8 patients with traumatic brain injury experience a comatose state.\n\nInjury to either or both of the cerebral cortex or the reticular activating system (RAS) is sufficient to cause a person to enter coma.\n\nThe cerebral cortex is the outer layer of neural tissue of the cerebrum of the brain. The cerebral cortex is composed of gray matter which consists of the nuclei of neurons, whereas the inner portion of the cerebrum is composed of white matter and is composed of the axons of neuron. White matter is responsible for perception, relay of the sensory input via the thalamic pathway, and many other neurological functions, including complex thinking.\n\nThe RAS, on the other hand, is a more primitive structure in the brainstem which includes the reticular formation (RF). The RAS has two tracts, the ascending and descending tract. The ascending track, or ascending reticular activating system (ARAS), is made up of a system of acetylcholine-producing neurons, and works to arouse and wake up the brain. Arousal of the brain begins from the RF, through the thalamus, and then finally to the cerebral cortex. Any impairment in ARAS functioning, a neuronal dysfunction, along the arousal pathway stated directly above, prevents the body from being aware of its surroundings. Without the arousal and consciousness centers, the body cannot awaken, remaining in a comatose state.\n\nThe severity and mode of onset of coma depends on the underlying cause. There are two main subdivisions of a coma: structural and diffuse neuronal. A structural cause, for example, is brought upon by a mechanical force that brings about cellular damage, such as physical pressure or a blockage in neural transmission. While a diffuse cause is limited to aberrations of cellular function, that fall under a metabolic or toxic subgroup. Toxin-induced comas are caused by extrinsic substances, whereas metabolic-induced comas are caused by intrinsic processes, such as body thermoregulation or ionic imbalances(e.g. sodium). For instance, severe hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) or hypercapnia (increased carbon dioxide levels in the blood) are examples of a metabolic diffuse neuronal dysfunction. Hypoglycemia or hypercapnia initially cause mild agitation and confusion, but progress to obtundation, stupor, and finally, complete unconsciousness. In contrast, coma resulting from a severe traumatic brain injury or subarachnoid hemorrhage can be instantaneous. The mode of onset may therefore be indicative of the underlying cause.\n\nStructural and diffuse causes of coma are not isolated from one another, as one can lead to the other in some situations. For instance, coma induced by a diffuse metabolic process, such as hypoglycemia, can result in a structural coma if it is not resolved. Another example is if cerebral edema, a diffuse dysfunction, leads to ischemia of the brainstem, a structural issue, due to the blockage of the circulation in the brain.\n\nAlthough diagnosis of coma is simple, investigating the underlying cause of onset can be rather challenging. As such, after gaining stabilization of the patient's airways, breathing and circulation (the basic ABCs) various diagnostic tests, such as physical examinations and imaging tools (CAT scan, MRI, etc.) are employed to access the underlying cause of the coma.\n\nWhen an unconscious person enters a hospital, the hospital utilizes a series of diagnostic steps to identify the cause of unconsciousness. According to Young, the following steps should be taken when dealing with a patient possibly in a coma:\nBULLET::::1. Perform a general examination and medical history check\nBULLET::::2. Make sure the patient is in an actual comatose state and is not in locked-in state or experiencing psychogenic unresponsiveness. Patients with locked-in syndrome present with voluntary movement their eyes, whereas patients suffering from psychogenic comas, demonstrate active resistance to passive opening of the eyelids, with the eyelids closing abruptly and completely when the lifted upper eyelid is released (rather than slowly, asymmetrically and incompletely as seen in comas due to organic causes).\nBULLET::::3. Find the site of the brain that may be causing coma (i.e., brainstem, back of brain...) and assess the severity of the coma with the Glasgow Coma Scale\nBULLET::::4. Take blood work to see if drugs were involved or if it was a result of hypoventilation/hyperventilation\nBULLET::::5. Check for levels of “serum glucose, calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium, phosphate, urea, and creatinine”\nBULLET::::6. Perform brain scans to observe any abnormal brain functioning using either CT or MRI scans\nBULLET::::7. Continue to monitor brain waves and identify seizures of patient using EEGs\n\nIn the initial assessment of coma, it is common to gauge the level of consciousness on the AVPU (alert, vocal stimuli, painful stimuli, unresponsive) scale by spontaneously exhibiting actions and, assessing the patient's response to vocal and painful stimuli. More elaborate scales, such as the Glasgow Coma Scale, quantify an individual's reactions such as eye opening, movement and verbal response in order to indicate their extent of brain injury. The patient's score can vary from a score of 3 (indicating severe brain injury and death) to 15 (indicating mild or no brain injury).\n\nIn those with deep unconsciousness, there is a risk of asphyxiation as the control over the muscles in the face and throat is diminished. As a result, those presenting to a hospital with coma are typically assessed for this risk (\"airway management\"). If the risk of asphyxiation is deemed high, doctors may use various devices (such as an oropharyngeal airway, nasopharyngeal airway or endotracheal tube) to safeguard the airway.\n\nImaging basically encompasses computed tomography (CAT or CT) scan of the brain, or MRI for example, and is performed to identify specific causes of the coma, such as hemorrhage in the brain or herniation of the brain structures. Special tests such as an EEG can also show a lot about the activity level of the cortex such as semantic processing, presence of seizures, and are important available tools not only for the assessment of the cortical activity but also for predicting the likelihood of the patient's awakening. The autonomous responses such as the skin conductance response may also provide further insight on the patient's emotional processing.\n\nIn the treatment of traumatic brain injury (TBI), there are 4 examination methods that have proved useful: skull x-ray, angiography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The skull x-ray can detect linear fractures, impression fractures (expression fractures) and burst fractures. Angiography is used on rare occasions for TBIs i.e. when there is suspicion of an aneurysm, carotid sinus fistula, traumatic vascular occlusion, and vascular dissection. A CT can detect changes in density between the brain tissue and hemorrhages like subdural and intracerebral hemorrhages. MRIs are not the first choice in emergencies because of the long scanning times and because fractures cannot be detected as well as CT. MRIs are used for the imaging of soft tissues and lesions in the posterior fossa which cannot be found with the use of CT.\n\nAssessment of the brainstem and cortical function through special reflex tests such as the oculocephalic reflex test (doll's eyes test), oculovestibular reflex test (cold caloric test), corneal reflex, and the gag reflex. Reflexes are a good indicator of what cranial nerves are still intact and functioning and is an important part of the physical exam. Due to the unconscious status of the patient, only a limited number of the nerves can be assessed. These include the cranial nerves number 2 (CN II), number 3 (CN III), number 5 (CN V), number 7 (CN VII), and cranial nerves 9 and 10 (CN IX, CN X).\n\n!Type of reflex \n!Description \noculocephalic reflex\nOculocephalic reflex also known as the doll's eye is performed to assess the integrity of the brainstem.\n\nBULLET::::- Patient's eyelids are gently elevated and the cornea is visualized.\nBULLET::::- The patient's head is then moved to the patient's left, to observe if the eyes stay or deviate toward the patient's right; same maneuver is attempted on the opposite side.\nBULLET::::- If the patient's eyes move in a direction opposite to the direction of the rotation of the head, then the patient is said to have an intact brainstem.\nBULLET::::- However, failure of both eyes to move to one side, can indicate damage or destruction of the affected side. In special cases, where only one eye deviates and the other does not, this often indicates a lesion (or damage) of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), which is a brainstem nerve tract.\nPupillary light reflex\nPupil reaction to light is important because it shows an intact retina, and cranial nerve number 2 (CN II)\n\nBULLET::::- If pupils are reactive to light, then that also indicates that the cranial nerve number 3 (CN III) (or at least its parasympathetic fibers) are intact.\nOculovestibular Reflex (Cold Caloric Test)\nCaloric reflex test also evaluates both cortical and brainstem function\n\nBULLET::::- Cold water is injected into one ear and the patient is observed for eye movement\nBULLET::::- If the patient's eyes slowly deviate toward the ear where the water was injected, then the brainstem is intact, however failure to deviate toward the injected ear indicates damage of the brainstem on that side.\nBULLET::::- The cortex is responsible for a rapid nystagmus away from this deviated position and is often seen in patients who are conscious or merely lethargic.\nCorneal Reflex\nThe corneal reflex assess the proper function of the trigeminal nerve (CN 5) and facial nerve (CN 7) and is present at infancy.\n\nBULLET::::- Lightly touching the cornea with a tissue or cotton swab induces a rapid blink reflex of both eyes.\nBULLET::::- Touching the sclera or eyelashes, presenting a light flash, or stimulating the supraorbital nerve will induce a less rapid but still reliable response.\nBULLET::::- Those in a comatose state will have altered corneal reflex depending on the severity of their unconscious and the location of their lesion.\nGag Reflex\nThe gag, or pharyngeal, reflex is centered in the medulla and consists of the reflexive motor response of pharyngeal elevation and constriction with tongue retraction in response to sensory stimulation of the pharyngeal wall, posterior tongue, tonsils, or faucial pillars.\n\nBULLET::::- This reflex is examined by touching the posterior pharynx with the soft tip of a cotton applicator and visually inspecting for elevation of the pharynx.\nBULLET::::- Those in comatose states will often demonstrate poor gag reflexes if there has been damage to their glossopharyngeal (CN 9) or vagus nerve (CN 10).\n\nAssessment of posture and physique is the next step. It involves general observation about the patient's positioning. There are often two stereotypical postures seen in comatose patients. Decorticate posturing is a stereotypical posturing in which the patient has arms flexed at the elbow, and arms adducted toward the body, with both legs extended. Decerebrate posturing is a stereotypical posturing in which the legs are similarly extended (stretched), but the arms are also stretched (extended at the elbow). The posturing is critical since it indicates where the damage is in the central nervous system. A decorticate posturing indicates a lesion (a point of damage) at or above the red nucleus, whereas a decerebrate posturing indicates a lesion at or below the red nucleus. In other words, a decorticate lesion is closer to the cortex, as opposed to a decerebrate posturing which indicates that the lesion is closer to the brainstem.\n\nPupil assessment is often a critical portion of a comatose examination, as it can give information as to the cause of the coma; the following table is a technical, medical guideline for common pupil findings and their possible interpretations:\n\n! Pupil sizes (left eye vs. right eye) !! Possible interpretation\n\nA coma can be classified as (1) supratentorial (above Tentorium cerebelli), (2) infratentorial (below Tentorium cerebelli), (3) metabolic or (4) diffused. This classification is merely dependent on the position of the original damage that caused the coma, and does not correlate with severity or the prognosis. The severity of coma impairment however is categorized into several levels. Patients may or may not progress through these levels. In the first level, the brain responsiveness lessens, normal reflexes are lost, the patient no longer responds to pain and cannot hear.\n\nThe Rancho Los Amigos Scale is a complex scale that has eight separate levels, and is often used in the first few weeks or months of coma while the patient is under closer observation, and when shifts between levels are more frequent.\n\nTreatment for people in a coma will depend on the severity and cause of the comatose state. Upon admittance to an emergency department, coma patients will usually be placed in an Intensive Care Unit (ICU) immediately, where maintenance of the patient's respiration and circulation become a first priority. Stability of their respiration and circulation is sustained through the use of intubation, ventilation, administration of intravenous fluids or blood and other supportive care as needed.\n\nOnce a patient is stable and no longer in immediate danger, there may be a shift of priority from stabilizing the patient to maintaining the state of their physical wellbeing. Moving patients every 2–3 hours by turning them side to side is crucial to avoiding bed sores as a result of being confined to a bed. Moving patients through the use of physical therapy also aids in preventing atelectasis, contractures or other orthopedic deformities which would interfere with a coma patient's recovery.\n\nPneumonia is also common in coma patients due to their inability to swallow which can then lead to aspiration. A coma patient's lack of a gag reflex, and use of a feeding tube can result in food, drink or other solid organic matter being lodged within their lower respiratory tract (from the trachea to the lungs). This trapping of matter in their lower respiratory tract can ultimately lead to infection, resulting in aspiration pneumonia.\n\nComa patients may also deal with restless, or seizures. As such, soft cloth restraints may be used to prevent them from pulling on tubes or dressings and side rails on the bed should be kept up to prevent patients from falling.\n\nComa has a wide variety of emotional reactions from the family members of the affected patients, as well as the primary care givers taking care of the patients. Research has shown that the severity of injury causing coma was found to have no significant impact compared to how much time has passed since the injury occurred. Common reactions, such as desperation, anger, frustration, and denial are possible. The focus of the patient care should be on creating an amicable relationship with the family members or dependents of a comatose patient as well as creating a rapport with the medical staff. Although there is heavy importance of a primary care taker, secondary care takers can play a supporting role to temporarily relieve the primary care taker's burden of tasks.\n\nComas can last from several days to several weeks. In more severe cases a coma may last for over five weeks, while some have lasted as long as several years. After this time, some patients gradually come out of the coma, some progress to a vegetative state, and others die. Some patients who have entered a vegetative state go on to regain a degree of awareness and in some cases, may remain in vegetative state for years or even decades (the longest recorded period being 42 years).\n\nPredicted chances of recovery will differ depending on which techniques were used to measure the patient's severity of neurological damage. Predictions of recovery are based on statistical rates, expressed as the level of chance the person has of recovering. Time is the best general predictor of a chance of recovery. For example, after four months of coma caused by brain damage, the chance of partial recovery is less than 15%, and the chance of full recovery is very low.\n\nThe outcome for coma and vegetative state depends on the cause, location, severity and extent of neurological damage. A deeper coma alone does not necessarily mean a slimmer chance of recovery, similarly, milder comas do not ensure higher chances of recovery . The most common cause of death for a person in a vegetative state is secondary infection such as pneumonia, which can occur in patients who lie still for extended periods.\n\nPeople may emerge from a coma with a combination of physical, intellectual, and psychological difficulties that need special attention. It is common for coma patients to awaken in a profound state of confusion and suffer from dysarthria, the inability to articulate any speech. Recovery usually occurs gradually. In the first days, patients may only awaken for a few minutes, with increased duration of wakefulness as their recovery progresses and may eventually recover full awareness. That said, some patients may never progress beyond very basic responses.\n\nThere are reports of people coming out of coma after long periods of time. After 19 years in a minimally conscious state, Terry Wallis spontaneously began speaking and regained awareness of his surroundings.\n\nA brain-damaged man, trapped in a coma-like state for six years, was brought back to consciousness in 2003 by doctors who planted electrodes deep inside his brain. The method, called deep brain stimulation (DBS) successfully roused communication, complex movement and eating ability in the 38-year-old American man who suffered a traumatic brain injury. His injuries left him in a minimally conscious state (MCS), a condition akin to a coma but characterized by occasional, but brief, evidence of environmental and self-awareness that coma patients lack.\n\nResearch by Dr. Eelco Wijdicks on the depiction of comas in movies was published in Neurology in May 2006. Dr. Wijdicks studied 30 films (made between 1970 and 2004) that portrayed actors in prolonged comas, and he concluded that only two films accurately depicted the state of a coma victim and the agony of waiting for a patient to awaken: \"Reversal of Fortune\" (1990) and \"The Dreamlife of Angels\" (1998). The remaining 28 were criticized for portraying miraculous awakenings with no lasting side effects, unrealistic depictions of treatments and equipment required, and comatose patients remaining muscular and tanned.\n\nA person in a coma is said to be in an unconscious state, perspectives on personhood, identity and consciousness come into play when discussing the metaphysical and bioethical views on comas.\n\nIt has been argued that unawareness should be just as ethically relevant and important as a state of awareness and that there should be metaphysical support of unawareness as a state.\n\nIn the ethical discussions about disorders of consciousness (DOCs), two abilities are usually considered as central: \"experiencing well-being and having interests.\" Well-being can broadly be understood as the positive effect related to what makes life good (according to specific standards) for the individual in question. The only condition for well-being broadly considered is the ability to experience its ‘positiveness’. That said, because experiencing positiveness is a basic emotional process with phylogenetic roots, it is likely to occur at a completely unaware level and therefore, introduces the idea of an unconscious well-being. As such, the ability of having interests, is crucial for describing two abilities which those with comas are deficient in. Having an interest in a certain domain can be understood as having a stake in something can affect what makes our life good in that domain. An interest is what directly and immediately improves life from a certain point of view or within a particular domain, or greatly increases the likelihood of life improvement enabling the subject to realize some good. That said, sensitivity to reward signals is a fundamental element in the learning process, both consciously and unconsciously. Moreover, the unconscious brain is able to interact with its surroundings in a meaningful way and to produce meaningful information processing of stimuli coming from the external environment, including other people.\n\nAccording to Hawkins, \"1. A life is good if the subject is able to value, or more basically if the subject is able to care. Importantly, Hawkins stresses that caring has no need for cognitive commitment, i.e. for high-level cognitive activities: it requires being able to distinguish something, track it for a while, recognize it over time, and have certain emotional dispositions \"vis-à-vis\" something. 2. A life is good if the subject has the capacity for relationship with others, i.e. for meaningfully interacting with other people.\" This suggests that unawareness may (at least partly) fulfil both conditions identified by Hawkins for life to be a good for a subject, thus making the unconscious ethically relevant.\n\nBULLET::::- Brain death, lack of activity in both cortex, and lack of brainstem function\nBULLET::::- Coma scale, a system to assess the severity of coma\nBULLET::::- Locked-in syndrome, paralysis of most muscles, except ocular muscles of the eyes, while patient is conscious\nBULLET::::- Persistent vegetative state (vegetative coma), deep coma without detectable awareness. Damage to the cortex, with an intact brainstem.\nBULLET::::- Process Oriented Coma Work, for an approach to working with residual consciousness in comatose patients.\nBULLET::::- Suspended animation, the inducement of a temporary cessation or decay of main body functions.\n"}
{"id": "5722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5722", "title": "Call of Cthulhu (role-playing game)", "text": "Call of Cthulhu (role-playing game)\n\nCall of Cthulhu is a horror fiction role-playing game based on H. P. Lovecraft's story of the same name and the associated Cthulhu Mythos. The game, often abbreviated as \"CoC\", is published by Chaosium; it was first released in 1981 and is currently in its seventh edition, with many different versions released. It makes use of Chaosium's Basic Role-Playing (BRP) system, with special rules for Sanity.\n\nThe setting of \"Call of Cthulhu\" is a darker version of our world, based on H. P. Lovecraft's observation (from his essay, \"Supernatural Horror in Literature\") that \"The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown.\" The original game, first published in 1981, uses mechanics from Basic Role-Playing, and is set in the 1920s, the setting of many of Lovecraft's stories. Additional settings were developed in the \"Cthulhu by Gaslight\" supplement, a blend of occult and Holmesian mystery and mostly set in England during the 1890s, and modern/1980s conspiracy with \"Cthulhu Now\" and \"Delta Green\". More recent additions include 1000 AD (\"Cthulhu: Dark Ages\"), 23rd century (\"Cthulhu Rising\") and Ancient Roman times (\"Cthulhu Invictus\"). The protagonists may also travel to places that are not of this earth, represented in the Dreamlands (which can be accessed through dreams as well as being physically connected to the earth), to other planets, or into the voids of space. In keeping with the Lovecraftian theme, the gamemaster is called the Keeper of Arcane Lore, or simply the keeper, while player characters are called \"investigators\".\n\n\"CoC\" uses the Basic Role-Playing system first developed for \"RuneQuest\" and used in other Chaosium games. It is skill-based, with player characters getting better with their skills by succeeding at using them for as long as they stay functionally healthy and sane. They do not, however, gain hit points and do not become significantly harder to kill. The game does not use levels. \n\n\"CoC\" uses percentile dice (with a results ranging from 1 to 100) to determine success or failure. Every player statistic is intended to be compatible with the notion that there is a probability of success for a particular action given what the player is capable of doing. For example, an artist may have a 75% chance of being able to draw something (represented by having 75 in Art skill), and thus rolling a number under 75 would yield a success. Rolling or less of the skill level (1-15 in the example) would be a \"special success\" (or an \"impale\" for combat skills) and would yield some extra bonus to be determined by the keeper. For example, the artist character might draw especially well or especially fast, or catch some unapparent detail in the drawing.\n\nThe players take the roles of ordinary people drawn into the realm of the mysterious: detectives, criminals, scholars, artists, war veterans, etc. Often, happenings begin innocently enough, until more and more of the workings behind the scenes are revealed. As the characters learn more of the true horrors of the world and the irrelevance of humanity, their sanity (represented by \"Sanity Points\", abbreviated SAN) inevitably withers away. The game includes a mechanism for determining how damaged a character's sanity is at any given point; encountering the horrific beings usually triggers a loss of SAN points. To gain the tools they need to defeat the horrors – mystic knowledge and magic – the characters may end up losing some of their sanity, though other means such as pure firepower or simply outsmarting one's opponents also exist. \"CoC\" has a reputation as a game in which it is quite common for a player character to die in gruesome circumstances or end up in a mental institution. Eventual triumph of the players is not assumed.\n\nThe original conception of \"Call of Cthulhu\" was \"Dark Worlds\", a game commissioned by the publisher Chaosium but never published. Sandy Petersen contacted them regarding writing a supplement for their popular fantasy game \"RuneQuest\" set in Lovecraft's Dreamlands. He took over the writing of \"Call of Cthulhu\", and the game was released in 1981.\n\nSince Petersen's departure from Chaosium, continuing development of \"Call of Cthulhu\" passed to Lynn Willis, credited as co-author in the fifth and sixth editions, and more recently to Paul Fricker and Mike Mason. The game system underwent only minor rules changes in its first six editions (between 1981 and 2011); the current seventh edition, released 2014, includes more significant rules alterations than in any previous release.\n\n! scope=\"col\" width=\"20%\"  Edition\n! scope=\"col\" width=\"15%\"  Published\n! scope=\"col\" width=\"20%\"  Format\n! scope=\"col\" width=\"45%\"  Notes\n\nFor those grounded in the RPG tradition, the very first release of \"Call of Cthulhu\" created a brand new framework for table-top gaming. Rather than the traditional format established by \"Dungeons & Dragons\", which often involved the characters wandering through caves or tunnels and fighting different types of monsters, Sandy Petersen introduced the concept of the \"Onion Skin\": Interlocking layers of information and nested clues that lead the player characters from seemingly minor investigations into a missing person to discovering mind-numbingly awful, global conspiracies to destroy the world. Unlike its predecessor games, \"CoC\" assumed that most investigators would not survive, alive or sane, and that the only safe way to deal with the vast majority of nasty things described in the rule books was to run away. A well-run \"CoC\" campaign should engender a sense of foreboding and inevitable doom in its players. The style and setting of the game, in a relatively modern time period, created an emphasis on real-life settings, character research, and thinking one's way around trouble.\n\nThe first book of \"Call of Cthulhu\" adventures was \"Shadows of Yog-Sothoth\". In this work, the characters come upon a secret society's foul plot to destroy mankind, and pursue it first near to home and then in a series of exotic locations. This template was to be followed in many subsequent campaigns, including \"Fungi from Yuggoth\" (later known as \"Curse of Cthulhu\" and \"Day of the Beast\"), \"Spawn of Azathoth\", and possibly the most highly acclaimed, \"Masks of Nyarlathotep\".\n\n\"Shadows of Yog-Sothoth\" is important not only because it represents the first published addition to the boxed first edition of \"Call of Cthulhu\", but because its format defined a new way of approaching a campaign of linked RPG scenarios involving actual clues for the would-be detectives amongst the players to follow and link in order to uncover the dastardly plots afoot. Its format has been used by every other campaign-length \"Call of Cthulhu\" publication. The standard of \"CoC\" scenarios was well received by independent reviewers. \"The Asylum and Other Tales\", a series of stand alone articles released in 1983, rated an overall 9/10 in Issue 47 of \"White Dwarf\" magazine.\n\nThe standard of the included 'clue' material varies from scenario to scenario, but reached its zenith in the original boxed versions of the \"Masks of Nyarlathotep\" and \"Horror on the Orient Express\" campaigns. Inside these one could find matchbooks and business cards apparently defaced by non-player characters, newspaper cuttings and (in the case of \"Orient Express\") period passports to which players could attach their photographs, increasing the sense of immersion. Indeed, during the period that these supplements were produced, third party campaign publishers strove to emulate the quality of the additional materials, often offering separately-priced 'deluxe' clue packages for their campaigns.\n\nAdditional milieux were provided by Chaosium with the release of \"Dreamlands\", a boxed supplement containing additional rules needed for playing within the Lovecraft Dreamlands, a large map and a scenario booklet, and \"Cthulhu By Gaslight\", another boxed set which moved the action from the 1920s to the 1890s.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Shadows of Yog-Sothoth\", 1982\nBULLET::::- \"Fungi from Yuggoth\", 1984\nBULLET::::- \"Masks of Nyarlathotep\", 1984\nBULLET::::- \"Spawn of Azathoth\", 1986\nBULLET::::- \"Horror on the Orient Express\", 1991\nBULLET::::- \"Beyond the Mountains of Madness\", 1999\n\nIn 1987, Chaosium issued the supplement titled \"Cthulhu Now\", a collection of rules, supplemental source materials and scenarios for playing \"Call of Cthulhu\" in the present day. This proved to be a very popular alternative milieu, so much so that much of the supplemental material is now included in the core rule book.\n\nPagan Publishing released \"Delta Green\", a series of supplements originally set in the 1990s, although later supplements add support for playing closer to the present day. In these, player characters are agents of a secret agency known as Delta Green, which fights against creatures from the Mythos and conspiracies related to them. Arc Dream Publishing released a new version of \"Delta Green\" in 2016 as a standalone game, partially using the mechanics from \"Call of Cthulhu\".\n\n\"Lovecraft Country\" was a line of supplements for \"Call of Cthulhu\" released in 1990. These supplements were overseen by Keith Herber and provided backgrounds and adventures set in Lovecraft's fictional towns of Arkham, Kingsport, Innsmouth, Dunwich, and their environs. The intent was to give investigators a common base, as well as to center the action on well-drawn characters with clear motivations.\n\nIn the years since the collapse of the \"Mythos\" collectible card game (production ceased in 1997), the release of \"CoC\" books has been very sporadic with up to a year between releases. Chaosium struggled with near bankruptcy for many years before finally starting their upward climb again.\n\n2005 was Chaosium's busiest year for many years with ten releases for the game. Chaosium took to marketing \"monographs\"—short books by individual writers with editing and layout provided out-of-house—directly to the consumer, allowing the company to gauge market response to possible new works. The range of times and places in which the horrors of the Mythos can be encountered was also expanded in late 2005 onwards with the addition of \"Cthulhu Dark Ages\" by Stéphane Gesbert, which gives a framework for playing games set in 11th century Europe, \"Secrets of Japan\" by Michael Dziesinski for gaming in modern-day Japan, and \"Secrets of Kenya\" by David Conyers for gaming in interwar period Africa.\n\nIn July 2011, Chaosium announced it would re-release a 30th anniversary edition of the \"CoC\" 6th edition role-playing game. This 320-page book features thick (3 mm) leatherette hardcovers with the front cover and spine stamped with gold foil. The interior pages are printed in black ink, on 90 gsm matte art paper. The binding is thread sewn, square backed. Chaosium offered a one-time printing of this Collector's Edition.\n\nOn May 28, 2013, a crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter for the 7th Edition of \"Call of Cthulhu\" was launched with a goal of $40,000; it ended on June 29 of the same year having collected $561,836. It included many more major revisions than any previous edition, and also split the core rules into two books, a Player's Guide and Keeper's Guide. Problems and delays fulfilling the Kickstarters for the 7th edition of \"Call of Cthulhu\" led Greg Stafford and Sandy Petersen (who had both left in 1998) to return to an active role at Chaosium in June 2015.\n\nChaosium has licensed other publishers to create supplements using their rule system, notably including \"Delta Green\" by Pagan Publishing. Other licensees have included Infogrames, Miskatonic River Press, Theater of the Mind Enterprises, Triad Entertainment, Games Workshop, Fantasy Flight Games, RAFM, Goodman Games, Grenadier Models Inc. and Yog-Sothoth.com. These supplements may be set in different time frames or even different game universes from the original game.\n\n\"Shadow of the Comet\" (later repackaged as \"Call of Cthulhu: Shadow of the Comet\") is an adventure game developed and released by Infogrames in 1993. The game is based on H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos and uses many elements from Lovecraft's \"The Dunwich Horror\" and \"The Shadow Over Innsmouth\". A follow-up game, \"Prisoner of Ice\", is not a direct sequel.\n\n\"Prisoner of Ice\" (also \"Call of Cthulhu: Prisoner of Ice\") is an adventure game developed and released by Infogrames for the PC and Macintosh computers in 1995 in America and Europe. It is based on H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos, particularly \"At the Mountains of Madness\", and is a follow-up to Infogrames' earlier \"Shadow of the Comet\". In 1997, the game was ported to the Sega Saturn and PlayStation exclusively in Japan.\n\nIn 2001, a stand-alone version of \"Call of Cthulhu\" was released by Wizards of the Coast, for the d20 system. Intended to preserve the feeling of the original game, the d20 conversion of the game rules were supposed to make the game more accessible to the large \"D&D\" player base. The d20 system also made it possible to use \"Dungeons & Dragons\" characters in \"Call of Cthulhu\", as well as to introduce the Cthulhu Mythos into \"Dungeons & Dragons\" games. The d20 version of the game is no longer supported by Wizards as per their contract with Chaosium. Chaosium included d20 stats as an appendix in three releases (see Lovecraft Country), but have since dropped the \"dual stat\" idea.\n\nA licensed first-person shooter adventure game by Headfirst Productions, based on \"Call of Cthulhu\" campaign \"Escape from Innsmouth\" and released by Bethesda Softworks in 2005/2006 for the PC and Xbox.\n\nIn February 2008, Pelgrane Press published \"Trail of Cthulhu\", a stand-alone game created by Kenneth Hite using the GUMSHOE System developed by Robin Laws. \"Trail of Cthulhu\"s system is more mystery oriented and focuses mostly on interpreting clues.\n\nIn September 2008, Reality Deviant Publications published \"Shadows of Cthulhu\", a supplement that brings Lovecraftian gaming to Green Ronin's True20 system.\n\nIn October 2009, Reality Blurs published \"Realms of Cthulhu\", a supplement for Pinnacle Entertainment's Savage Worlds system.\n\nIn 2010, Cubicle 7 published an official role-playing game, \"The Laundry\" and a number of supplements, all based on Charles Stross's \"Laundry Files\" series.\n\nIn April 2011, Chaosium and new developer Red Wasp Design announced a joint project to produce a mobile video game based on the \"Call of Cthulhu\" RPG, entitled \"Call of Cthulhu: The Wasted Land\". The game was released on January 30, 2012.\n\nIn 2018, Metarcade produced \"Cthulhu Chronicles\", a game for iOS with a campaign of nine mobile interactive fiction stories set in 1920s England based on \"Call of Cthulhu\". The first five stories were released on July 10, 2018.\n\n\"Mythos\" was a collectible card game (CCG) based on the Cthulhu Mythos that Chaosium produced and marketed during the mid-1990s. While generally praised for its fast gameplay and unique mechanics, it ultimately failed to gain a very large market presence. It bears mention because its eventual failure brought the company to hard times that affected its ability to produce material for \"Call of Cthulhu\". \"Call of Cthulhu: The Card Game\" is a second collectible card game, produced by Fantasy Flight Games.\n\nThe first licensed \"Call of Cthulhu\" gaming miniatures were sculpted by Andrew Chernack and released by Grenadier Models in boxed sets and blister packs in 1983. The license was later transferred to RAFM. As of 2011, RAFM still produce licensed C\"all of Cthulhu\" models sculpted by Bob Murch. Both lines include investigator player character models and the iconic monsters of the Cthulhu mythos.\nAs of July 2015, Reaper Miniatures started its third \"Bones Kickstarter\", a Kickstarter intended to help the company migrate some miniatures from metal to plastic, and introducing some new ones. Among the stretch goals was the second $50 expansion, devoted to the Mythos, with miniatures such as Cultists, Deep Ones, Mi'Go, and an extra $15 Shub-Niggurath \"miniature\" (it is, at least, 6x4 squares). It is expected for those miniatures to remain in the Reaper Miniatures catalogue after the Kickstarter project finishes.\n\nCall of Cthulhu: The Official Video Game is a survival horror role-playing video game developed by Cyanide and published by Focus Home Interactive for PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows. The game features a semi-open world environment and incorporates themes of Lovecraftian and psychological horror into a story which includes elements of investigation and stealth. It is inspired by H. P. Lovecraft's short story \"The Call of Cthulhu\".\n\nSeveral reviews of various editions appeared in \"Space Gamer/Fantasy Gamer\". \nBULLET::::- In the March 1982 edition (No. 49), William A. Barton noted that there were some shortcomings resulting from an assumption by the designers that players would have access to rules from \"RuneQuest\" that were not in \"Call of Cthulhu\", but otherwise Barton called the game \"an excellent piece of work... The worlds of H. P. Lovecraft are truly open for the fantasy gamer.\"\nBULLET::::- In the October–November 1987 edition (No. 80), Lisa Cohen reviewed the 3rd edition, saying, \"\"This book can be for collectors of art, players, or anyone interested in knowledge about old time occult. It is the one reprint that is worth the money.\"\n\nSeveral reviews of various editions appeared in \"White Dwarf\".\nBULLET::::- In the August 1982 edition (Issue 32), Ian Bailey admired much about the first edition of the game; his only criticism was that the game was too \"U.S. orientated and consequently any Keeper... who wants to set his game in the UK will have a lot of research to do.\" Bailey gave the game an above average rating of 9 out of 10, saying, \"\"Call of Cthulhu\" is an excellent game and a welcome addition to the world of role-playing.\"\nBULLET::::- In the August 1986 edition (Issue 80), Ashley Shepherd thought the inclusion of much material in the 3rd edition that had been previously published as supplementary books \"makes the game incredibly good value.\" He concluded, \"This package is going to keep \"Call of Cthulhu\" at the front of the fantasy game genre.\"\n\nSeveral reviews of various editions and supplements also appeared in \"Dragon\". \nBULLET::::- In the May 1982 edition (Issue 61), David Cook thought the rules were too complex for new gamers, but said, \"It is a good game for experienced role-playing gamers and ambitious judges, especially if they like Lovecraft’s type of story.\"\nBULLET::::- In the August 1987 edition (Issue 124), Ken Rolston reviewed the \"Terror Australis\" supplement for 3rd edition that introduced an Australian setting in the 1920s. Bambra thought that \"Literate, macabre doom shambles from each page. Good reading, and a good campaign setting for COC adventures.\"\nBULLET::::- In the October 1988 edition (Issue 138), Ken Rolston gave an overview of the 3rd edition, and placed it ahead of its competitors due to superior campaign setting, tone and atmosphere, the player characters as investigators, and the use of realistic player handouts such as authentic-looking newspaper clippings. Rolston concluded, \"\"CoC\" is one of role-playing’s acknowledged classics. Its various supplements over the years have maintained an exceptional level of quality; several, including \"Shadows of Yog-Sothoth\" and \"Masks of Nyarlathotep\", deserve consideration among the greatest pinnacles of the fantasy role-playing game design.\"\nBULLET::::- In the June 1990 edition (Issue 158), Jim Bambra liked the updated setting of the 4th edition, placing the game firmly in Lovecraft's 1920s. He also liked the number of adventures included in the 192-page rulebook: \"The fourth edition contains enough adventures to keep any group happily entertained and sanity blasted.\" However, while Cook questioned whether owners of the 2nd or 3rd edition would get good value for their money — \"You lack only the car-chase rules and the improved layout of the three books in one. The rest of the material has received minor editing but no substantial changes\" — Cook strongly recommended the new edition to newcomers, saying, \"If you don’t already play \"CoC\", all I can do is urge you to give it a try... discover for yourself why it has made so many converts since its release.\"\nBULLET::::- In the October 1992 edition (Issue 186), Rick Swan admitted that he was skeptical that the 5th edition would offer anything new, but instead found that the new edition benefited from \"fresh material, judicious editing, and thorough polishes.\" He concluded, \"Few RPGs exceed the \"CoC\" game’s scope or match its skillful integration of background and game systems. And there’s no game more fun.\"\n\nIn a 1996 reader poll by \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, \"Call of Cthulhu\" was ranked 1st. Editor Paul Pettengale commented: \"\"Call of Cthulhu\" is fully deserved of the title as the most popular roleplaying system ever - it's a game that doesn't age, is eminently playable, and which hangs together perfectly. The system, even though it's over ten years old, it still one of the very best you'll find in any roleplaying game. Also, there's not a referee in the land who could say they've read every Lovecraft inspired book or story going, so there's a pretty-well endless supply of scenario ideas. It's simply marvellous.\"\n\nThe game has won several major awards:\n\nBULLET::::- 1982, Origins Awards, \"Best Role Playing Game\"\nBULLET::::- 1981, Game Designer's Guild, \"Select Award\"\nBULLET::::- 1985, Games Day Award, \"Best Role Playing Game\"\nBULLET::::- 1986, Games Day Award, \"Best Contemporary Role Playing Game\"\nBULLET::::- 1987, Games Day Award, \"Best Other Role Playing Game\"\nBULLET::::- 1993, Leeds Wargame Club, \"Best Role Playing Game\"\nBULLET::::- 1994, Gamer's Choice Award, \"Hall of Fame\"\nBULLET::::- 1995, Origins Award, \"Hall of Fame\"\nBULLET::::- 2001, Origins Award, \"Best Graphic Presentation of a Book Product\" (for \"Call of Cthulhu\" 20th anniversary edition)\nBULLET::::- 2003, GamingReport.com readers voted it as the number-one Gothic/Horror RPG\n\nBULLET::::- \"Arkham Horror\" - a cooperative board game based on the Mythos.\nBULLET::::- \"Cthulhu Live\" - a live action role-playing game version of \"Call of Cthulhu\".\nBULLET::::- \"CthulhuTech\" - another role-playing game, conceived for a \"Cthulhu science-fiction setting\".\n\nBULLET::::- Review\nBULLET::::- Chaosium\n"}
{"id": "5723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5723", "title": "Constellations (journal)", "text": "Constellations (journal)\n\nConstellations: An International Journal of Critical and Democratic Theory is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal of critical and democratic theory and successor of \"Praxis International\". It is edited by Jean L. Cohen, Amy Allen, and Andreas Kalyvas. Seyla Benhabib is a co-founding former editor and Nancy Fraser a former co-editor. With an international editorial contribution, it is based at the New School in New York.\n"}
{"id": "5724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5724", "title": "Cape Breton Island", "text": "Cape Breton Island\n\nCape Breton Island (—formerly '; or '; ; or simply \"Cape Breton\") is an island on the Atlantic coast of North America and part of the province of Nova Scotia, Canada.\n\nThe island accounts for 18.7% of Nova Scotia's total area. Although the island is physically separated from the Nova Scotia peninsula by the Strait of Canso, the long rock-fill Canso Causeway connects it to mainland Nova Scotia. The island is east-northeast of the mainland with its northern and western coasts fronting on the Gulf of Saint Lawrence; its western coast also forms the eastern limits of the Northumberland Strait. The eastern and southern coasts front the Atlantic Ocean; its eastern coast also forms the western limits of the Cabot Strait. Its landmass slopes upward from south to north, culminating in the highlands of its northern cape. One of the world's larger salt water lakes, (\"Arm of Gold\" in French), dominates the island's centre.\n\nThe island is divided into four of Nova Scotia's eighteen counties: Cape Breton, Inverness, Richmond, and Victoria. Their total population at the 2016 census numbered 132,010 Cape Bretoners; this is approximately 15% of the provincial population. Cape Breton Island has experienced a decline in population of approximately 2.9% since the 2011 census. Approximately 75% of the island's population is in the Cape Breton Regional Municipality (CBRM) which includes all of Cape Breton County and is often referred to as Industrial Cape Breton, given the history of coal mining and steel manufacturing in this area, which was Nova Scotia's industrial heartland throughout the 20th century.\n\nThe island has five reserves of the Mi'kmaq Nation: , , , , and /Chapel Island. is the largest in both population and land area.\n\nIts name may derive from near Bayonne, or more probably from \"Cape\" and the word ', the French demonym for ', the French historical region. William Francis Ganong, however, refutes a French origin for the name and offers, instead, that the earliest form of the name appeared on Portuguese maps as \"bertomes\", and, he argues, \"that word meant at the time the English and not the French Bretons, and referred to the region which John Cabot and his Bristol Englishmen discovered on the voyage of 1497...therefore our Cape Breton would mean 'Cape of the English'\"\n\nCape Breton Island's first residents were likely Archaic maritime natives, ancestors of the Mi'kmaq. These peoples and their progeny inhabited the island (known as Unama'ki) for several thousand years and continue to live there to this day. Their traditional lifestyle centred around hunting and fishing because of the unfavourable agricultural conditions of their maritime home. This ocean-centric lifestyle did, however, make them among the first indigenous peoples to discover European explorers and sailors fishing in the St Lawrence Estuary. John Cabot reportedly visited the island in 1497. However, European histories and maps of the period are of too poor quality to be sure whether Cabot first visited Newfoundland or Cape Breton Island. This discovery is commemorated by Cape Breton's Cabot Trail, and by the Cabot's Landing Historic Site & Provincial Park, near the village of Dingwall.\n\nThe local Mi'kmaq peoples began trading with European fishermen when the fishermen began landing in their territories as early as the 1520s. In about 1521–22, the Portuguese under João Álvares Fagundes established a fishing colony on the island. As many as two hundred settlers lived in a village, the name of which is not known, located according to some historians at what is now Ingonish on the island's northeastern peninsula. These fishermen traded with the local population but did not maintain a permanent settlement. This Portuguese colony's fate is unknown, but it is mentioned as late as 1570.\n\nDuring the Anglo-French War of 1627 to 1629, under Charles I, the Kirkes took Quebec City; Sir James Stewart of Killeith, Lord Ochiltree planted a colony on Unama'ki at Baleine, Nova Scotia; and Alexander's son, William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling, established the first incarnation of \"New Scotland\" at Port Royal. These claims, and larger European ideals of native conquest were the first time the island was incorporated as European territory, though it would be several decades later that treaties would actually be signed (no copies of these treaties exist).\n\nThese Scottish triumphs, which left Cape Sable as the only major French holding in North America, did not last. Charles I's haste to make peace with France on the terms most beneficial to him meant the new North American gains would be bargained away in the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1632), which established which European power had claim over the territories, but did not in fact establish that Europeans had any claim to begin with.\n\nThe French quickly defeated the Scots at Baleine, and established the first European settlements on Île Royale: present day Englishtown (1629) and St. Peter's (1630). These settlements lasted only one generation, until Nicolas Denys left in 1659. The island did not have any European settlers for another fifty years before those communities along with Louisbourg were re-established in 1713, after which point European settlement was permanently established on the island.\n\nKnown as \"\"Île Royale\"\" (\"Royal Island\") to the French, the island also saw active settlement by France. After the French ceded their claims to Newfoundland and the Acadian mainland to the British by the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, the French relocated the population of Plaisance, Newfoundland, to Île Royale and the French garrison was established in the central eastern part at Sainte Anne. As the harbour at Sainte Anne experienced icing problems, it was decided to build a much larger fortification at Louisbourg to improve defences at the entrance to the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and to defend France's fishing fleet on the Grand Banks. The French also built the Louisbourg Lighthouse in 1734, the first lighthouse in Canada and one of the first in North America. In addition to Cape Breton Island, the French colony of Île Royale also included Île Saint-Jean, today called Prince Edward Island, and Les Îles-de-la-Madeleine.\n\nLouisbourg itself was one of the most important commercial and military centres in New France. Louisbourg was captured by New Englanders with British naval assistance in 1745 and by British forces in 1758. The French population of Île Royale was deported to France after each siege. While French settlers returned to their homes in Île Royale after the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle was signed in 1748, the fortress was demolished after the second siege. Île Royale remained formally part of New France until it was ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of Paris in 1763. It was then merged with the adjacent, British colony of Nova Scotia (present day peninsular Nova Scotia and New Brunswick). Acadians who had been expelled from Nova Scotia and Île Royale were permitted to settle in Cape Breton beginning in 1764, and established communities in north-western Cape Breton, near Cheticamp, and southern Cape Breton, on and near Isle Madame.\n\nSome of the first British-sanctioned settlers on the island following the Seven Years' War were Irish, although upon settlement they merged with local French communities to form a culture rich in music and tradition. From 1763 to 1784, the island was administratively part of the colony of Nova Scotia and was governed from Halifax.\n\nThe first permanently settled Scottish community on Cape Breton Island was Judique, settled in 1775 by Michael Mor MacDonald. He spent his first winter using his upside-down boat for shelter, which is reflected in the architecture of the village's Community Centre. He composed a song about the area called \"O 's àlainn an t-àite\", or \"O, Fair is the Place.\"\n\nDuring the American Revolution, on 1 November 1776, John Paul Jones – the father of the American Navy – set sail in command of \"Alfred\" to free hundreds of American prisoners working in the area's coal mines. Although winter conditions prevented the freeing of the prisoners, the mission did result in the capture of \"Mellish\", a vessel carrying a vital supply of winter clothing intended for John Burgoyne's troops in Canada.\n\nMajor Timothy Hierlihy and his regiment on board HMS \"Hope\" worked in and protected from privateer attacks on the coal mines at Sydney Cape Breton. Sydney Cape Breton provided a vital supply of coal for Halifax throughout the war. The British began developing the mining site at Sydney Mines in 1777. On 14 May 1778, Major Hierlihy arrived at Cape Breton. While there, Hierlihy reported that he \"beat off many piratical attacks, killed some and took other prisoners.\"\n\nA few years into the war there was also a naval engagement between French ships and a British convoy off Sydney, Nova Scotia, near Spanish River (1781), Cape Breton. French ships (fighting with the Americans) were re-coaling and defeated a British convoy. Six French sailors were killed and 17 British, with many more wounded.\n\nIn 1784, Britain split the colony of Nova Scotia into three separate colonies: New Brunswick, Cape Breton Island, and present-day peninsular Nova Scotia, in addition to the adjacent colonies of St. John's Island (renamed Prince Edward Island in 1798) and Newfoundland. The colony of Cape Breton Island had its capital at Sydney on its namesake harbour fronting on Spanish Bay and the Cabot Strait. Its first Lieutenant-Governor was Joseph Frederick Wallet DesBarres (1784–1787) and his successor was William Macarmick (1787).\n\nA number of United Empire Loyalists emigrated to the Canadian colonies, including Cape Breton. David Mathews, the former Mayor of New York City during the American Revolution, emigrated with his family to Cape Breton in 1783. He succeeded Macarmick as head of the colony and served from 1795 to 1798.\n\nFrom 1799 to 1807, the military commandant was John Despard, brother of Edward.\n\nAn order forbidding the granting of land in Cape Breton, issued in 1763, was removed in 1784. The mineral rights to the island were given over to the Duke of York by an order-in-council. The British government had intended that the Crown take over the operation of the mines when Cape Breton was made a colony, but this was never done, probably because of the rehabilitation cost of the mines. The mines were in a neglected state, caused by careless operations dating back at least to the time of the final fall of Louisbourg in 1758.\n\nLarge-scale shipbuilding began in the 1790s, beginning with schooners for local trade moving in the 1820s to larger brigs and brigantines, mostly built for British shipowners. Shipbuilding peaked in the 1850s, marked in 1851 by the full-rigged ship \"Lord Clarendon\", the largest wooden ship ever built in Cape Breton.\n\nIn 1820, the colony of Cape Breton Island was merged for the second time with Nova Scotia. This development is one of the factors which led to large-scale industrial development in the Sydney Coal Field of eastern Cape Breton County. By the late 19th century, as a result of the faster shipping, expanding fishery and industrialization of the island, exchanges of people between the island of Newfoundland and Cape Breton increased, beginning a cultural exchange that continues to this day.\n\nThe 1920s were some of the most violent times in Cape Breton. They were marked by several severe labour disputes. The famous murder of William Davis by strike breakers, and the seizing of the New Waterford power plant by striking miners led to a major union sentiment that persists to this day in some circles. William Davis Miners' Memorial Day is celebrated in coal mining towns to commemorate the deaths of miners at the hands of the coal companies.\n\nThe turn of the 20th century saw Cape Breton Island at the forefront of scientific achievement with the now-famous activities launched by inventors Alexander Graham Bell and Guglielmo Marconi.\n\nFollowing his successful invention of the telephone and being relatively wealthy, Bell acquired land near Baddeck in 1885, largely due to surroundings reminiscent of his early years in Scotland. He established a summer estate complete with research laboratories, working with deaf people—including Helen Keller—and continued to invent. Baddeck would be the site of his experiments with hydrofoil technologies as well as the Aerial Experiment Association, financed by his wife, which saw the first powered flight in Canada when the AEA \"Silver Dart\" took off from the ice-covered waters of Bras d'Or Lake. Bell also built the forerunner to the iron lung and experimented with breeding sheep.\n\nMarconi's contributions to Cape Breton Island were also quite significant, as he used the island's geography to his advantage in transmitting the first North American trans-Atlantic radio message from a station constructed at Table Head in Glace Bay to a receiving station at Poldhu in Cornwall, England. Marconi's pioneering work in Cape Breton marked the beginning of modern radio technology. Marconi's station at Marconi Towers, on the outskirts of Glace Bay, became the chief communication centre for the Royal Canadian Navy in World War I through to the early years of World War II.\n\nPromotions for tourism beginning in the 1950s recognized the importance of the Scottish culture to the province, and the provincial government started encouraging the use of Gaelic once again. The establishment of funding for the Gaelic College of Celtic Arts and Crafts and formal Gaelic language courses in public schools are intended to address the near-loss of this culture to English assimilation.\nIn the 1960s, the Fortress of Louisbourg was partially reconstructed by Parks Canada. Since 2009, this National Historic Site of Canada has attracted an average of 90 000 visitors per year.\n\nGaelic speakers in Cape Breton, as elsewhere in Nova Scotia, furnished a large proportion of the local population from the eighteenth century on. They brought with them a common culture of poetry, traditional songs and tales, music and dance, and used this to develop distinctive local traditions.\n\nMost Gaelic settlement in Nova Scotia happened between 1770 and 1840, with probably over 50,000 Gaelic speakers emigrating from the Scottish Highlands and the Hebrides to Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island. Such emigration was facilitated by changes in Gaelic society and the economy, with sharp increases in rents, confiscation of land and disruption of local customs and rights. In Nova Scotia, poetry and song in Gaelic flourished. George Emmerson argues that an \"ancient and rich\" tradition of storytelling, song, and Gaelic poetry emerged during the eighteenth century and was transplanted from the Highlands of Scotland to Nova Scotia, where the language similarly took root there. The majority of those settling in Nova Scotia from the end of the eighteenth century through to middle of the next were from the Scottish Highlands, rather than the Lowlands, making the Highland tradition's impact more profound on the region. Gaelic settlement in Cape Breton began in earnest in the early nineteenth century.\nThe Gaelic language became dominant from Colchester County in the west of Nova Scotia into Cape Breton County in the east. It was reinforced in Cape Breton in the first half of the 19th century with an influx of Highland Scots numbering approximately 50,000 as a result of the Highland Clearances.\n\nGaelic speakers, however, tended to be poor; they were largely illiterate and had little access to education. This situation still obtained in the early twentieth century. In 1921 Gaelic was approved as an optional subject in the curriculum of Nova Scotia, but few teachers could be found and children were discouraged from using the language in schools. By 1931 the number of Gaelic speakers in Nova Scotia had fallen to approximately 25,000, mostly in discrete pockets. In Cape Breton it was still a majority language, but the proportion was falling. Children were no longer being raised with Gaelic.\n\nFrom 1939 on attempts were made to strengthen its position in the public school system in Nova Scotia, but funding, official commitment and the availability of teachers continued to be a problem. By the 1950s the number of speakers was less than 7,000. The advent of multiculturalism in Canada in the 1960s meant that new educational opportunities became available, with a gradual strengthening of the language at secondary and tertiary level. At present several schools in Cape Breton offer Gaelic Studies and Gaelic language programs, and the language is taught at University College of Cape Breton.\n\nThe 2016 Canadian Census shows that there are only 40 reported speakers of Gaelic as a mother tongue in Cape Breton. On the other hand, there are families and individuals who have recommenced intergenerational transmission. They include fluent speakers from Gaelic-speaking areas of Scotland and speakers who became fluent in Nova Scotia and who in some cases studied in Scotland. Other revitalization activities include adult education, community cultural events and publishing.\n\nThe island measures in area, making it the 77th largest island in the world and Canada's 18th largest island. Cape Breton Island is composed mainly of rocky shores, rolling farmland, glacial valleys, barren headlands, mountains, woods and plateaus. Geological evidence suggests at least part of the island was joined with present-day Scotland and Norway, now separated by millions of years of plate tectonics.\n\nCape Breton Island's northern portion is dominated by the Cape Breton Highlands, commonly shortened to simply the \"Highlands\", which are an extension of the Appalachian mountain chain. The Highlands comprise the northern portions of Inverness and Victoria counties. In 1936, the federal government established the Cape Breton Highlands National Park covering across the northern third of the Highlands. The Cabot Trail scenic highway also encircles the plateau's coastal perimeter.\n\nCape Breton Island's hydrological features include the Bras d'Or Lake system, a salt-water fjord at the heart of the island, and freshwater features including Lake Ainslie, the Margaree River system, and the Mira River. Innumerable smaller rivers and streams drain into the Bras d'Or Lake estuary and on to the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Atlantic coasts.\n\nCape Breton Island is joined to the mainland by the Canso Causeway, which was completed in 1955, enabling direct road and rail traffic to and from the island, but requiring marine traffic to pass through the Canso Canal at the eastern end of the causeway.\n\nCape Breton Island is divided into four counties: Cape Breton, Inverness, Richmond, and Victoria.\n\nThe climate is one of mild, often pleasantly warm summers and cold winters, although the proximity to the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf Stream moderates the extreme winter cold found on the mainland, especially on the east side that faces the Atlantic. Precipitation is abundant year round, with annual totals up to 60 inches on the eastern side facing the Atlantic storms. Considerable snowfall occurs in winter, especially in the highlands.\n\nThe island's residents can be grouped into five main cultures: Scottish, Mi'kmaq, Acadian, Irish, English, with respective languages Scottish Gaelic, Mi'kmaq, French, and English. English is now the primary language, including a locally distinctive Cape Breton accent, while Mi'kmaq, Scottish Gaelic and Acadian French are still spoken in some communities.\n\nLater migrations of Black Loyalists, Italians, and Eastern Europeans mostly settled in the island's eastern part around the industrial Cape Breton region. Cape Breton Island's population has been in decline two decades with an increasing exodus in recent years due to economic conditions.\n\nAccording to the Census of Canada, the population of Cape Breton [Economic region] in 2016 / 2011 / 2006 / 1996 was 132,010 / 135,974 / 142,298 / 158,260.\n\nStatistics Canada in 2001 reported a \"religion\" total of 145,525 for Cape Breton, including 5,245 with \"no religious affiliation.\" Major categories included:\nBULLET::::- Roman Catholic : 96,260 (includes Eastern Catholic, Polish National Catholic Church, Old Catholic)\nBULLET::::- Protestant: 42,390\nBULLET::::- Christian, not included elsewhere: 580\nBULLET::::- Orthodox: 395\nBULLET::::- Jewish: 250\nBULLET::::- Muslim: 145\n\nMuch of the recent economic history of Cape Breton Island can be tied to the coal industry.\n\nThe island has two major coal deposits:\n\nBULLET::::- the Sydney Coal Field in the southeastern part of the island along the Atlantic Ocean drove the Industrial Cape Breton economy throughout the 19th and 20th centuries—until after World War II, its industries were the largest private employers in Canada.\nBULLET::::- the Inverness Coal Field in the western part of the island along the Gulf of St. Lawrence is significantly smaller but hosted several mines.\n\nSydney has traditionally been the main port, with facilities in a large, sheltered, natural harbour. It is the island's largest commercial centre and home to the \"Cape Breton Post\" daily newspaper, as well as one television station, CJCB-TV (CTV), and several radio stations. The Marine Atlantic terminal at North Sydney is the terminal for large ferries traveling to Channel-Port aux Basques and seasonally to Argentia, both on the island of Newfoundland.\n\nPoint Edward on the west side of Sydney Harbour is the location of Sydport, a former navy base () now converted to commercial use. The Canadian Coast Guard College is nearby at Westmount. Petroleum, bulk coal, and cruise ship facilities are also in Sydney Harbour.\n\nGlace Bay, the second largest urban community in population, was the island's main coal mining centre until its last mine closed in the 1980s. Glace Bay was the hub of the Sydney & Louisburg Railway and a major fishing port. At one time, Glace Bay was known as the largest town in Nova Scotia, based on population.\n\nPort Hawkesbury has risen to prominence since the completion of the Canso Causeway and Canso Canal created an artificial deep-water port, allowing extensive petrochemical, pulp and paper, and gypsum handling facilities to be established. The Strait of Canso is completely navigable to Seawaymax vessels, and Port Hawkesbury is open to the deepest-draught vessels on the world's oceans. Large marine vessels may also enter Bras d'Or Lake through the Great Bras d'Or channel, and small craft can use the Little Bras d'Or channel or St. Peters Canal. While commercial shipping no longer uses the St. Peters Canal, it remains an important waterway for recreational vessels.\n\nThe industrial Cape Breton area faced several challenges with the closure of the Cape Breton Development Corporation's (DEVCO) coal mines and the Sydney Steel Corporation's (SYSCO) steel mill. In recent years, the Island's residents have tried to diversify the area economy by investing in tourism developments, call centres, and small businesses, as well as manufacturing ventures in fields such as auto parts, pharmaceuticals, and window glazings.\n\nWhile the Cape Breton Regional Municipality is in transition from an industrial to a service-based economy, the rest of Cape Breton Island outside the industrial area surrounding Sydney-Glace Bay has been more stable, with a mixture of fishing, forestry, small-scale agriculture, and tourism.\n\nTourism in particular has grown throughout the post-Second World War era, especially the growth in vehicle-based touring, which was furthered by the creation of the Cabot Trail scenic drive. The scenery of the island is rivalled in northeastern North America by only Newfoundland; and Cape Breton Island tourism marketing places a heavy emphasis on its Scottish Gaelic heritage through events such as the Celtic Colours Festival, held each October, as well as promotions through the Gaelic College of Celtic Arts and Crafts.\n\nWhale-watching is a popular attraction for tourists. Whale-watching cruises are operated by vendors from Baddeck to Cheticamp. The most popular species of whale found in Cape Breton's waters is the Pilot whale.\n\nThe island's primary east-west road is Highway 105, the Trans-Canada Highway, although Trunk 4 is also heavily used. Highway 125 is an important arterial route around Sydney Harbour in the Cape Breton Regional Municipality. The Cabot Trail, circling the Cape Breton Highlands, and Trunk 19, along the island's western coast, are important secondary roads. The Cape Breton and Central Nova Scotia Railway maintains railway connections between the port of Sydney to the Canadian National Railway in Truro\n\nThe Cabot Trail is a scenic road circuit around and over the Cape Breton Highlands with spectacular coastal vistas; over 400,000 visitors drive the Cabot Trail each summer and fall. Coupled with the Fortress of Louisbourg, it has driven the growth of the tourism industry on the island in recent decades. The \"Condé Nast\" travel guide has rated Cape Breton Island as one of the world's best island destinations.\n\nCape Breton is well known for its traditional fiddle music, which was brought to North America by Scottish immigrants during the Highland Clearances. The traditional style has been well preserved in Cape Breton, and céilidhs have become a popular attraction for tourists. Inverness County in particular has a heavy concentration of musical activity, with regular performances in communities such as Mabou and Judique. Judique is recognized as 'Baile nam Fonn', (literally: Village of Tunes) or the 'Home of Celtic Music', featuring the Celtic Music Interpretive Centre. Performers who have received significant recognition outside of Cape Breton include Angus Chisholm, Buddy MacMaster, Joseph Cormier, first Cape Breton fiddler to record an album made available in Europe (1974), Lee Cremo, Bruce Guthro, Natalie MacMaster, Ashley MacIsaac, The Rankin Family, Aselin Debison, Gordie Sampson, Dawn and Margie Beaton, also known as \"The Beaton Sisters\", and the Barra MacNeils. The Margaree's of Cape Breton also serve as a large contributor of fiddle music celebrated throughout the island. This traditional fiddle music of Cape Breton is studied by musicians around the world, where its global recognition continues to rise.\n\nThe Men of the Deeps are a male choral group of current and former miners from the industrial Cape Breton area.\n\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1994) starring Adam Beach\nBULLET::::- \"Margaret's Museum\" (1995) starring Helena Bonham Carter\nBULLET::::- \"The Bay Boy\" (1984) starring Kiefer Sutherland\nBULLET::::- \"New Waterford Girl\" (1999) directed by Allan Moyle\nBULLET::::- \"The Hanging Garden\" (1997) directed by Thom Fitzgerald\nBULLET::::- \"Marion Bridge\" (2002) directed by Wiebke von Carolsfeld\nBULLET::::- \"My Bloody Valentine\" (1981) directed by George Mihalka\nBULLET::::- \"Pit Pony\" (1997), TV movie and series adapted from the novel by Joyce Barkhouse\nBULLET::::- \"The Book of Negroes\" (2015) starring Cuba Gooding Jr. adapted from the novel of the same name by Lawrence Hill\n\nCape Breton artists who have been recognized with major national or international awards include actor Harold Russell of North Sydney, who won an Academy Award in 1946 for his portrayal of Homer Parrish in \"The Best Years of Our Lives\", and Lynn Coady and Linden MacIntyre of Inverness County, who are both past winners of the Giller Prize for Canadian literature. The Rankin Family and Rita MacNeil have recorded multiple albums certified as Double Platinum by Music Canada.\n\nPeople from Cape Breton have also achieved a number of firsts in Canadian politics and governance. These include Mayann Francis of Whitney Pier, the first Black Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia, Isaac Phills of Sydney, Nova Scotia, the first person of African descent to be awarded the Order of Canada, and Elizabeth May of Margaree Harbour, the first member of the Green Party of Canada elected to the House of Commons of Canada.\n\nCape Breton Island is also home to YouTube weather forecaster Frankie MacDonald, who has over 200,000 subscribers. He accurately predicted an magnitude 7 earthquake in New Zealand in November 2016.\n\nAmerican artists like sculptor Richard Serra, composer Philip Glass and abstract painter John Beardman spent part of the year on Cape Breton Island.\n\nSteve Arbuckle is a Canadian-born actor born in Cape Breton Island.\n\nDirector Ashley McKenzie's 2016 film \"Werewolf\" is set on the island and features local actors; McKenzie grew up on the island.\n\nBruce Guthro; Lead singer and guitarist of the former Scottish Celtic band Runrig, which disbanded in 2018 after 46 years. Guthro resides in Hammonds Plains, Nova Scotia.\n\nDylan Guthro; musician. Son of Bruce Guthro.\n\nBULLET::::- Canadian Gaelic\nBULLET::::- Cape Breton accent\nBULLET::::- Cape Breton Labour Party\nBULLET::::- Cape Breton Regional Municipality\nBULLET::::- Provinces and territories of Canada\nBULLET::::- Province of Cape Breton Island\nBULLET::::- Sydney Tar Ponds\n\n\n\n\nBULLET::::- Cape Breton Island Official Travel Guide\n"}
{"id": "5725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5725", "title": "Cthulhu Mythos", "text": "Cthulhu Mythos\n\nThe Cthulhu Mythos is a shared fictional universe, originating in the works of American horror writer H. P. Lovecraft. The term was coined by August Derleth, a contemporary correspondent and protégé of Lovecraft, to identify the settings, tropes, and lore that were employed by Lovecraft and his literary successors. The name \"Cthulhu\" derives from the central creature in Lovecraft's seminal short story, \"The Call of Cthulhu\", first published in the pulp magazine \"Weird Tales\" in 1928.\n\nRichard L. Tierney, a writer who also wrote Mythos tales, later applied the term \"Derleth Mythos\" to distinguish Lovecraft's works from Derleth's later stories, which modify key tenets of the Mythos. Authors of Lovecraftian horror in particular frequently use elements of the Cthulhu Mythos.\n\nIn his essay \"H. P. Lovecraft and the Cthulhu Mythos\", Robert M. Price described two stages in the development of the Cthulhu Mythos. Price called the first stage the \"Cthulhu Mythos proper.\" This stage was formulated during Lovecraft's lifetime and was subject to his guidance. The second stage was guided by August Derleth who, in addition to publishing Lovecraft's stories after his death, attempted to categorize and expand the Mythos.\n\nAn ongoing theme in Lovecraft's work is the complete irrelevance of mankind in the face of the cosmic horrors that apparently exist in the universe. Lovecraft made frequent references to the \"Great Old Ones\", a loose pantheon of ancient, powerful deities from space who once ruled the Earth and have since fallen into a deathlike sleep. While these monstrous deities have been present in almost all of Lovecraft's published work (his second short story \"Dagon,\" published in 1919, is considered the start of the mythos), the first story to really expand the pantheon of Great Old Ones and its themes is \"The Call of Cthulhu,\" which was published in 1928.\n\nLovecraft broke with other pulp writers of the time by having his main characters' minds deteriorate when afforded a glimpse of what exists outside their perceived reality. He emphasized the point by stating in the opening sentence of the story that \"The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents.\"\n\nWriter Dirk W. Mosig notes that Lovecraft was a \"mechanistic materialist\" who embraced the philosophy of \"cosmic indifference\" (Cosmicism). Lovecraft believed in a purposeless, mechanical, and uncaring universe. Human beings, with their limited faculties, can never fully understand this universe, and the cognitive dissonance caused by this revelation leads to insanity, in his view.\n\nThere have been attempts at categorizing this fictional group of beings. Phillip A. Schreffler argues that by carefully scrutinizing Lovecraft's writings, a workable framework emerges that outlines the entire \"pantheon\"from the unreachable \"Outer Ones\" (e.g. Azathoth, who occupies the centre of the universe) and \"Great Old Ones\" (e.g. Cthulhu, imprisoned on Earth in the sunken city of R'lyeh) to the lesser castes (the lowly slave shoggoths and the Mi-go).\n\nDavid E. Schultz, however, believes that Lovecraft never meant to create a canonical Mythos but rather intended his imaginary pantheon to merely serve as a background element. Lovecraft himself humorously referred to his Mythos as \"Yog Sothothery\" (Dirk W. Mosig coincidentally suggested the term \"Yog-Sothoth Cycle of Myth\" be substituted for \"Cthulhu Mythos\"). At times, Lovecraft even had to remind his readers that his Mythos creations were entirely fictional.\n\nThe view that there was no rigid structure is expounded upon by S. T. Joshi, who said \"Lovecraft's imaginary cosmogony was never a static system but rather a sort of aesthetic construct that remained ever adaptable to its creator's developing personality and altering interests. . . . There was never a rigid system that might be posthumously appropriated. . . . The essence of the mythos lies not in a pantheon of imaginary deities nor in a cobwebby collection of forgotten tomes, but rather in a certain convincing cosmic attitude.\"\n\nPrice, however, believed that Lovecraft's writings could at least be divided into categories and identified three distinct themes: the \"Dunsanian\" (written a similar style as Lord Dunsany), \"Arkham\" (occurring in Lovecraft's fictionalized New England setting), and \"Cthulhu\" (the cosmic tales) cycles. Writer Will Murray noted that while Lovecraft often used his fictional pantheon in the stories he ghostwrote for other authors, he reserved Arkham and its environs exclusively for those tales he wrote under his own name.\n\nAlthough the Mythos was not formalized or acknowledged between them, Lovecraft did correspond and share story elements with other contemporary writers including Clark Ashton Smith, Robert E. Howard, Robert Bloch, Frank Belknap Long, Henry Kuttner, Henry S. Whitehead, and Fritz Leibera group referred to as the \"Lovecraft Circle.\"\n\nFor example, Robert E. Howard's character Friedrich Von Junzt reads Lovecraft's \"Necronomicon\" in the short story \"The Children of the Night\" (1931), and in turn Lovecraft mentions Howard's \"Unaussprechlichen Kulten\" in the stories \"Out of the Aeons\" (1935) and \"The Shadow Out of Time\" (1936). Many of Howard's original unedited \"Conan\" stories also involve parts of the Cthulhu Mythos.\n\nPrice denotes the second stage's commencement with August Derleth. The principal difference between Lovecraft and Derleth being Derleth's use of hope and development of the idea that the Cthulhu mythos essentially represented a struggle between good and evil. Derleth is credited with creating the \"Elder Gods.\" He stated:\n\nPrice believes that the basis for Derleth's system is found in Lovecraft: \"Was Derleth's use of the rubric 'Elder Gods' so alien to Lovecraft's in \"At the Mountains of Madness\"? Perhaps not. In fact, this very story, along with some hints from \"The Shadow over Innsmouth\", provides the key to the origin of the 'Derleth Mythos'. For in \"At the Mountains of Madness\" is shown the history of a conflict between interstellar races, first among them the Elder Ones and the Cthulhu-spawn.\n\nDerleth himself believed that Lovecraft wished for other authors to actively write about the Mythos as opposed to it being a discrete plot device within Lovecraft's own stories. Derleth expanded the boundaries of the Mythos by including any passing reference to another author's story elements by Lovecraft as part of the genre. Just as Lovecraft made passing reference to Clark Ashton Smith's \"Book of Eibon\", Derleth in turn added Smith's Ubbo-Sathla to the Mythos.\n\nDerleth also attempted to connect the deities of the Mythos to the four elements (\"air\", \"earth\", \"fire\", and \"water\"), creating new beings representative of certain elements in order to legitimize his system of classification. Derleth created \"Cthugha\" as a sort of fire elemental when a fan, Francis Towner Laney, complained that he had neglected to include the element in his schema. Laney, the editor of \"The Acolyte\", had categorized the Mythos in an essay that first appeared in the Winter 1942 issue of the magazine.\n\nImpressed by the glossary, Derleth asked Laney to rewrite it for publication in the Arkham House collection \"Beyond the Wall of Sleep\" (1943). Laney's essay (\"The Cthulhu Mythos\") was later republished in \"Crypt of Cthulhu #32\" (1985). In applying the elemental theory to beings that function on a cosmic scale (e.g. Yog-Sothoth) some authors created a fifth element that they termed \"aethyr\".\n\n+ Derleth's elemental classifications\n! Air\n! Earth\n! Fire\n! Water\n\nBULLET::::- Cthulhu Mythos anthology\nBULLET::::- Cthulhu Mythos biographies\nBULLET::::- Cthulhu Mythos deities\nBULLET::::- Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture\nBULLET::::- Elements of the Cthulhu Mythos\nBULLET::::- Weird fiction\n\nBULLET::::- Robert M. Price, West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press. Original publication:\nBULLET::::- Robert M. Price, West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press.\nBULLET::::- Dziemianowicz, Stefan. \"The Cthulhu Mythos: Chronicle of a Controversy\". In The Lovecraft Society of New England (ed) \"Necronomicon: The Cthulhu Mythos Convention 1993\" (convention book). Boston, MA: NecronomiCon, 1993, pp. 25–31\n\nBULLET::::- Lovecraft Archive\nBULLET::::- The Virtual World of H. P. Lovecraft a mapping of Lovecraft's imaginary version of New England\nBULLET::::- Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown – full documentary at the Snagfilms company YouTube channel\n"}
{"id": "5726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5726", "title": "Crane shot", "text": "Crane shot\n\nIn filmmaking and video production, a crane shot is a shot taken by a camera on a moving crane or jib. Most cranes accommodate both the camera and an operator, but some can be moved by remote control. Camera cranes go back to the dawn of movie-making, and were frequently used in silent films to enhance the epic nature of large sets and massive crowds. Another use is to move up and away from the actors, a common way of ending a movie. Crane shots are often found in what are supposed to be emotional or suspenseful scenes. One example of this technique is the shots taken by remote cranes in the car-chase sequence of the 1985 film \"To Live and Die in L.A.\". Some filmmakers place the camera on a boom arm simply to make it easier to move around between ordinary set-ups.\n\nThe major supplier of cranes in the cinema of the United States throughout the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s was the Chapman Company (later Chapman-Leonard of North Hollywood), supplanted by dozens of similar manufacturers around the world. The traditional design provided seats for both the director and the camera operator, and sometimes a third seat for the cinematographer as well. Large weights on the back of the crane compensate for the weight of the people riding the crane and must be adjusted carefully to avoid the possibility of accidents. During the 1960s, the tallest crane was the Chapman Titan crane, a massive design over 20 feet high that won an Academy Scientific & Engineering award. Most such cranes were manually operated, requiring an experienced boom operator who knew how to vertically raise, lower, and \"crab\" the camera alongside actors while the crane platform rolled on separate tracks. The crane operator and camera operator had to precisely coordinate their moves so that focus, pan, and camera position all started and stopped at the same time, requiring great skill and rehearsal.\n\nCamera cranes may be small, medium, or large, depending on the load capacity and length of the loading arm. Historically, the first camera crane provided for lifting the chamber together with the operator, and sometimes an assistant. The range of motion of the boom was restricted because of the high load capacity and the need to ensure operator safety. In recent years a camera crane boom tripod with a remote control has become popular. It carries on the boom only a movie or television camera without an operator and allows shooting from difficult positions as a small load capacity makes it possible to achieve a long reach of the crane boom and relative freedom of movement. The operator controls the camera from the ground through a motorized panoramic head, using remote control and video surveillance by watching the image on the monitor. A separate category consists of telescopic camera cranes. These devices allow setting an arbitrary trajectory of the camera, eliminating the characteristic jib crane radial displacement that comes with traditional spanning shots. \n\nLarge camera cranes are almost indistinguishable from the usual boom-type cranes, with the exception of special equipment for smoothly moving the boom and controlling noise. Small camera cranes and crane-trucks have a lightweight construction, often without a mechanical drive. The valves are controlled manually by balancing the load-specific counterweight, facilitating manipulation. To improve usability and repeatability of movement of the crane in different takes, the axis of rotation arrows are provided with limbs and a pointer. In some cases, the camera crane is mounted on a dolly for even greater camera mobility. Such devices are called crane trolleys. In modern films robotic cranes allow use of multiple actuators for high-accuracy repeated movement of the camera in trick photography. These devices are called tap-robots; some sources use the term motion control.\n\nDuring the last few years, camera cranes have been miniaturized and costs have dropped so dramatically that most aspiring film makers have access to these tools. What was once a \"Hollywood\" effect is now available for under $400. Main producers of cranes companies include ABC-Products, Cambo, Filmotechnic, Polecam, Panther and Matthews Studio Equipment.\n\nBULLET::::- Leni Riefenstahl had a cameraman shoot a half-circle pan shot from a crane for the 1935 Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will\nBULLET::::- A crane shot was used in Orson Welles' 1941 film \"Citizen Kane\"\nBULLET::::- The Western \"High Noon\" had a famous crane shot. The shot backs up and rises, in order to show Marshal Will Kane totally alone and isolated on the street.\nBULLET::::- Director Dario Argento included an extensive scene in \"Tenebrae\" where the camera seemingly crawled over the walls and up a house wall, all in one seamless take. Due to its length, the tracking shot ended up being the production's most difficult and complex part to complete.\nBULLET::::- The 1980 comedy-drama film \"The Stunt Man\" featured a crane throughout the production of the fictitious film-within-a-film, directed by eccentric director Peter O'Toole.\nBULLET::::- The television comedy \"Second City Television\" (\"SCTV\") uses the concept of the crane shot as comedic material. After using a crane shot in one of the first NBC-produced episodes, the network complained about the exorbitant cost of renting the crane. SCTV writers responded by making the \"crane shot\" a ubiquitous symbol of production excess while also lampooning network executives who care nothing about artistic vision and everything about the bottom line. At the end of the second season, an inebriated Johnny LaRue (John Candy) is given his very own crane by Santa Claus, implying he would be able to have a crane shot whenever he wanted it.\nBULLET::::- In his film \"Sympathy for the Devil\", Jean-Luc Godard used a crane for almost every shot in the movie, giving each scene a 360 degree tour of the tableau Godard presented to the viewer. In the final scene he even shows the crane he was able to rent on his limited his budget by including it in the scene. This was one of his traits as a filmmaker—showing off his budget—as he did with Brigitte Bardot in \"Le Mepris\" (\"Contempt\").\nBULLET::::- Director Dennis Dugan frequently uses top-to-bottom crane shots in his comedy films.\nBULLET::::- Orson Welles used a crane camera during the iconic opening of \"Touch of Evil\". The camera perched on a Chapman crane begins on a close-up of a ticking time bomb and ends three-plus minutes later with a blinding explosion.\nBULLET::::- The closing take of Richard Attenborough's film version of \"Oh! What a Lovely War\" begins with a single war grave, gradually pulling back to reveal hundreds of identical crosses.\nBULLET::::- The 2004 Johnnie To film \"Breaking News\" opens with an elaborate seven-minute single-take crane shot.\nBULLET::::- The 1964 film by Mikhail Kalatozov, \"I Am Cuba\" contains two of the most astonishing tracking shots ever attempted.\n"}
{"id": "5729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5729", "title": "Chariots of Fire", "text": "Chariots of Fire\n\nChariots of Fire is a 1981 British historical drama sports film directed by Hugh Hudson, produced by David Puttnam, and written by Colin Welland. It tells the fact-based story of two athletes in the 1924 Olympics: Eric Liddell, a devout Scottish Christian who runs for the glory of God, and Harold Abrahams, an English Jew who runs to overcome prejudice. Ben Cross and Ian Charleson star as Abrahams and Liddell, respectively, alongside Nigel Havers, Ian Holm, Lindsay Anderson, John Gielgud, Cheryl Campbell, and Alice Krige in supporting roles.\n\nThe film's title was inspired by the line, \"Bring me my chariot of fire,\" from the William Blake poem adapted into the popular British hymn \"Jerusalem\"; the hymn is heard at the end of the film. The original phrase \"chariot(s) of fire\" is from 2 Kings and in the Bible.\n\nThe film was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won four, including Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay. It is ranked number nineteen on the British Film Institute's list of the top 100 British films, and is also noted for its memorable theme song composed by Vangelis, who won the Academy Award for Best Original Score.\n\nIn 1919, Harold Abrahams enters the University of Cambridge, where he experiences anti-Semitism from the staff, but enjoys participating in the Gilbert and Sullivan club. He becomes the first person to ever complete the Trinity Great Court Run, running around the college courtyard in the time it takes for the clock to strike 12, and achieves an undefeated string of victories in various national running competitions. Although focused on his running, he falls in love with Sybil, a leading Gilbert and Sullivan soprano.\n\nEric Liddell, born in China of Scottish missionary parents, is in Scotland. His devout sister Jennie disapproves of Liddell's plans to pursue competitive running, but Liddell sees running as a way of glorifying God before returning to China to work as a missionary.\n\nWhen they first race against each other, Liddell beats Abrahams. Abrahams takes it poorly, but Sam Mussabini, a professional trainer whom he had approached earlier, offers to take him on to improve his technique. This attracts criticism from the Cambridge college masters, who allege it is not gentlemanly for an amateur to \"play the tradesman\" by employing a professional coach. Abrahams dismisses this concern, interpreting it as cover for anti-Semitic and class-based prejudice.\n\nWhen Eric Liddell accidentally misses a church prayer meeting because of his running, his sister Jennie upbraids him and accuses him of no longer caring about God. Eric tells her that though he intends to return eventually to the China mission, he feels divinely inspired when running, and that not to run would be to dishonour God, saying \"I believe that God made me for a purpose. But He also made me fast, and when I run, I feel His pleasure.\"\n\nThe two athletes, after years of training and racing, are accepted to represent Great Britain in the 1924 Olympics in Paris. Also accepted are Abrahams' Cambridge friends, Lord Andrew Lindsay, Aubrey Montague, and Henry Stallard.\n\nWhile boarding the boat to Paris for the Olympics, Liddell discovers the heats for his 100-metre race will be on a Sunday. He refuses to run the race, despite strong pressure from the Prince of Wales and the British Olympic Association, because his Christian convictions prevent him from running on the Sabbath.\n\nA solution is found thanks to Liddell's teammate Lindsay, who, having already won a silver medal in the 400 metres hurdles, offers to give his place in the 400-metre race on the following Thursday to Liddell, who gratefully agrees. Liddell's religious convictions in the face of national athletic pride make headlines around the world.\n\nLiddell delivers a sermon at the Paris Church of Scotland that Sunday, and quotes from , ending with \"But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.\"\n\nAbrahams is badly beaten by the heavily favoured United States runners in the 200 metre race. He knows his last chance for a medal will be the 100 metres. He competes in the race, and wins. His coach Sam Mussabini is overcome that the years of dedication and training have paid off with an Olympic gold medal. Now Abrahams can get on with his life and reunite with his girlfriend Sybil, whom he had neglected for the sake of running.\n\nBefore Liddell's race, the American coach remarks dismissively to his runners that Liddell has little chance of doing well in his now, far longer, 400 metre race. But one of the American runners, Jackson Scholz, hands Liddell a note of support, quoting 1 Samuel 2:30 \"He that honors Me I will honor\". Liddell defeats the American favourites and wins the gold medal.\n\nThe British team returns home triumphant. Decades later in 1978, the last surviving members, Montague and Lindsay, attend Abraham's funeral where a choir sings the hymn Jerusalem. As they leave the service, they share a moment of levity before parting and fondly recall Abraham's inspirational resolve. \n\nWhile the final verse of the hymn is sung, onscreen text explains that Abrahams married Sybil and became the elder statesman of British athletics. Liddell went on to do missionary work in China. All of Scotland mourned his death in 1945 in Japanese-occupied China.\n\nBULLET::::- Ben Cross as Harold Abrahams, a Jewish student at Cambridge University\nBULLET::::- Ian Charleson as Eric Liddell, the son of Scottish missionaries to China\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Farrell as Aubrey Montague, a runner and friend of Harold Abrahams\nBULLET::::- Nigel Havers as Lord Andrew Lindsay, a Cambridge student runner partially based on David Burghley and Douglas Lowe\nBULLET::::- Ian Holm as Sam Mussabini, Abrahams's running coach\nBULLET::::- John Gielgud as Master of Trinity College at Cambridge University\nBULLET::::- Lindsay Anderson as Master of Caius College at Cambridge University\nBULLET::::- Cheryl Campbell as Jennie Liddell, Eric's devout sister (Janet Lillian \"Jenny\" Liddell)\nBULLET::::- Alice Krige as Sybil Gordon, Abrahams' fiancée (his actual fiancée was Sybil Evers)\nBULLET::::- Struan Rodger as Sandy McGrath, Liddell's friend and running coach\nBULLET::::- Nigel Davenport as Lord Birkenhead, member of the British Olympic Committee, who counsels the athletes\nBULLET::::- Patrick Magee as Lord Cadogan, chairman of the British Olympics Committee, who is unsympathetic to Liddell's religious plight\nBULLET::::- David Yelland as the Prince of Wales, who tries to get Liddell to change his mind about running on Sunday\nBULLET::::- Peter Egan as the Duke of Sutherland, president of the British Olympic Committee, who is sympathetic to Liddell\nBULLET::::- Daniel Gerroll as Henry Stallard, a Cambridge student and runner\nBULLET::::- Dennis Christopher as Charley Paddock, American Olympic runner\nBULLET::::- Brad Davis as Jackson Scholz, American Olympic runner\nBULLET::::- Richard Griffiths as the Head Porter at Caius College\n\nThe film depicts Abrahams as attending Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge with three other Olympic athletes: Henry Stallard, Aubrey Montague, and Lord Andrew Lindsay. Abrahams and Stallard were in fact students there and competed in the 1924 Olympics. Montague also competed in the Olympics as depicted, but he attended Oxford, not Cambridge. Aubrey Montague sent daily letters to his mother about his time at Oxford and the Olympics; these letters were the basis of Montague's narration in the film.\n\nThe character of Lindsay was based partially on Lord Burghley, a significant figure in the history of British athletics. Although Burghley did attend Cambridge, he was not a contemporary of Harold Abrahams, as Abrahams was an undergraduate from 1919 to 1923 and Burghley was at Cambridge from 1923 to 1927. One scene in the film depicts the Burghley-based \"Lindsay\" as practising hurdles on his estate with full champagne glasses placed on each hurdle – this was something the wealthy Burghley did, although he used matchboxes instead of champagne glasses. The fictional character of Lindsay was created when Douglas Lowe, who was Britain's third athletics gold medallist in the 1924 Olympics, was not willing to be involved with the film.\nAnother scene in the film recreates the Great Court Run, in which the runners attempt to run around the perimeter of the Great Court at Trinity College, Cambridge in the time it takes the clock to strike 12 at midday. The film shows Abrahams performing the feat for the first time in history. In fact, Abrahams never attempted this race, and at the time of filming the only person on record known to have succeeded was Lord Burghley, in 1927. In \"Chariots of Fire\", Lindsay, who is based on Lord Burghley, runs the Great Court Run with Abrahams in order to spur him on, and crosses the finish line just a moment too late. Since the film's release, the Great Court Run has also been successfully run by Trinity undergraduate Sam Dobin, in October 2007.\n\nIn the film, Eric Liddell is tripped up by a Frenchman in the 400-metre event of a Scotland–France international athletic meeting. He recovers, makes up a 20-metre deficit, and wins. This was based on fact; the actual race was the 440 yards at a Triangular Contest meet between Scotland, England, and Ireland at Stoke-on-Trent in England in July 1923. His achievement was remarkable as he had already won the 100- and 220-yard events that day. Also unmentioned with regard to Liddell is that it was he who introduced Abrahams to Sam Mussabini. This is alluded to: In the film Abrahams first encounters Mussabini while he is watching Liddell race. The film, however, suggests that Abrahams himself sought Mussabini's assistance.\n\nAbrahams and Liddell did race against each other once, but not quite as depicted in the film, which shows Liddell winning the final of the 100 yards against a shattered Abrahams at the 1923 AAA Championship at Stamford Bridge. In fact, they raced only in a heat of the 220 yards, which Liddell won, five yards ahead of Abrahams, who did not progress to the final. In the 100 yards, Abrahams was eliminated in the heats and never raced against Liddell, who won the finals of both races the next day.\n\nAbrahams' fiancée is misidentified as Sybil Gordon, a soprano at the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company. In fact, in 1936, Abrahams married Sybil Evers, who sang at the D'Oyly Carte, but they did not meet until 1934. Also, in the film, Sybil is depicted as singing the role of Yum-Yum in \"The Mikado\", but neither Sybil Gordon nor Sybil Evers ever sang that role with D'Oyly Carte, although Evers was known for her charm in singing Peep-Bo, one of the two other \"little maids from school\". Harold Abrahams' love of and heavy involvement with Gilbert and Sullivan, as depicted in the film, is factual.\n\nLiddell's sister was several years younger than she was portrayed in the film. Her disapproval of Liddell's track career was creative licence; she actually fully supported his sporting work. Jenny Liddell Somerville cooperated fully with the making of the film and has a brief cameo in the Paris Church of Scotland during Liddell's sermon.\n\nAt the memorial service for Harold Abrahams, which opens the film, Lord Lindsay mentions that he and Montague are the only members of the 1924 Olympic team still alive. However, Montague died in 1948, 30 years before Abrahams' death.\n\nThe film takes some liberties with the events at the 1924 Olympics, including the events surrounding Liddell's refusal to race on a Sunday. In the film, he doesn't learn that the 100-metre heat is to be held on the Christian Sabbath until he is boarding the boat to Paris. In fact, the schedule was made public several months in advance; Liddell did however face immense pressure to run on that Sunday and to compete in the 100 metres, getting called before a grilling by the British Olympic Committee, the Prince of Wales, and other grandees, and his refusal to run made headlines around the world.\n\nThe decision to change races was, even so, made well before embarking to Paris, and Liddell spent the intervening months training for the 400 metres, an event in which he had previously excelled. It is true, nonetheless, that Liddell's success in the Olympic 400m was largely unexpected.\n\nThe film depicts Lindsay, having already won a medal in the 400-metre hurdles, giving up his place in the 400-metre race for Liddell. In fact Burghley, on whom Lindsay is loosely based, was eliminated in the heats of the 110 hurdles (he would go on to win a gold medal in the 400 hurdles at the 1928 Olympics), and was not entered for the 400 metres.\n\nThe film reverses the order of Abrahams' 100m and 200m races at the Olympics. In reality, after winning the 100 metres race, Abrahams ran the 200 metres but finished last, Jackson Scholz taking the gold medal. In the film, before his triumph in the 100m, Abrahams is shown losing the 200m and being scolded by Mussabini. And during the following scene in which Abrahams speaks with his friend Montague while receiving a massage from Mussabini, there is a French newspaper clipping showing Scholz and Charley Paddock with a headline which states that the 200 metres was a triumph for the United States. In the same conversation, Abrahams laments getting \"beaten out of sight\" in the 200. The film thus has Abrahams overcoming the disappointment of losing the 200 by going on to win the 100, a reversal of the real order.\n\nEric Liddell actually also ran in the 200m race, and finished third, behind Paddock and Scholz. This was the only time in reality that Liddell and Abrahams competed in the same race. While their meeting in the 1923 AAA Championship in the film was fictitious, Liddell's record win in that race did spur Abrahams to train even harder.\n\nAbrahams also won a silver medal as an opening runner for the 4 x 100 metres relay team, not shown in the film, and Montague placed sixth in the steeplechase, as depicted.\n\nIn the film, the 100m bronze medallist is a character called \"Tom Watson\"; the real medallist was Arthur Porritt of New Zealand, who refused permission for his name to be used in the film, allegedly out of modesty, and his wish was accepted by the film's producers, even though his permission was not necessary. However, the brief back-story given for Watson, who is called up to the New Zealand team from the University of Oxford, substantially matches Porritt's history. With the exception of Porritt, all the runners in the 100m final are identified correctly when they line up for inspection by the Prince of Wales.\n\nJackson Scholz is depicted as handing Liddell an inspirational Bible-quotation message before the 400 metres final: \"It says in the Old Book, 'He that honors me, I will honor.' Good luck.\" In reality, the note was from members of the British team, and was handed to Liddell before the race by his attending masseur at the team's Paris hotel. For dramatic purposes, screenwriter Welland asked Scholz if he could be depicted handing the note, and Scholz readily agreed, saying \"Yes, great, as long as it makes me look good.\"\n\nProducer David Puttnam was looking for a story in the mold of \"A Man for All Seasons\" (1966), regarding someone who follows his conscience, and felt sports provided clear situations in this sense. He discovered Eric Liddell's story by accident in 1977, when he happened upon a reference book on the Olympics while housebound from the flu in a rented house in Los Angeles.\n\nScreenwriter Colin Welland, commissioned by Puttnam, did an enormous amount of research for his Academy Award-winning script. Among other things, he took out advertisements in London newspapers seeking memories of the 1924 Olympics, went to the National Film Archives for pictures and footage of the 1924 Olympics, and interviewed everyone involved who was still alive. Welland just missed Abrahams, who died 14 January 1978, but he did attend Abrahams' February 1978 memorial service, which inspired the present-day framing device of the film. Montague's son saw Welland's newspaper ad and sent him copies of the letters his father had sent home – which gave Welland something to use as a narrative bridge in the film. Except for changes in the greetings of the letters from \"Darling Mummy\" to \"Dear Mum\" and the change from Oxford to Cambridge, all of the readings from Montague's letters are from the originals.\n\nWelland's original script also featured, in addition to Eric Liddell and Harold Abrahams, a third protagonist, 1924 Olympic gold medallist Douglas Lowe, who was presented as a privileged aristocratic athlete. However, Lowe refused to have anything to do with the film, and his character was written out and replaced by the fictional character of Lord Andrew Lindsay.\n\nInitial financing towards development costs was provided by Goldcrest Films, who then sold the project to Allied, but kept a percentage of the profits.\n\nIan Charleson wrote Eric Liddell's speech to the post-race workingmen's crowd at the Scotland v. Ireland races. Charleson, who had studied the Bible intensively in preparation for the role, told director Hugh Hudson that he didn't feel the portentous and sanctimonious scripted speech was either authentic or inspiring. Hudson and Welland allowed him to write words he personally found inspirational instead.\n\nThe film was slightly altered for the U.S. audience. A brief scene depicting a pre-Olympics cricket game between Abrahams, Liddell, Montague, and the rest of the British track team appears shortly after the beginning of the original film. For the American audience, this brief scene was deleted. In the U.S., to avoid the initial G rating, which had been strongly associated with children's films and might have hindered box office sales, a different scene was used – one depicting Abrahams and Montague arriving at a Cambridge railway station and encountering two World War I veterans who use an obscenity – in order to be given a PG rating.\n\nPuttnam chose Hugh Hudson, a multiple award-winning advertising and documentary filmmaker who had never helmed a feature film, to direct \"Chariots of Fire\". Hudson and Puttnam had known each other since the 1960s, when Puttnam was an advertising executive and Hudson was making films for ad agencies. In 1977, Hudson had also been second-unit director on the Puttnam-produced film \"Midnight Express\".\n\nDirector Hugh Hudson was determined to cast young, unknown actors in all the major roles of the film, and to back them up by using veterans like John Gielgud, Lindsay Anderson, and Ian Holm as their supporting cast. Hudson and producer David Puttnam did months of fruitless searching for the perfect actor to play Eric Liddell. They then saw Scottish stage actor Ian Charleson performing the role of Pierre in the Royal Shakespeare Company's production of \"Piaf\", and knew immediately they had found their man. Unbeknownst to them, Charleson had heard about the film from his father, and desperately wanted to play the part, feeling it would \"fit like a kid glove\".\n\nBen Cross, who plays Harold Abrahams, was discovered while playing Billy Flynn in \"Chicago\". In addition to having a natural pugnaciousness, he had the desired ability to sing and play the piano. Cross was thrilled to be cast, and said he was moved to tears by the film's script.\n\n20th Century Fox, which put up half of the production budget in exchange for distribution rights outside of North America, insisted on having a couple of notable American names in the cast. Thus the small parts of the two American champion runners, Jackson Scholz and Charlie Paddock, were cast with recent headliners: Brad Davis had recently starred in \"Midnight Express\" (also produced by Puttnam), and Dennis Christopher had recently starred, as a young bicycle racer, in the popular indie film \"Breaking Away\".\n\nAll of the actors portraying runners underwent a gruelling three-month training intensive with renowned running coach Tom McNab. This training and isolation of the actors also created a strong bond and sense of camaraderie among them.\n\nAlthough the film is a period piece, set in the 1920s, the Academy Award-winning original soundtrack composed by Vangelis uses a modern 1980s electronic sound, with a strong use of synthesizer and piano among other instruments. This was a bold and significant departure from earlier period films, which employed sweeping orchestral instrumentals. The title theme of the film has become iconic, and has been used in subsequent films and television shows during slow-motion segments.\n\nVangelis, a Greek-born electronic composer who moved to Paris in the late 1960s, had been living in London since 1974. Director Hugh Hudson had collaborated with him on documentaries and commercials, and was also particularly impressed with his 1979 albums \"Opera Sauvage\" and \"China\". David Puttnam also greatly admired Vangelis's body of work, having originally selected his compositions for his previous film \"Midnight Express\". Hudson made the choice for Vangelis and for a modern score: \"I knew we needed a piece which was anachronistic to the period to give it a feel of modernity. It was a risky idea but we went with it rather than have a period symphonic score.\" The soundtrack had a personal significance to Vangelis: After composing the iconic theme tune he told Puttnam, \"My father is a runner, and this is an anthem to him.\"\n\nHudson originally wanted Vangelis's 1977 tune \"L'Enfant\", from his \"Opera Sauvage\" album, to be the title theme of the film, and the beach running sequence was actually filmed with \"L'Enfant\" playing on loudspeakers for the runners to pace to. Vangelis finally convinced Hudson he could create a new and better piece for the film's main theme – and when he played the now-iconic \"Chariots of Fire\" theme for Hudson, it was agreed the new tune was unquestionably better. The \"L'Enfant\" melody still made it into the film: when the athletes reach Paris and enter the stadium, a brass band marches through the field, and first plays a modified, acoustic performance of the piece. Vangelis's electronic \"L'Enfant\" track eventually was used prominently in the 1982 film \"The Year of Living Dangerously\".\n\nSome pieces of Vangelis's music in the film did not end up on the film's soundtrack album. One of them is the background music to the race Eric Liddell runs in the Scottish highlands. This piece is a version of \"Hymne\", the original version of which appears on Vangelis's 1979 album, \"Opéra sauvage\". Various versions are also included on Vangelis's compilation albums \"Themes\", \"Portraits\", and \"\", though none of these include the version used in the film.\n\nFive lively Gilbert and Sullivan tunes also appear in the soundtrack, and serve as jaunty period music which nicely counterpoints Vangelis's modern electronic score. These are: \"He is an Englishman\" from \"H.M.S. Pinafore\", \"Three Little Maids from School Are We\" from \"The Mikado\", \"With Catlike Tread\" from \"The Pirates of Penzance\", \"The Soldiers of Our Queen\" from \"Patience\", and \"There Lived a King\" from \"The Gondoliers\".\n\nThe film also incorporates a major traditional work: \"Jerusalem\", sung by a British choir at the 1978 funeral of Harold Abrahams. The words, written by William Blake in 1804-8, were set to music by Parry in 1916 as a celebration of England. This hymn has been described as \"England's unofficial national anthem\", concludes the film and inspired its title. A handful of other traditional anthems and hymns and period-appropriate instrumental ballroom-dance music round out the film's soundtrack.\n\nThe beach scenes associated with the theme tune were filmed at West Sands, St Andrews. A plaque commemorating the filming can be found there today. The very last scene of the opening titles, of the athletes running to the Carlton Hotel in Broadstairs, Kent, was filmed at the 18th hole of the Old Course at St Andrews Links.\n\nAll of the Cambridge scenes were actually filmed at Hugh Hudson's alma mater Eton College, because Cambridge refused filming rights, fearing depictions of anti-Semitism. The Cambridge administration greatly regretted the decision after the film's enormous success.\n\nLiverpool Town Hall was the setting for the scenes depicting the British Embassy in Paris. The Colombes Olympic Stadium in Paris was represented by the Oval Sports Centre, Bebington, Merseyside. The nearby Woodside ferry terminal was used to represent the embarkation scenes set in Dover. The railway station scenes were filmed in York, using locomotives from the National Railway Museum. The scene depicting a performance of \"The Mikado\" was filmed in the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool with members of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company who were on tour.\n\n\"Chariots of Fire\" became a recurring theme in promotions for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. The film's theme tune was featured at the opening of the 2012 London New Years fireworks celebrating the Olympics, and the film's iconic beach-running scene and theme tune were used in \"The Sun\"'s \"Let's Make It Great, Britain\" Olympic ads. The runners who first tested the new Olympic Park were spurred on by the \"Chariots of Fire\" theme tune, and the iconic music was also used to fanfare the carriers of the Olympic flame on parts of its route through the UK. The beach-running sequence was also recreated at St. Andrews and filmed as part of the Olympic torch relay.\n\nThe film's theme was also performed by the London Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Simon Rattle, during the Opening Ceremony of the games; the performance was accompanied by a comedy skit by Rowan Atkinson (as Mr Bean) which included the opening beach-running footage from the film. The film's theme tune was also played during each medal ceremony of the 2012 Olympics.\n\nA stage adaptation of \"Chariots of Fire\" was mounted in honour of the 2012 Olympics. The play, \"Chariots of Fire\", which was adapted by playwright Mike Bartlett and included the iconic Vangelis score, ran from 9 May to 16 June 2012 at London's Hampstead Theatre, and transferred to the Gielgud Theatre in the West End on 23 June, where it ran until 5 January 2013. It starred Jack Lowden as Eric Liddell and James McArdle as Harold Abrahams, and Edward Hall directed. Stage designer Miriam Buether transformed each theatre into an Olympic stadium, and composer Jason Carr wrote additional music. Vangelis also created several new pieces of music for the production. The stage version for the London Olympic year was the idea of the film's director, Hugh Hudson, who co-produced the play; he stated, \"Issues of faith, of refusal to compromise, standing up for one's beliefs, achieving something for the sake of it, with passion, and not just for fame or financial gain, are even more vital today.\"\n\nAnother play, \"Running for Glory\", written by Philip Dart, based on the 1924 Olympics, and focusing on Abrahams and Liddell, toured parts of Britain from 25 February to 1 April 2012. It starred Nicholas Jacobs as Harold Abrahams, and Tom Micklem as Eric Liddell.\n\nAs an official part of the London 2012 Festival celebrations, a new digitally re-mastered version of the film screened in 150 cinemas throughout the UK. The re-release began 13 July 2012, two weeks before the opening ceremony of the London Olympics.\n\nA Blu-ray of the film was released on 10 July 2012 in North America, and was released 16 July 2012 in the UK. The release includes nearly an hour of special features, a CD sampler, and a 32-page \"digibook\".\n\nSince its release, \"Chariots of Fire\" has received generally positive reviews from critics. , the film holds an 84% \"Certified Fresh\" rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 68 reviews, with a weighted average of 7.66/10. The site's consensus reads: \"Decidedly slower and less limber than the Olympic runners at the center of its story, the film nevertheless manages to make effectively stirring use of its spiritual and patriotic themes.\"\n\nFor its 2012 re-release, Kate Muir of \"The Times\" gave the film five stars, writing: \"In a time when drug tests and synthetic fibres have replaced gumption and moral fibre, the tale of two runners competing against each other in the 1924 Olympics has a simple, undiminished power. From the opening scene of pale young men racing barefoot along the beach, full of hope and elation, backed by Vangelis's now famous anthem, the film is utterly compelling.\"\n\n\"Chariots of Fire\" was very successful at the 54th Academy Awards, winning four of seven nominations. When accepting his Oscar for Best Original Screenplay, Colin Welland famously announced \"The British are coming\". At the 1981 Cannes Film Festival the film won two awards and competed for the Palme d'Or.\n\nBULLET::::- BFI Top 100 British films (1999) – rank 19\nBULLET::::- Hot 100 No. 1 Hits of 1982 (USA) (8 May) – Vangelis, \"Chariots of Fire\" theme\n\nAmerican Film Institute recognition\nBULLET::::- 1998: AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - Nominated\nBULLET::::- 2005: AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated\nBULLET::::- 2006: AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers - No. 100\nBULLET::::- 2007: AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated\nBULLET::::- 2008: AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Sports Movie\n\n! Award !! Category !! Recipients and nominees !! Result\n\nBULLET::::- Chariots of Fire, inspired by the film, held in Cambridge since 1991\nBULLET::::- Great Britain at the 1924 Summer Olympics\nBULLET::::- Sabbath breaking\n\nBULLET::::- Chapman, James. \"The British Are Coming: \"Chariots of Fire\" (1981)\". In: \"Past and Present: National Identity and the British Historical Film\". London: I.B. Tauris & Co, 2005. pp. 270–298.\nBULLET::::- Ryan, Mark. \"Running with Fire: The True Story of Chariots of Fire Hero Harold Abrahams\". Robson Press, 2012 (paperback). (Original hardback: JR Books Ltd, 2011.)\n\nBULLET::::- Critics' Picks: \"Chariots of Fire\" retrospective video by A. O. Scott, \"The New York Times\" (2008)\nBULLET::::- Four speeches from the movie in text and audio from AmericanRhetoric.com\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" review by Roger Ebert\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" review in \"Variety\"\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" at the Arts & Faith Top 100 Spiritually Significant Films\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" Filming locations\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" screenplay, second draft, February 1980\nBULLET::::- Great Court Run\nBULLET::::- \"Chariots of Fire\" play – Hampstead Theatre\n"}
{"id": "5734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5734", "title": "Consequentialism", "text": "Consequentialism\n\nConsequentialism is the class of normative ethical theories holding that the consequences of one's conduct are the ultimate basis for any judgment about the rightness or wrongness of that conduct. Thus, from a consequentialist standpoint, a morally right act (or omission from acting) is one that will produce a good outcome, or consequence. \n\nConsequentialism is primarily non-prescriptive, meaning the moral worth of an action is determined by its potential consequence, not by whether it follows a set of written edicts or laws. One example would entail lying under the threat of government punishment to save an innocent person's life, even though it is illegal to lie under oath.\n\nConsequentialism is usually contrasted with deontological ethics (or \"deontology\"), in that deontology, in which rules and moral duty are central, derives the rightness or wrongness of one's conduct from the character of the behaviour itself rather than the outcomes of the conduct. It is also contrasted with virtue ethics, which focuses on the character of the agent rather than on the nature or consequences of the act (or omission) itself, and pragmatic ethics which treats morality like science: advancing socially over the course of many lifetimes, such that any moral criterion is subject to revision. Consequentialist theories differ in how they define moral goods.\n\nSome argue that consequentialist and deontological theories are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example, T. M. Scanlon advances the idea that human rights, which are commonly considered a \"deontological\" concept, can only be justified with reference to the consequences of having those rights. Similarly, Robert Nozick argued for a theory that is mostly consequentialist, but incorporates inviolable \"side-constraints\" which restrict the sort of actions agents are permitted to do. Derek Parfit argued that in practice, when understood properly, rule consequentialism, Kantian deontology and contractualism would all end up prescribing the same.\n\nState consequentialism, also known as mohist consequentialism, is an ethical theory which evaluates the moral worth of an action based on how much it contributes to the welfare of a state. According to the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", Mohist consequentialism, dating back to the 5th century BCE, is the \"world's earliest form of consequentialism, a remarkably sophisticated version based on a plurality of intrinsic goods taken as constitutive of human welfare\".\n\nUnlike utilitarianism, which views utility as the sole moral good, \"the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are... order, material wealth, and increase in population\". During Mozi's era, war and famines were common, and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society. The \"material wealth\" of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing, and the \"order\" of Mohist consequentialism refers to Mozi's stance against warfare and violence, which he viewed as pointless and a threat to social stability. Stanford sinologist David Shepherd Nivison, in \"The Cambridge History of Ancient China\", writes that the moral goods of Mohism \"are interrelated: more basic wealth, then more reproduction; more people, then more production and wealth... if people have plenty, they would be good, filial, kind, and so on unproblematically\".\n\nThe Mohists believed that morality is based on \"promoting the benefit of all under heaven and eliminating harm to all under heaven\". In contrast to Jeremy Bentham's views, state consequentialism is not utilitarian because it is not hedonistic or individualistic. The importance of outcomes that are good for the community outweigh the importance of individual pleasure and pain. The term state consequentialism has also been applied to the political philosophy of the Confucian philosopher Xunzi.\n\nOn the other hand, the \"Legalist\" Han Fei \"is motivated almost totally from the ruler's point of view\".\n\nIn summary, Jeremy Bentham states that people are driven by their interests and their fears, but their interests take precedence over their fears, and their interests are carried out in accordance with how people view the consequences that might be involved with their interests. \"Happiness\" on this account is defined as the maximization of pleasure and the minimization of pain. It can be argued that the existence of phenomenal consciousness and \"qualia\" is required for the experience of pleasure or pain to have an ethical significance. Historically, hedonistic utilitarianism is the paradigmatic example of a consequentialist moral theory. This form of utilitarianism holds that what matters is the aggregate happiness; the happiness of everyone and not the happiness of any particular person. John Stuart Mill, in his exposition of hedonistic utilitarianism, proposed a hierarchy of pleasures, meaning that the pursuit of certain kinds of pleasure is more highly valued than the pursuit of other pleasures. However, some contemporary utilitarians, such as Peter Singer, are concerned with maximizing the satisfaction of preferences, hence \"preference utilitarianism\". Other contemporary forms of utilitarianism mirror the forms of consequentialism outlined below.\n\nEthical egoism can be understood as a consequentialist theory according to which the consequences for the individual agent are taken to matter more than any other result. Thus, egoism will prescribe actions that may be beneficial, detrimental, or neutral to the welfare of others. Some, like Henry Sidgwick, argue that a certain degree of egoism \"promotes\" the general welfare of society for two reasons: because individuals know how to please themselves best, and because if everyone were an austere altruist then general welfare would inevitably decrease.\n\nEthical altruism can be seen as a consequentialist ethic which prescribes that an individual take actions that have the best consequences for everyone except for himself. This was advocated by Auguste Comte, who coined the term \"altruism,\" and whose ethics can be summed up in the phrase \"Live for others\".\n\nIn general, consequentialist theories focus on actions. However, this need not be the case. Rule consequentialism is a theory that is sometimes seen as an attempt to reconcile deontology and consequentialism—and in some cases, this is stated as a criticism of rule consequentialism. Like deontology, rule consequentialism holds that moral behavior involves following certain rules. However, rule consequentialism chooses rules based on the consequences that the selection of those rules has. Rule consequentialism exists in the forms of rule utilitarianism and rule egoism.\n\nVarious theorists are split as to whether the rules are the only determinant of moral behavior or not. For example, Robert Nozick held that a certain set of minimal rules, which he calls \"side-constraints\", are necessary to ensure appropriate actions. There are also differences as to how absolute these moral rules are. Thus, while Nozick's side-constraints are absolute restrictions on behavior, Amartya Sen proposes a theory that recognizes the importance of certain rules, but these rules are not absolute. That is, they may be violated if strict adherence to the rule would lead to much more undesirable consequences.\n\nOne of the most common objections to rule-consequentialism is that it is incoherent, because it is based on the consequentialist principle that what we should be concerned with is maximizing the good, but then it tells us not to act to maximize the good, but to follow rules (even in cases where we know that breaking the rule could produce better results).\n\nBrad Hooker avoided this objection by not basing his form of rule-consequentialism on the ideal of maximizing the good. He writes:\n\n…the best argument for rule-consequentialism is not that it derives from an overarching commitment to maximise the good. The best argument for rule-consequentialism is that it does a better job than its rivals of matching and tying together our moral convictions, as well as offering us help with our moral disagreements and uncertainties.\n\nDerek Parfit described Brad Hooker's book on rule-consequentialism \"Ideal Code, Real World\" as the \"best statement and defence, so far, of one of the most important moral theories\".\n\nRule-consequentialism may offer a means to reconcile pure consequentialism with deontological, or rules-based ethics.\n\nThe two-level approach involves engaging in critical reasoning and considering all the possible ramifications of one's actions before making an ethical decision, but reverting to generally reliable moral rules when one is not in a position to stand back and examine the dilemma as a whole. In practice, this equates to adhering to rule consequentialism when one can only reason on an intuitive level, and to act consequentialism when in a position to stand back and reason on a more critical level.\n\nThis position can be described as a reconciliation between act consequentialism – in which the morality of an action is determined by that action's effects – and rule consequentialism – in which moral behavior is derived from following rules that lead to positive outcomes.\n\nThe two-level approach to consequentialism is most often associated with R. M. Hare and Peter Singer.\n\nAnother consequentialist version is motive consequentialism which looks at whether the state of affairs that results from the motive to choose an action is better or at least as good as each of the alternative state of affairs that would have resulted from alternative actions. This version gives relevance to the motive of an act and links it to its consequences. An act can therefore not be wrong if the decision to act was based on a right motive. A possible inference is, that one can not be blamed for mistaken judgments if the motivation was to do good.\n\nMost consequentialist theories focus on \"promoting\" some sort of good consequences. However, negative utilitarianism lays out a consequentialist theory that focuses solely on minimizing bad consequences.\n\nOne major difference between these two approaches is the agent's responsibility. Positive consequentialism demands that we bring about good states of affairs, whereas negative consequentialism requires that we avoid bad ones. Stronger versions of negative consequentialism will require active intervention to prevent bad and ameliorate existing harm. In weaker versions, simple forbearance from acts tending to harm others is sufficient. An example of this is the Slippery Slope Argument, which encourages others to avoid a specified act on the grounds that it may ultimately lead to undesirable consequences.\n\nOften \"negative\" consequentialist theories assert that reducing suffering is more important than increasing pleasure. Karl Popper, for example, claimed \"…from the moral point of view, pain cannot be outweighed by pleasure...\". (While Popper is not a consequentialist per se, this is taken as a classic statement of negative utilitarianism.) When considering a theory of justice, negative consequentialists may use a statewide or global-reaching principle: the reduction of suffering (for the disadvantaged) is more valuable than increased pleasure (for the affluent or luxurious).\n\nTeleological ethics (Greek telos, \"end\"; logos, \"science\") is an ethical theory that holds that the ends or consequences of an act determine whether an act is good or evil. Teleological theories are often discussed in opposition to deontological ethical theories, which hold that acts themselves are \"inherently\" good or evil, regardless of the consequences of acts. The saying, \"the end justifies the means\", meaning that if a goal is morally important enough, any method of achieving it is acceptable.\n\nTeleological theories differ on the nature of the end that actions ought to promote. Eudaemonist theories (Greek eudaimonia, \"happiness\") hold that the goal of ethics consists in some function or activity appropriate to man as a human being, and thus tend to emphasize the cultivation of virtue or excellence in the agent as the end of all action. These could be the classical virtues—courage, temperance, justice, and wisdom—that promoted the Greek ideal of man as the \"rational animal\", or the theological virtues—faith, hope, and love—that distinguished the Christian ideal of man as a being created in the image of God.\nUtilitarian-type theories hold that the end consists in an experience or feeling produced by the action. Hedonism, for example, teaches that this feeling is pleasure—either one's own, as in egoism (the 17th-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes), or everyone's, as in universalistic hedonism, or utilitarianism (the 19th-century English philosophers Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and Henry Sidgwick), with its formula of the \"greatest pleasure of the greatest number\".\n\nOther utilitarian-type views include the claims that the end of action is survival and growth, as in evolutionary ethics (the 19th-century English philosopher Herbert Spencer); the experience of power, as in despotism; satisfaction and adjustment, as in pragmatism (20th-century American philosophers Ralph Barton Perry and John Dewey); and freedom, as in existentialism (the 20th-century French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre).\n\nThe chief problem for eudaemonist theories is to show that leading a life of virtue will also be attended by happiness—by the winning of the goods regarded as the chief end of action. That Job should suffer and Socrates and Jesus die while the wicked prosper, then seems unjust. Eudaemonists generally reply that the universe is moral and that, in Socrates' words, \"No evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after death,\" or, in Jesus' words, \"But he who endures to the end will be saved.\" (Matt 10:22).\n\nUtilitarian theories, on the other hand, must answer the charge that ends do not justify the means. The problem arises in these theories because they tend to separate the achieved ends from the action by which these ends were produced. One implication of utilitarianism is that one's intention in performing an act may include all of its foreseen consequences. The goodness of the intention then reflects the balance of the good and evil of these consequences, with no limits imposed upon it by the nature of the act itself—even if it be, say, the breaking of a promise or the execution of an innocent man. Utilitarianism, in answering this charge, must show either that what is apparently immoral is not really so or that, if it really is so, then closer examination of the consequences will bring this fact to light. Ideal utilitarianism (G.E. Moore and Hastings Rashdall) tries to meet the difficulty by advocating a plurality of ends and including among them the attainment of virtue itself, which, as John Stuart Mill affirmed, \"may be felt a good in itself, and desired as such with as great intensity as any other good\".\n\nSince pure consequentialism holds that an action is to be judged solely by its result, most consequentialist theories hold that a deliberate action is no different from a deliberate decision not to act. This contrasts with the \"acts and omissions doctrine\", which is upheld by some medical ethicists and some religions: it asserts there is a significant moral distinction between acts and deliberate non-actions which lead to the same outcome. This contrast is brought out in issues such as voluntary euthanasia.\n\nOne important characteristic of many normative moral theories such as consequentialism is the ability to produce practical moral judgements. At the very least, any moral theory needs to define the standpoint from which the goodness of the consequences are to be determined. What is primarily at stake here is the \"responsibility\" of the agent.\n\nOne common tactic among consequentialists, particularly those committed to an altruistic (selfless) account of consequentialism, is to employ an ideal, neutral observer from which moral judgements can be made. John Rawls, a critic of utilitarianism, argues that utilitarianism, in common with other forms of consequentialism, relies on the perspective of such an ideal observer. The particular characteristics of this ideal observer can vary from an omniscient observer, who would grasp all the consequences of any action, to an ideally informed observer, who knows as much as could reasonably be expected, but not necessarily all the circumstances or all the possible consequences. Consequentialist theories that adopt this paradigm hold that right action is the action that will bring about the best consequences from this ideal observer's perspective.\n\nIn practice, it is very difficult, and at times arguably impossible, to adopt the point of view of an ideal observer. Individual moral agents do not know everything about their particular situations, and thus do not know all the possible consequences of their potential actions. For this reason, some theorists have argued that consequentialist theories can only require agents to choose the best action in line with what they know about the situation. However, if this approach is naïvely adopted, then moral agents who, for example, recklessly fail to reflect on their situation, and act in a way that brings about terrible results, could be said to be acting in a morally justifiable way. Acting in a situation without first informing oneself of the circumstances of the situation can lead to even the most well-intended actions yielding miserable consequences. As a result, it could be argued that there is a moral imperative for an agent to inform himself as much as possible about a situation before judging the appropriate course of action. This imperative, of course, is derived from consequential thinking: a better-informed agent is able to bring about better consequences.\n\nMoral action always has consequences for certain people or things. Varieties of consequentialism can be differentiated by the beneficiary of the good consequences. That is, one might ask \"Consequences for whom?\"\n\nA fundamental distinction can be drawn between theories which require that agents act for ends perhaps disconnected from their own interests and drives, and theories which permit that agents act for ends in which they have some personal interest or motivation. These are called \"agent-neutral\" and \"agent-focused\" theories respectively.\n\nAgent-neutral consequentialism ignores the specific value a state of affairs has for any particular agent. Thus, in an agent-neutral theory, an actor's personal goals do not count any more than anyone else's goals in evaluating what action the actor should take. Agent-focused consequentialism, on the other hand, focuses on the particular needs of the moral agent. Thus, in an agent-focused account, such as one that Peter Railton outlines, the agent might be concerned with the general welfare, but the agent is \"more\" concerned with the immediate welfare of herself and her friends and family.\n\nThese two approaches could be reconciled by acknowledging the tension between an agent's interests as an individual and as a member of various groups, and seeking to somehow optimize among all of these interests. For example, it may be meaningful to speak of an action as being good for someone as an individual, but bad for them as a citizen of their town.\n\nMany consequentialist theories may seem primarily concerned with human beings and their relationships with other human beings. However, some philosophers argue that we should not limit our ethical consideration to the interests of human beings alone. Jeremy Bentham, who is regarded as the founder of utilitarianism, argues that animals can experience pleasure and pain, thus demanding that 'non-human animals' should be a serious object of moral concern. More recently, Peter Singer has argued that it is unreasonable that we do not give equal consideration to the interests of animals as to those of human beings when we choose the way we are to treat them. Such equal consideration does not necessarily imply identical treatment of humans and non-humans, any more than it necessarily implies identical treatment of all humans.\n\nOne way to divide various consequentialisms is by the types of consequences that are taken to matter most, that is, which consequences count as good states of affairs. According to utilitarianism, a good action is one that results in an increase in pleasure, and the best action is one that results in the most pleasure for the greatest number. Closely related is eudaimonic consequentialism, according to which a full, flourishing life, which may or may not be the same as enjoying a great deal of pleasure, is the ultimate aim. Similarly, one might adopt an aesthetic consequentialism, in which the ultimate aim is to produce beauty. However, one might fix on non-psychological goods as the relevant effect. Thus, one might pursue an increase in material equality or political liberty instead of something like the more ephemeral \"pleasure\". Other theories adopt a package of several goods, all to be promoted equally. As the consequentialist approach contains an inherent assumption that the outcomes of a moral decision can be quantified in terms of \"goodness\" or \"badness\", or at least put in order of increasing preference, it is an especially suited moral theory for a probabilistic and decision theoretical approach.\n\nConsequentialism can also be contrasted with aretaic moral theories such as virtue ethics. Whereas consequentialist theories posit that consequences of action should be the primary focus of our thinking about ethics, virtue ethics insists that it is the character rather than the consequences of actions that should be the focal point. Some virtue ethicists hold that consequentialist theories totally disregard the development and importance of moral character. For example, Philippa Foot argues that consequences in themselves have no ethical content, unless it has been provided by a virtue such as benevolence.\n\nHowever, consequentialism and virtue ethics need not be entirely antagonistic. Iain King has developed an approach that reconciles the two schools. Other consequentialists consider effects on the character of people involved in an action when assessing consequence. Similarly, a consequentialist theory may aim at the maximization of a particular virtue or set of virtues. Finally, following Foot's lead, one might adopt a sort of consequentialism that argues that virtuous activity ultimately produces the best consequences.\nThe \"ultimate end\" is a concept in the moral philosophy of Max Weber, in which individuals act in a faithful, rather than rational, manner.\n\nThe term \"consequentialism\" was G. E. M. Anscombe in her essay \"Modern Moral Philosophy\" in 1958, to describe what she saw as the central error of certain moral theories, such as those propounded by Mill and Sidgwick.\n\nThe phrase and concept of \"The end justifies the means\" are at least as old as the first century BC. Ovid wrote in his \"Heroides\" that \"Exitus acta probat\" \"The result justifies the deed\".\n\nG. E. M. Anscombe objects to the consequentialism of Sidgwick on the grounds that the moral worth of an action is premised on the predictive capabilities of the individual, relieving them of the responsibility for the \"badness\" of an act should they \"make out a case for not having foreseen\" negative consequences.\n\nThe future amplification of the effects of small decisions is an important factor that makes it more difficult to predict the ethical value of consequences, even though most would agree that only predictable consequences are charged with a moral responsibility.\nBernard Williams has argued that consequentialism is alienating because it requires moral agents to put too much distance between themselves and their own projects and commitments. Williams argues that consequentialism requires moral agents to take a strictly impersonal view of all actions, since it is only the consequences, and not who produces them, that are said to matter. Williams argues that this demands too much of moral agents—since (he claims) consequentialism demands that they be willing to sacrifice any and all personal projects and commitments in any given circumstance in order to pursue the most beneficent course of action possible. He argues further that consequentialism fails to make sense of intuitions that it can matter whether or not someone is personally the author of a particular consequence. For example, that participating in a crime can matter, even if the crime would have been committed anyway, or would even have been worse, without the agent's participation.\n\nSome consequentialists—most notably Peter Railton—have attempted to develop a form of consequentialism that acknowledges and avoids the objections raised by Williams. Railton argues that Williams's criticisms can be avoided by adopting a form of consequentialism in which moral decisions are to be determined by the sort of life that they express. On his account, the agent should choose the sort of life that will, on the whole, produce the best overall effects.\n\nBULLET::::- R. M. Adams (born 1937)\nBULLET::::- Jonathan Baron (born 1944)\nBULLET::::- Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832)\nBULLET::::- Richard B. Brandt (1910–1997)\nBULLET::::- John Dewey (1857–1952)\nBULLET::::- Julia Driver\nBULLET::::- Milton Friedman (1912–2006)\nBULLET::::- David Friedman (born 1945)\nBULLET::::- William Godwin (1756–1836)\nBULLET::::- R. M. Hare (1919–2002)\nBULLET::::- John Harsanyi (1920–2000)\nBULLET::::- Brad Hooker\nBULLET::::- Francis Hutcheson (1694–1746)\nBULLET::::- Shelly Kagan (born 1963)\nBULLET::::- Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527)\nBULLET::::- James Mill (1773–1836)\nBULLET::::- John Stuart Mill (1806–1873)\nBULLET::::- G. E. Moore (1873–1958)\nBULLET::::- Mozi (470–391 BCE)\nBULLET::::- Philip Pettit (born 1945)\nBULLET::::- Peter Railton (born 1950)\nBULLET::::- Henry Sidgwick (1838–1900)\nBULLET::::- Peter Singer (born 1946)\nBULLET::::- J. J. C. Smart (1920–2012)\n\nA much longer list of utilitarian consequentialists may be found in the list of utilitarians.\n\nBULLET::::- Cārvāka\nBULLET::::- Demandingness objection\nBULLET::::- Dharmayuddha\nBULLET::::- Doctrine of mental reservation\nBULLET::::- Effective altruism\nBULLET::::- Lesser of two evils principle\nBULLET::::- Mohism\nBULLET::::- Omission bias\nBULLET::::- Rule consequentialism\nBULLET::::- Situation ethics\nBULLET::::- Utilitarianism\nBULLET::::- Welfarism\n\n"}
{"id": "5735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5735", "title": "Conscription", "text": "Conscription\n\nConscription, sometimes called the draft, is the compulsory enlistment of people in a national service, most often a military service. Conscription dates back to antiquity and continues in some countries to the present day under various names. The modern system of near-universal national conscription for young men dates to the French Revolution in the 1790s, where it became the basis of a very large and powerful military. Most European nations later copied the system in peacetime, so that men at a certain age would serve 1–8 years on active duty and then transfer to the reserve force.\nConscription is controversial for a range of reasons, including conscientious objection to military engagements on religious or philosophical grounds; political objection, for example to service for a disliked government or unpopular war; and ideological objection, for example, to a perceived violation of individual rights. Those conscripted may evade service, sometimes by leaving the country, and seeking asylum in another country. Some selection systems accommodate these attitudes by providing alternative service outside combat-operations roles or even outside the military, such as \"Siviilipalvelus\" (alternative civil service) in Finland, \"Zivildienst\" (compulsory community service) in Austria and Switzerland. Several countries conscript male soldiers not only for armed forces, but also for paramilitary agencies, which are dedicated to police-like \"domestic only\" service like internal troops, border guards or \"non-combat\" rescue duties like civil defence.\n\nAs of the early 21st century, many states no longer conscript soldiers, relying instead upon professional militaries with volunteers. The ability to rely on such an arrangement, however, presupposes some degree of predictability with regard to both war-fighting requirements and the scope of hostilities. Many states that have abolished conscription still, therefore, reserve the power to resume conscription during wartime or times of crisis. States involved in wars or interstate rivalries are most likely to implement conscription, whereas democracies are less likely than autocracies to implement conscription. Former British colonies are less likely to have conscription, as they are influenced by British anti-conscription norms that can be traced back to the English Civil War.\n\nAround the reign of Hammurabi (1791–1750 BC), the Babylonian Empire used a system of conscription called \"Ilkum\". Under that system those eligible were required to serve in the royal army in time of war. During times of peace they were instead required to provide labour for other activities of the state. In return for this service, people subject to it gained the right to hold land. It is possible that this right was not to hold land \"per se\" but specific land supplied by the state.\n\nVarious forms of avoiding military service are recorded. While it was outlawed by the Code of Hammurabi, the hiring of substitutes appears to have been practiced both before and after the creation of the code. Later records show that Ilkum commitments could become regularly traded. In other places, people simply left their towns to avoid their Ilkum service. Another option was to sell Ilkum lands and the commitments along with them. With the exception of a few exempted classes, this was forbidden by the Code of Hammurabi.\n\nIn medieval Scandinavia the \"leiðangr\" (Old Norse), \"leidang\" (Norwegian), \"leding\", (Danish), \"ledung\" (Swedish), \"lichting\" (Dutch), \"expeditio\" (Latin) or sometimes \"leþing\" (Old English), was a levy of free farmers conscripted into coastal fleets for seasonal excursions and in defence of the realm.\n\nThe bulk of the Anglo-Saxon English army, called the \"fyrd\", was composed of part-time English soldiers drawn from the freemen of each county. In the 690s Laws of Ine, three levels of fines are imposed on different social classes for neglecting military service. Some modern writers claim military service was restricted to the landowning minor nobility. These thegns were the land-holding aristocracy of the time and were required to serve with their own armour and weapons for a certain number of days each year. The historian David Sturdy has cautioned about regarding the \"fyrd\" as a precursor to a modern national army composed of all ranks of society, describing it as a \"ridiculous fantasy\":The persistent old belief that peasants and small farmers gathered to form a national army or \"fyrd\" is a strange delusion dreamt up by antiquarians in the late eighteenth or early nineteenth centuries to justify universal military conscription.\n\nMedieval levy in Poland was known as the \"pospolite ruszenie\".\n\nThe system of military slaves was widely used in the Middle East, beginning with the creation of the corps of Turkish slave-soldiers (\"ghulams\" or \"mamluks\") by the Abbasid caliph al-Mu'tasim in the 820s and 830s. The Turkish troops soon came to dominate the government, establishing a pattern throughout the Islamic world of a ruling military class, often separated by ethnicity, culture and even religion by the mass of the population, a paradigm that found its apogee in the Mamluks of Egypt and the Janissary corps of the Ottoman Empire, institutions that survived until the early 19th century.\n\nIn the middle of the 14th century, Ottoman Sultan Murad I developed personal troops to be loyal to him, with a slave army called the \"Kapıkulu\". The new force was built by taking Christian children from newly conquered lands, especially from the far areas of his empire, in a system known as the \"devşirme\" (translated \"gathering\" or \"converting\"). The captive children were forced to convert to Islam. The Sultans had the young boys trained over several years. Those who showed special promise in fighting skills were trained in advanced warrior skills, put into the sultan's personal service, and turned into the Janissaries, the elite branch of the \"Kapıkulu\". A number of distinguished military commanders of the Ottomans, and most of the imperial administrators and upper-level officials of the Empire, such as Pargalı İbrahim Pasha and Sokollu Mehmet Paşa, were recruited in this way. By 1609, the Sultan's \"Kapıkulu\" forces increased to about 100,000.\n\nIn later years, Sultans turned to the Barbary Pirates to supply their Jannissaries corps. Their attacks on ships off the coast of Africa or in the Mediterranean, and subsequent capture of able-bodied men for ransom or sale provided some captives for the Sultan's system. Starting in the 17th century, Christian families living under the Ottoman rule began to submit their sons into the Kapikulu system willingly, as they saw this as a potentially invaluable career opportunity for their children. Eventually the Sultan turned to foreign volunteers from the warrior clans of Circassians in southern Russia to fill his Janissary armies. As a whole the system began to break down, the loyalty of the Jannissaries became increasingly suspect. Mahmud II forcibly disbanded the Janissary corps in 1826.\n\nSimilar to the Janissaries in origin and means of development were the Mamluks of Egypt in the Middle Ages. The Mamluks were usually captive non-Muslim Iranian and Turkish children who had been kidnapped or bought as slaves from the Barbary coasts. The Egyptians assimilated and trained the boys and young men to become Islamic soldiers who served the Muslim caliphs and the Ayyubid sultans during the Middle Ages. The first mamluks served the Abbasid caliphs in 9th-century Baghdad. Over time they became a powerful military caste. On more than one occasion, they seized power, for example, ruling Egypt from 1250 to 1517.\n\nFrom 1250 Egypt had been ruled by the Bahri dynasty of Kipchak origin. Slaves from the Caucasus served in the army and formed an elite corp of troops. They eventually revolted in Egypt to form the Burgi dynasty. The Mamluks' excellent fighting abilities, massed Islamic armies, and overwhelming numbers succeeded in overcoming the Christian Crusader fortresses in the Holy Land. The Mamluks were the most successful defense against the Mongol Ilkhanate of Persia and Iraq from entering Egypt.\n\nOn the western coast of Africa, Berber Muslims captured non-Muslims to put to work as laborers. They generally converted the younger people to Islam and many became quite assimilated. In Morocco, the Berber looked south rather than north. The Moroccan Sultan Moulay Ismail, called \"the Bloodthirsty\" (1672–1727), employed a corps of 150,000 black slaves, called his Black Guard. He used them to coerce the country into submission.\n\nModern conscription, the massed military enlistment of national citizens, was devised during the French Revolution, to enable the Republic to defend itself from the attacks of European monarchies. Deputy Jean-Baptiste Jourdan gave its name to the 5 September 1798 Act, whose first article stated: \"Any Frenchman is a soldier and owes himself to the defense of the nation.\" It enabled the creation of the \"Grande Armée\", what Napoleon Bonaparte called \"the nation in arms\", which overwhelmed European professional armies that often numbered only into the low tens of thousands. More than 2.6 million men were inducted into the French military in this way between the years 1800 and 1813.\n\nThe defeat of the Prussian Army in particular shocked the Prussian establishment, which had believed it was invincible after the victories of Frederick the Great. The Prussians were used to relying on superior organization and tactical factors such as order of battle to focus superior troops against inferior ones. Given approximately equivalent forces, as was generally the case with professional armies, these factors showed considerable importance. However, they became considerably less important when the Prussian armies faced forces that outnumbered their own in some cases by more than ten to one. Scharnhorst advocated adopting the \"levée en masse\", the military conscription used by France. The \"Krümpersystem\" was the beginning of short-term compulsory service in Prussia, as opposed to the long-term conscription previously used.\n\nIn the Russian Empire, the military service time \"owed\" by serfs was 25 years at the beginning of the 19th century. In 1834 it was decreased to 20 years. The recruits were to be not younger than 17 and not older than 35. In 1874 Russia introduced universal conscription in the modern pattern, an innovation only made possible by the abolition of serfdom in 1861. New military law decreed that all male Russian subjects, when they reached the age of 20, were eligible to serve in the military for six years.\n\nIn the decades prior to World War I universal conscription along broadly Prussian lines became the norm for European armies, and those modeled on them. By 1914 the only substantial armies still completely dependent on voluntary enlistment were those of Britain and the United States. Some colonial powers such as France reserved their conscript armies for home service while maintaining professional units for overseas duties.\n\nThe range of eligible ages for conscripting was expanded to meet national demand during the World Wars.\nIn the United States, the Selective Service System drafted men for World War I initially in an age range from 21 to 30 but expanded its eligibility in 1918 to an age range of 18 to 45. In the case of a widespread mobilization of forces where service includes homefront defense, ages of conscripts may range much higher, with the oldest conscripts serving in roles requiring lesser mobility. Expanded-age conscription was common during the Second World War: in Britain, it was commonly known as \"call-up\" and extended to age 51. Nazi Germany termed it \"Volkssturm\" (\"People's Storm\") and included children as young as 16 and men as old as 60. During the Second World War, both Britain and the Soviet Union conscripted women. The United States was on the verge of drafting women into the Nurse Corps because it anticipated it would need the extra personnel for its planned invasion of Japan. However, the Japanese surrendered and the idea was abandoned.\n\nFeminists and other opponents of discrimination against men have criticized military conscription, or compulsory military service, as sexist.\n\nFeminists have argued that military conscription is sexist because wars serve the interests of what they view as the patriarchy, the military is a sexist institution, conscripts are therefore indoctrinated in sexism, and conscription of men normalizes violence by men as socially acceptable. Feminists have been organizers and participants in resistance to conscription in several countries.\n\nConscription has also been criticised as, historically, only men have been subjected to conscription. Men who opt out of military service must often perform alternative service, such as Zivildienst in Austria and Switzerland, whereas women do not have these obligations.\n\nAmerican libertarians oppose conscription and call for the abolition of the Selective Service System, believing that impressment of individuals into the armed forces is \"involuntary servitude.\" Ron Paul, a former presidential nominee of the U.S. Libertarian Party has said that conscription \"is wrongly associated with patriotism, when it really represents slavery and involuntary servitude.\" The philosopher Ayn Rand opposed conscription, suggesting that \"of all the statist violations of individual rights in a mixed economy, the military draft is the worst. It is an abrogation of rights. It negates man's fundamental right—the right to life—and establishes the fundamental principle of statism: that a man's life belongs to the state, and the state may claim it by compelling him to sacrifice it in battle.\"\n\nIn 1917, a number of radicals and anarchists, including Emma Goldman, challenged the new draft law in federal court arguing that it was a direct violation of the Thirteenth Amendment's prohibition against slavery and involuntary servitude. However, the Supreme Court unanimously upheld the constitutionality of the draft act in the case of \"Arver v. United States\" on 7 January 1918. The decision said the Constitution gave Congress the power to declare war and to raise and support armies. The Court emphasized the principle of the reciprocal rights and duties of citizens:\n\nIt can be argued that in a cost-to-benefit ratio, conscription during peacetime is not worthwhile. Months or years of service performed by the most fit and capable subtract from the productivity of the economy; add to this the cost of training them, and in some countries paying them. Compared to these extensive costs, some would argue there is very little benefit; if there ever was a war then conscription and basic training could be completed quickly, and in any case there is little threat of a war in most countries with conscription. In the United States, every male resident is required by law to register with the Selective Service System within 30 days following his 18th birthday and be available for a draft; this is often accomplished automatically by a motor vehicle department during licensing or by voter registration.\n\nThe cost of conscription can be related to the parable of the broken window in anti-draft arguments. The cost of the work, military service, does not disappear even if no salary is paid. The work effort of the conscripts is effectively wasted, as an unwilling workforce is extremely inefficient. The impact is especially severe in wartime, when civilian professionals are forced to fight as amateur soldiers. Not only is the work effort of the conscripts wasted and productivity lost, but professionally skilled conscripts are also difficult to replace in the civilian workforce. Every soldier conscripted in the army is taken away from his civilian work, and away from contributing to the economy which funds the military. This may be less a problem in an agrarian or pre-industrialized state where the level of education is generally low, and where a worker is easily replaced by another. However, this is potentially more costly in a post-industrial society where educational levels are high and where the workforce is sophisticated and a replacement for a conscripted specialist is difficult to find. Even direr economic consequences result if the professional conscripted as an amateur soldier is killed or maimed for life; his work effort and productivity are lost.\n\nJean Jacques Rousseau argued vehemently against professional armies, believing that it was the right and privilege of every citizen to participate to the defense of the whole society, and a mark of moral decline to leave this business to professionals. He based this belief upon the development of the Roman republic, which came to an end at the same time as the Roman army changed from a conscript to professional force. Similarly, Aristotle linked the division of armed service among the populace intimately with the political order of the state. Niccolò Machiavelli argued strongly for conscription, seeing the professional armies as the cause of the failure of societal unity in Italy.\n\nOther proponents, such as William James, consider both mandatory military and national service as ways of instilling maturity in young adults. Some proponents, such as Jonathan Alter and Mickey Kaus, support a draft in order to reinforce social equality, create social consciousness, break down class divisions and for young adults to immerse themselves in public enterprise. Charles Rangel called for the reinstatement of the draft during the Iraq war, not because he seriously expected it to be adopted, but to stress how the socioeconomic restratification meant that very few children of upper-class Americans served in the all-volunteer American armed forces. \n\nIt is estimated by the British military that in a professional military, a company deployed for active duty in peacekeeping corresponds to three inactive companies at home. Salaries for each are paid from the military budget. In contrast, volunteers from a trained reserve are in their civilian jobs when they are not deployed.\n\nIt was more financially beneficial for less-educated young Portuguese men born in 1967 to participate in conscription, as opposed to participating in the highly competitive job market with men of the same age who continued through to higher education.\n\nTraditionally conscription has been limited to the male population of a given body. Women and disabled men have been exempt from conscription. Many societies have considered, and continue to consider, military service as a test of manhood and a rite of passage from boyhood into manhood.\n\nOnly a few nations actively draft women into military service: Bolivia, \nChad, \nEritrea, \nIsrael, \nMozambique,\nNorway,\nNorth Korea \nand Sweden.\n\nNorway introduced female conscription in 2015, making it the first NATO member to have a legally compulsory national service for both men and women. In practice only motivated volunteers are selected to join the army in Norway.\n\nSweden introduced female conscription in 2010, but it was not activated until 2017. This made Sweden the second nation in Europe to draft women, and the second in the world to draft women on exactly the same formal terms as men.\n\nIsrael has universal female conscription, although in practice women can avoid service by claiming a religious exemption and over a third of Israeli women do so.\n\nSudanese law allows for conscription of women, but this is not implemented in practice.\nIn the United Kingdom during World War II, beginning in 1941, women were brought into the scope of conscription but, as all women with dependent children were exempt and many women were informally left in occupations such as nursing or teaching, the number conscripted was relatively few.\n\nIn the USSR, there was no systematic conscription of women for the armed forces, but the severe disruption of normal life and the high proportion of civilians affected by World War II after the German invasion attracted many volunteers for what was termed \"The Great Patriotic War\". Medical doctors of both sexes could and would be conscripted (as officers). Also, the Soviet university education system required Department of Chemistry students of both sexes to complete an ROTC course in NBC defense, and such female reservist officers could be conscripted in times of war. The United States came close to drafting women into the Nurse Corps in preparation for a planned invasion of Japan.\n\nIn 1981 in the United States, several men filed lawsuit in the case \"Rostker v. Goldberg\", alleging that the Selective Service Act of 1948 violates the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment by requiring that only men register with the Selective Service System (SSS). The Supreme Court eventually upheld the Act, stating that \"the argument for registering women was based on considerations of equity, but Congress was entitled, in the exercise of its constitutional powers, to focus on the question of military need, rather than 'equity.'\"\n\nOn October 1, 1999 in Taiwan, the Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China in its Interpretation 490 considered that the physical differences between males and females and the derived role differentiation in their respective social functions and lives would not make drafting only males a violation of the Constitution of the Republic of China. Though women are not conscripted in Taiwan, transsexual persons are exempt.\n\nA conscientious objector is an individual whose personal beliefs are incompatible with military service, or, more often, with any role in the armed forces. In some countries, conscientious objectors have special legal status, which augments their conscription duties. For example, Sweden used to allow (and once again, with the re-introduction of conscription, allows) conscientious objectors to choose a service in the \"weapons-free\" branch, such as an airport fireman, nurse, or telecommunications technician.\n\nThe reasons for refusing to serve in the military are varied. Some people are conscientious objectors for religious reasons. In particular, the members of the historic peace churches are pacifist by doctrine, and Jehovah's Witnesses, while not strictly pacifists, refuse to participate in the armed forces on the ground that they believe that Christians should be neutral in international conflicts.\n\n+Conscription by country – Examples\n! width=170Country\n! Conscription\n! Conscription gender\n! Land area (km)\n! GDP nominal (US$M)\n! Per capitaGDP (US$)\n! Population\n! Government\n$3,759\n9,754,830\n\n11,437\nN/A\n49,035\n$112.333\n$20,598\n5,450,421\n10,031,231\n\nEvery male citizen of the Republic of Austria up to the age of 35 can be drafted for a six-month long basic military training in the Bundesheer. For men refusing to undergo this training, a nine-month lasting community service is mandatory.\n\nBelgium abolished the conscription in 1994. The last conscripts left active service in February 1995. To this day (2019), a strong minority of the Belgian citizens (especially in Flanders) supports the idea of reintroducing military conscription, for both men and women.\n\nBulgaria had mandatory military service for males above 18 until conscription was ended in 2008. Due to a shortfall in the army of some 5500 soldiers, parts of the current ruling coalition have expressed their support for the return of mandatory military service, most notably Krasimir Karakachanov. Opposition towards this idea from the main coalition partner, GERB, has seen a compromise, where instead of mandatory military service, Bulgaria could possibly introduce a voluntary military service by 2019 where young citizens can volunteer for a period of 6 to 9 months, and will receive a basic wage.\n\nUniversal conscription in China dates back to the State of Qin, which eventually became the Qin Empire of 221 BC. Following unification, historical records show that a total of 300,000 conscript soldiers and 500,000 conscript labourers constructed the Great Wall of China.\n\nIn the following dynasties, universal conscription was abolished and reintroduced on numerous occasions.\n\n, universal military conscription is theoretically mandatory in the People's Republic of China, and reinforced by law. However, due to the large population of China and large pool of candidates available for recruitment, the People's Liberation Army has always had sufficient volunteers, so conscription has not been required in practice at all.\n\nMilitary service in the Cypriot National Guard is mandatory for all male citizens of the Republic of Cyprus, as well as any male non-citizens born of a parent of Greek Cypriot descent, lasting from the January 1 of the year in which they turn 18 years of age to December 31, of the year in which they turn 50. (Efthymiou, 2016). All male residents of Cyprus who are of military age (16 and over) are required to obtain an exit visa from the Ministry of Defense. Currently, military conscription in Cyprus lasts 14 months.\n\nConscription is known in Denmark since the Viking Age, where one man out of every 10 had to serve the king. Frederick IV of Denmark changed the law in 1710 to every 4th man. The men were chosen by the landowner and it was seen as a penalty.\n\nSince 12 February 1849, every physically fit man must do military service. According to §81 in the Constitution of Denmark, which was promulgated in 1849: Every male person able to carry arms shall be liable with his person to contribute to the defence of his country under such rules as are laid down by Statute. — Constitution of DenmarkThe legislation about compulsory military service is articulated in the Danish Law of Conscription. National service takes 4–12 months. It is possible to postpone the duty when one is still in full-time education. Every male turning 18 will be drafted to the 'Day of Defence', where they will be introduced to the Danish military and their health will be tested. Physically unfit persons are not required to do military service. It is only compulsory for men, while women are free to choose to join the Danish army. Almost all of the men have been volunteers in recent years, 96.9% of the total number of recruits having been volunteers in the 2015 draft.\n\nAfter lottery, one can become a conscientious objector. Total objection (refusal from alternative civilian service) results in up to 4 months jailtime according to the law. However, in 2014 a Danish man, who signed up for the service and objected later, got only 14 days of home arrest. In many countries the act of desertion (objection after signing up) is punished harder than objecting the compulsory service.\n\nConscription in Finland is part of a general compulsion for national military service for all adult males (; ) defined in the 127§ of the Constitution of Finland.\n\nConscription can take the form of military or of civilian service. According to Finnish Defence Forces 2011 data slightly under 80% of Finnish males turned 30 had entered and finished the military service. The number of female volunteers to annually enter armed service had stabilised at approximately 300. The service period is 165, 255 or 347 days for the rank and file conscripts and 347 days for conscripts trained as NCOs or reserve officers. The length of civilian service is always twelve months. Those electing to serve unarmed in duties where unarmed service is possible serve either nine or twelve months, depending on their training.\n\nAny Finnish male citizen who refuses to perform both military and civilian service faces a penalty of 173 days in prison, minus any served days. Such sentences are usually served fully in prison, with no parole. Jehovah's Witnesses are exempted in that they may be granted a deferment of service for 3 years upon presentation of a certificate from their congregation's minister showing they are an active member of that religious community. Providing they are still an active member 3 years later, there is nothing to stop them getting a further certificate and deferment. The inhabitants of the demilitarized Åland Islands are exempt from military service. By the Conscription Act of 1951, they are, however, required to serve a time at a local institution, like the coast guard. However, until such service has been arranged, they are freed from service obligation. The non-military service of Åland islands has not been arranged since the introduction of the act, and there are no plans to institute it. The inhabitants of Åland islands can also volunteer for military service on the mainland. As of 1995, women are permitted to serve on a voluntary basis and pursue careers in the military after their initial voluntary military service.\n\nThe military service takes place in Finnish Defence Forces or in the Finnish Border Guard. All services of the Finnish Defence Forces train conscripts. However, the Border Guard trains conscripts only in land-based units, not in coast guard detachments or in the Border Guard Air Wing. Civilian service may take place in the Civilian Service Center in Lapinjärvi or in an accepted non-profit organization of educational, social or medical nature.\n\nBetween 1956 and 2011 conscription was mandatory for all male citizens in the German federal armed forces (German: \"Bundeswehr\"), as well as for the Federal Border Guard (German: \"Bundesgrenzschutz\") in the 1970s (see Border Guard Service). With the end of the Cold War the German government drastically reduced the size of its armed forces. The low demand for conscripts led to the suspension of compulsory conscription in 2011. Since then, only volunteer professionals serve in the \"Bundeswehr\".\n\nSince 1914, Greece has had a period of mandatory military service lasting 9 months for men between the ages of 16 and 45. Citizens discharged from active service are normally placed in the reserve and are subject to periodic recalls of 1–10 days at irregular intervals.\n\nUniversal conscription was introduced in Greece during the military reforms of 1909, although various forms of selective conscription had been in place earlier. In more recent years, conscription was associated with the state of general mobilisation declared on July 20, 1974 due to the crisis in Cyprus (the mobilisation was formally ended on December 18, 2002).\n\nThe period of time that a conscript is required to serve has varied historically, between 12–36 months depending on various factors particular to the conscript, and the political situation. Although women are employed by the Greek army as officers and petty officers, they are not required to enlist, as men are. Soldiers receive no health insurance, but they are provided medical support during their army service, including hospitalization costs.\n\nSince 2009, Greece has mandatory military service of 9 months for male citizens between the ages of 19 and 45. However, as the Armed forces had been gearing towards a completely professional army, the government had announced that the mandatory military service period would be cut to 6 months by 2008 or even abolished completely. However, this timetable was under reconsideration as of April 2006, due to severe manpower shortages. These had been caused by a combination of financial difficulties, meaning that professional soldiers could not be hired at the projected rate, and widespread abuse of the deferment process, resulting in two-thirds of the conscripts deferred service in 2005. In August 2009, the mandatory service period was reduced to 9 months for the army, but has remained at 12 months for the navy and the air force. The number of conscripts affected to the latter two has been greatly reduced, with an aim towards full professionalisation.\n\nThere is a mandatory service for all men and women who are fit and 18 years old. Men must serve 32 months while women serve 24 months with some exempt from mandatory service:\nBULLET::::- Muslim and Christian Arabs\nBULLET::::- permanent residents such as the Druze of the Golan Heights\nBULLET::::- Ultra-Orthodox Jews can apply for deferment to study in Yeshiva and the deferment tends to become an exemption\nBULLET::::- Female religious Jews, if they declare they are unable to serve due to religious grounds. Many choose to volunteer in the national service Sherut Leumi.\n\nAll of the above can choose to volunteer to the IDF. Relatively large numbers of Bedouin choose to volunteer.\n\nMale Druze and Circassian Israeli citizens are liable, by agreement with their community leaders (Female Druze and Circassian are exempt from service).\n\nLithuania abolished its conscription in 2008. In May 2015 the Lithuanian parliament voted to return the conscription and the conscripts started their training in August 2015. In practice there is no conscription in Lithuania, since all recruits have been volunteers.\n\nLuxembourg practiced military conscription from 1948 until 1967.\n\nMoldova, which currently has male conscription, has announced plans to abolish the practice. Moldova's Defense Ministry announced that a plan which stipulates the gradual elimination of military conscription will be implemented starting from the autumn of 2018.\n\nConscription, which was called \"Service Duty\" () in the Netherlands, was first employed in 1810 by French occupying forces. Napoleon's brother Louis Bonaparte, who was King of Holland from 1806 to 1810, had tried to introduce conscription a few years earlier, unsuccessfully. Every man aged 20 years or older had to enlist. By means of drawing lots it was decided who had to undertake service in the French army. It was possible to arrange a substitute against payment.\n\nLater on, conscription was used for all men over the age of 18. Postponement was possible, due to study, for example. Conscientious objectors could perform an alternative civilian service instead of military service. For various reasons, this forced military service was criticized at the end of the twentieth century. Since the Cold War was over, so was the direct threat of a war. Instead, the Dutch army was employed in more and more peacekeeping operations. The complexity and danger of these missions made the use of conscripts controversial. Furthermore, the conscription system was thought to be unfair as only men were drafted.\n\nIn the European part of Netherlands, compulsory attendance has been officially suspended since 1 May 1997. Between 1991 and 1996, the Dutch armed forces phased out their conscript personnel and converted to an all-professional force. The last conscript troops were inducted in 1995, and demobilized in 1996. The suspension means that citizens are no longer forced to serve in the armed forces, as long as it is not required for the safety of the country. Since then, the Dutch army has become an all-professional force. However, to this day, every male and female citizen aged 17 gets a letter in which they are told that they have been registered but do not have to present themselves for service.\n\n, Norway currently employs a weak form of mandatory military service for men and women. In practice recruits are not forced to serve, instead only those who are motivated are selected. About 60,000 Norwegians are available for conscription every year, but only 8,000 to 10,000 are conscripted. Since 1985, women have been able to enlist for voluntary service as regular recruits. On 14 June 2013 the Norwegian Parliament voted to extend conscription to women, making Norway the first NATO member and first European country to make national service compulsory for both sexes. In earlier times, up until at least the early 2000s, all men aged 19–44 were subject to mandatory service, with good reasons required to avoid becoming drafted. There is a right of conscientious objection.\n\nIn addition to the military service, the Norwegian government draft a total of 8,000 men and women between 18 and 55 to non-military Civil defence duty. (Not to be confused with Alternative civilian service.) Former service in the military does not exclude anyone from later being drafted to the Civil defence, but an upper limit of total 19 months of service applies. Neglecting mobilisation orders to training exercises and actual incidents, may impose fines.\n\n, Serbia no longer practises mandatory military service. Prior to this, mandatory military service lasted 6 months for men. Conscientious objectors could however opt for 9 months of civil service instead.\n\nOn 15 December 2010, the Parliament of Serbia voted to suspend mandatory military service. The decision fully came into force on January 1, 2011.\n\nSweden had conscription () for men between 1901 and 2010. During the last few decades it was selective. Since 1980, women have been allowed to sign up by choice, and, if passing the tests, do military training together with male conscripts. Since 1989 women have been allowed to serve in all military positions and units, including combat.\n\nIn 2010, conscription was made gender-neutral, meaning both women and men would be conscripted –on equal terms. The conscription system was simultaneously deactivated in peacetime. Seven years later, referencing increased military threat, the Swedish Government reactivated military conscription. Beginning in 2018, both men and women are conscripted.\n\nThe United Kingdom introduced conscription to full-time military service for the first time in January 1916 (the eighteenth month of World War I) and abolished it in 1920. Ireland, then part of the United Kingdom, was exempted from the original 1916 military service legislation, and although further legislation in 1918 gave power for an extension of conscription to Ireland, the power was never put into effect.\n\nConscription was reintroduced in 1939, in the lead up to World War II, and continued in force until 1963. Northern Ireland was exempted from conscription legislation throughout the whole period.\n\nIn all, eight million men were conscripted during both World Wars, as well as several hundred thousand younger single women. The introduction of conscription in May 1939, before the war began, was partly due to pressure from the French, who emphasized the need for a large British army to oppose the Germans. From early 1942 unmarried women age 19–30 were conscripted. Most were sent to the factories, but they could volunteer for the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) and other women's services. Some women served in the Women's Land Army: initially volunteers but later conscription was introduced. However, women who were already working in a skilled job considered helpful to the war effort, such as a General Post Office telephonist, were told to continue working as before. None was assigned to combat roles unless she volunteered. By 1943 women were liable to some form of directed labour up to age 51. During the Second World War, 1.4 million British men volunteered for service and 3.2 million were conscripted. Conscripts comprised 50% of the Royal Air Force, 60% of the Royal Navy and 80% of the British Army.\n\nBritain and its colonies did not develop such pervasive administrative states, and therefore did not opt out for regulatory solutions, such as conscription, as a reliability. The abolition of conscription in Britain was announced on 4 April 1957, by new prime minister Harold Macmillan, with the last conscripts being recruited three years later.\n\nConscription in the United States ended in 1973, but males aged between 18 and 25 are required to register with the Selective Service System to enable a reintroduction of conscription if necessary. President Gerald Ford had suspended mandatory draft registration in 1975; but, President Jimmy Carter reinstated that requirement when the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan five years later. Consequently, Selective Service registration is still required of almost all young men. There have been no prosecutions for violations of the draft registration law since 1986. Males between the ages of 17 and 45, and female members of the US National Guard may be conscripted for federal militia service pursuant to 10 U.S. Code § 246 and the Militia Clauses of the United States Constitution.\n\nIn February 2019, the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas ruled that male-only conscription breached the Fourteenth Amendment's equal protection clause. In \"National Coalition for Men v. Selective Service System\", a case brought by non-profit men's rights organisation the National Coalition for Men against the U.S. Selective Service System, judge Gray H. Miller issued a declaratory judgement that the male-only registration requirement is unconstitutional, though did not specify what action the government should take.\n\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Australia\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Canada\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Egypt\nBULLET::::- Conscription in France\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Gibraltar\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Malaysia\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Mexico\nBULLET::::- Conscription in New Zealand\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Russia\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Singapore\nBULLET::::- Conscription in South Korea\nBULLET::::- Conscription in Switzerland\nBULLET::::- Conscription in the Ottoman Empire\nBULLET::::- Conscription in the Republic of China (Taiwan)\nBULLET::::- Conscription in the Russian Empire\n\nBULLET::::- Arrière-ban\nBULLET::::- Civil conscription\nBULLET::::- Civilian Public Service\nBULLET::::- Corvée\nBULLET::::- Economic conscription\nBULLET::::- Impressment and the Quota System\nBULLET::::- National service\nBULLET::::- Pospolite ruszenie, mass mobilization in Poland\nBULLET::::- Zivildienst\nBULLET::::- Male expendability\n\nBULLET::::- Bevin Boys\nBULLET::::- Civil conscription\nBULLET::::- Ephebic Oath\nBULLET::::- List of countries by number of troops\nBULLET::::- Men's Rights\nBULLET::::- Military history\nBULLET::::- Military recruitment\nBULLET::::- Timeline of women's participation in warfare\nBULLET::::- War resister\n\nBULLET::::- Burk, James (April 1989). \"Debating the Draft in America,\" Armed Forces and Society p. vol. 15: pp. 431–48.\nBULLET::::- Challener, Richard D. \"The French theory of the nation in arms, 1866–1939\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- Chambers, John Whiteclay. \"To Raise an Army: The Draft Comes to Modern America\" (1987)\nBULLET::::- Flynn, George Q. (1998 33(1): 5–20). \"Conscription and Equity in Western Democracies, 1940–75,\" \"Journal of Contemporary History\" in JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Looks at citizens' responses to military conscription in several democracies since the French Revolution.\nBULLET::::- Krueger, Christine, and Sonja Levsen, eds. \"War Volunteering in Modern Times: From the French Revolution to the Second World War\" (Palgrave Macmillan 2011)\nBULLET::::- Pfaffenzeller, Stephan. 2010. \"Conscription and Democracy: The Mythology of Civil-Military Relations.\" Armed Forces & Society April Vol. 36 pp. 481–504, http://afs.sagepub.com/content/36/3/481.abstract\n"}
{"id": "5736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5736", "title": "Catherine Coleman", "text": "Catherine Coleman\n\nCatherine Grace \"Cady\" Coleman (born December 14, 1960) is an American chemist, a former United States Air Force officer, and a retired NASA astronaut. She is a veteran of two Space Shuttle missions, and departed the International Space Station on May 23, 2011, as a crew member of Expedition 27 after logging 159 days in space.\n\nColeman graduated from Wilbert Tucker Woodson High School, Fairfax, Virginia, in 1978; in 1978–1979, she was an exchange student at Røyken upper secondary school in Norway with the AFS Intercultural Programs. She received a B.S. degree in chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1983 and was commissioned as graduate of the Air Force ROTC., then received a Ph.D. degree in polymer science and engineering from the University of Massachusetts Amherst in 1991 She was advised by Professor Thomas J. McCarthy on her doctorate. As an undergraduate she was a member of the intercollegiate crew and was a resident of Baker House.\n\nColeman continued to pursue her PhD at the University of Massachusetts Amherst as a Second Lieutenant. In 1988 she entered active duty at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base as a research chemist. During her work she participated as a surface analysis consultant on the NASA Long Duration Exposure Facility experiment. In 1991, she received her doctorate in polymer science and engineering. She retired from the Air Force in November 2009 as a colonel.\n\nColeman was selected by NASA in 1992 to join the NASA Astronaut Corps. In 1995, she was a member of the STS-73 crew on the scientific mission USML-2 with experiments including biotechnology, combustion science, and the physics of fluids. During the flight, she reported to Houston Mission Control that she had spotted an unidentified flying object. She also trained for the mission STS-83 to be the backup for Donald A. Thomas; however, as he recovered on time, she did not fly that mission. STS-93 was Coleman's second space flight in 1999. She was mission specialist in charge of deploying the Chandra X-ray Observatory and its Inertial Upper Stage out of the shuttle's cargo bay.\n\nColeman served as Chief of Robotics for the Astronaut Office, to include robotic arm operations and training for all Space Shuttle and International Space Station missions. In October 2004, Coleman served as an aquanaut during the mission aboard the Aquarius underwater laboratory, living and working underwater for eleven days.\n\nColeman was assigned as a backup U.S. crew member for Expeditions 19, 20 and 21 and served as a backup crew member for Expeditions 24 and 25 as part of her training for Expedition 26.\n\nColeman launched on December 15, 2010 (December 16 Baikonur time), aboard Soyuz TMA-20 to join the Expedition 26 mission aboard the International Space Station. She retired from NASA on December 1, 2016.\n\nSTS-73 on Space Shuttle \"Columbia\" (October 20 to November 5, 1995) was the second United States Microgravity Laboratory mission. The mission focused on materials science, biotechnology, combustion science, the physics of fluids, and numerous scientific experiments housed in the pressurized Spacelab module. In completing her first space flight, Coleman orbited the Earth 256 times, traveled over 6 million miles, and logged a total of 15 days, 21 hours, 52 minutes and 21 seconds in space.\n\nSTS-93 on \"Columbia\" (July 22 to 27, 1999) was a five-day mission during which Coleman was the lead mission specialist for the deployment of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Designed to conduct comprehensive studies of the universe, the telescope will enable scientists to study exotic phenomena such as exploding stars, quasars, and black holes. Mission duration was 118 hours and 50 minutes.\n\nSoyuz TMA-20 / Expedition 26/27 (December 15, 2010, to May 23, 2011) was an extended duration mission to the International Space Station.\n\nColeman is married to glass artist Josh Simpson who lives in Massachusetts. They have one son. She is part of the band Bandella, which also includes fellow NASA astronaut Steven Robinson, Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield, and Micki Pettit (astronaut Don Pettit's wife). Coleman is a flute player and has taken several flutes with her to the ISS, including a pennywhistle from Paddy Moloney of the Chieftains, an old Irish flute from Matt Molloy of the Chieftains, and a flute from Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull. On February 15, 2011, she played one of the instruments live from orbit on National Public Radio. On April 12, 2011, she played live via video link for the audience of Jethro Tull's show in Russia in honour of the 50th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin's flight, playing in orbit while Anderson played on the ground. On May 13 of that year, Coleman delivered a taped commencement address to the class of 2011 at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.\n\nAs do many other astronauts, Coleman holds an amateur radio license (callsign: KC5ZTH).\n\nAs of 2015, she is also a member of the board of directors for the Hollywood Science Fiction Museum.\n\nAs of 2015 she is also known to be working as a guest speaker at the Baylor College of Medicine, for the children's program 'Saturday Morning Science'.\n\nIn 2018 she gave a graduation address to Carter Lynch, the sole graduate of Cuttyhunk Elementary School, on Cuttyhunk Island, Massachusetts.\n\nBULLET::::- Cady Coleman Video produced by \"\"\nBULLET::::- NASA biography\n"}
{"id": "5738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5738", "title": "Cervix", "text": "Cervix\n\nThe cervix or cervix uteri (Latin, 'neck of the uterus') is the lower part of the uterus in the human female reproductive system. The cervix is usually 2 to 3 cm long (~1 inch) and roughly cylindrical in shape, which changes during pregnancy. The narrow, central cervical canal runs along its entire length, connecting the uterine cavity and the lumen of the vagina. The opening into the uterus is called the internal os, and the opening into the vagina is called the external os. The lower part of the cervix, known as the vaginal portion of the cervix (or ectocervix), bulges into the top of the vagina. The cervix has been documented anatomically since at least the time of Hippocrates, over 2,000 years ago.\n\nThe cervical canal is a passage through which sperm must travel to fertilize an egg cell after sexual intercourse. Several methods of contraception, including cervical caps and cervical diaphragms, aim to block or prevent the passage of sperm through the cervical canal. Cervical mucus is used in several methods of fertility awareness, such as the Creighton model and Billings method, due to its changes in consistency throughout the menstrual period. During vaginal childbirth, the cervix must flatten and dilate to allow the fetus to progress along the birth canal. Midwives and doctors use the extent of the dilation of the cervix to assist decision-making during childbirth.\n\nThe cervical canal is lined with a single layer of column-shaped cells, while the ectocervix is covered with multiple layers of cells topped with flat cells. The two types of epithelia meet the squamocolumnar junction. Infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV) can cause changes in the epithelium, which can lead to cancer of the cervix. Cervical cytology tests can often detect cervical cancer and its precursors, and enable early successful treatment. Ways to avoid HPV include avoiding sex, using condoms, and HPV vaccination. HPV vaccines, developed in the early 21st century, reduce the risk of cervical cancer by preventing infections from the main cancer-causing strains of HPV.\n\nThe cervix is part of the female reproductive system. Around in length, it is the lower narrower part of the uterus continuous above with the broader upper part—or body—of the uterus. The lower end of the cervix bulges through the anterior wall of the vagina, and is referred to as the vaginal portion of cervix (or ectocervix) while the rest of the cervix above the vagina is called the supravaginal portion of cervix. A central canal, known as the cervical canal, runs along its length and connects the cavity of the body of the uterus with the lumen of the vagina. The openings are known as the internal os and external orifice of the uterus (or external os) respectively. The mucosa lining the cervical canal is known as the endocervix, and the mucosa covering the ectocervix is known as the exocervix. The cervix has an inner mucosal layer, a thick layer of smooth muscle, and posteriorly the supravaginal portion has a serosal covering consisting of connective tissue and overlying peritoneum.\n\nIn front of the upper part of the cervix lies the bladder, separated from it by cellular connective tissue known as parametrium, which also extends over the sides of the cervix. To the rear, the supravaginal cervix is covered by peritoneum, which runs onto the back of the vaginal wall and then turns upwards and onto the rectum, forming the recto-uterine pouch. The cervix is more tightly connected to surrounding structures than the rest of the uterus.\n\nThe cervical canal varies greatly in length and width between women or over the course of a woman's life, and it can measure 8 mm (0.3 inch) at its widest diameter in premenopausal adults. It is wider in the middle and narrower at each end. The anterior and posterior walls of the canal each have a vertical fold, from which ridges run diagonally upwards and laterally. These are known as \"palmate folds\", due to their resemblance to a palm leaf. The anterior and posterior ridges are arranged in such a way that they interlock with each other and close the canal. They are often effaced after pregnancy.\n\nThe ectocervix (also known as the vaginal portion of the cervix) has a convex, elliptical shape and projects into the cervix between the anterior and posterior vaginal fornices. On the rounded part of the ectocervix is a small, depressed external opening, connecting the cervix with the vagina. The size and shape of the ectocervix and the external opening (external os) can vary according to age, hormonal state, and whether natural or normal childbirth has taken place. In women who have not had a vaginal delivery, the external opening is small and circular, and in women who have had a vaginal delivery, it is slit-like. On average, the ectocervix is long and wide.\n\nBlood is supplied to the cervix by the descending branch of the uterine artery and drains into the uterine vein. The pelvic splanchnic nerves, emerging as S2–S3, transmit the sensation of pain from the cervix to the brain. These nerves travel along the uterosacral ligaments, which pass from the uterus to the anterior sacrum.\n\nThree channels facilitate lymphatic drainage from the cervix. The anterior and lateral cervix drains to nodes along the uterine arteries, travelling along the cardinal ligaments at the base of the broad ligament to the external iliac lymph nodes and ultimately the paraaortic lymph nodes. The posterior and lateral cervix drains along the uterine arteries to the internal iliac lymph nodes and ultimately the paraaortic lymph nodes, and the posterior section of the cervix drains to the obturator and presacral lymph nodes. However, there are variations as lymphatic drainage from the cervix travels to different sets of pelvic nodes in some people. This has implications in scanning nodes for involvement in cervical cancer.\n\nAfter menstruation and directly under the influence of estrogen, the cervix undergoes a series of changes in position and texture. During most of the menstrual cycle, the cervix remains firm, and is positioned low and closed. However, as ovulation approaches, the cervix becomes softer and rises to open in response to the higher levels of estrogen present. These changes are also accompanied by changes in cervical mucus, described below.\n\nAs a component of the female reproductive system, the cervix is derived from the two paramesonephric ducts (also called Müllerian ducts), which develop around the sixth week of embryogenesis. During development, the outer parts of the two ducts fuse, forming a single urogenital canal that will become the vagina, cervix and uterus. The cervix grows in size at a smaller rate than the body of the uterus, so the relative size of the cervix over time decreases, decreasing from being much larger than the body of the uterus in fetal life, twice as large during childhood, and decreasing to its adult size, smaller than the uterus, after puberty. Previously it was thought that during fetal development, the original squamous epithelium of the cervix is derived from the urogenital sinus and the original columnar epithelium is derived from the paramesonephric duct. The point at which these two original epithelia meet is called the original squamocolumnar junction. New studies show, however, that all the cervical as well as large part of the vaginal epithelium are derived from Müllerian duct tissue and that phenotypic differences might be due to other causes.\n\nThe endocervical mucosa is about thick and lined with a single layer of columnar mucous cells. It contains numerous tubular mucous glands, which empty viscous alkaline mucus into the lumen. In contrast, the ectocervix is covered with nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, which resembles the squamous epithelium lining the vaginal. The junction between these two types of epithelia is called the squamocolumnar junction. Underlying both types of epithelium is a tough layer of collagen. The mucosa of the endocervix is not shed during menstruation. The cervix has more fibrous tissue, including collagen and elastin, than the rest of the uterus.\nIn prepubertal girls, the functional squamocolumnar junction is present just within the cervical canal. Upon entering puberty, due to hormonal influence, and during pregnancy, the columnar epithelium extends outwards over the ectocervix as the cervix everts. Hence, this also causes the squamocolumnar junction to move outwards onto the vaginal portion of the cervix, where it is exposed to the acidic vaginal environment. The exposed columnar epithelium can undergo physiological metaplasia and change to tougher metaplastic squamous epithelium in days or weeks, which is very similar to the original squamous epithelium when mature. The new squamocolumnar junction is therefore internal to the original squamocolumnar junction, and the zone of unstable epithelium between the two junctions is called the transformation zone of the cervix. After menopause, the uterine structures involute and the functional squamocolumnar junction moves into the cervical canal.\n\nNabothian cysts (or Nabothian follicles) form in the transformation zone where the lining of metaplastic epithelium has replaced mucous epithelium and caused a strangulation of the outlet of some of the mucous glands. A buildup of mucus in the glands forms Nabothian cysts, usually less than about in diameter, which are considered physiological rather than pathological. Both gland openings and Nabothian cysts are helpful to identify the transformation zone.\n\nThe cervical canal is a pathway through which sperm enter the uterus after sexual intercourse, and some forms of artificial insemination. Some sperm remains in cervical crypts, infoldings of the endocervix, which act as a reservoir, releasing sperm over several hours and maximising the chances of fertilisation. A theory states the cervical and uterine contractions during orgasm draw semen into the uterus. Although the \"upsuck theory\" has been generally accepted for some years, it has been disputed due to lack of evidence, small sample size, and methodological errors.\n\nSome methods of fertility awareness, such as the Creighton model and the Billings method involve estimating a woman's periods of fertility and infertility by observing physiological changes in her body. Among these changes are several involving the quality of her cervical mucus: the sensation it causes at the vulva, its elasticity (\"Spinnbarkeit\"), its transparency, and the presence of ferning.\n\nSeveral hundred glands in the endocervix produce 20–60 mg of cervical mucus a day, increasing to 600 mg around the time of ovulation. It is viscous because it contains large proteins known as mucins. The viscosity and water content varies during the menstrual cycle; mucus is composed of around 93% water, reaching 98% at midcycle. These changes allow it to function either as a barrier or a transport medium to spermatozoa. It contains electrolytes such as calcium, sodium, and potassium; organic components such as glucose, amino acids, and soluble proteins; trace elements including zinc, copper, iron, manganese, and selenium; free fatty acids; enzymes such as amylase; and prostaglandins. Its consistency is determined by the influence of the hormones estrogen and progesterone. At midcycle around the time of ovulation—a period of high estrogen levels— the mucus is thin and serous to allow sperm to enter the uterus and is more alkaline and hence more hospitable to sperm. It is also higher in electrolytes, which results in the \"ferning\" pattern that can be observed in drying mucus under low magnification; as the mucus dries, the salts crystallize, resembling the leaves of a fern. The mucus has a stretchy character described as \"Spinnbarkeit\" most prominent around the time of ovulation.\n\nAt other times in the cycle, the mucus is thick and more acidic due to the effects of progesterone. This \"infertile\" mucus acts as a barrier to keep sperm from entering the uterus. Women taking an oral contraceptive pill also have thick mucus from the effects of progesterone. Thick mucus also prevents pathogens from interfering with a nascent pregnancy.\n\nA cervical mucus plug, called the operculum, forms inside the cervical canal during pregnancy. This provides a protective seal for the uterus against the entry of pathogens and against leakage of uterine fluids. The mucus plug is also known to have antibacterial properties. This plug is released as the cervix dilates, either during the first stage of childbirth or shortly before. It is visible as a blood-tinged mucous discharge.\n\nThe cervix plays a major role in childbirth. As the fetus descends within the uterus in preparation for birth, the presenting part, usually the head, rests on and is supported by the cervix. As labour progresses, the cervix becomes softer and shorter, begins to dilate, and rotates to face anteriorly. The support the cervix provides to the fetal head starts to give way when the uterus begins its contractions. During childbirth, the cervix must dilate to a diameter of more than to accommodate the head of the fetus as it descends from the uterus to the vagina. In becoming wider, the cervix also becomes shorter, a phenomenon known as effacement.\n\nAlong with other factors, midwives and doctors use the extent of cervical dilation to assist decision making during childbirth. Generally, the active first stage of labour, when the uterine contractions become strong and regular, begins when the cervical dilation is more than . The second phase of labor begins when the cervix has dilated to , which is regarded as its fullest dilation, and is when active pushing and contractions push the baby along the birth canal leading to the birth of the baby. The number of past vaginal deliveries is a strong factor in influencing how rapidly the cervix is able to dilate in labour. The time taken for the cervix to dilate and efface is one factor used in reporting systems such as the Bishop score, used to recommend whether interventions such as a forceps delivery, induction, or Caesarean section should be used in childbirth.\n\nCervical incompetence is a condition in which shortening of the cervix due to dilation and thinning occurs, before term pregnancy. Short cervical length is the strongest predictor of preterm birth.\n\nSeveral methods of contraception involve the cervix. Cervical diaphragms are reusable, firm-rimmed plastic devices inserted by a woman prior to intercourse that cover the cervix. Pressure against the walls of the vagina maintain the position of the diaphragm, and it acts as a physical barrier to prevent the entry of sperm into the uterus, preventing fertilisation. Cervical caps are a similar method, although they are smaller and adhere to the cervix by suction. Diaphragms and caps are often used in conjunction with spermicides. In one year, 12% of women using the diaphragm will undergo an unintended pregnancy, and with optimal use this falls to 6%. Efficacy rates are lower for the cap, with 18% of women undergoing an unintended pregnancy, and 10–13% with optimal use. Most types of progestogen-only pills are effective as a contraceptive because they thicken cervical mucus, making it difficult for sperm to pass along the cervical canal. In addition, they may also sometimes prevent ovulation. In contrast, contraceptive pills that contain both oestrogen and progesterone, the combined oral contraceptive pills, work mainly by preventing ovulation. They also thicken cervical mucus and thin the lining of the uterus, enhancing their effectiveness.\n\nIn 2008, cervical cancer was the third-most common cancer in women worldwide, with rates varying geographically from less than one to more than 50 cases per 100,000 women. It is a leading cause of cancer-related death in poor countries, where delayed diagnosis leading to poor outcomes is common. The introduction of routine screening has resulted in fewer cases of (and deaths from) cervical cancer, however this has mainly taken place in developed countries. Most developing countries have limited or no screening, and 85% of the global burden occurring there.\n\nCervical cancer nearly always involves human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. HPV is a virus with numerous strains, several of which predispose to precancerous changes in the cervical epithelium, particularly in the transformation zone, which is the most common area for cervical cancer to start. HPV vaccines, such as Gardasil and Cervarix, reduce the incidence of cervical cancer, by inoculating against the viral strains involved in cancer development.\n\nPotentially precancerous changes in the cervix can be detected by cervical screening, using methods including a Pap smear (also called a cervical smear), in which epithelial cells are scraped from the surface of the cervix and examined under a microscope. The colposcope, an instrument used to see a magnified view of the cervix, was invented in 1925. The Pap smear was developed by Georgios Papanikolaou in 1928. A LEEP procedure using a heated loop of platinum to excise a patch of cervical tissue was developed by Aurel Babes in 1927. In some parts of the developed world including the UK, the Pap test has been superseded with liquid-based cytology.\n\nA cheap, cost-effective and practical alternative in poorer countries is visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA). Instituting and sustaining cytology-based programs in these regions can be difficult, due to the need for trained personnel, equipment and facilities and difficulties in follow-up. With VIA, results and treatment can be available on the same day. As a screening test, VIA is comparable to cervical cytology in accurately identifying precancerous lesions.\n\nA result of dysplasia is usually further investigated, such as by taking a cone biopsy, which may also remove the cancerous lesion. Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia is a possible result of the biopsy, and represents dysplastic changes that may eventually progress to invasive cancer. Most cases of cervical cancer are detected in this way, without having caused any symptoms. When symptoms occur, they may include vaginal bleeding, discharge, or discomfort.\n\nInflammation of the cervix is referred to as cervicitis. This inflammation may be of the endocervix or ectocervix. When associated with the endocervix, it is associated with a mucous vaginal discharge and sexually transmitted infections such as chlamydia and gonorrhoea. As many as half of pregnant women having a gonorrheal infection of the cervix are asymptomatic. Other causes include overgrowth of the commensal flora of the vagina. When associated with the ectocervix, inflammation may be caused by the herpes simplex virus. Inflammation is often investigated through directly visualising the cervix using a speculum, which may appear whiteish due to exudate, and by taking a Pap smear and examining for causal bacteria. Special tests may be used to identify particular bacteria. If the inflammation is due to a bacterium, then antibiotics may be given as treatment.\n\nCervical stenosis is an abnormally narrow cervical canal, typically associated with trauma caused by removal of tissue for investigation or treatment of cancer, or cervical cancer itself. Diethylstilbestrol, used from 1938 to 1971 to prevent preterm labour and miscarriage, is also strongly associated with the development of cervical stenosis and other abnormalities in the daughters of the exposed women. Other abnormalities include: vaginal adenosis, in which the squamous epithelium of the ectocervix becomes columnar; cancers such as clear cell adenocarcinomas; cervical ridges and hoods; and development of a cockscomb cervix appearance, which is the condition wherein, as the name suggests, the cervix of the uterus is shaped like a cockscomb. About one third of women born to diethylstilbestrol-treated mothers (i.e. in-utero exposure) develop a cockscomb cervix.\n\nEnlarged folds or ridges of cervical stroma (fibrous tissues) and epithelium constitute a cockscomb cervix. Similarly, cockscomb polyps lining the cervix are usually considered or grouped into the same overarching description. It is in and of itself considered a benign abnormality; its presence, however is usually indicative of DES exposure, and as such women who experience these abnormalities should be aware of their increased risk of associated pathologies.\n\nCervical agenesis is a rare congenital condition in which the cervix completely fails to develop, often associated with the concurrent failure of the vagina to develop. Other congenital cervical abnormalities exist, often associated with abnormalities of the vagina and uterus. The cervix may be duplicated in situations such as bicornuate uterus and uterine didelphys.\n\nCervical polyps, which are benign overgrowths of endocervical tissue, if present, may cause bleeding, or a benign overgrowth may be present in the cervical canal. Cervical ectropion refers to the horizontal overgrowth of the endocervical columnar lining in a one-cell-thick layer over the ectocervix.\n\nFemale marsupials have paired uteri and cervices. Most eutherian (placental) mammal species have a single cervix and single, bipartite or bicornuate uterus. Lagomorphs, rodents, aardvarks and hyraxes have a duplex uterus and two cervices. Lagomorphs and rodents share many morphological characteristics and are grouped together in the clade Glires. Anteaters of the family myrmecophagidae are unusual in that they lack a defined cervix; they are thought to have lost the characteristic rather than other mammals developing a cervix on more than one lineage. In domestic pigs, the cervix contains a series of five interdigitating pads that hold the boar's corkscrew-shaped penis during copulation.\n\nThe word \"cervix\" () came to English from Latin, where it means \"neck\", and like its Germanic counterpart, it can refer not only to the neck [of the body] but also to an analogous narrowed part of an object. The cervix uteri (neck of the uterus) is thus the uterine cervix, but in English the word \"cervix\" used alone usually refers to it. Thus the adjective \"cervical\" may refer either to the neck (as in \"cervical vertebrae\" or \"cervical lymph nodes\") or to the uterine cervix (as in \"cervical cap\" or \"cervical cancer\").\n\nLatin \"cervix\" came from the Proto-Indo-European root \"ker-\", referring to a \"structure that projects\". Thus, the word cervix is linguistically related to the English word \"horn\", the Persian word for \"head\" ( \"sar\"), the Greek word for \"head\" ( \"koruphe\"), and the Welsh word for \"deer\" ().\n\nThe cervix was documented in anatomical literature in at least the time of Hippocrates; cervical cancer was first described more than 2,000 years ago, with descriptions provided by both Hippocrates and Aretaeus. However, there was some variation in word sense among early writers, who used the term to refer to both the cervix and the internal uterine orifice. The first attested use of the word to refer to the cervix of the uterus was in 1702.\n\nBULLET::::- Cited texts\n"}
{"id": "5739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5739", "title": "Compiler", "text": "Compiler\n\nA compiler is a computer program that translates computer code written in one programming language (the source language) into another language (the target language). The name \"compiler\" is primarily used for programs that translate source code from a high-level programming language to a lower level language (e.g., assembly language, object code, or machine code) to create an executable program.\n\nHowever, there are many different types of compilers. If the compiled program can run on a computer whose CPU or operating system is different from the one on which the compiler runs, the compiler is a cross-compiler. A bootstrap compiler is written in the language that it intends to compile. A program that translates from a low-level language to a higher level one is a decompiler. A program that translates between high-level languages is usually called a source-to-source compiler or transpiler. A language rewriter is usually a program that translates the form of expressions without a change of language. The term compiler-compiler refers to tools used to create parsers that perform syntax analysis.\n\nA compiler is likely to perform many or all of the following operations: preprocessing, lexical analysis, parsing, semantic analysis (syntax-directed translation), conversion of input programs to an intermediate representation, code optimization and code generation. Compilers implement these operations in phases that promote efficient design and correct transformations of source input to target output. Program faults caused by incorrect compiler behavior can be very difficult to track down and work around; therefore, compiler implementers invest significant effort to ensure compiler correctness.\n\nCompilers are not the only language processor used to transform source programs. An interpreter is computer software that transforms and then executes the indicated operations. The translation process influences the design of computer languages which leads to a preference of compilation or interpretation. In practice, an interpreter can be implemented for compiled languages and compilers can be implemented for interpreted languages.\n\nTheoretical computing concepts developed by scientists, mathematicians, and engineers formed the basis of digital modern computing development during World War II. Primitive binary languages evolved because digital devices only understand ones and zeros and the circuit patterns in the underlying machine architecture. In the late 1940s, assembly languages were created to offer a more workable abstraction of the computer architectures. Limited memory capacity of early computers led to substantial technical challenges when the first compilers were designed. Therefore, the compilation process needed to be divided into several small programs. The front end programs produce the analysis products used by the back end programs to generate target code. As computer technology provided more resources, compiler designs could align better with the compilation process.\n\nIt is usually more productive for a programmer to use a high-level language, so the development of high-level languages followed naturally from the capabilities offered by digital computers. High-level languages are formal languages that are strictly defined by their syntax and semantics which form the high-level language architecture. Elements of these formal languages include:\nBULLET::::- \"Alphabet\", any finite set of symbols;\nBULLET::::- \"String\", a finite sequence of symbols;\nBULLET::::- \"Language\", any set of strings on an alphabet.\n\nThe sentences in a language may be defined by a set of rules called a grammar.\n\nBackus–Naur form (BNF) describes the syntax of \"sentences\" of a language and was used for the syntax of Algol 60 by John Backus. The ideas derive from the context-free grammar concepts by Noam Chomsky, a linguist. \"BNF and its extensions have become standard tools for describing the syntax of programming notations, and in many cases parts of compilers are generated automatically from a BNF description.\"\n\nIn the 1940s, Konrad Zuse designed an algorithmic programming language called Plankalkül (\"Plan Calculus\"). While no actual implementation occurred until the 1970s, it presented concepts later seen in APL designed by Ken Iverson in the late 1950s. APL is a language for mathematical computations.\n\nHigh-level language design during the formative years of digital computing provided useful programming tools for a variety of applications:\nBULLET::::- FORTRAN (Formula Translation) for engineering and science applications is considered to be the first high-level language.\nBULLET::::- COBOL (Common Business-Oriented Language) evolved from A-0 and FLOW-MATIC to become the dominant high-level language for business applications.\nBULLET::::- LISP (List Processor) for symbolic computation.\n\nCompiler technology evolved from the need for a strictly defined transformation of the high-level source program into a low-level target program for the digital computer. The compiler could be viewed as a front end to deal with the analysis of the source code and a back end to synthesize the analysis into the target code. Optimization between the front end and back end could produce more efficient target code.\n\nSome early milestones in the development of compiler technology:\nBULLET::::- 1952 – An Autocode compiler developed by Alick Glennie for the Manchester Mark I computer at the University of Manchester is considered by some to be the first compiled programming language.\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Grace Hopper's team at Remington Rand wrote the compiler for the A-0 programming language (and coined the term \"compiler\" to describe it), although the A-0 compiler functioned more as a loader or linker than the modern notion of a full compiler.\nBULLET::::- 1954-1957 – A team led by John Backus at IBM developed FORTRAN which is usually considered the first high-level language. In 1957, they completed a FORTRAN compiler that is generally credited as having introduced the first unambiguously complete compiler.\nBULLET::::- 1959 – The Conference on Data Systems Language (CODASYL) initiated development of COBOL. The COBOL design drew on A-0 and FLOW-MATIC. By the early 1960s COBOL was compiled on multiple architectures.\nBULLET::::- 1958-1962 – John McCarthy at MIT designed LISP. The symbol processing capabilities provided useful features for artificial intelligence research. In 1962, LISP 1.5 release noted some tools: an interpreter written by Stephen Russell and Daniel J. Edwards, a compiler and assembler written by Tim Hart and Mike Levin.\n\nEarly operating systems and software were written in assembly language. In the 60s and early 70s, the use of high-level languages for system programming was still controversial due to resource limitations. However, several research and industry efforts began the shift toward high-level systems programming languages, for example, BCPL, BLISS, B, and C.\n\nBCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language) designed in 1966 by Martin Richards at the University of Cambridge was originally developed as a compiler writing tool. Several compilers have been implemented, Richards' book provides insights to the language and its compiler. BCPL was not only an influential systems programming language that is still used in research but also provided a basis for the design of B and C languages.\n\nBLISS (Basic Language for Implementation of System Software) was developed for a Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-10 computer by W.A. Wulf's Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) research team. The CMU team went on to develop BLISS-11 compiler one year later in 1970.\n\nMultics (Multiplexed Information and Computing Service), a time-sharing operating system project, involved MIT, Bell Labs, General Electric (later Honeywell) and was led by Fernando Corbató from MIT. Multics was written in the PL/I language developed by IBM and IBM User Group. IBM's goal was to satisfy business, scientific, and systems programming requirements. There were other languages that could have been considered but PL/I offered the most complete solution even though it had not been implemented. For the first few years of the Mulitics project, a subset of the language could be compiled to assembly language with the Early PL/I (EPL) compiler by Doug McIlory and Bob Morris from Bell Labs. EPL supported the project until a boot-strapping compiler for the full PL/I could be developed.\n\nBell Labs left the Multics project in 1969: \"Over time, hope was replaced by frustration as the group effort initially failed to produce an economically useful system.\" Continued participation would drive up project support costs. So researchers turned to other development efforts. A system programming language B based on BCPL concepts was written by Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson. Ritchie created a boot-strapping compiler for B and wrote Unics (Uniplexed Information and Computing Service) operating system for a PDP-7 in B. Unics eventually became spelled Unix.\n\nBell Labs started development and expansion of C based on B and BCPL. The BCPL compiler had been transported to Multics by Bell Labs and BCPL was a preferred language at Bell Labs. Initially, a front-end program to Bell Labs' B compiler was used while a C compiler was developed. In 1971, a new PDP-11 provided the resource to define extensions to B and rewrite the compiler. By 1973 the design of C language was essentially complete and the Unix kernel for a PDP-11 was rewritten in C. Steve Johnson started development of Portable C Compiler (PCC) to support retargeting of C compilers to new machines.\n\nObject-oriented programming (OOP) offered some interesting possibilities for application development and maintenance. OOP concepts go further back but were part of LISP and Simula language science. At Bell Labs, the development of C++ became interested in OOP. C++ was first used in 1980 for systems programming. The initial design leveraged C language systems programming capabilities with Simula concepts. Object-oriented facilities were added in 1983. The Cfront program implemented a C++ front-end for C84 language compiler. In subsequent years several C++ compilers were developed as C++ popularity grew.\n\nIn many application domains, the idea of using a higher-level language quickly caught on. Because of the expanding functionality supported by newer programming languages and the increasing complexity of computer architectures, compilers became more complex.\n\nDARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) sponsored a compiler project with Wulf's CMU research team in 1970. The Production Quality Compiler-Compiler PQCC design would produce a Production Quality Compiler (PQC) from formal definitions of source language and the target. PQCC tried to extend the term compiler-compiler beyond the traditional meaning as a parser generator (e.g., Yacc) without much success. PQCC might more properly be referred to as a compiler generator.\n\nPQCC research into code generation process sought to build a truly automatic compiler-writing system. The effort discovered and designed the phase structure of the PQC. The BLISS-11 compiler provided the initial structure. The phases included analyses (front end), intermediate translation to virtual machine (middle end), and translation to the target (back end). TCOL was developed for the PQCC research to handle language specific constructs in the intermediate representation. Variations of TCOL supported various languages. The PQCC project investigated techniques of automated compiler construction. The design concepts proved useful in optimizing compilers and compilers for the object-oriented programming language Ada.\n\nThe Ada Stoneman Document formalized the program support environment (APSE) along with the kernel (KAPSE) and minimal (MAPSE). An Ada interpreter NYU/ED supported development and standardization efforts with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the International Standards Organization (ISO). Initial Ada compiler development by the U.S. Military Services included the compilers in a complete integrated design environment along the lines of the Stoneman Document. Army and Navy worked on the Ada Language System (ALS) project targeted to DEC/VAX architecture while the Air Force started on the Ada Integrated Environment (AIE) targeted to IBM 370 series. While the projects did not provide the desired results, they did contribute to the overal effort on Ada development.\n\nOther Ada compiler efforts got underway in Britain at the University of York and in Germany at the University of Karlsruhe. In the U. S., Verdix (later acquired by Rational) delivered the Verdix Ada Development System (VADS) to the Army. VADS provided a set of development tools including a compiler. Unix/VADS could be hosted on a variety of Unix platforms such as DEC Ultrix and the Sun 3/60 Solaris targeted to Motorola 68020 in an Army CECOM evaluation. There were soon many Ada compilers available that passed the Ada Validation tests. The Free Software Foundation GNU project developed the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) which provides a core capability to support multiple languages and targets. The Ada version GNAT is one of the most widely used Ada compilers. GNAT is free but there is also commercial support, for example, AdaCore, was founded in 1994 to provide commercial software solutions for Ada. GNAT Pro includes the GNU GCC based GNAT with a tool suite to provide an integrated development environment.\n\nHigh-level languages continued to drive compiler research and development. Focus areas included optimization and automatic code generation. Trends in programming languages and development environments influenced compiler technology. More compilers became included in language distributions (PERL, Java Development Kit) and as a component of an IDE (VADS, Eclipse, Ada Pro). The interrelationship and interdependence of technologies grew. The advent of web services promoted growth of web languages and scripting languages. Scripts trace back to the early days of Command Line Interfaces (CLI) where the user could enter commands to be executed by the system. User Shell concepts developed with languages to write shell programs. Early Windows designs offered a simple batch programming capability. The conventional transformation of these language used an interpreter. While not widely used, Bash and Batch compilers have been written. More recently sophisticated interpreted languages became part of the developers tool kit. Modern scripting languages include PHP, Python, Ruby and Lua. (Lua is widely used in game development.) All of these have interpreter and compiler support.\n\n\"When the field of compiling began in the late 50s, its focus was limited to the translation of high-level language programs into machine code ... The compiler field is increasingly intertwined with other disciplines including computer architecture, programming languages, formal methods, software engineering, and computer security.\" The \"Compiler Research: The Next 50 Years\" article noted the importance of object-oriented languages and Java. Security and parallel computing were cited among the future research targets.\n\nA compiler implements a formal transformation from a high-level source program to a low-level target program. Compiler design can define an end to end solution or tackle a defined subset that interfaces with other compilation tools e.g. preprocessors, assemblers, linkers. Design requirements include rigorously defined interfaces both internally between compiler components and externally between supporting toolsets.\n\nIn the early days, the approach taken to compiler design was directly affected by the complexity of the computer language to be processed, the experience of the person(s) designing it, and the resources available. Resource limitations led to the need to pass through the source code more than once.\n\nA compiler for a relatively simple language written by one person might be a single, monolithic piece of software. However, as the source language grows in complexity the design may be split into a number of interdependent phases. Separate phases provide design improvements that focus development on the functions in the compilation process.\n\nClassifying compilers by number of passes has its background in the hardware resource limitations of computers. Compiling involves performing lots of work and early computers did not have enough memory to contain one program that did all of this work. So compilers were split up into smaller programs which each made a pass over the source (or some representation of it) performing some of the required analysis and translations.\n\nThe ability to compile in a single pass has classically been seen as a benefit because it simplifies the job of writing a compiler and one-pass compilers generally perform compilations faster than multi-pass compilers. Thus, partly driven by the resource limitations of early systems, many early languages were specifically designed so that they could be compiled in a single pass (e.g., Pascal).\n\nIn some cases the design of a language feature may require a compiler to perform more than one pass over the source. For instance, consider a declaration appearing on line 20 of the source which affects the translation of a statement appearing on line 10. In this case, the first pass needs to gather information about declarations appearing after statements that they affect, with the actual translation happening during a subsequent pass.\n\nThe disadvantage of compiling in a single pass is that it is not possible to perform many of the sophisticated optimizations needed to generate high quality code. It can be difficult to count exactly how many passes an optimizing compiler makes. For instance, different phases of optimization may analyse one expression many times but only analyse another expression once.\n\nSplitting a compiler up into small programs is a technique used by researchers interested in producing provably correct compilers. Proving the correctness of a set of small programs often requires less effort than proving the correctness of a larger, single, equivalent program.\n\nRegardless of the exact number of phases in the compiler design, the phases can be assigned to one of three stages. The stages include a front end, a middle end, and a back end.\nBULLET::::- The \"front end\" verifies syntax and semantics according to a specific source language. For statically typed languages it performs type checking by collecting type information. If the input program is syntactically incorrect or has a type error, it generates error and/or warning messages, usually identifying the location in the source code where the problem was detected; in some cases the actual error may be (much) earlier in the program. Aspects of the front end include lexical analysis, syntax analysis, and semantic analysis. The front end transforms the input program into an intermediate representation (IR) for further processing by the middle end. This IR is usually a lower-level representation of the program with respect to the source code.\nBULLET::::- The \"middle end\" performs optimizations on the IR that are independent of the CPU architecture being targeted. This source code/machine code independence is intended to enable generic optimizations to be shared between versions of the compiler supporting different languages and target processors. Examples of middle end optimizations are removal of useless (dead code elimination) or unreachable code (reachability analysis), discovery and propagation of constant values (constant propagation), relocation of computation to a less frequently executed place (e.g., out of a loop), or specialization of computation based on the context. Eventually producing the \"optimized\" IR that is used by the back end.\nBULLET::::- The \"back end\" takes the optimized IR from the middle end. It may perform more analysis, transformations and optimizations that are specific for the target CPU architecture. The back end generates the target-dependent assembly code, performing register allocation in the process. The back end performs instruction scheduling, which re-orders instructions to keep parallel execution units busy by filling delay slots. Although most optimization problems are NP-hard, heuristic techniques for solving them are well-developed and currently implemented in production-quality compilers. Typically the output of a back end is machine code specialized for a particular processor and operating system.\n\nThis front/middle/back-end approach makes it possible to combine front ends for different languages with back ends for different CPUs while sharing the optimizations of the middle end. Practical examples of this approach are the GNU Compiler Collection, LLVM, and the Amsterdam Compiler Kit, which have multiple front-ends, shared optimizations and multiple back-ends.\n\nThe front end analyzes the source code to build an internal representation of the program, called the intermediate representation (IR). It also manages the symbol table, a data structure mapping each symbol in the source code to associated information such as location, type and scope.\n\nWhile the frontend can be a single monolithic function or program, as in a scannerless parser, it is more commonly implemented and analyzed as several phases, which may execute sequentially or concurrently. This method is favored due to its modularity and separation of concerns. Most commonly today, the frontend is broken into three phases: lexical analysis (also known as lexing), syntax analysis (also known as scanning or parsing), and semantic analysis. Lexing and parsing comprise the syntactic analysis (word syntax and phrase syntax, respectively), and in simple cases these modules (the lexer and parser) can be automatically generated from a grammar for the language, though in more complex cases these require manual modification. The lexical grammar and phrase grammar are usually context-free grammars, which simplifies analysis significantly, with context-sensitivity handled at the semantic analysis phase. The semantic analysis phase is generally more complex and written by hand, but can be partially or fully automated using attribute grammars. These phases themselves can be further broken down: lexing as scanning and evaluating, and parsing as building a concrete syntax tree (CST, parse tree) and then transforming it into an abstract syntax tree (AST, syntax tree). In some cases additional phases are used, notably \"line reconstruction\" and \"preprocessing,\" but these are rare.\n\nThe main phases of the front end include the following:\nBULLET::::- \"\" converts the input character sequence to a canonical form ready for the parser. Languages which strop their keywords or allow arbitrary spaces within identifiers require this phase. The top-down, recursive-descent, table-driven parsers used in the 1960s typically read the source one character at a time and did not require a separate tokenizing phase. Atlas Autocode and Imp (and some implementations of ALGOL and Coral 66) are examples of stropped languages whose compilers would have a \"Line Reconstruction\" phase.\nBULLET::::- \"Preprocessing\" supports macro substitution and conditional compilation. Typically the preprocessing phase occurs before syntactic or semantic analysis; e.g. in the case of C, the preprocessor manipulates lexical tokens rather than syntactic forms. However, some languages such as Scheme support macro substitutions based on syntactic forms.\nBULLET::::- \"Lexical analysis\" (also known as \"lexing\" or \"tokenization\") breaks the source code text into a sequence of small pieces called \"lexical tokens\". This phase can be divided into two stages: the \"scanning\", which segments the input text into syntactic units called \"lexemes\" and assign them a category; and the \"evaluating\", which converts lexemes into a processed value. A token is a pair consisting of a \"token name\" and an optional \"token value\". Common token categories may include identifiers, keywords, separators, operators, literals and comments, although the set of token categories varies in different programming languages. The lexeme syntax is typically a regular language, so a finite state automaton constructed from a regular expression can be used to recognize it. The software doing lexical analysis is called a lexical analyzer. This may not be a separate step—it can be combined with the parsing step in scannerless parsing, in which case parsing is done at the character level, not the token level.\nBULLET::::- \"Syntax analysis\" (also known as \"parsing\") involves parsing the token sequence to identify the syntactic structure of the program. This phase typically builds a parse tree, which replaces the linear sequence of tokens with a tree structure built according to the rules of a formal grammar which define the language's syntax. The parse tree is often analyzed, augmented, and transformed by later phases in the compiler.\nBULLET::::- \"Semantic analysis\" adds semantic information to the parse tree and builds the symbol table. This phase performs semantic checks such as type checking (checking for type errors), or object binding (associating variable and function references with their definitions), or definite assignment (requiring all local variables to be initialized before use), rejecting incorrect programs or issuing warnings. Semantic analysis usually requires a complete parse tree, meaning that this phase logically follows the parsing phase, and logically precedes the code generation phase, though it is often possible to fold multiple phases into one pass over the code in a compiler implementation.\n\nThe middle end, also known as \"optimizer,\" performs optimizations on the intermediate representation in order to improve the performance and the quality of the produced machine code. The middle end contains those optimizations that are independent of the CPU architecture being targeted.\n\nThe main phases of the middle end include the following:\nBULLET::::- Analysis: This is the gathering of program information from the intermediate representation derived from the input; data-flow analysis is used to build use-define chains, together with dependence analysis, alias analysis, pointer analysis, escape analysis, etc. Accurate analysis is the basis for any compiler optimization. The control flow graph of every compiled function and the call graph of the program are usually also built during the analysis phase.\nBULLET::::- Optimization: the intermediate language representation is transformed into functionally equivalent but faster (or smaller) forms. Popular optimizations are inline expansion, dead code elimination, constant propagation, loop transformation and even automatic parallelization.\nCompiler analysis is the prerequisite for any compiler optimization, and they tightly work together. For example, dependence analysis is crucial for loop transformation.\n\nThe scope of compiler analysis and optimizations vary greatly; their scope may range from operating within a basic block, to whole procedures, or even the whole program. There is a trade-off between the granularity of the optimizations and the cost of compilation. For example, peephole optimizations are fast to perform during compilation but only affect a small local fragment of the code, and can be performed independently of the context in which the code fragment appears. In contrast, interprocedural optimization requires more compilation time and memory space, but enable optimizations which are only possible by considering the behavior of multiple functions simultaneously.\n\nInterprocedural analysis and optimizations are common in modern commercial compilers from HP, IBM, SGI, Intel, Microsoft, and Sun Microsystems. The free software GCC was criticized for a long time for lacking powerful interprocedural optimizations, but it is changing in this respect. Another open source compiler with full analysis and optimization infrastructure is Open64, which is used by many organizations for research and commercial purposes.\n\nDue to the extra time and space needed for compiler analysis and optimizations, some compilers skip them by default. Users have to use compilation options to explicitly tell the compiler which optimizations should be enabled.\n\nThe back end is responsible for the CPU architecture specific optimizations and for code generation\".\"\n\nThe main phases of the back end include the following:\nBULLET::::- \"Machine dependent optimizations\": optimizations that depend on the details of the CPU architecture that the compiler targets. A prominent example is peephole optimizations, which rewrites short sequences of assembler instructions into more efficient instructions.\nBULLET::::- \"Code generation\": the transformed intermediate language is translated into the output language, usually the native machine language of the system. This involves resource and storage decisions, such as deciding which variables to fit into registers and memory and the selection and scheduling of appropriate machine instructions along with their associated addressing modes (see also Sethi-Ullman algorithm). Debug data may also need to be generated to facilitate debugging.\n\nCompiler correctness is the branch of software engineering that deals with trying to show that a compiler behaves according to its language specification. Techniques include developing the compiler using formal methods and using rigorous testing (often called compiler validation) on an existing compiler.\n\nHigher-level programming languages usually appear with a type of translation in mind: either designed as compiled language or interpreted language. However, in practice there is rarely anything about a language that \"requires\" it to be exclusively compiled or exclusively interpreted, although it is possible to design languages that rely on re-interpretation at run time. The categorization usually reflects the most popular or widespread implementations of a language — for instance, BASIC is sometimes called an interpreted language, and C a compiled one, despite the existence of BASIC compilers and C interpreters.\n\nInterpretation does not replace compilation completely. It only hides it from the user and makes it gradual. Even though an interpreter can itself be interpreted, a directly executed program is needed somewhere at the bottom of the stack (see machine language).\n\nFurther, compilers can contain interpreters for optimization reasons. For example, where an expression can be executed during compilation and the results inserted into the output program, then it prevents it having to be recalculated each time the program runs, which can greatly speed up the final program. Modern trends toward just-in-time compilation and bytecode interpretation at times blur the traditional categorizations of compilers and interpreters even further.\n\nSome language specifications spell out that implementations \"must\" include a compilation facility; for example, Common Lisp. However, there is nothing inherent in the definition of Common Lisp that stops it from being interpreted. Other languages have features that are very easy to implement in an interpreter, but make writing a compiler much harder; for example, APL, SNOBOL4, and many scripting languages allow programs to construct arbitrary source code at runtime with regular string operations, and then execute that code by passing it to a special evaluation function. To implement these features in a compiled language, programs must usually be shipped with a runtime library that includes a version of the compiler itself.\n\nOne classification of compilers is by the platform on which their generated code executes. This is known as the \"target platform.\"\n\nA \"native\" or \"hosted\" compiler is one whose output is intended to directly run on the same type of computer and operating system that the compiler itself runs on. The output of a cross compiler is designed to run on a different platform. Cross compilers are often used when developing software for embedded systems that are not intended to support a software development environment.\n\nThe output of a compiler that produces code for a virtual machine (VM) may or may not be executed on the same platform as the compiler that produced it. For this reason such compilers are not usually classified as native or cross compilers.\n\nThe lower level language that is the target of a compiler may itself be a high-level programming language. C, viewed by some as a sort of portable assembly language, is frequently the target language of such compilers. For example, Cfront, the original compiler for C++, used C as its target language. The C code generated by such a compiler is usually not intended to be readable and maintained by humans, so indent style and creating pretty C intermediate code are ignored. Some of the features of C that make it a good target language include the codice_1 directive, which can be generated by the compiler to support debugging of the original source, and the wide platform support available with C compilers.\n\nWhile a common compiler type outputs machine code, there are many other types:\nBULLET::::- Source-to-source compilers are a type of compiler that takes a high-level language as its input and outputs a high-level language. For example, an automatic parallelizing compiler will frequently take in a high-level language program as an input and then transform the code and annotate it with parallel code annotations (e.g. OpenMP) or language constructs (e.g. Fortran's codice_2 statements).\nBULLET::::- Bytecode compilers that compile to assembly language of a theoretical machine, like some Prolog implementations\nBULLET::::- This Prolog machine is also known as the Warren Abstract Machine (or WAM).\nBULLET::::- Bytecode compilers for Java, Python are also examples of this category.\nBULLET::::- Just-in-time compilers (JIT compiler) defer compilation until runtime. JIT compilers exist for many modern languages including Python, JavaScript, Smalltalk, Java, Microsoft .NET's Common Intermediate Language (CIL) and others. A JIT compiler generally runs inside an interpreter. When the interpreter detects that a code path is \"hot\", meaning it is executed frequently, the JIT compiler will be invoked and compile the \"hot\" code for increased performance.\nBULLET::::- For some languages, such as Java, applications are first compiled using a bytecode compiler and delivered in a machine-independent intermediate representation. A bytecode interpreter executes the bytecode, but the JIT compiler will translate the bytecode to machine code when increased performance is necessary.\nBULLET::::- Hardware compilers (also known as syntheses tools) are compilers whose output is a description of the hardware configuration instead of a sequence of instructions.\nBULLET::::- The output of these compilers target computer hardware at a very low level, for example a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) or structured application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC). Such compilers are said to be hardware compilers, because the source code they compile effectively controls the final configuration of the hardware and how it operates. The output of the compilation is only an interconnection of transistors or lookup tables.\nBULLET::::- An example of hardware compiler is XST, the Xilinx Synthesis Tool used for configuring FPGAs. Similar tools are available from Altera, Synplicity, Synopsys and other hardware vendors.\nBULLET::::- An \"assembler\" is a program that compiles human readable assembly language to machine code, the actual instructions executed by hardware. The inverse program that translates machine code to assembly language is called a disassembler.\nBULLET::::- A program that translates from a low-level language to a higher level one is a decompiler.\nBULLET::::- A program that translates between high-level languages is usually called a language translator, source-to-source compiler, language converter, or language rewriter. The last term is usually applied to translations that do not involve a change of language.\nBULLET::::- A program that translates into an object code format that is not supported on the compilation machine is called a cross compiler and is commonly used to prepare code for embedded applications.\nBULLET::::- A program that rewrites object code back into the same type of object code while applying optimisations and transformations is a binary recompiler.\n\nBULLET::::- Abstract interpretation\nBULLET::::- Bottom-up parsing\nBULLET::::- Compile and go loader\nBULLET::::- Compile farm\nBULLET::::- List of compilers\nBULLET::::- Metacompilation\nBULLET::::- Compiler textbook references A collection of references to mainstream Compiler Construction Textbooks\n\nBULLET::::- Incremental Approach to Compiler Constructiona PDF tutorial\nBULLET::::- Compile-Howto\nBULLET::::- explaining the key conceptual difference between compilers and interpreters\nBULLET::::- Let's Build a Compiler, by Jack Crenshaw\nBULLET::::- Difference Between Compiler and Interpreter\n"}
{"id": "5742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5742", "title": "Castrato", "text": "Castrato\n\nA castrato (Italian, plural: \"castrati\") is a type of classical male singing voice equivalent to that of a soprano, mezzo-soprano, or contralto. The voice is produced by castration of the singer before puberty, or it occurs in one who, due to an endocrinological condition, never reaches sexual maturity.\n\nCastration before puberty (or in its early stages) prevents a boy's larynx from being transformed by the normal physiological events of puberty. As a result, the vocal range of prepubescence (shared by both sexes) is largely retained, and the voice develops into adulthood in a unique way. Prepubescent castration for this purpose diminished greatly in the late 18th century and was made illegal in the Papal states, the last to prohibit them, in 1870.\n\nAs the castrato's body grew, his lack of testosterone meant that his epiphyses (bone-joints) did not harden in the normal manner. Thus the limbs of the castrati often grew unusually long, as did the bones of their ribs. This, combined with intensive training, gave them unrivalled lung-power and breath capacity. Operating through small, child-sized vocal cords, their voices were also extraordinarily flexible, and quite different from the equivalent adult female voice. Their vocal range was higher than that of the uncastrated adult male. Listening to the only surviving recordings of a castrato (see below), one can hear that the lower part of the voice sounds like a \"super-high\" tenor, with a more falsetto-like upper register above that.\n\nCastrati were rarely referred to as such: in the 18th century, the euphemism \"musico\" (pl \"musici\") was much more generally used, although it usually carried derogatory implications; another synonym was \"evirato,\" literally meaning \"emasculated\". Eunuch is a more general term since, historically, many eunuchs were castrated after puberty and thus the castration had no impact on their voices.\n\nCastration as a means of subjugation, enslavement or other punishment has a very long history, dating back to ancient Sumer. In a Western context, eunuch singers are known to have existed from the early Byzantine Empire. In Constantinople around 400 AD, the empress Aelia Eudoxia had a eunuch choir-master, Brison, who may have established the use of castrati in Byzantine choirs, though whether Brison himself was a singer and whether he had colleagues who were eunuch singers is not certain. By the 9th century, eunuch singers were well-known (not least in the choir of Hagia Sophia) and remained so until the sack of Constantinople by the Western forces of the Fourth Crusade in 1204. Their fate from then until their reappearance in Italy more than three hundred years later is not clear. It seems likely that the Spanish tradition of soprano falsettists may have hidden castrati. Much of Spain was under Muslim rulers during the Middle Ages, and castration had a history going back to the ancient Near East. Stereotypically, eunuchs served as harem guards, but they were also valued as high-level political appointees since they could not start a dynasty which would threaten the ruler.\n\nCastrati first appeared in Italy in the mid-16th century, though at first the terms describing them were not always clear. The phrase \"soprano maschio\" (male soprano), which could also mean falsettist, occurs in the \"Due Dialoghi della Musica\" (Two dialogues upon music) of Luigi Dentice, an Oratorian priest, published in Rome in 1553. On 9 November 1555 Cardinal Ippolito II d'Este (famed as the builder of the Villa d'Este at Tivoli), wrote to Guglielmo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua (1538–1587), that he has heard that the Duke was interested in his \"cantoretti\" (little singers) and offered to send him two, so that he could choose one for his own service. This is a rare term but probably does equate to \"castrato\". The Cardinal's nephew, Alfonso II d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, was another early enthusiast, enquiring about castrati in 1556. There were certainly castrati in the Sistine Chapel choir in 1558, although not described as such: on 27 April of that year, Hernando Bustamante, a Spaniard from Palencia, was admitted (the first castrati so termed who joined the Sistine choir were Pietro Paolo Folignato and Girolamo Rossini, admitted in 1599). Surprisingly, considering the later French distaste for castrati they certainly existed in France at this time also, being known of in Paris, Orléans, Picardy and Normandy, though they were not abundant: the King of France himself had difficulty in obtaining them. By 1574, there were castrati in the Ducal court chapel at Munich, where the Kapellmeister (music director) was the famous Orlando di Lasso. In 1589, by the bull \"Cum pro nostro pastorali munere\", Pope Sixtus V re-organised the choir of St Peter's, Rome specifically to include castrati. Thus the castrati came to supplant both boys (whose voices broke after only a few years) and falsettists (whose voices were weaker and less reliable) from the top line in such choirs. Women were banned by the Pauline dictum \"mulieres in ecclesiis taceant\" (\"let women keep silent in the churches\"; see I Corinthians, ch. 14, v. 34).\n\nAlthough the castrato (or musico) predates opera, there is some evidence that castrati had parts in the earliest operas. In the first performance of Monteverdi's \"Orfeo\" (1607), for example, they played subsidiary roles, including Speranza and (possibly) that of Euridice. Although female roles were performed by castrati in some of the papal states, this was increasingly rare; by 1680, they had supplanted \"normal\" male voices in lead roles, and retained their position as \"primo uomo\" for about a hundred years; an Italian opera not featuring at least one renowned castrato in a lead part would be doomed to fail. Because of the popularity of Italian opera throughout 18th-century Europe (except France), singers such as Ferri, Farinelli, Senesino and Pacchierotti became the first operatic superstars, earning enormous fees and hysterical public adulation. The strictly hierarchical organisation of \"opera seria\" favoured their high voices as symbols of heroic virtue, though they were frequently mocked for their strange appearance and bad acting. In his 1755 \"Reflections upon theatrical expression in tragedy\", Roger Pickering wrote:\nFarinelli drew every Body to the Haymarket. What a Pipe! What Modulation! What Extasy to the Ear! But, Heavens! What Clumsiness! What Stupidity! What Offence to the Eye! Reader, if of the City, thou mayest probably have seen in the Fields of Islington or Mile-End or, If thou art in the environs of St James', thou must have observed in the Park with what Ease and Agility a cow, heavy with calf, has rose up at the command of the Milk-woman's foot: thus from the mossy bank sprang the DIVINE FARINELLI.\nThe means by which future singers were prepared could lead to premature death. To prevent the child from experiencing the intense pain of castration, many were inadvertently administered lethal doses of opium or some other narcotic, or were killed by overlong compression of the carotid artery in the neck (intended to render them unconscious during the castration procedure).\n\nDuring the 18th century itself, the music historian Charles Burney was sent from pillar to post in search of places where \"the operation\" was carried out:\nI enquired throughout Italy at what place boys were chiefly qualified for singing by castration, but could get no certain intelligence. I was told at Milan that it was at Venice; at Venice that it was at Bologna; but at Bologna the fact was denied, and I was referred to Florence; from Florence to Rome, and from Rome I was sent to Naples ... it is said that there are shops in Naples with this inscription: 'QUI SI CASTRANO RAGAZZI' (\"Here boys are castrated\"); but I was utterly unable to see or hear of any such shops during my residence in that city.\n\nThe training of the boys was rigorous. The regimen of one singing school in Rome (c. 1700) consisted of one hour of singing difficult and awkward pieces, one hour practising trills, one hour practising ornamented passaggi, one hour of singing exercises in their teacher's presence and in front of a mirror so as to avoid unnecessary movement of the body or facial grimaces, and one hour of literary study; all this, moreover, before lunch. After, half an hour would be devoted to musical theory, another to writing counterpoint, an hour copying down the same from dictation, and another hour of literary study. During the remainder of the day, the young castrati had to find time to practice their harpsichord playing, and to compose vocal music, either sacred or secular depending on their inclination. This demanding schedule meant that, if sufficiently talented, they were able to make a debut in their mid-teens with a perfect technique and a voice of a flexibility and power no woman or ordinary male singer could match.\nIn the 1720s and 1730s, at the height of the craze for these voices, it has been estimated that upwards of 4,000 boys were castrated annually in the service of art. Many came from poor homes and were castrated by their parents in the hope that their child might be successful and lift them from poverty (this was the case with Senesino). There are, though, records of some young boys asking to be operated on to preserve their voices (e.g. Caffarelli, who was from a wealthy family: his grandmother gave him the income from two vineyards to pay for his studies). Caffarelli was also typical of many castrati in being famous for tantrums on and off-stage, and for amorous adventures with noble ladies. Some, as described by Casanova, preferred gentlemen (noble or otherwise). Only a small percentage of boys castrated to preserve their voices had successful careers on the operatic stage; the better \"also-rans\" sang in cathedral or church choirs, but because of their marked appearance and the ban on their marrying, there was little room for them in society outside a musical context.\n\nThe castrati came in for a great amount of scurrilous and unkind abuse, and as their fame increased, so did the hatred of them. They were often castigated as malign creatures who lured men into homosexuality. There were homosexual castrati, as Casanova's accounts of 18th-century Italy bear witness. He mentions meeting an abbé whom he took for a girl in disguise, only later discovering that \"she\" was a famous castrato. In Rome in 1762 he attended a performance at which the prima donna was a castrato, \"the favourite pathic\" of Cardinal Borghese, who dined every evening with his protector. From his behaviour on stage \"it was obvious that he hoped to inspire the love of those who liked him as a man, and probably would not have done so as a woman\".\n\nBy the late 18th century, changes in operatic taste and social attitudes spelled the end for castrati. They lingered on past the end of the \"ancien régime\" (which their style of opera parallels), and two of their number, Pacchierotti and Crescentini, even entranced the iconoclastic Napoleon. The last great operatic castrato was Giovanni Battista Velluti (1781–1861), who performed the last operatic castrato role ever written: Armando in \"Il crociato in Egitto\" by Meyerbeer (Venice, 1824). Soon after this they were replaced definitively as the first men of the operatic stage by a new breed of heroic tenor, as first incarnated by the Frenchman Gilbert-Louis Duprez, the earliest so-called \"king of the high Cs\". His successors have included such singers as Enrico Tamberlik, Jean de Reszke, Francesco Tamagno, Enrico Caruso, Giovanni Martinelli, Beniamino Gigli, Jussi Björling, Franco Corelli and Luciano Pavarotti, among others.\n\nAfter the unification of Italy in 1861, castration for musical purposes was officially made illegal (the new Italian state had adopted a French legal code which expressly forbade the practice). In 1878, Pope Leo XIII prohibited the hiring of new castrati by the church: only in the Sistine Chapel and in other papal basilicas in Rome did a few castrati linger. A group photo of the Sistine Choir taken in 1898 shows that by then only six remained (plus the \"Direttore Perpetuo\", the fine soprano castrato Domenico Mustafà), and in 1902 a ruling was extracted from Pope Leo that no further castrati should be admitted. The official end to the castrati came on St. Cecilia's Day, 22 November 1903, when the new pope, Pius X, issued his \"motu proprio\", \"Tra le Sollecitudini\" ('Amongst the Cares'), which contained this instruction: \"Whenever ... it is desirable to employ the high voices of sopranos and contraltos, these parts must be taken by boys, according to the most ancient usage of the Church.\"\n\nThe last Sistine castrato to survive was Alessandro Moreschi, the only castrato to have made solo recordings. While an interesting historical record, these discs of his give us only a glimpse of the castrato voice – although he had been renowned as \"The Angel of Rome\" at the beginning of his career, some would say he was past his prime when the recordings were made in 1902 and 1904 and he never attempted to sing opera. The recording technology of the day was not of modern high quality. He retired officially in March 1913, and died in 1922.\n\nThe Catholic Church's involvement in the castrato phenomenon has long been controversial, and there have recently been calls for it to issue an official apology for its role. As early as 1748, Pope Benedict XIV tried to ban castrati from churches, but such was their popularity at the time that he realised that doing so might result in a drastic decline in church attendance.\n\nThe rumours of another castrato sequestered in the Vatican for the personal delectation of the Pontiff until as recently as 1959 have been proven false. The singer in question was a pupil of Moreschi's, Domenico Mancini, such a successful imitator of his teacher's voice that even Lorenzo Perosi, Direttore Perpetuo of the Sistine Choir from 1898 to 1956 and a strenuous opponent of the practice of castrato singers, thought he was a castrato. Mancini was in fact a moderately skilful falsettist and professional double bass player.\n\nSo-called \"natural\" or \"endocrinological castrati\" are born with hormonal anomalies, such as Klinefelter's syndrome and Kallmann's syndrome, or have undergone unusual physical or medical events during their early lives that reproduce the vocal effects of castration without being castrated. Basically, a male can retain his child voice if it never changes during puberty. The retained voice can be the treble voice shared by both sexes in childhood and is the same as boy soprano voice. But as evidence shows, many castratos, such as Senesino and Caffarelli, were actually altos (mezzo-soprano) – not sopranos.\n\nJimmy Scott, Robert Crowe and Radu Marian are examples of this type of high male voice. Michael Maniaci is somewhat different, in that he has no hormonal or other anomalies, but for some unknown reason, his voice did not \"break\" in the usual manner, leaving him still able to sing in the soprano register. Other uncastrated male adults sing soprano, generally using some form of falsetto but in a much higher range than most countertenors. Examples are Aris Christofellis, Jörg Waschinski, and Ghio Nannini.\n\nHowever, it is believed the castrati possessed more of a tenorial chest register (the aria \"Navigante che non spera\" in Leonardo Vinci's opera \"Il Medo\", written for Farinelli, requires notes down to C, 131 Hz). Similar low-voiced singing can be heard from the jazz vocalist Jimmy Scott, whose range matches approximately that used by female blues singers. High-pitched singer Jordan Smith has demonstrated having more of a tenorial chest register.\n\nActor Chris Colfer has soprano voice. Colfer has stated in interviews that when his voice began to change at puberty he sang in a high voice \"constantly\" in an effort to retain his range. Actor and singer Alex Newell has soprano range. Voice actor Walter Tetley may or may not have been a \"castrato\"; Bill Scott, a co-worker of Tetley's during their later work in television, once half-jokingly quipped that Tetley's mother \"had him fixed\" to protect the child star's voice-acting career. Tetley never personally divulged the exact reason for his condition, which left him with the voice of a preteen boy for his entire adult life.\n\nTurkish popular singer Cem Adrian has the ability to sing from bass to soprano, his vocal folds having been reported to be three times the average length.\n\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Bacchini (\"Bacchino\")\nBULLET::::- Loreto Vittori (1604–1670)\nBULLET::::- Baldassare Ferri (1610–1680)\nBULLET::::- Atto Melani (1626–1714)\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Panici (1634–1702)\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Grossi (\"Siface\") (1653–1697)\nBULLET::::- Pier Francesco Tosi (1654–1732)\nBULLET::::- Francesco Pistocchi (\"Pistocchino\") (1659–1726)\nBULLET::::- Matteo Sassano (\"Mateuccio\") (1667–1737)\nBULLET::::- Nicolo Grimaldi (\"Nicolini\") (1673–1732)\nBULLET::::- Antonio Bernacchi (1685–1756)\nBULLET::::- Francesco Bernardi (\"Senesino\") (1686–1758)\nBULLET::::- Valentino Urbani (\"Valentini\") (1690–1722)\nBULLET::::- Giacinto Fontana (\"Farfallino\") (1692–1739)\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Carestini (\"Cusanino\") (c. 1704–c. 1760)\nBULLET::::- Carlo Broschi (\"Farinelli\") (1705–1782)\nBULLET::::- Domenico Annibali (\"Domenichino\") (1705–1779)\nBULLET::::- Gaetano Majorano (\"Caffarelli\") (1710–1783)\nBULLET::::- Felice Salimbeni (1712–1752)\nBULLET::::- Giaocchino Conti (\"Gizziello\") (1714–1761)\nBULLET::::- Mariano Nicolini (\"Marianino\") (c. 1715–1758)\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Manzuoli (1720–1782)\nBULLET::::- Gaetano Guadagni (1725–1792)\nBULLET::::- Antonio Albanese (1729 or 1731–1800)\nBULLET::::- Silvio Giorgetti (1733–c. 1802)\nBULLET::::- Giusto Fernando Tenducci (ca. 1736–1790)\nBULLET::::- Giuseppe Millico (\"Il Muscovita\") (1737–1802)\nBULLET::::- Gasparo Pacchierotti (1740–1821)\nBULLET::::- Venanzio Rauzzini (1746–1810)\nBULLET::::- Luigi Marchesi (\"Marchesini\") (1754–1829)\nBULLET::::- Vincenzo dal Prato (1756–1828)\nBULLET::::- Girolamo Crescentini (1762–1848)\nBULLET::::- Giovanni Battista \"Giambattista\" Velluti (1781–1861)\nBULLET::::- Domenico Mustafà (1829–1912)\nBULLET::::- Domenico Salvatori (1855–1909)\nBULLET::::- Alessandro Moreschi (1858–1922), the only castrato to be recorded\n\nBULLET::::- \"Cry to Heaven\"\nBULLET::::- \"Farinelli\" (film)\nBULLET::::- \"Sarrasine\"\nBULLET::::- Eunuch\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\nBULLET::::- Bibliography\nBULLET::::- Bontempi, G: \"Historia Musica\" (Perugia, 1695)\nBULLET::::- Casanova, G: \"Memoirs\" (tr Machen, A., with additional tr by Symons, A; London, 1894)\nBULLET::::- Clapton, N: \"Moreschi, the Last Castrato\" (London, 2004)\nBULLET::::- Cont, A: \"Evirati cantori e mondo nobiliare: un contributo allo studio delle dinamiche sociali dell'Italia barocca\", in \"Atti della Accademia Roveretana degli Agiati\", serie IX, 7, A (2017), pp. 165–188\nBULLET::::- Freitas, R: \"The Eroticism of Emasculation: Confronting the Baroque Body of the Castrato\" (\"Journal of Musicology\", vol 20, no 2, Spring 2003, pp 196–249)\nBULLET::::- Haböck, F: \"Die Kastraten und ihre Gesangskunst \"(Berlin, 1927)\nBULLET::::- Heriot, A: \"The Castrati in Opera\" (London, 1956)\nBULLET::::- Howard, P: \"The Modern Castrato: Gaetano Guadagni and the coming of a new operatic age\", (New York, 2014)\nBULLET::::- Moran, N: \"Byzantine castrati\" (\"Plainsong and medieval Music\", vol 11, no 2, Cambridge, 2002, pp 99–112)\nBULLET::::- Pleasants, H: \"The Castrati\" (\"Stereo Review\", July 1966)\nBULLET::::- Scholes, P (ed): \"Dr Burney's Musical Tours in Europe\" (London, 1959)\nBULLET::::- Sherr, R: \"Guglielmo Gonzaga and the Castrati\" (\"Renaissance Quarterly\", vol 33, no 1, Spring 1980, pp 33–56)\nBULLET::::- Rosselli, J: \"The Castrati as a Professional Group and a Social Phenomenon, 1550–1850\", (\"Acta Musicologica\", LX, Basel, 1988)\nBULLET::::- Tougher, S (ed): \"Eunuchs in Antiquity and Beyond\" (London, 2002)\n\nBULLET::::- All you would like to know about Castrati\nBULLET::::- Castrados por amor al arte\nBULLET::::- Singing Voice: Castrati\nBULLET::::- Recordings:\nBULLET::::- Antonio Maria Bononcini's \"Vorrei pupille belle\", sung by Radu Marian\nBULLET::::- 1904 Recording of Alessandro Moreschi singing Bach/Gounod \"Ave Maria\"\nBULLET::::- Javier Medina Avila, including an audio sample (Riccardo Broschi: \"Ombra fedele anch'io\")\n"}
{"id": "5743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5743", "title": "Counting-out game", "text": "Counting-out game\n\nA counting-out game is a simple game intended to select a person to be \"it\", often for the purpose of playing another game. These games usually require no materials, and are played with spoken words (counting rhymes) or hand gestures. The historian Henry Carrington Bolton suggested in his 1888 book \"Counting Out Rhymes of Children\" that the custom of counting out originated in the \"superstitious practice of divination by lot.\"\n\nMany such games involve one person pointing at each participant in a circle of players while reciting a rhyme. A new person is pointed at as each word is said. The player who is selected at the conclusion of the rhyme is \"it\" or \"out\". In an alternate version, the circle of players may each put two feet in and at the conclusion of the rhyme, that player removes one foot and the rhyme starts over with the next person. In this case, the first player that has both feet removed is \"it\" or \"out\". In theory a counting rhyme is determined entirely by the starting selection (and would result in a modulo operation), but in practice they are often accepted as random selections because the number of words has not been calculated beforehand, so the result is unknown until someone is selected.\n\nA variant of counting-out game, known as the Josephus problem, represents a famous theoretical problem in mathematics and computer science.\n\nSeveral simple games can be played to select one person from a group, either as a straightforward winner, or as someone who is eliminated. Rock, Paper, Scissors, Odd or Even and Blue Shoe require no materials and are played using hand gestures, although with the former it is possible for a player to win or lose through skill rather than luck. Coin flipping and drawing straws are fair methods of randomly determining a player. Bizz Buzz is a spoken word game where if a player slips up and speaks a word out of sequence, they are eliminated.\n\nBULLET::::- Eeny, meeny, miny, moe\nBULLET::::- 10 Little Indians\nBULLET::::- Five Little Ducks\nBULLET::::- Ip dip\nBULLET::::- One, Two, Three, Four, Five\nBULLET::::- Tinker, Tailor (traditionally played in England)\nBULLET::::- Yan Tan Tethera\nBULLET::::- Inky Pinky Ponky\n\nA scene in the Marx Brothers movie \"Duck Soup\" plays on the fact that counting-out games are not really random. Faced with selecting someone to go on a dangerous mission, the character Chicolini (Chico Marx) chants:\n\nonly to stop as he realizes he is about to select himself. He then says, \"I did it wrong. Wait, wait, I start here\", and repeats the chant—with the same result. After that, he says, \"That's no good too. I got it!\" and reduces the chant to\n\nAnd with this version he finally manages to \"randomly\" select someone else.\n\nBULLET::::- Repetitive song\n\nBULLET::::- Videos of \"choosing songs\" a.k.a. Counting rhymes\nBULLET::::- Selection Rhymes at the BBC's project \"h2g2\"\nBULLET::::- Counting rhymes and other songs for counting in traditional music from county of Nice, France.\n"}
{"id": "5749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5749", "title": "Key size", "text": "Key size\n\nIn cryptography, key size or key length is the number of bits in a key used by a cryptographic algorithm (such as a cipher).\n\nKey length defines the upper-bound on an algorithm's security (i.e. a logarithmic measure of the fastest known attack against an algorithm, relative to the key length), since the security of all algorithms can be violated by brute-force attacks. Ideally, key length would coincide with the lower-bound on an algorithm's security. Indeed, most symmetric-key algorithms are designed to have security equal to their key length. However, after design, a new attack might be discovered. For instance, Triple DES was designed to have a 168 bit key, but an attack of complexity 2 is now known (i.e. Triple DES has 112 bits of security). Nevertheless, as long as the relation between key length and security is sufficient for a particular application, then it doesn't matter if key length and security coincide. This is important for asymmetric-key algorithms, because no such algorithm is known to satisfy this property; elliptic curve cryptography comes the closest with an effective security of roughly half its key length.\n\nKeys are used to control the operation of a cipher so that only the correct key can convert encrypted text (ciphertext) to plaintext. Many ciphers are actually based on publicly known algorithms or are open source and so it is only the difficulty of obtaining the key that determines security of the system, provided that there is no analytic attack (i.e. a \"structural weakness\" in the algorithms or protocols used), and assuming that the key is not otherwise available (such as via theft, extortion, or compromise of computer systems). The widely accepted notion that the security of the system should depend on the key alone has been explicitly formulated by Auguste Kerckhoffs (in the 1880s) and Claude Shannon (in the 1940s); the statements are known as Kerckhoffs' principle and Shannon's Maxim respectively.\n\nA key should therefore be large enough that a brute-force attack (possible against any encryption algorithm) is infeasible – i.e. would take too long to execute. Shannon's work on information theory showed that to achieve so called \"perfect secrecy\", the key length must be at least as large as the message and only used once (this algorithm is called the One-time pad). In light of this, and the practical difficulty of managing such long keys, modern cryptographic practice has discarded the notion of perfect secrecy as a requirement for encryption, and instead focuses on \"computational security\", under which the computational requirements of breaking an encrypted text must be infeasible for an attacker.\n\nEncryption systems are often grouped into families. Common families include symmetric systems (e.g. AES) and asymmetric systems (e.g. RSA); they may alternatively be grouped according to the central algorithm used (e.g. elliptic curve cryptography).\n\nAs each of these is of a different level of cryptographic complexity, it is usual to have different key sizes for the same level of security, depending upon the algorithm used. For example, the security available with a 1024-bit key using asymmetric RSA is considered approximately equal in security to an 80-bit key in a symmetric algorithm.\n\nThe actual degree of security achieved over time varies, as more computational power and more powerful mathematical analytic methods become available. For this reason cryptologists tend to look at indicators that an algorithm or key length shows signs of potential vulnerability, to move to longer key sizes or more difficult algorithms. For example, , a 1039 bit integer was factored with the special number field sieve using 400 computers over 11 months. The factored number was of a special form; the special number field sieve cannot be used on RSA keys. The computation is roughly equivalent to breaking a 700 bit RSA key. However, this might be an advance warning that 1024 bit RSA used in secure online commerce should be deprecated, since they may become breakable in the near future. Cryptography professor Arjen Lenstra observed that \"Last time, it took nine years for us to generalize from a special to a nonspecial, hard-to-factor number\" and when asked whether 1024-bit RSA keys are dead, said: \"The answer to that question is an unqualified yes.\"\n\nThe 2015 Logjam attack revealed additional dangers in using Diffie-Helman key exchange when only one or a few common 1024-bit or smaller prime moduli are in use. This common practice allows large amounts of communications to be compromised at the expense of attacking a small number of primes.\n\nEven if a symmetric cipher is currently unbreakable by exploiting structural weaknesses in its algorithm, it is possible to run through the entire space of keys in what is known as a \"brute-force attack\". Since longer symmetric keys require exponentially more work to brute force search, a sufficiently long symmetric key makes this line of attack impractical.\n\nWith a key of length \"n\" bits, there are 2 possible keys. This number grows very rapidly as \"n\" increases. The large number of operations (2) required to try all possible 128-bit keys is widely considered out of reach for conventional digital computing techniques for the foreseeable future. However, experts anticipate alternative computing technologies that may have processing power superior to current computer technology. If a suitably sized quantum computer capable of running Grover's algorithm reliably becomes available, it would reduce a 128-bit key down to 64-bit security, roughly a DES equivalent. This is one of the reasons why AES supports a 256-bit key length. See the discussion on the relationship between key lengths and quantum computing attacks at the bottom of this page for more information.\n\nUS Government export policy has long restricted the \"strength\" of cryptography that can be sent out of the country. For many years the limit was 40 bits. Today, a key length of 40 bits offers little protection against even a casual attacker with a single PC, a predictable and inevitable consequence of governmental restrictions limiting key length. In response, by the year 2000, most of the major US restrictions on the use of strong encryption were relaxed. However, not all regulations have been removed, and encryption registration with the U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security is still required to export \"mass market encryption commodities, software and components with encryption exceeding 64 bits\" ().\n\nIBM's Lucifer cipher was selected in 1974 as the base for what would become the Data Encryption Standard. Lucifer's key length was reduced from 128 bits to 56 bits, which the NSA and NIST argued was sufficient. The NSA has major computing resources and a large budget; some cryptographers including Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman complained that this made the cipher so weak that NSA computers would be able to break a DES key in a day through brute force parallel computing. The NSA disputed this, claiming brute forcing DES would take them something like 91 years. However, by the late 90s, it became clear that DES could be cracked in a few days' time-frame with custom-built hardware such as could be purchased by a large corporation or government. The book \"Cracking DES\" (O'Reilly and Associates) tells of the successful attempt in 1998 to break 56-bit DES by a brute-force attack mounted by a cyber civil rights group with limited resources; see EFF DES cracker. Even before that demonstration, 56 bits was considered insufficient length for symmetric algorithm keys; DES has been replaced in many applications by Triple DES, which has 112 bits of security when used 168-bit keys (triple key). In 2002, Distributed.net and its volunteers broke a 64-bit RC5 key after several years effort, using about seventy thousand (mostly home) computers.\n\nThe Advanced Encryption Standard published in 2001 uses key sizes of 128 bits, 192 or 256 bits. Many observers consider 128 bits sufficient for the foreseeable future for symmetric algorithms of AES's quality until quantum computers become available. However, as of 2015, the U.S. National Security Agency has issued guidance that it plans to switch to quantum computing resistant algorithms and now requires 256-bit AES keys for data classified up to Top Secret.\n\nIn 2003, the U.S. National Institute for Standards and Technology, NIST proposed phasing out 80-bit keys by 2015. At 2005, 80-bit keys were allowed only until 2010.\n\nSince 2015, NIST guidance says that \"the use of keys that provide less than 112 bits of security strength for key agreement is now disallowed.\" NIST approved symmetric encryption algorithms include three-key Triple DES, and AES. Approvals for two-key Triple DES and Skipjack were withdrawn in 2015; the NSA's Skipjack algorithm used in its Fortezza program employs 80-bit keys.\n\nThe effectiveness of public key cryptosystems depends on the intractability (computational and theoretical) of certain mathematical problems such as integer factorization. These problems are time consuming to solve, but usually faster than trying all possible keys by brute force. Thus, asymmetric algorithm keys must be longer for equivalent resistance to attack than symmetric algorithm keys. As of 2002, an asymmetric key length of 1024 bits was generally considered by cryptology experts to be the minimum necessary for the RSA encryption algorithm.\n\nThe Finite Field Diffie-Hellman algorithm has roughly the same key strength as RSA for the same key sizes. The work factor for breaking Diffie-Hellman is based on the discrete logarithm problem, which is related to the integer factorization problem on which RSA's strength is based. Thus, a 3072-bit Diffie-Hellman key has about the same strength as a 3072-bit RSA key.\n\nOne of the asymmetric algorithm types, elliptic curve cryptography, or ECC, appears to be secure with shorter keys than other asymmetric key algorithms require. NIST guidelines state that ECC keys should be twice the length of equivalent strength symmetric key algorithms. So, for example, a 224-bit ECC key would have roughly the same strength as a 112-bit symmetric key. These estimates assume no major breakthroughs in solving the underlying mathematical problems that ECC is based on. A message encrypted with an elliptic key algorithm using a 109-bit long key has been broken by brute force.\n\nThe NSA previously specified that \"Elliptic Curve Public Key Cryptography using the 256-bit prime modulus elliptic curve as specified in FIPS-186-2 and SHA-256 are appropriate for protecting classified information up to the SECRET level. Use of the 384-bit prime modulus elliptic curve and SHA-384 are necessary for the protection of TOP SECRET information.\" In 2015 the NSA announced that it plans to transition from Elliptic Curve Cryptography to new algorithms that are resistant to attack by future quantum computers. In the interim it recommends the larger 384-bit curve for all classified information.\n\nThe two best known quantum computing attacks are based on Shor's algorithm and Grover's algorithm. Of the two, Shor's offers the greater risk to current security systems.\n\nDerivatives of Shor's algorithm are widely conjectured to be effective against all mainstream public-key algorithms including RSA, Diffie-Hellman and elliptic curve cryptography. According to Professor Gilles Brassard, an expert in quantum computing: \"The time needed to factor an RSA integer is the same order as the time needed to use that same integer as modulus for a single RSA encryption. In other words, it takes no more time to break RSA on a quantum computer (up to a multiplicative constant) than to use it legitimately on a classical computer.\" The general consensus is that these public key algorithms are insecure at any key size if sufficiently large quantum computers capable of running Shor's algorithm become available. The implication of this attack is that all data encrypted using current standards based security systems such as the ubiquitous SSL used to protect e-commerce and Internet banking and SSH used to protect access to sensitive computing systems is at risk. Encrypted data protected using public-key algorithms can be archived and may be broken at a later time.\n\nMainstream symmetric ciphers (such as AES or Twofish) and collision resistant hash functions (such as SHA) are widely conjectured to offer greater security against known quantum computing attacks. They are widely thought most vulnerable to Grover's algorithm. Bennett, Bernstein, Brassard, and Vazirani proved in 1996 that a brute-force key search on a quantum computer cannot be faster than roughly 2 invocations of the underlying cryptographic algorithm, compared with roughly 2 in the classical case. Thus in the presence of large quantum computers an \"n\"-bit key can provide at least \"n\"/2 bits of security. Quantum brute force is easily defeated by doubling the key length, which has little extra computational cost in ordinary use. This implies that at least a 256-bit symmetric key is required to achieve 128-bit security rating against a quantum computer. As mentioned above, the NSA announced in 2015 that it plans to transition to quantum-resistant algorithms.\n\nAccording to NSA \"A sufficiently large quantum computer, if built, would be capable of undermining all widely-deployed public key algorithms used for key establishment and digital signatures. ... It is generally accepted that quantum computing techniques are much less effective against symmetric algorithms than against current widely used public key algorithms. While public key cryptography requires changes in the fundamental design to protect against a potential future quantum computer, symmetric key algorithms are believed to be secure provided a sufficiently large key size is used. ... In the longer term, NSA looks to NIST to identify a broadly accepted, standardized suite of commercial public key algorithms that are not vulnerable to quantum attacks.\n\n, the NSA's Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite includes:\n\n! Algorithm\n! Usage\nDigital Signature\n\nBULLET::::- Key stretching\n\nBULLET::::- General\nBULLET::::- \"Recommendation for Key Management — Part 1: general,\" NIST Special Publication 800-57. March, 2007\nBULLET::::- Blaze, Matt; Diffie, Whitfield; Rivest, Ronald L.; et al. \"Minimal Key Lengths for Symmetric Ciphers to Provide Adequate Commercial Security\". January, 1996\nBULLET::::- Arjen K. Lenstra, Eric R. Verheul: Selecting Cryptographic Key Sizes. J. Cryptology 14(4): 255-293 (2001) — Citeseer link\n\nBULLET::::- www.keylength.com: An online keylength calculator\nBULLET::::- Articles discussing the implications of quantum computing\nBULLET::::- NIST cryptographic toolkit\nBULLET::::- Burt Kaliski: TWIRL and RSA key sizes (May 2003)\n"}
