{"id": "9646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9646", "title": "Erlang (programming language)", "text": "Erlang (programming language)\n\nErlang ( ) is a general-purpose, concurrent, functional programming language, and a garbage-collected runtime system. The term Erlang is used interchangeably with Erlang/OTP, or Open Telecom Platform (OTP), which consists of the Erlang runtime system, several ready-to-use components (OTP) mainly written in Erlang, and a set of design principles for Erlang programs.\n\nThe Erlang runtime system is designed for systems with these traits:\n\nBULLET::::- Distributed\nBULLET::::- Fault-tolerant\nBULLET::::- Soft real-time\nBULLET::::- Highly available, non-stop applications\nBULLET::::- Hot swapping, where code can be changed without stopping a system.\n\nThe Erlang programming language has immutable data, pattern matching, and functional programming. The sequential subset of the Erlang language supports eager evaluation, single assignment, and dynamic typing.\n\nIt was originally proprietary software within Ericsson, developed by Joe Armstrong, Robert Virding, and Mike Williams in 1986, but was released as free and open-source software in 1998. Erlang/OTP is supported and maintained by the Open Telecom Platform (OTP) product unit at Ericsson.\n\nThe name \"Erlang\", attributed to Bjarne Däcker, has been presumed by those working on the telephony switches (for whom the language was designed) to be a reference to Danish mathematician and engineer Agner Krarup Erlang and a syllabic abbreviation of \"Ericsson Language\". Erlang was designed with the aim of improving the development of telephony applications. The initial version of Erlang was implemented in Prolog and was influenced by the programming language PLEX used in earlier Ericsson exchanges. By 1988 Erlang had proven that it was suitable for prototyping telephone exchanges, but the Prolog interpreter was far too slow. One group within Ericsson estimated that it would need to be 40 times faster to be suitable for production use. In 1992, work began on the BEAM virtual machine (VM) which compiles Erlang to C using a mix of natively compiled code and threaded code to strike a balance between performance and disk space. According to Armstrong, the language went from lab product to real applications following the collapse of the next-generation AXE telephone exchange named in 1995. As a result, Erlang was chosen for the next asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) exchange \"AXD\".\n\nIn 1998 Ericsson announced the AXD301 switch, containing over a million lines of Erlang and reported to achieve a high availability of nine \"9\"s. Shortly thereafter, Ericsson Radio Systems banned the in-house use of Erlang for new products, citing a preference for non-proprietary languages. The ban caused Armstrong and others to leave Ericsson. The implementation was open-sourced at the end of the year. Ericsson eventually lifted the ban; it re-hired Armstrong in 2004.\n\nIn 2006, native symmetric multiprocessing support was added to the runtime system and VM.\n\nThe Erlang view of the world, as Joe Armstrong, co-inventor of Erlang, summarized in his PhD thesis:\n\nBULLET::::- Everything is a process.\nBULLET::::- Processes are strongly isolated.\nBULLET::::- Process creation and destruction is a lightweight operation.\nBULLET::::- Message passing is the only way for processes to interact.\nBULLET::::- Processes have unique names.\nBULLET::::- If you know the name of a process you can send it a message.\nBULLET::::- Processes share no resources.\nBULLET::::- Error handling is non-local.\nBULLET::::- Processes do what they are supposed to do or fail.\n\nJoe Armstrong remarked in an interview with Rackspace in 2013: “If Java is 'write once, run anywhere', then Erlang is 'write once, run forever'.”\n\nIn 2014, Ericsson reported Erlang was being used in its support nodes, and in GPRS, 3G and LTE mobile networks worldwide and also by Nortel and T-Mobile.\n\nAs Tim Bray, director of Web Technologies at Sun Microsystems, expressed in his keynote at O'Reilly Open Source Convention (OSCON) in July 2008:\nErlang is the programming language used to code WhatsApp.\n\nA factorial algorithm implemented in Erlang:\nA tail recursive algorithm to calculate the n'th Fibonacci number.\n\nHere's the same coding without the explanatory comments\n\nQuicksort in Erlang, using list comprehension:\n\nThe above example recursively invokes the function codice_1 until nothing remains to be sorted. The expression codice_2 is a list comprehension, meaning \"Construct a list of elements codice_3 such that codice_3 is a member of codice_5, and codice_3 is less than codice_7.\" codice_8 is the list concatenation operator.\n\nA comparison function can be used for more complicated structures for the sake of readability.\n\nThe following code would sort lists according to length:\nHere again, a codice_7 is taken from the first parameter given to codice_10 and the rest of codice_11 is named codice_5. Note that the expression\n\nis no different in form from\n\n(in the previous example) except for the use of a comparison function in the last part, saying \"Construct a list of elements codice_13 such that codice_13 is a member of codice_5, and codice_16 is true\", with codice_16 being defined earlier as\n\nNote also that the anonymous function is named codice_16 in the parameter list of the second definition of codice_1 so that it can be referenced by that name within that function. It is not named in the first definition of codice_1, which deals with the base case of an empty list and thus has no need of this function, let alone a name for it.\n\nErlang has eight primitive data types:\n\nBULLET::::- Integers: Integers are written as sequences of decimal digits, for example, 12, 12375 and -23427 are integers. Integer arithmetic is exact and only limited by available memory on the machine. (This is called arbitrary-precision arithmetic.)\nBULLET::::- Atoms: Atoms are used within a program to denote distinguished values. They are written as strings of consecutive alphanumeric characters, the first character being lowercase. Atoms can contain any character if they are enclosed within single quotes and an escape convention exists which allows any character to be used within an atom. Atoms are never garbage collected and should be used with caution, especially if using dynamic atom generation.\nBULLET::::- Floats: Floating point numbers use the IEEE 754 64-bit representation.\nBULLET::::- References: References are globally unique symbols whose only property is that they can be compared for equality. They are created by evaluating the Erlang primitive codice_21.\nBULLET::::- Binaries: A binary is a sequence of bytes. Binaries provide a space-efficient way of storing binary data. Erlang primitives exist for composing and decomposing binaries and for efficient input/output of binaries.\nBULLET::::- Pids: Pid is short for \"process identifier\"a Pid is created by the Erlang primitive codice_22 Pids are references to Erlang processes.\nBULLET::::- Ports: Ports are used to communicate with the external world. Ports are created with the built-in function codice_23. Messages can be sent to and received from ports, but these messages must obey the so-called \"port protocol.\"\nBULLET::::- Funs: Funs are function closures. Funs are created by expressions of the form: codice_24.\n\nAnd three compound data types:\n\nBULLET::::- Tuples: Tuples are containers for a fixed number of Erlang data types. The syntax codice_25 denotes a tuple whose arguments are codice_26 The arguments can be primitive data types or compound data types. Any element of a tuple can be accessed in constant time.\nBULLET::::- Lists: Lists are containers for a variable number of Erlang data types. The syntax codice_27 denotes a list whose first element is codice_28, and whose remaining elements are the list codice_29. The syntax codice_30 denotes an empty list. The syntax codice_31 is short for codice_32. The first element of a list can be accessed in constant time. The first element of a list is called the \"head\" of the list. The remainder of a list when its head has been removed is called the \"tail\" of the list.\nBULLET::::- Maps: Maps contain a variable number of key-value associations. The syntax iscodice_33.\n\nTwo forms of syntactic sugar are provided:\n\nBULLET::::- Strings: Strings are written as doubly quoted lists of characters. This is syntactic sugar for a list of the integer Unicode code points for the characters in the string. Thus, for example, the string \"cat\" is shorthand for codice_34.\nBULLET::::- Records: Records provide a convenient way for associating a tag with each of the elements in a tuple. This allows one to refer to an element of a tuple by name and not by position. A pre-compiler takes the record definition and replaces it with the appropriate tuple reference.\n\nErlang has no method to define classes, although there are external libraries available.\n\nIn most other programming languages, software crashes have always been (and often still are) considered highly undesirable situations that must be avoided at all costs. Consequently, elaborate exception handling mechanisms exist to trap these situations and then mitigate their effects. It should be noted however that this design philosophy exists because many of the foundational principles of software design were defined at a time when computers were single processor machines. Under these conditions, software crashes were indeed fatal. Given this basic constraint, it was perfectly natural therefore to develop programming styles in which a large proportion of the code was dedicated to detecting and then handling error situations. This in turn, led directly to the still widely popular coding style known as defensive programming.\n\nHowever, the designers of Erlang realised that in spite of their undesirable effects, software crashes are much like death and taxes - quite unavoidable. Therefore, rather than treating a crash as a crisis situation that temporarily suspends all normal work until a solution is found, they reasoned it would make far greater sense to treat a crash in exactly the same manner as any other normal runtime event. Consequently, when an Erlang process crashes, this situation is reported as just another type of message arriving in a process' mail box.\n\nThis realisation led to Erlang's designers building a language with the following fundamental features:\n\nBULLET::::- Erlang has no concept of global memory; therefore relative to each other, all processes are isolated execution environments\nBULLET::::- Erlang processes can:\nBULLET::::- be spawned very cheaply\nBULLET::::- only communicate using message passing\nBULLET::::- monitor each other. This allows processes to be arranged in hierarchies known as 'supervisor trees'\nBULLET::::- A process should perform its task or fail\nBULLET::::- Process failure is reported simply as a message\n\nThe 'Let It Crash' style of coding is therefore the practical consequence of working in a language that operates on these principles.\n\nA typical Erlang application is written in the form of a supervisor tree. This architecture is based on a hierarchy of processes in which the top level process is known as a \"supervisor\". The supervisor then spawns multiple child processes that act either as workers or more, lower level supervisors. Such hierarchies can exist to arbitrary depths and have proven to provide a highly scalable and fault-tolerant environment within which application functionality can be implemented.\n\nWithin a supervisor tree, all supervisor processes are responsible for managing the lifecycle of their child processes, and this includes handling situations in which those child processes crash. Any process can become a supervisor by first spawning a child process, then calling codice_35 on that process. If the monitored process then crashes, the supervisor will receive a message containing a tuple whose first member is the atom codice_36. The supervisor is responsible firstly for listening for such messages and secondly, for taking the appropriate action to correct the error condition.\n\nIn addition to this, the 'Let It Crash' philosophy results in a style of coding that contains very little (if any) defensive code. Consequently, applications written in Erlang tend to be much smaller than the equivalent functionality written in a language that does not discourage defensive programming.\n\nIMPORTANT<br>\nIn the case of productive Erlang applications, writing your own monitoring code is strongly discouraged because there are so many subtle and unforeseen edge cases. Within the Erlang/OTP environment, the codice_37 behaviour is provided that both handles these edge cases, and provides a simple API.\n\nErlang's main strength is support for concurrency. It has a small but powerful set of primitives to create processes and communicate among them. Erlang is conceptually similar to the language occam, though it recasts the ideas of communicating sequential processes (CSP) in a functional framework and uses asynchronous message passing. Processes are the primary means to structure an Erlang application. They are neither operating system processes nor threads, but lightweight processes that are scheduled by BEAM. Like operating system processes (but unlike operating system threads), they share no state with each other. The estimated minimal overhead for each is 300 words. Thus, many processes can be created without degrading performance. In 2005, a benchmark with 20 million processes was successfully performed with 64-bit Erlang on a machine with 16 GB random-access memory (RAM; total 800 bytes/process). Erlang has supported symmetric multiprocessing since release R11B of May 2006.\n\nWhile threads need external library support in most languages, Erlang provides language-level features to create and manage processes with the goal of simplifying concurrent programming. Though all concurrency is explicit in Erlang, processes communicate using message passing instead of shared variables, which removes the need for explicit locks (a locking scheme is still used internally by the VM).\n\nInter-process communication works via a shared-nothing asynchronous message passing system: every process has a \"mailbox\", a queue of messages that have been sent by other processes and not yet consumed. A process uses the codice_38 primitive to retrieve messages that match desired patterns. A message-handling routine tests messages in turn against each pattern, until one of them matches. When the message is consumed and removed from the mailbox the process resumes execution. A message may comprise any Erlang structure, including primitives (integers, floats, characters, atoms), tuples, lists, and functions.\n\nThe code example below shows the built-in support for distributed processes:\n\nAs the example shows, processes may be created on remote nodes, and communication with them is transparent in the sense that communication with remote processes works exactly as communication with local processes.\n\nConcurrency supports the primary method of error-handling in Erlang. When a process crashes, it neatly exits and sends a message to the controlling process which can then take action, such as for instance starting a new process that takes over the old process's task.\n\nThe official reference implementation of Erlang uses BEAM. BEAM is included in the official distribution of Erlang, called Erlang/OTP. BEAM executes bytecode which is converted to threaded code at load time. It also includes a native code compiler on most platforms, developed by the High Performance Erlang Project (HiPE) at Uppsala University. Since October 2001 the HiPE system is fully integrated in Ericsson's Open Source Erlang/OTP system. It also supports interpreting, directly from source code via abstract syntax tree, via script as of R11B-5 release of Erlang.\n\nErlang supports language-level Dynamic Software Updating. To implement this, code is loaded and managed as \"module\" units; the module is a compilation unit. The system can keep two versions of a module in memory at the same time, and processes can concurrently run code from each. The versions are referred to as the \"new\" and the \"old\" version. A process will not move into the new version until it makes an external call to its module.\n\nAn example of the mechanism of hot code loading:\n\nFor the second version, we add the possibility to reset the count to zero.\n\nOnly when receiving a message consisting of the atom codice_39 will the loop execute an external call to codeswitch/1 (codice_40 is a preprocessor macro for the current module). If there is a new version of the \"counter\" module in memory, then its codeswitch/1 function will be called. The practice of having a specific entry-point into a new version allows the programmer to transform state to what is needed in the newer version. In the example, the state is kept as an integer.\n\nIn practice, systems are built up using design principles from the Open Telecom Platform, which leads to more code upgradable designs. Successful hot code loading is exacting. Code must be written with care to make use of Erlang's facilities.\n\nIn 1998, Ericsson released Erlang as free and open-source software to ensure its independence from a single vendor and to increase awareness of the language. Erlang, together with libraries and the real-time distributed database Mnesia, forms the OTP collection of libraries. Ericsson and a few other companies support Erlang commercially.\n\nSince the open source release, Erlang has been used by several firms worldwide, including Nortel and T-Mobile. Although Erlang was designed to fill a niche and has remained an obscure language for most of its existence, its popularity is growing due to demand for concurrent services.\nErlang has found some use in fielding massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) servers.\n\nBULLET::::- Elixir – a functional, concurrent, general-purpose programming language that runs on BEAM\nBULLET::::- Lisp Flavored Erlang (LFE) – a Lisp-based programming language that runs on BEAM\nBULLET::::- Mix (build tool)\nBULLET::::- Phoenix (web framework)\n\nBULLET::::- Early history of Erlang by Bjarne Däcker\n"}
{"id": "9647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9647", "title": "Euphoria (programming language)", "text": "Euphoria (programming language)\n\nEuphoria is a programming language originally created by Robert Craig of Rapid Deployment Software in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Initially developed (though not publicly released) on the Atari ST, the first commercial release was for the 16-bit DOS platform and was proprietary. In 2006, with the release of version 3, Euphoria became open-source software. The openEuphoria Group continues to administer and develop the project. In December 2010, the openEuphoria Group released version 4 of openEuphoria along with a new identity and mascot for the project. OpenEuphoria is currently available for Windows, Linux, macOS and three flavors of *BSD.\n\nEuphoria is a general-purpose high-level imperative-procedural interpreted language. A translator generates C source code and the GNU compiler collection (GCC) and Open Watcom compilers are supported. Alternatively, Euphoria programs may be bound with the interpreter to create stand-alone executables. A number of graphical user interface (GUI) libraries are supported including Win32lib and wrappers for wxWidgets, GTK+ and IUP. Euphoria has a simple built-in database and wrappers for a variety of other databases.\n\nThe Euphoria language is a general purpose procedural language that focuses on simplicity, legibility, rapid development and performance via several means.\nBULLET::::- \"Simplicity\" – It uses just four built-in data types (see below) and implements automatic garbage collection.\nBULLET::::- \"Legibility\" – The syntax favors simple English keywords over the use of punctuation to delineate constructs.\nBULLET::::- \"Rapid development\" – An interpreter encourages prototyping and incremental development.\nBULLET::::- \"Performance\" – An efficient reference-counting garbage collector correctly handles cyclic references.\n\nDeveloped as a personal project to invent a programming language from scratch, Euphoria was created by Robert Craig on an Atari Mega-ST. Many design ideas for the language came from Craig's Master's thesis in computer science at the University of Toronto. Craig's thesis was heavily influenced by the work of John Backus on functional programming (FP) languages.\n\nCraig ported his original Atari implementation to the 16-bit DOS platform and Euphoria was first released, version 1.0, in July 1993 under a proprietary licence. The original Atari implementation is described by Craig as \"primitive\" and has not been publicly released. Euphoria continued to be developed and released by Craig via his company Rapid Deployment Software (RDS) and website rapideuphoria.com. In October 2006 RDS released version 3 of Euphoria and announced that henceforth Euphoria would be freely distributed under an open-source software licence.\n\nRDS continued to develop Euphoria, culminating with the release of version 3.1.1 in August, 2007. Subsequently, RDS ceased unilateral development of Euphoria and the openEuphoria Group took over ongoing development. The openEuphoria Group released version 4 in December, 2010 along with a new logo and mascot for the openEuphoria project.\n\nVersion 3.1.1 remains an important milestone release, being the last version of Euphoria which supports the DOS platform.\n\nEuphoria is an acronym for \"End-User Programming with Hierarchical Objects for Robust Interpreted Applications\" although there is some suspicion that this is a backronym.\n\nThe Euphoria interpreter was originally written in C. With the release of version 2.5 in November 2004 the Euphoria interpreter was split into two parts: a front-end parser, and a back-end interpreter. The front-end is now written in Euphoria (and used with the Euphoria-to-C translator and the Binder). The main back-end and run time library are written in C.\n\nEuphoria was conceived and developed with the following design goals and features:\n\nBULLET::::- Ease of learning and with consistent high-level constructs (more so than, for example, the BASIC language)\nBULLET::::- Implementation of flat-form 32-bit memory to avoid complex memory management and size-addressing limits\nBULLET::::- Debugging support and run-time error-handling\nBULLET::::- Subscript and type checking\nBULLET::::- Loose and strict variable typing\nBULLET::::- Programming via objects as types (user-defined or otherwise)\nBULLET::::- Interpreted, with automatic memory management and garbage collection\nBULLET::::- Heterogeneous collection types (sequences)\nBULLET::::- DOS graphics library (Euphoria language versions up to and including 3.1.1)\nBULLET::::- Debugger\nBULLET::::- Integrated database system\nBULLET::::- Low-level memory handling\nBULLET::::- Straightforward wrapping of (or access to) C libraries\n\nBULLET::::- Interpreter\nBULLET::::- C translator (E2C) for standalone executables or dynamic linking\nBULLET::::- Bytecode compiler and interpreter (shrouder)\nBULLET::::- The Binder binds the Euphoria source code to the interpreter to create an executable.\nBULLET::::- A read–eval–print loop (REPL) version is on the openEuphoria roadmap.\n\nEuphoria is designed to readily facilitate handling of dynamic sets of data of varying types and is particularly useful for string and image processing. Euphoria has been used in artificial intelligence experiments, the study of mathematics, for teaching programming, and to implement fonts involving thousands of characters. A large part of the Euphoria interpreter is written in Euphoria.\n\nEuphoria has two basic data types:\n\nEuphoria has two additional data types predefined:\n\nThere is no character string data type. Strings are represented by a \"sequence\" of \"integer\" values. However, because literal strings are so commonly used in programming, Euphoria interprets double-quote enclosed characters as a sequence of integers. Thus\nis seen as if the coder had written:\nwhich is the same as:\n\n puts(1, \"Hello, World!\\n\")\n\nProgram comments start with a double hyphen codice_1 and go through the end of line.\n\nThe following code looks for an old item in a group of items. If found, it removes it by concatenating all the elements before it with all the elements after it. Note that the first element in a sequence has the index one [1] and that $ refers to the length (i.e., total number of elements) of the sequence.\n\nThe following modification to the above example replaces an old item with a new item. As the variables \"old\" and \"new\" have been defined as objects, they could be \"atoms\" or \"sequences\". Type checking is not needed as the function will work with any sequence of data of any type and needs no external libraries.\n\nFurthermore, no pointers are involved and subscripts are automatically checked. Thus the function cannot access memory out-of-bounds. There is no need to allocate or deallocate memory explicitly and no chance of a memory leak.\n\nThe line\n\nshows some of the \"sequence\" handling facilities. A \"sequence\" may contain a set of any types, and this can be sliced (to take a subset of the data in a \"sequence\") and concatenated in expressions with no need for special functions.\n\nArguments to routines are always passed by value; there is no pass-by-reference facility. However, parameters are allowed to be modified \"locally\" (i.e., within the callee) which is implemented very efficiently as sequences have automatic copy-on-write semantics. In other words, when you pass a sequence to a routine, initially only a reference to it is passed, but at the point the routine modifies this sequence parameter the sequence is copied and the routine updates only a copy of the original.\n\nBULLET::::- Lua\nBULLET::::- Phix\nBULLET::::- Python\nBULLET::::- REBOL\nBULLET::::- Ruby\n\nFree downloads of Euphoria for the various platforms, packages, Windows IDE, Windows API libraries, a cross-platform GTK3 wrapper for Linux and Windows, graphics libraries (DOS, OpenGL, etc.).\nBULLET::::- OpenEuphoria\nBULLET::::- RapidEuphoria\nBULLET::::- openEuphoria Wiki\nBULLET::::- openEuphoria Forum\nBULLET::::- OpenEuphoria · GitHub Development repositories.\nBULLET::::- Using Euphoria\n"}
{"id": "9649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9649", "title": "Energy", "text": "Energy\n\nIn physics, energy is the quantitative property that must be transferred to an object in order to perform work on, or to heat, the object. Energy is a conserved quantity; the law of conservation of energy states that energy can be converted in form, but not created or destroyed. The SI unit of energy is the joule, which is the energy transferred to an object by the work of moving it a distance of 1 metre against a force of 1 newton.\n\nCommon forms of energy include the kinetic energy of a moving object, the potential energy stored by an object's position in a force field (gravitational, electric or magnetic), the elastic energy stored by stretching solid objects, the chemical energy released when a fuel burns, the radiant energy carried by light, and the thermal energy due to an object's temperature.\n\nMass and energy are closely related. Due to mass–energy equivalence, any object that has mass when stationary (called rest mass) also has an equivalent amount of energy whose form is called rest energy, and any additional energy (of any form) acquired by the object above that rest energy will increase the object's total mass just as it increases its total energy. For example, after heating an object, its increase in energy could be measured as a small increase in mass, with a sensitive enough scale.\n\nLiving organisms require energy to stay alive, such as the energy humans get from food. Human civilization requires energy to function, which it gets from energy resources such as fossil fuels, nuclear fuel, or renewable energy. The processes of Earth's climate and ecosystem are driven by the radiant energy Earth receives from the sun and the geothermal energy contained within the earth.\n\nThe total energy of a system can be subdivided and classified into potential energy, kinetic energy, or combinations of the two in various ways. Kinetic energy is determined by the movement of an object – or the composite motion of the components of an object – and potential energy reflects the potential of an object to have motion, and generally is a function of the position of an object within a field or may be stored in the field itself.\n\nWhile these two categories are sufficient to describe all forms of energy, it is often convenient to refer to particular combinations of potential and kinetic energy as its own form. For example, macroscopic mechanical energy is the sum of translational and rotational kinetic and potential energy in a system neglects the kinetic energy due to temperature, and nuclear energy which combines utilize potentials from the nuclear force and the weak force), among others.\n\nThe word \"energy\" derives from the , which possibly appears for the first time in the work of Aristotle in the 4th century BC. In contrast to the modern definition, energeia was a qualitative philosophical concept, broad enough to include ideas such as happiness and pleasure.\n\nIn the late 17th century, Gottfried Leibniz proposed the idea of the , or living force, which defined as the product of the mass of an object and its velocity squared; he believed that total \"vis viva\" was conserved. To account for slowing due to friction, Leibniz theorized that thermal energy consisted of the random motion of the constituent parts of matter, although it would be more than a century until this was generally accepted. The modern analog of this property, kinetic energy, differs from \"vis viva\" only by a factor of two.\n\nIn 1807, Thomas Young was possibly the first to use the term \"energy\" instead of \"vis viva\", in its modern sense. Gustave-Gaspard Coriolis described \"kinetic energy\" in 1829 in its modern sense, and in 1853, William Rankine coined the term \"potential energy\". The law of conservation of energy was also first postulated in the early 19th century, and applies to any isolated system. It was argued for some years whether heat was a physical substance, dubbed the caloric, or merely a physical quantity, such as momentum. In 1845 James Prescott Joule discovered the link between mechanical work and the generation of heat.\n\nThese developments led to the theory of conservation of energy, formalized largely by William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) as the field of thermodynamics. Thermodynamics aided the rapid development of explanations of chemical processes by Rudolf Clausius, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Walther Nernst. It also led to a mathematical formulation of the concept of entropy by Clausius and to the introduction of laws of radiant energy by Jožef Stefan. According to Noether's theorem, the conservation of energy is a consequence of the fact that the laws of physics do not change over time. Thus, since 1918, theorists have understood that the law of conservation of energy is the direct mathematical consequence of the translational symmetry of the quantity conjugate to energy, namely time.\n\nIn 1843, Joule independently discovered the mechanical equivalent in a series of experiments. The most famous of them used the \"Joule apparatus\": a descending weight, attached to a string, caused rotation of a paddle immersed in water, practically insulated from heat transfer. It showed that the gravitational potential energy lost by the weight in descending was equal to the internal energy gained by the water through friction with the paddle.\n\nIn the International System of Units (SI), the unit of energy is the joule, named after James Prescott Joule. It is a derived unit. It is equal to the energy expended (or work done) in applying a force of one newton through a distance of one metre. However energy is also expressed in many other units not part of the SI, such as ergs, calories, British Thermal Units, kilowatt-hours and kilocalories, which require a conversion factor when expressed in SI units.\n\nThe SI unit of energy rate (energy per unit time) is the watt, which is a joule per second. Thus, one joule is one watt-second, and 3600 joules equal one watt-hour. The CGS energy unit is the erg and the imperial and US customary unit is the foot pound. Other energy units such as the electronvolt, food calorie or thermodynamic kcal (based on the temperature change of water in a heating process), and BTU are used in specific areas of science and commerce.\n\nIn classical mechanics, energy is a conceptually and mathematically useful property, as it is a conserved quantity. Several formulations of mechanics have been developed using energy as a core concept.\n\nWork, a function of energy, is force times distance.\n\nThis says that the work (formula_2) is equal to the line integral of the force F along a path \"C\"; for details see the mechanical work article. Work and thus energy is frame dependent. For example, consider a ball being hit by a bat. In the center-of-mass reference frame, the bat does no work on the ball. But, in the reference frame of the person swinging the bat, considerable work is done on the ball.\n\nThe total energy of a system is sometimes called the Hamiltonian, after William Rowan Hamilton. The classical equations of motion can be written in terms of the Hamiltonian, even for highly complex or abstract systems. These classical equations have remarkably direct analogs in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics.\n\nAnother energy-related concept is called the Lagrangian, after Joseph-Louis Lagrange. This formalism is as fundamental as the Hamiltonian, and both can be used to derive the equations of motion or be derived from them. It was invented in the context of classical mechanics, but is generally useful in modern physics. The Lagrangian is defined as the kinetic energy \"minus\" the potential energy. Usually, the Lagrange formalism is mathematically more convenient than the Hamiltonian for non-conservative systems (such as systems with friction).\n\nNoether's theorem (1918) states that any differentiable symmetry of the action of a physical system has a corresponding conservation law. Noether's theorem has become a fundamental tool of modern theoretical physics and the calculus of variations. A generalisation of the seminal formulations on constants of motion in Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics (1788 and 1833, respectively), it does not apply to systems that cannot be modeled with a Lagrangian; for example, dissipative systems with continuous symmetries need not have a corresponding conservation law.\n\nIn the context of chemistry, energy is an attribute of a substance as a consequence of its atomic, molecular or aggregate structure. Since a chemical transformation is accompanied by a change in one or more of these kinds of structure, it is invariably accompanied by an increase or decrease of energy of the substances involved. Some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants. A reaction is said to be exergonic if the final state is lower on the energy scale than the initial state; in the case of endergonic reactions the situation is the reverse. Chemical reactions are invariably not possible unless the reactants surmount an energy barrier known as the activation energy. The \"speed\" of a chemical reaction (at given temperature \"T\") is related to the activation energy \"E\", by the Boltzmann's population factor ethat is the probability of molecule to have energy greater than or equal to \"E\" at the given temperature \"T\". This exponential dependence of a reaction rate on temperature is known as the Arrhenius equation.The activation energy necessary for a chemical reaction can be in the form of thermal energy.\n\nIn biology, energy is an attribute of all biological systems from the biosphere to the smallest living organism. Within an organism it is responsible for growth and development of a biological cell or an organelle of a biological organism. Energy is thus often said to be stored by cells in the structures of molecules of substances such as carbohydrates (including sugars), lipids, and proteins, which release energy when reacted with oxygen in respiration. In human terms, the human equivalent (H-e) (Human energy conversion) indicates, for a given amount of energy expenditure, the relative quantity of energy needed for human metabolism, assuming an average human energy expenditure of 12,500 kJ per day and a basal metabolic rate of 80 watts. For example, if our bodies run (on average) at 80 watts, then a light bulb running at 100 watts is running at 1.25 human equivalents (100 ÷ 80) i.e. 1.25 H-e. For a difficult task of only a few seconds' duration, a person can put out thousands of watts, many times the 746 watts in one official horsepower. For tasks lasting a few minutes, a fit human can generate perhaps 1,000 watts. For an activity that must be sustained for an hour, output drops to around 300; for an activity kept up all day, 150 watts is about the maximum. The human equivalent assists understanding of energy flows in physical and biological systems by expressing energy units in human terms: it provides a \"feel\" for the use of a given amount of energy.\n\nSunlight's radiant energy is also captured by plants as \"chemical potential energy\" in photosynthesis, when carbon dioxide and water (two low-energy compounds) are converted into the high-energy compounds carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Plants also release oxygen during photosynthesis, which is utilized by living organisms as an electron acceptor, to release the energy of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Release of the energy stored during photosynthesis as heat or light may be triggered suddenly by a spark, in a forest fire, or it may be made available more slowly for animal or human metabolism, when these molecules are ingested, and catabolism is triggered by enzyme action.\n\nAny living organism relies on an external source of energy – radiant energy from the Sun in the case of green plants, chemical energy in some form in the case of animals – to be able to grow and reproduce. The daily 1500–2000 Calories (6–8 MJ) recommended for a human adult are taken as a combination of oxygen and food molecules, the latter mostly carbohydrates and fats, of which glucose (CHO) and stearin (CHO) are convenient examples. The food molecules are oxidised to carbon dioxide and water in the mitochondria\nand some of the energy is used to convert ADP into ATP.\nThe rest of the chemical energy in O and the carbohydrate or fat is converted into heat: the ATP is used as a sort of \"energy currency\", and some of the chemical energy it contains is used for other metabolism when ATP reacts with OH groups and eventually splits into ADP and phosphate (at each stage of a metabolic pathway, some chemical energy is converted into heat). Only a tiny fraction of the original chemical energy is used for work:\n\nIt would appear that living organisms are remarkably inefficient (in the physical sense) in their use of the energy they receive (chemical or radiant energy), and it is true that most real machines manage higher efficiencies. In growing organisms the energy that is converted to heat serves a vital purpose, as it allows the organism tissue to be highly ordered with regard to the molecules it is built from. The second law of thermodynamics states that energy (and matter) tends to become more evenly spread out across the universe: to concentrate energy (or matter) in one specific place, it is necessary to spread out a greater amount of energy (as heat) across the remainder of the universe (\"the surroundings\"). Simpler organisms can achieve higher energy efficiencies than more complex ones, but the complex organisms can occupy ecological niches that are not available to their simpler brethren. The conversion of a portion of the chemical energy to heat at each step in a metabolic pathway is the physical reason behind the pyramid of biomass observed in ecology: to take just the first step in the food chain, of the estimated 124.7 Pg/a of carbon that is fixed by photosynthesis, 64.3 Pg/a (52%) are used for the metabolism of green plants, i.e. reconverted into carbon dioxide and heat.\n\nIn geology, continental drift, mountain ranges, volcanoes, and earthquakes are phenomena that can be explained in terms of energy transformations in the Earth's interior, while meteorological phenomena like wind, rain, hail, snow, lightning, tornadoes and hurricanes are all a result of energy transformations brought about by solar energy on the atmosphere of the planet Earth.\n\nSunlight may be stored as gravitational potential energy after it strikes the Earth, as (for example) water evaporates from oceans and is deposited upon mountains (where, after being released at a hydroelectric dam, it can be used to drive turbines or generators to produce electricity). Sunlight also drives many weather phenomena, save those generated by volcanic events. An example of a solar-mediated weather event is a hurricane, which occurs when large unstable areas of warm ocean, heated over months, give up some of their thermal energy suddenly to power a few days of violent air movement.\n\nIn a slower process, radioactive decay of atoms in the core of the Earth releases heat. This thermal energy drives plate tectonics and may lift mountains, via orogenesis. This slow lifting represents a kind of gravitational potential energy storage of the thermal energy, which may be later released to active kinetic energy in landslides, after a triggering event. Earthquakes also release stored elastic potential energy in rocks, a store that has been produced ultimately from the same radioactive heat sources. Thus, according to present understanding, familiar events such as landslides and earthquakes release energy that has been stored as potential energy in the Earth's gravitational field or elastic strain (mechanical potential energy) in rocks. Prior to this, they represent release of energy that has been stored in heavy atoms since the collapse of long-destroyed supernova stars created these atoms.\n\nIn cosmology and astronomy the phenomena of stars, nova, supernova, quasars and gamma-ray bursts are the universe's highest-output energy transformations of matter. All stellar phenomena (including solar activity) are driven by various kinds of energy transformations. Energy in such transformations is either from gravitational collapse of matter (usually molecular hydrogen) into various classes of astronomical objects (stars, black holes, etc.), or from nuclear fusion (of lighter elements, primarily hydrogen). The nuclear fusion of hydrogen in the Sun also releases another store of potential energy which was created at the time of the Big Bang. At that time, according to theory, space expanded and the universe cooled too rapidly for hydrogen to completely fuse into heavier elements. This meant that hydrogen represents a store of potential energy that can be released by fusion. Such a fusion process is triggered by heat and pressure generated from gravitational collapse of hydrogen clouds when they produce stars, and some of the fusion energy is then transformed into sunlight.\n\nIn quantum mechanics, energy is defined in terms of the energy operator\nas a time derivative of the wave function. The Schrödinger equation equates the energy operator to the full energy of a particle or a system. Its results can be considered as a definition of measurement of energy in quantum mechanics. The Schrödinger equation describes the space- and time-dependence of a slowly changing (non-relativistic) wave function of quantum systems. The solution of this equation for a bound system is discrete (a set of permitted states, each characterized by an energy level) which results in the concept of quanta. In the solution of the Schrödinger equation for any oscillator (vibrator) and for electromagnetic waves in a vacuum, the resulting energy states are related to the frequency by Planck's relation: formula_3 (where formula_4 is Planck's constant and formula_5 the frequency). In the case of an electromagnetic wave these energy states are called quanta of light or photons.\n\nWhen calculating kinetic energy (work to accelerate a massive body from zero speed to some finite speed) relativistically – using Lorentz transformations instead of Newtonian mechanics – Einstein discovered an unexpected by-product of these calculations to be an energy term which does not vanish at zero speed. He called it rest energy: energy which every massive body must possess even when being at rest. The amount of energy is directly proportional to the mass of the body:\n\nwhere\n\nFor example, consider electron–positron annihilation, in which the rest energy of these two individual particles (equivalent to their rest mass) is converted to the radiant energy of the photons produced in the process. In this system the matter and antimatter (electrons and positrons) are destroyed and changed to non-matter (the photons). However, the total mass and total energy do not change during this interaction. The photons each have no rest mass but nonetheless have radiant energy which exhibits the same inertia as did the two original particles. This is a reversible process – the inverse process is called pair creation – in which the rest mass of particles is created from the radiant energy of two (or more) annihilating photons.\n\nIn general relativity, the stress–energy tensor serves as the source term for the gravitational field, in rough analogy to the way mass serves as the source term in the non-relativistic Newtonian approximation.\n\nEnergy and mass are manifestations of one and the same underlying physical property of a system. This property is responsible for the inertia and strength of gravitational interaction of the system (\"mass manifestations\"), and is also responsible for the potential ability of the system to perform work or heating (\"energy manifestations\"), subject to the limitations of other physical laws.\n\nIn classical physics, energy is a scalar quantity, the canonical conjugate to time. In special relativity energy is also a scalar (although not a Lorentz scalar but a time component of the energy–momentum 4-vector). In other words, energy is invariant with respect to rotations of space, but not invariant with respect to rotations of space-time (= boosts).\n\nEnergy may be transformed between different forms at various efficiencies. Items that transform between these forms are called transducers. Examples of transducers include a battery, from chemical energy to electric energy; a dam: gravitational potential energy to kinetic energy of moving water (and the blades of a turbine) and ultimately to electric energy through an electric generator; or a heat engine, from heat to work.\n\nExamples of energy transformation include generating electric energy from heat energy via a steam turbine, or lifting an object against gravity using electrical energy driving a crane motor. Lifting against gravity performs mechanical work on the object and stores gravitational potential energy in the object. If the object falls to the ground, gravity does mechanical work on the object which transforms the potential energy in the gravitational field to the kinetic energy released as heat on impact with the ground. Our Sun transforms nuclear potential energy to other forms of energy; its total mass does not decrease due to that in itself (since it still contains the same total energy even if in different forms), but its mass does decrease when the energy escapes out to its surroundings, largely as radiant energy.\n\nThere are strict limits to how efficiently heat can be converted into work in a cyclic process, e.g. in a heat engine, as described by Carnot's theorem and the second law of thermodynamics. However, some energy transformations can be quite efficient. The direction of transformations in energy (what kind of energy is transformed to what other kind) is often determined by entropy (equal energy spread among all available degrees of freedom) considerations. In practice all energy transformations are permitted on a small scale, but certain larger transformations are not permitted because it is statistically unlikely that energy or matter will randomly move into more concentrated forms or smaller spaces.\n\nEnergy transformations in the universe over time are characterized by various kinds of potential energy that has been available since the Big Bang later being \"released\" (transformed to more active types of energy such as kinetic or radiant energy) when a triggering mechanism is available. Familiar examples of such processes include nuclear decay, in which energy is released that was originally \"stored\" in heavy isotopes (such as uranium and thorium), by nucleosynthesis, a process ultimately using the gravitational potential energy released from the gravitational collapse of supernovae, to store energy in the creation of these heavy elements before they were incorporated into the solar system and the Earth. This energy is triggered and released in nuclear fission bombs or in civil nuclear power generation. Similarly, in the case of a chemical explosion, chemical potential energy is transformed to kinetic energy and thermal energy in a very short time. Yet another example is that of a pendulum. At its highest points the kinetic energy is zero and the gravitational potential energy is at maximum. At its lowest point the kinetic energy is at maximum and is equal to the decrease of potential energy. If one (unrealistically) assumes that there is no friction or other losses, the conversion of energy between these processes would be perfect, and the pendulum would continue swinging forever.\n\nEnergy is also transferred from potential energy (formula_8) to kinetic energy (formula_9) and then back to potential energy constantly. This is referred to as conservation of energy. In this closed system, energy cannot be created or destroyed; therefore, the initial energy and the final energy will be equal to each other. This can be demonstrated by the following:\n\nThe equation can then be simplified further since formula_10 (mass times acceleration due to gravity times the height) and formula_11 (half mass times velocity squared). Then the total amount of energy can be found by adding formula_12.\n\nEnergy gives rise to weight when it is trapped in a system with zero momentum, where it can be weighed. It is also equivalent to mass, and this mass is always associated with it. Mass is also equivalent to a certain amount of energy, and likewise always appears associated with it, as described in mass-energy equivalence. The formula \"E\" = \"mc\"², derived by Albert Einstein (1905) quantifies the relationship between rest-mass and rest-energy within the concept of special relativity. In different theoretical frameworks, similar formulas were derived by J.J. Thomson (1881), Henri Poincaré (1900), Friedrich Hasenöhrl (1904) and others (see Mass-energy equivalence#History for further information).\n\nPart of the rest energy (equivalent to rest mass) of matter may be converted to other forms of energy (still exhibiting mass), but neither energy nor mass can be destroyed; rather, both remain constant during any process. However, since formula_13 is extremely large relative to ordinary human scales, the conversion of an everyday amount of rest mass (for example, 1 kg) from rest energy to other forms of energy (such as kinetic energy, thermal energy, or the radiant energy carried by light and other radiation) can liberate tremendous amounts of energy (~formula_14 joules = 21 megatons of TNT), as can be seen in nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons. Conversely, the mass equivalent of an everyday amount energy is minuscule, which is why a loss of energy (loss of mass) from most systems is difficult to measure on a weighing scale, unless the energy loss is very large. Examples of large transformations between rest energy (of matter) and other forms of energy (e.g., kinetic energy into particles with rest mass) are found in nuclear physics and particle physics.\n\nThermodynamics divides energy transformation into two kinds: reversible processes and irreversible processes. An irreversible process is one in which energy is dissipated (spread) into empty energy states available in a volume, from which it cannot be recovered into more concentrated forms (fewer quantum states), without degradation of even more energy. A reversible process is one in which this sort of dissipation does not happen. For example, conversion of energy from one type of potential field to another, is reversible, as in the pendulum system described above. In processes where heat is generated, quantum states of lower energy, present as possible excitations in fields between atoms, act as a reservoir for part of the energy, from which it cannot be recovered, in order to be converted with 100% efficiency into other forms of energy. In this case, the energy must partly stay as heat, and cannot be completely recovered as usable energy, except at the price of an increase in some other kind of heat-like increase in disorder in quantum states, in the universe (such as an expansion of matter, or a randomisation in a crystal).\n\nAs the universe evolves in time, more and more of its energy becomes trapped in irreversible states (i.e., as heat or other kinds of increases in disorder). This has been referred to as the inevitable thermodynamic heat death of the universe. In this heat death the energy of the universe does not change, but the fraction of energy which is available to do work through a heat engine, or be transformed to other usable forms of energy (through the use of generators attached to heat engines), grows less and less.\n\nThe fact that energy can be neither created nor be destroyed is called the law of conservation of energy. In the form of the first law of thermodynamics, this states that a closed system's energy is constant unless energy is transferred in or out by work or heat, and that no energy is lost in transfer. The total inflow of energy into a system must equal the total outflow of energy from the system, plus the change in the energy contained within the system. Whenever one measures (or calculates) the total energy of a system of particles whose interactions do not depend explicitly on time, it is found that the total energy of the system always remains constant.\n\nWhile heat can always be fully converted into work in a reversible isothermal expansion of an ideal gas, for cyclic processes of practical interest in heat engines the second law of thermodynamics states that the system doing work always loses some energy as waste heat. This creates a limit to the amount of heat energy that can do work in a cyclic process, a limit called the available energy. Mechanical and other forms of energy can be transformed in the other direction into thermal energy without such limitations. The total energy of a system can be calculated by adding up all forms of energy in the system.\n\nRichard Feynman said during a 1961 lecture:\nMost kinds of energy (with gravitational energy being a notable exception) are subject to strict local conservation laws as well. In this case, energy can only be exchanged between adjacent regions of space, and all observers agree as to the volumetric density of energy in any given space. There is also a global law of conservation of energy, stating that the total energy of the universe cannot change; this is a corollary of the local law, but not vice versa.\n\nThis law is a fundamental principle of physics. As shown rigorously by Noether's theorem, the conservation of energy is a mathematical consequence of translational symmetry of time, a property of most phenomena below the cosmic scale that makes them independent of their locations on the time coordinate. Put differently, yesterday, today, and tomorrow are physically indistinguishable. This is because energy is the quantity which is canonical conjugate to time. This mathematical entanglement of energy and time also results in the uncertainty principle - it is impossible to define the exact amount of energy during any definite time interval. The uncertainty principle should not be confused with energy conservation - rather it provides mathematical limits to which energy can in principle be defined and measured.\n\nEach of the basic forces of nature is associated with a different type of potential energy, and all types of potential energy (like all other types of energy) appears as system mass, whenever present. For example, a compressed spring will be slightly more massive than before it was compressed. Likewise, whenever energy is transferred between systems by any mechanism, an associated mass is transferred with it.\n\nIn quantum mechanics energy is expressed using the Hamiltonian operator. On any time scales, the uncertainty in the energy is by\n\nwhich is similar in form to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (but not really mathematically equivalent thereto, since \"H\" and \"t\" are not dynamically conjugate variables, neither in classical nor in quantum mechanics).\n\nIn particle physics, this inequality permits a qualitative understanding of virtual particles which carry momentum, exchange by which and with real particles, is responsible for the creation of all known fundamental forces (more accurately known as fundamental interactions). Virtual photons (which are simply lowest quantum mechanical energy state of photons) are also responsible for electrostatic interaction between electric charges (which results in Coulomb law), for spontaneous radiative decay of exited atomic and nuclear states, for the Casimir force, for van der Waals bond forces and some other observable phenomena.\n\nEnergy transfer can be considered for the special case of systems which are closed to transfers of matter. The portion of the energy which is transferred by conservative forces over a distance is measured as the work the source system does on the receiving system. The portion of the energy which does not do work during the transfer is called heat. Energy can be transferred between systems in a variety of ways. Examples include the transmission of electromagnetic energy via photons, physical collisions which transfer kinetic energy, and the conductive transfer of thermal energy.\n\nEnergy is strictly conserved and is also locally conserved wherever it can be defined. In thermodynamics, for closed systems, the process of energy transfer is described by the first law:\n\nwhere formula_16 is the amount of energy transferred, formula_2  represents the work done on the system, and formula_18 represents the heat flow into the system. As a simplification, the heat term, formula_18, is sometimes ignored, especially when the thermal efficiency of the transfer is high.\n\nThis simplified equation is the one used to define the joule, for example.\n\nBeyond the constraints of closed systems, open systems can gain or lose energy in association with matter transfer (both of these process are illustrated by fueling an auto, a system which gains in energy thereby, without addition of either work or heat). Denoting this energy by formula_16, one may write\n\nInternal energy is the sum of all microscopic forms of energy of a system. It is the energy needed to create the system. It is related to the potential energy, e.g., molecular structure, crystal structure, and other geometric aspects, as well as the motion of the particles, in form of kinetic energy. Thermodynamics is chiefly concerned with changes in internal energy and not its absolute value, which is impossible to determine with thermodynamics alone.\n\nThe first law of thermodynamics asserts that energy (but not necessarily thermodynamic free energy) is always conserved and that heat flow is a form of energy transfer. For homogeneous systems, with a well-defined temperature and pressure, a commonly used corollary of the first law is that, for a system subject only to pressure forces and heat transfer (e.g., a cylinder-full of gas) without chemical changes, the differential change in the internal energy of the system (with a \"gain\" in energy signified by a positive quantity) is given as\n\nwhere the first term on the right is the heat transferred into the system, expressed in terms of temperature \"T\" and entropy \"S\" (in which entropy increases and the change d\"S\" is positive when the system is heated), and the last term on the right hand side is identified as work done on the system, where pressure is \"P\" and volume \"V\" (the negative sign results since compression of the system requires work to be done on it and so the volume change, d\"V\", is negative when work is done on the system).\n\nThis equation is highly specific, ignoring all chemical, electrical, nuclear, and gravitational forces, effects such as advection of any form of energy other than heat and pV-work. The general formulation of the first law (i.e., conservation of energy) is valid even in situations in which the system is not homogeneous. For these cases the change in internal energy of a \"closed\" system is expressed in a general form by\n\nwhere formula_23 is the heat supplied to the system and formula_24 is the work applied to the system.\n\nThe energy of a mechanical harmonic oscillator (a mass on a spring) is alternatively kinetic and potential. At two points in the oscillation cycle it is entirely kinetic, and at two points it is entirely potential. Over the whole cycle, or over many cycles, net energy is thus equally split between kinetic and potential. This is called equipartition principle; total energy of a system with many degrees of freedom is equally split among all available degrees of freedom.\n\nThis principle is vitally important to understanding the behaviour of a quantity closely related to energy, called entropy. Entropy is a measure of evenness of a distribution of energy between parts of a system. When an isolated system is given more degrees of freedom (i.e., given new available energy states that are the same as existing states), then total energy spreads over all available degrees equally without distinction between \"new\" and \"old\" degrees. This mathematical result is called the second law of thermodynamics. The second law of thermodynamics is valid only for systems which are near or in equilibrium state. For non-equilibrium systems, the laws governing system's behavior are still debatable. One of the guiding principles for these systems is the principle of maximum entropy production. It states that nonequilibrium systems behave in such a way to maximize its entropy production.\n\nBULLET::::- Combustion\nBULLET::::- Index of energy articles\nBULLET::::- Index of wave articles\nBULLET::::- Mattergy\nBULLET::::- Orders of magnitude (energy)\nBULLET::::- Power station\nBULLET::::- Transfer energy\nBULLET::::- \"The Biosphere\" (A \"Scientific American\" Book), San Francisco, W.H. Freeman and Co., 1970, . This book, originally a 1970 \"Scientific American\" issue, covers virtually every major concern and concept since debated regarding materials and energy resources, population trends, and environmental degradation.\nBULLET::::- \"Energy and Power\" (A \"Scientific American\" Book), San Francisco, W.H. Freeman and Co., 1971, .\nBULLET::::- Santos, Gildo M. \"Energy in Brazil: a historical overview,\" \" \"The Journal of Energy History\" (2018) $1 online\nBULLET::::- \"The Journal of Energy History / Revue d'histoire de l'énergie\" (JEHRHE), 2018-\n\nBULLET::::- Differences between Heat and Thermal energy – BioCab\n"}
{"id": "9653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9653", "title": "Expected value", "text": "Expected value\n\nIn probability theory, the expected value of a random variable is a key aspect of its probability distribution. The expected value of a discrete random variable is the probability-weighted average of all its possible values. In other words, each possible value the random variable can assume is multiplied by its probability of occurring, and the resulting products are summed to produce the expected value. Intuitively, a random variable's expected value represents the mean of a large number of independent realizations of the random variable. The expected value is also known as the expectation, mathematical expectation, mean, or first moment.\n\nExpected value also applies to an absolutely continuous random variable, except that an integral of the variable with respect to its probability density replaces the sum. The formal definition includes both of these and also works for distributions which are neither discrete nor absolutely continuous; the expected value of a random variable is the integral of the random variable with respect to its probability measure.\n\nThe idea of the expected value originated in the middle of the 17th century from the study of the so-called problem of points, which seeks to divide the stakes \"in a fair way\" between two players who have to end their game before it's properly finished. This problem had been debated for centuries, and many conflicting proposals and solutions had been suggested over the years, when it was posed in 1654 to Blaise Pascal by French writer and amateur mathematician Chevalier de Méré. Méré claimed that this problem couldn't be solved and that it showed just how flawed mathematics was when it came to its application to the real world. Pascal, being a mathematician, was provoked and determined to solve the problem once and for all. He began to discuss the problem in a now famous series of letters to Pierre de Fermat. Soon enough they both independently came up with a solution. They solved the problem in different computational ways but their results were identical because their computations were based on the same fundamental principle. The principle is that the value of a future gain should be directly proportional to the chance of getting it. This principle seemed to have come naturally to both of them. They were very pleased by the fact that they had found essentially the same solution and this in turn made them absolutely convinced they had solved the problem conclusively; however, they did not publish their findings. They only informed a small circle of mutual scientific friends in Paris about it.\n\nThree years later, in 1657, a Dutch mathematician Christiaan Huygens, who had just visited Paris, published a treatise (see ) \"\"De ratiociniis in ludo aleæ\"\" on probability theory. In this book he considered the problem of points and presented a solution based on the same principle as the solutions of Pascal and Fermat. Huygens also extended the concept of expectation by adding rules for how to calculate expectations in more complicated situations than the original problem (e.g., for three or more players). In this sense this book can be seen as the first successful attempt at laying down the foundations of the theory of probability.\n\nIn the foreword to his book, Huygens wrote: \n\nThus, Huygens learned about de Méré's Problem in 1655 during his visit to France; later on in 1656 from his correspondence with Carcavi he learned that his method was essentially the same as Pascal's; so that before his book went to press in 1657 he knew about Pascal's priority in this subject.\n\nNeither Pascal nor Huygens used the term \"expectation\" in its modern sense. In particular, Huygens writes: \n\nMore than a hundred years later, in 1814, Pierre-Simon Laplace published his tract \"\"Théorie analytique des probabilités\"\", where the concept of expected value was defined explicitly:\n\nThe use of the letter \"E\" to denote expected value goes back to W. A. Whitworth in 1901, who used a script E. The symbol has become popular since for English writers it meant \"Expectation\", for Germans \"Erwartungswert\", for Spanish \"Esperanza matemática\" and for French \"Espérance mathématique\".\n\nLet formula_1 be a random variable with a finite number of finite outcomes formula_2 occurring with probabilities formula_3 respectively. The expectation of formula_1 is defined as\n\nSince all probabilities formula_6 add up to 1 (formula_7), the expected value is the weighted average, with formula_6’s being the weights.\n\nIf all outcomes formula_9 are equiprobable (that is, formula_10), then the weighted average turns into the simple average. If the outcomes formula_9 are not equiprobable, then the simple average must be replaced with the weighted average, which takes into account the fact that some outcomes are more likely than the others. \n\nBULLET::::- Let formula_1 represent the outcome of a roll of a fair six-sided . More specifically, formula_1 will be the number of pips showing on the top face of the after the toss. The possible values for formula_1 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, all of which are equally likely with a probability of . The expectation of formula_1 is\n\nBULLET::::- The roulette game consists of a small ball and a wheel with 38 numbered pockets around the edge. As the wheel is spun, the ball bounces around randomly until it settles down in one of the pockets. Suppose random variable formula_1 represents the (monetary) outcome of a $1 bet on a single number (\"straight up\" bet). If the bet wins (which happens with probability in American roulette), the payoff is $35; otherwise the player loses the bet. The expected profit from such a bet will be\n\nIntuitively, the expectation of a random variable taking values in a countable set of outcomes is defined analogously as the weighted sum of the outcome values, where the weights correspond to the probabilities of realizing that value. However, convergence issues associated with the infinite sum necessitate a more careful definition. A rigorous definition first defines expectation of a non-negative random variable, and then adapts it to general random variables. \n\nLet formula_1 be a non-negative random variable with a countable set of outcomes formula_24 occurring with probabilities formula_25 respectively. Analogous to the discrete case, the expected value of formula_1 is then defined as the series\nNote that since formula_28, the infinite sum is well-defined and does not depend on the order in which it is computed. Unlike the discrete case, the expectation here can be equal to infinity, if the infinite sum above increases without bound. \n\nBULLET::::- Suppose formula_29 and formula_30 for formula_31, where formula_32 (with formula_33 being the natural logarithm) is the scale factor such that the probabilities sum to 1. Then, using the direct definition for non-negative random variables, we have\n\nBULLET::::- An example where the expectation is infinite arises in the context of the St. Petersburg paradox. Let formula_35 and formula_36 for formula_31. Once again, since the random variable is non-negative, the expected value calculation gives\n\nBULLET::::- For an example where the expectation is not well-defined, suppose the random variable formula_1 takes values 1, −2, 3, −4, ..., with respective probabilities formula_40, ..., where formula_41 is a normalizing constant that ensures the probabilities sum up to one.\n\nIf formula_1 is a random variable whose cumulative distribution function admits a density formula_56, then the expected value is defined as the following Lebesgue integral, if the integral exists:\n\nThe expected value of a random variable may be undefined, if the integral does not exist. An example of such a random variable is one with the Cauchy distribution, due to its large \"tails\".\n\nIn general, if formula_1 is a non-negative random variable defined on a probability space formula_59, then the expected value of formula_1, denoted by formula_61, is defined as the Lebesgue integral \n\nFor a general random variable formula_1, define as before formula_64 and formula_65, and note that formula_66, with both formula_42 and formula_47 nonnegative. Then, the expected value of formula_1 is defined as \n\nFor multidimensional random variables, their expected value is defined per component, i.e.\n\nand, for a random matrix formula_1 with elements formula_73, formula_74\n\nThe basic properties below replicate or follow immediately from those of Lebesgue integral.\n\nBULLET::::- Non-negativity: If formula_75 (a.s.), then formula_76.\n\nBULLET::::- Linearity of expectation: The expected value operator (or expectation operator) formula_77 is linear in the sense that, for any random variables formula_1 and formula_79, and a constant formula_80,\n\nBULLET::::- Monotonicity: If formula_82 (a.s.), and both formula_61 and formula_84 exist, then formula_85.\n\nBULLET::::- Non-multiplicativity: In general, the expected value operator is not multiplicative, i.e. formula_88 is not necessarily equal to formula_89. Only if formula_1 and formula_79 are independent, then one can show that formula_92. If the random variables are dependent, then generally formula_93.\n\nBULLET::::- Law of the unconscious statistician: The expected value of a measurable function of formula_1, formula_95, given that formula_1 has a probability density function formula_56, is given by the inner product of formula_98 and formula_99:\n\nBULLET::::- Non-degeneracy: If formula_103, then formula_104 (a.s.).\nBULLET::::- Jensen's Inequality: For a random variable formula_1 with well-defined expectation: formula_106.\n\nBULLET::::- The following statements regarding a random variable formula_1 are equivalent:\nBULLET::::- formula_61 exists and is finite.\nBULLET::::- Both formula_109 and formula_110 are finite.\nBULLET::::- formula_111 is finite.\n\nBULLET::::- If formula_114 then formula_115 (a.s.). Similarly, if formula_116 then formula_117 (a.s.).\n\nBULLET::::- If X and Y are two random variables, and Y can be written as a function of X, that is, Y = f(X), then one can compute the expected value of Y using the distribution function of X.\n\nBULLET::::- Let formula_118 denote the indicator function of an event formula_119. Then formula_120\n\nBULLET::::- If formula_121 (a.s.), then formula_122. That is, if X = Y \"nearly\" everywhere, then the expectation of the function X will equal the expectation of the function Y. This is consistent with the definition of expected value and how it is calculated.\n\nBULLET::::- If formula_123 (a.s.) for some constant formula_124, then formula_125. In particular, for a random variable formula_1 with well-defined expectation, formula_127. A well defined expectation implies that there is one number, or rather, one constant that defines the expected value. Thus follows that the expectation of this constant is just the original expected value.\n\nThe expectation of a random variable plays an important role in a variety of contexts. For example, in decision theory, an agent making an optimal choice in the context of incomplete information is often assumed to maximize the expected value of theirutility function.\nFor a different example, in statistics, where one seeks estimates for unknown parameters based on available data, the estimate itself is a random variable. In such settings, a desirable criterion for a \"good\" estimator is that it is unbiased – that is, the expected value of the estimate is equal to the true value of the underlying parameter.\n\nIt is possible to construct an expected value equal to the probability of an event by taking the expectation of an indicator function that is one if the event has occurred and zero otherwise. This relationship can be used to translate properties of expected values into properties of probabilities, e.g. using the law of large numbers to justify estimating probabilities by frequencies.\n\nThe expected values of the powers of \"X\" are called the moments of \"X\"; the moments about the mean of \"X\" are expected values of powers of \"X\" − E[\"X\"]. The moments of some random variables can be used to specify their distributions, via their moment generating functions.\n\nTo empirically estimate the expected value of a random variable, one repeatedly measures observations of the variable and computes the arithmetic mean of the results. If the expected value exists, this procedure estimates the true expected value in an unbiased manner and has the property of minimizing the sum of the squares of the residuals (the sum of the squared differences between the observations and the estimate). The law of large numbers demonstrates (under fairly mild conditions) that, as the size of the sample gets larger, the variance of this estimate gets smaller.\n\nThis property is often exploited in a wide variety of applications, including general problems of statistical estimation and machine learning, to estimate (probabilistic) quantities of interest via Monte Carlo methods, since most quantities of interest can be written in terms of expectation, e.g. formula_128, where formula_129 is the indicator function of the set formula_130.\n\nExpected values can also be used to compute the variance, by means of the computational formula for the variance\n\nA very important application of the expectation value is in the field of quantum mechanics. The expectation value of a quantum mechanical operator formula_132 operating on a quantum state vector formula_133 is written as formula_134. The uncertainty in formula_132 can be calculated using the formula formula_136. \n\nIn general, it is not the case that formula_137 despite formula_138 pointwise. Thus, one cannot interchange limits and expectation, without additional conditions on the random variables. To see this, let formula_139 be a random variable distributed uniformly on formula_140. For formula_141 define a sequence of random variables\n\nwith formula_143 being the indicator function of the event formula_119. Then, it follows that formula_145 (a.s). But, formula_146 for each formula_17. Hence, formula_148\n\nAnalogously, for general sequence of random variables formula_149, the expected value operator is not formula_150-additive, i.e.\n\nAn example is easily obtained by setting formula_152 and formula_153 for formula_154, where formula_155 is as in the previous example.\n\nA number of convergence results specify exact conditions which allow one to interchange limits and expectations, as specified below. \n\nBULLET::::- Monotone convergence theorem: Let formula_156 be a sequence of random variables, with formula_157 (a.s) for each formula_158. Furthermore, let formula_159 pointwise. Then, the monotone convergence theorem states that formula_160\n\nBULLET::::- Fatou's lemma: Let formula_163 be a sequence of non-negative random variables. Fatou's lemma states that\n\nBULLET::::- Dominated convergence theorem: Let formula_171 be a sequence of random variables. If formula_138 pointwise (a.s.), formula_173 (a.s.), and formula_174. Then, according to the dominated convergence theorem,\nBULLET::::- formula_175;\nBULLET::::- formula_176\nBULLET::::- formula_177\n\nBULLET::::- Uniform integrability: In some cases, the equality formula_178 holds when the sequence formula_179 is \"uniformly integrable\".\n\nThere are a number of inequalities involving the expected values of functions of random variables. The following list includes some of the more basic ones.\n\nBULLET::::- Markov's inequality: For a \"nonnegative\" random variable formula_1 and formula_181, Markov's inequality states that\n\nBULLET::::- Bienaymé-Chebyshev inequality: Let formula_1 be an arbitrary random variable with finite expected value formula_61 and finite variance formula_185. The Bienaymé-Chebyshev inequality states that, for any real number formula_186,\n\nBULLET::::- Jensen's inequality: Let formula_188 be a measurable convex function and formula_1 a random variable such that formula_190. Jensen's inequality states that\n\nBULLET::::- Lyapunov's inequality: Let formula_192\n\nBULLET::::- Cauchy–Bunyakovsky–Schwarz inequality: The Cauchy–Bunyakovsky–Schwarz inequality states that\n\nBULLET::::- Hölder's inequality: Let formula_198 and formula_199 satisfy formula_200, formula_201, and formula_202. The Hölder's inequality states that\n\nBULLET::::- Minkowski inequality: Let formula_198 be an integer satisfying formula_200. Let, in addition, formula_206 and formula_207. Then, according to the Minkowski inequality, formula_208 and\n\n+Expected Values of Various Statistical Distributions\n!Distribution\n!Mathematical Distibution\n!Mean E(X)\nBernoulli\nformula_210\nformula_198\nBinomial\nformula_212\nformula_213\nGeometric\nformula_214\nformula_215\nUniform\nformula_216\nformula_217\nExponential\nformula_218\nformula_219\nNormal\nformula_220\nformula_221\nStandard Normal\nformula_222\nformula_46\nPareto\nformula_224\nformula_225\n\nThe probability density function formula_226 of a scalar random variable formula_1 is related to its characteristic function formula_228 by the inversion formula:\n\nFor the expected value of formula_95 (where formula_231 is a Borel function), we can use this inversion formula to obtain\n\nIf formula_233 is finite, changing the order of integration, we get, in accordance with Fubini–Tonelli theorem,\n\nwhere\n\nis the Fourier transform of formula_236 The expression for formula_233 also follows directly from Plancherel theorem.\n\nFor non-negative random variables, one can compute the expected value using an alternative formula involving only the cumulative distribution function of the random variable. Similar formulas for general random variables can be obtained by using the relation formula_238 and noting that both formula_239 and formula_240 are non-negative, for which the following applies.\n\nFor a non-negative integer-valued random variable formula_241\n\nwhere formula_243, and formula_244 is the cdf of formula_1.\n\nIf formula_246 then formula_247 On the other hand,\n\nso the series on the right diverges to formula_249 and the equality holds.\n\nIf formula_250 then\n\nLet\nbe an infinite upper triangular matrix. The double series formula_253 is the sum of formula_254's elements if summation is done row by row.\nSince every summand is non-negative, the series either converges absolutely or diverges to formula_255 In both cases, changing summation order does not affect the sum. Changing summation order, from row-by-row to column-by-column, gives us\n\nIn a coin tossing experiment, let the probability of heads be formula_198. Including the final attempt, how many tosses can we expect until the first head?\n\nSolution. If formula_258 is the random variable indicating the numbers of coin tosses before and including the first head, then, for formula_259,\nwhere we took into account the geometric series summation formula. We now compute\n\nIf formula_262 is a non-negative random variable, then\n\nwhere formula_243, and formula_265 is the cdf of formula_1.\n\n1. For every formula_267,\nwhere formula_269 is the indicator function of formula_270. Substituting this into the definition of formula_61, obtain\n\nSince formula_273 and formula_274 this integral (finite or infinite) meets the requirements of Tonelli's theorem. Changing the order of integration gives us\n\nBULLET::::- Center of mass\nBULLET::::- Central tendency\nBULLET::::- Chebyshev's inequality (an inequality on location and scale parameters)\nBULLET::::- Conditional expectation\nBULLET::::- Expected value is also a key concept in economics, finance, and many other subjects\nBULLET::::- The general term expectation\nBULLET::::- Expectation value (quantum mechanics)\nBULLET::::- Law of total expectation –the expected value of the conditional expected value of \"X\" given \"Y\" is the same as the expected value of \"X\".\nBULLET::::- Moment (mathematics)\nBULLET::::- Nonlinear expectation (a generalization of the expected value)\nBULLET::::- Wald's equation for calculating the expected value of a random number of random variables\n\n"}
{"id": "9656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9656", "title": "Electric light", "text": "Electric light\n\nAn electric light is a device that produces visible light from electric current. It is the most common form of artificial lighting and is essential to modern society, providing interior lighting for buildings and exterior light for evening and nighttime activities. In technical usage, a replaceable component that produces light from electricity is called a lamp. Lamps are commonly called light bulbs; for example, the incandescent light bulb. Lamps usually have a base made of ceramic, metal, glass, or plastic, which secures the lamp in the socket of a light fixture. The electrical connection to the socket may be made with a screw-thread base, two metal pins, two metal caps or a bayonet cap.\n\nThe three main categories of electric lights are incandescent lamps, which produce light by a filament heated white-hot by electric current, gas-discharge lamps, which produce light by means of an electric arc through a gas, and LED lamps, which produce light by a flow of electrons across a band gap in a semiconductor.\n\nBefore electric lighting became common in the early 20th century, people used candles, gas lights, oil lamps, and fires. English chemist Humphry Davy developed the first incandescent light in 1802, followed by the first practical electric arc light in 1806. By the 1870s, Davy's arc lamp had been successfully commercialized, and was used to light many public spaces. Efforts by Swan and Edison\nled to commercial incandescent light bulbs becoming widely available in the 1880s, and by the early twentieth century these had completely replaced arc lamps.\n\nThe energy efficiency of electric lighting has increased radically since the first demonstration of arc lamps and the incandescent light bulb of the 19th century. Modern electric light sources come in a profusion of types and sizes adapted to many applications. Most modern electric lighting is powered by centrally generated electric power, but lighting may also be powered by mobile or standby electric generators or battery systems. Battery-powered light is often reserved for when and where stationary lights fail, often in the form of flashlights or electric lanterns, as well as in vehicles.\n\nTypes of electric lighting include:\nBULLET::::- Incandescent light bulb, a heated filament inside a glass envelope\nBULLET::::- Halogen lamps are incandescent lamps that use a fused quartz envelope filled with halogen gas\nBULLET::::- LED lamp, a solid-state lamp that uses light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as the source of light\nBULLET::::- Arc lamp\nBULLET::::- Xenon arc lamp\nBULLET::::- Mercury-xenon arc lamp\nBULLET::::- Ultra-high-performance lamp, an ultra-high-pressure mercury-vapor arc lamp for use in movie projectors\nBULLET::::- Metal-halide lamp\nBULLET::::- Gas-discharge lamp, a light source that generates light by sending an electric discharge through an ionized gas\nBULLET::::- Fluorescent lamp\nBULLET::::- Compact fluorescent lamp, a fluorescent lamp designed to replace an incandescent lamp\nBULLET::::- Neon lamp\nBULLET::::- Mercury-vapor lamp\nBULLET::::- Sodium-vapor lamp\nBULLET::::- Sulfur lamp\nBULLET::::- Electrodeless lamp, a gas discharge lamp in which the power is transferred from outside the bulb to inside via electromagnetic fields\n\nDifferent types of lights have vastly differing efficacies and color of light.\n! Name  Optical spectrum  Nominal efficacy(lm/W)  Lifetime (MTTF)(hours)  Color temperature(kelvin)  Color  Colorrenderingindex\n\nThe most efficient source of electric light is the low-pressure sodium lamp. It produces, for all practical purposes, a monochromatic orange-yellow light, which gives a similarly monochromatic perception of any illuminated scene. For this reason, it is generally reserved for outdoor public lighting applications. Low-pressure sodium lights are favoured for public lighting by astronomers, since the light pollution that they generate can be easily filtered, contrary to broadband or continuous spectra.\n\nThe modern incandescent light bulb, with a coiled filament of tungsten, and commercialized in the 1920s, developed from the carbon filament lamp introduced about 1880. As well as bulbs for normal illumination, there is a very wide range, including low voltage, low-power types often used as components in equipment, but now largely displaced by LEDs\n\nIncandescent bulbs are being phased out in many countries due to their low energy efficiency. Less than 3% of the input energy is converted into usable light. Nearly all of the input energy ends up as heat that, in warm climates, must then be removed from the building by ventilation or air conditioning, often resulting in more energy consumption. In colder climates where heating and lighting is required during the cold and dark winter months, the heat byproduct has at least some value.\n\nHalogen lamps are usually much smaller than standard incandescent lamps, because for successful operation a bulb temperature over 200 °C is generally necessary. For this reason, most have a bulb of fused silica (quartz) or aluminosilicate glass. This is often sealed inside an additional layer of glass. The outer glass is a safety precaution, to reduce ultraviolet emission and to contain hot glass shards should the inner envelope explode during operation. Oily residue from fingerprints may cause a hot quartz envelope to shatter due to excessive heat buildup at the contamination site. The risk of burns or fire is also greater with bare bulbs, leading to their prohibition in some places, unless enclosed by the luminaire.\n\nThose designed for 12- or 24-volt operation have compact filaments, useful for good optical control. Also, they have higher efficacies (lumens per watt) and better lives than non-halogen types. The light output remains almost constant throughout their life.\n\nFluorescent lamps consist of a glass tube that contains mercury vapour or argon under low pressure. Electricity flowing through the tube causes the gases to give off ultraviolet energy. The inside of the tubes are coated with phosphors that give off visible light when struck by ultraviolet photons. They have much higher efficiency than incandescent lamps. For the same amount of light generated, they typically use around one-quarter to one-third the power of an incandescent. The typical luminous efficacy of fluorescent lighting systems is 50–100 lumens per watt, several times the efficacy of incandescent bulbs with comparable light output. Fluorescent lamp fixtures are more costly than incandescent lamps, because they require a ballast to regulate the current through the lamp, but the lower energy cost typically offsets the higher initial cost. Compact fluorescent lamps are available in the same popular sizes as incandescent lamps and are used as an energy-saving alternative in homes. Because they contain mercury, many fluorescent lamps are classified as hazardous waste. The United States Environmental Protection Agency recommends that fluorescent lamps be segregated from general waste for recycling or safe disposal, and some jurisdictions require recycling of them.\n\nThe solid-state light-emitting diode (LED) has been popular as an indicator light in consumer electronics and professional audio gear since the 1970s. In the 2000s, efficacy and output have risen to the point where LEDs are now being used in lighting applications such as car headlights and brake lights, in flashlights and bicycle lights, as well as in decorative applications, such as holiday lighting. Indicator LEDs are known for their extremely long life, up to 100,000 hours, but lighting LEDs are operated much less conservatively, and consequently have shorter lives. LED technology is useful for lighting designers, because of its low power consumption, low heat generation, instantaneous on/off control, and in the case of single color LEDs, continuity of color throughout the life of the diode and relatively low cost of manufacture. LED lifetime depends strongly on the temperature of the diode. Operating an LED lamp in conditions that increase the internal temperature can greatly shorten the lamp's life.\n\nCarbon arc lamps consist of two carbon rod electrodes in open air, supplied by a current-limiting ballast. The electric arc is struck by touching the rod tips then separating them. The ensuing arc produces a white-hot plasma between the rod tips. These lamps have higher efficacy than filament lamps, but the carbon rods are short-lived and require constant adjustment in use, as the intense heat of the arc erodes them. The lamps produce significant ultraviolet output, they require ventilation when used indoors, and due to their intensity they need protection from direct sight.\n\nInvented by Humphry Davy around 1805, the carbon arc was the first practical electric light. It was used commercially beginning in the 1870s for large building and street lighting until it was superseded in the early 20th century by the incandescent light. Carbon arc lamps operate at high power and produce high intensity white light. They also are a point source of light. They remained in use in limited applications that required these properties, such as movie projectors, stage lighting, and searchlights, until after World War II.\n\nA discharge lamp has a glass or silica envelope containing two metal electrodes separated by a gas. Gases used include, neon, argon, xenon, sodium, metal halide, and mercury. The core operating principle is much the same as the carbon arc lamp, but the term \"arc lamp\" normally refers to carbon arc lamps, with more modern types of gas discharge lamp normally called discharge lamps. With some discharge lamps, very high voltage is used to strike the arc. This requires an electrical circuit called an igniter, which is part of the electrical ballast circuitry. After the arc is struck, the internal resistance of the lamp drops to a low level, and the ballast limits the current to the operating current. Without a ballast, excess current would flow, causing rapid destruction of the lamp.\n\nSome lamp types contain a little neon, which permits striking at normal running voltage, with no external ignition circuitry. Low pressure sodium lamps operate this way. The simplest ballasts are just an inductor, and are chosen where cost is the deciding factor, such as street lighting. More advanced electronic ballasts may be designed to maintain constant light output over the life of the lamp, may drive the lamp with a square wave to maintain completely flicker-free output, and shut down in the event of certain faults.\n\nMany lamp units, or light bulbs, are specified in standardized shape codes and socket names. Incandescent bulbs and their retrofit replacements are often specified as \"A19/A60 E26/E27\", a common size for these kind of light bulbs. In this example, the \"A\" parameters describe the bulb size and shape while the \"E\" parameters describe the Edison screw base size and thread characteristics.\n\nLife expectancy for many types of lamp is defined as the number of hours of operation at which 50% of them fail, that is the median life of the lamps. Production tolerances as low as 1% can create a variance of 25% in lamp life, so in general some lamps will fail well before the rated life expectancy, and some will last much longer. For LEDs, lamp life is defined as the operation time at which 50% of lamps have experienced a 70% decrease in light output.\n\nSome types of lamp are also sensitive to switching cycles. Rooms with frequent switching, such as bathrooms, can expect much shorter lamp life than what is printed on the box. Compact fluorescent lamps are particularly sensitive to switching cycles.\n\nThe total amount of artificial light (especially from street light) is sufficient for cities to be easily visible at night from the air, and from space. This light is the source of light pollution that burdens astronomers and others.\n\nElectric lamps can be used as heat sources, for example in incubators, as infrared lamps in fast food restaurants and toys such as the Kenner Easy-Bake Oven.\n\nDue to their nonlinear resistance characteristics, tungsten filament lamps have long been used as fast-acting thermistors in electronic circuits. Popular uses have included:\nBULLET::::- Stabilization of sine wave oscillators\nBULLET::::- Protection of tweeters in loudspeaker enclosures; excess current that is too high for the tweeter illuminates the light rather than destroying the tweeter.\nBULLET::::- Automatic volume control in telephones\n\nA stylized depiction of a light bulb features as the logo of the Turkish AK Party.\n\nIn circuit diagrams lamps usually are shown as symbols. There are two main types of symbols, these are:\n\nBULLET::::- Light tube\nBULLET::::- List of light sources\n"}
{"id": "9657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9657", "title": "Edgar Rice Burroughs", "text": "Edgar Rice Burroughs\n\nEdgar Rice Burroughs (September 1, 1875 – March 19, 1950) was an American fiction writer best known for his celebrated and prolific output in the adventure and science-fiction genres. Among the most notable of his creations are the jungle hero Tarzan, the heroic Mars adventurer John Carter, and the fictional landmass within Earth known as Pellucidar. Burroughs' California ranch is now the center of the Tarzana neighborhood in Los Angeles.\n\nBurroughs was born on September 1, 1875, in Chicago (he later lived for many years in the suburb of Oak Park), the fourth son of Major George Tyler Burroughs (1833–1913), a businessman and Civil War veteran, and his wife, Mary Evaline (Zieger) Burroughs (1840–1920). His middle name is from his paternal grandmother, Mary Coleman Rice Burroughs (1802-1889). He was of almost entirely English ancestry, with a family line that had been in North America since the Colonial era.\n\nThrough his Rice grandmother, Burroughs was descended from settler Edmund Rice, one of the English Puritans who moved to Massachusetts Bay Colony in the early 17th Century. He once remarked, \"I can trace my ancestry back to Deacon Edmund Rice.\" The Burroughs side of the family was also of English origin and also emigrated to Massachusetts around the same time. Many of his ancestors fought in the American Revolution. Some of his ancestors settled in Virginia during the colonial period, and Burroughs often emphasized his connection with that side of his family, seeing it as romantic and warlike, and, in fact, could have counted among his close cousins no less than seven signers of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, including his third cousin, four times removed, 2nd President of the United States John Adams.\n\nBurroughs was educated at a number of local schools. He then attended Phillips Academy, in Andover, Massachusetts, and then the Michigan Military Academy. Graduating in 1895, and failing the entrance exam for the United States Military Academy at West Point, he became an enlisted soldier with the 7th U.S. Cavalry in Fort Grant, Arizona Territory. After being diagnosed with a heart problem and thus ineligible to serve, he was discharged in 1897.\n\nAfter his discharge Burroughs worked a number of different jobs. During the Chicago influenza epidemic of 1891, he spent half a year at his brother's ranch on the Raft River in Idaho, as a cowboy, drifted somewhat afterward, then worked at his father's Chicago battery factory in 1899, marrying his childhood sweetheart, Emma Hulbert (1876–1944), in January 1900.\n\nIn 1903, Burroughs joined his brothers, Yale graduates George and Harry, who were, by then, prominent Pocatello area ranchers in southern Idaho, and partners in the Sweetser-Burroughs Mining Company, where he took on managing their ill-fated Snake River gold dredge, a classic bucket-line dredge. The Burroughs brothers were also the sixth cousins, once removed, of famed miner Kate Rice, a brilliant and statuesque Maths professor who, in 1914, became the first female prospector in the Canadian North. Journalist and publisher C. Allen Thorndike Rice was also his third cousin.\n\nWhen the new mine proved unsuccessful, the brothers secured for Burroughs a position with the Oregon Short Line Railroad in Salt Lake City. Burroughs resigned from the railroad in October 1904.\n\nBy 1911, after seven years of low wages as a pencil-sharpener wholesaler; Burroughs began to write fiction. By this time, Emma and he had two children, Joan (1908–1972), and Hulbert (1909–1991). During this period, he had copious spare time and began reading pulp-fiction magazines. In 1929, he recalled thinking that\n\nIn 1913, Burroughs and Emma had their third and last child, John Coleman Burroughs (1913–1979), later known for his illustrations of his father's books.\n\nIn the 1920s, Burroughs became a pilot, purchased a Security Airster S-1, and encouraged his family to learn to fly.\n\nDaughter Joan married \"Tarzan\" film actor, James Pierce, starring with her husband, as the voice of \"Jane\", during 1932-34 for the \"Tarzan\" radio series. The pair were wed for more than forty years, until her death, in 1972.\n\nBurroughs divorced Emma in 1934 and, in 1935, married the former actress Florence Gilbert Dearholt, who was the former wife of his friend (who was then remarrying himself), Ashton Dearholt, with whom he had co-founded Burroughs-Tarzan Enterprises while filming \"The New Adventures of Tarzan\". Burroughs adopted the Dearholts' two children. He and Florence divorced in 1942.\n\nBurroughs was in his late 60s and was in Honolulu at the time of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Despite his age, he applied for and received permission to become a war correspondent, becoming one of the oldest U.S. war correspondents during World War II. This period of his life is mentioned in William Brinkley's bestselling novel \"Don't Go Near the Water\".\n\nAfter the war ended, Burroughs moved back to Encino, California, where after many health problems, he died of a heart attack on March 19, 1950, having written almost 80 novels. He is buried at Tarzana, California, US.\n\nWhen he died, he was believed to have been the writer who had made the most from films, earning over $2 million in royalties from 27 Tarzan pictures.\n\nThe Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Burroughs in 2003.\n\nAiming his work at the pulps, Burroughs had his first story, \"Under the Moons of Mars\", serialized by Frank Munsey in the February to July 1912 issues of \"The All-Story\" – under the name \"Norman Bean\" to protect his reputation. \"Under the Moons of Mars\" inaugurated the Barsoom series and earned Burroughs US$400 ($ today). It was first published as a book by A. C. McClurg of Chicago in 1917, entitled \"A Princess of Mars\", after three Barsoom sequels had appeared as serials and McClurg had published the first four serial Tarzan novels as books.\n\nBurroughs soon took up writing full-time, and by the time the run of \"Under the Moons of Mars\" had finished, he had completed two novels, including \"Tarzan of the Apes\", published from October 1912 and one of his most successful series.\n\nBurroughs also wrote popular science fiction and fantasy stories involving adventurers from Earth transported to various planets (notably Barsoom, Burroughs's fictional name for Mars, and Amtor, his fictional name for Venus), lost islands, and into the interior of the hollow earth in his \"Pellucidar\" stories. He also wrote Westerns and historical romances. Besides those published in \"All-Story\", many of his stories were published in \"The Argosy\" magazine.\n\nTarzan was a cultural sensation when introduced. Burroughs was determined to capitalize on Tarzan's popularity in every way possible. He planned to exploit Tarzan through several different media including a syndicated Tarzan comic strip, movies, and merchandise. Experts in the field advised against this course of action, stating that the different media would just end up competing against each other. Burroughs went ahead, however, and proved the experts wrong – the public wanted Tarzan in whatever fashion he was offered. Tarzan remains one of the most successful fictional characters to this day and is a cultural icon.\n\nIn either 1915 or 1919, Burroughs purchased a large ranch north of Los Angeles, California, which he named \"Tarzana\". The citizens of the community that sprang up around the ranch voted to adopt that name when their community, Tarzana, California, was formed in 1927. Also, the unincorporated community of Tarzan, Texas, was formally named in 1927 when the US Postal Service accepted the name, reputedly coming from the popularity of the first (silent) \"Tarzan of the Apes\" film, starring Elmo Lincoln, and an early \"Tarzan\" comic strip.\n\nIn 1923, Burroughs set up his own company, Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc., and began printing his own books through the 1930s.\n\nBecause of the part Burroughs's science fiction played in inspiring real exploration of Mars, an impact crater on Mars was named in his honor after his death. In a \"Paris Review\" interview, Ray Bradbury said of Burroughs that \"Edgar Rice Burroughs never would have looked upon himself as a social mover and shaker with social obligations. But as it turns out – and I love to say it because it upsets everyone terribly – Burroughs is probably the most influential writer in the entire history of the world.\" Bradbury continued that \"By giving romance and adventure to a whole generation of boys, Burroughs caused them to go out and decide to become special.\"\n\nIn \"Something of Myself\" (published posthumously in 1937) Rudyard Kipling wrote: \"My \"Jungle Books\" begat Zoos of <nowiki>[imitators]</nowiki>. But the genius of all the genii was one who wrote a series called \"Tarzan of the Apes\". I read it, but regret I never saw it on the films, where it rages most successfully. He had 'jazzed' the motif of the \"Jungle Books\" and, I imagine, had thoroughly enjoyed himself. He was reported to have said that he wanted to find out how bad a book he could write and 'get away with', which is a legitimate ambition.\"\n\nBy 1963, Floyd C. Gale of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" wrote when discussing reprints of several Burroughs novels by Ace Books, \"an entire generation has grown up inexplicably Burroughs-less\". He stated that most of the author's books had been out of print for years and that only the \"occasional laughable Tarzan film\" reminded public of his fiction. Gale reported his surprise that after two decades his books were again available, with Canaveral Press, Dover Publications, and Ballantine Books also reprinting them.\n\nFew critical books have been written about Burroughs. From an academic standpoint, the most helpful are Erling Holtsmark's two books: \"Tarzan and Tradition\" and \"Edgar Rice Burroughs\"; Stan Galloway's \"The Teenage Tarzan: A Literary Analysis of Edgar Rice Burroughs' \"Jungle Tales of Tarzan; and Richard Lupoff's two books: \"Master of Adventure: Edgar Rice Burroughs\" and \"Barsoom: Edgar Rice Burroughs and the Martian Vision\". Galloway was identified by James Edwin Gunn as \"one of the half-dozen finest Burroughs scholars in the world\"; Galloway called Holtsmark his \"most important predecessor.\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Princess of Mars\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"The Gods of Mars\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"The Warlord of Mars\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"Thuvia, Maid of Mars\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"The Chessmen of Mars\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"The Master Mind of Mars\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"A Fighting Man of Mars\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"Swords of Mars\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"Synthetic Men of Mars\" (1939)\nBULLET::::- \"Llana of Gathol\" (1941)\nBULLET::::- \"John Carter of Mars\" (1964, stories from 1940-1943)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan of the Apes\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"The Return of Tarzan\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"The Beasts of Tarzan\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Son of Tarzan\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"Jungle Tales of Tarzan\" (stories 1916-1917)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan the Untamed\" (1919)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan the Terrible\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Golden Lion\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Ant Men\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan, Lord of the Jungle\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Lost Empire\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan at the Earth's Core\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan the Invincible\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan Triumphant\" (1931)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the City of Gold\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Lion Man\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Leopard Men\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan's Quest\" (1935)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan the Magnificent\" (1936)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Forbidden City\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Foreign Legion\" (1947, written in 1944)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Tarzan Twins\" (1963, collects 1927 and 1936 children's books)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Madman\" (1964, written in 1940)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and the Castaways\" (1965, stories from 1940-1941)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1995, rewritten version of 1946 fragment) (completed by Joe R. Lansdale)\n\nBULLET::::- \"At the Earth's Core\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"Pellucidar\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"Tanar of Pellucidar\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan at the Earth's Core\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"Back to the Stone Age\" (1937)\nBULLET::::- \"Land of Terror\" (1944, written in 1939)\nBULLET::::- \"Savage Pellucidar\" (1963, stories from 1942)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Pirates of Venus\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Lost on Venus\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Carson of Venus\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Escape on Venus\" (1946, stories from 1941-1942)\nBULLET::::- \"The Wizard of Venus\" (1970, written in 1941)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Land That Time Forgot\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"The People That Time Forgot\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"Out of Time's Abyss\" (1918)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Moon Maid\" (1923, revised 1925; \"The Moon Men\")\nBULLET::::- \"Part I: The Moon Maid\"\nBULLET::::- \"Part II: The Moon Men\"\nBULLET::::- \"Part III: The Red Hawk\"\nThese three texts have been published by various houses in one or two volumes. Adding to the confusion, some editions have the original (significantly longer) introduction to Part I from the first publication as a magazine serial, and others have the shorter version from the first book publication, which included all three parts under the title \"The Moon Maid\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Mucker\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Return of the Mucker\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"The Oakdale Affair\" (1918)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Monster Men\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lost Continent\" (1916; a.k.a. \"Beyond Thirty\")\nBULLET::::- \"The Resurrection of Jimber-Jaw\" (1937)\nBULLET::::- \"Beyond the Farthest Star\" (1942)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Cave Girl\" (1913, revised 1917)\nBULLET::::- \"The Eternal Lover\" (1914, revised 1915; a.k.a. \"The Eternal Savage\")\nBULLET::::- \"The Man-Eater\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lad and the Lion (1917)\nBULLET::::- \"Jungle Girl\" (1931; a.k.a. \"Land of the Hidden Men\")\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Bandit of Hell's Bend\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"The War Chief\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"Apache Devil\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"The Deputy Sheriff of Comanche County\" (1940)\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Outlaw of Torn\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"I am a Barbarian\" (1967, written in 1941)\n\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1998, written in 1903)\nBULLET::::- \"The Mad King\" (1914, revised 1915)\nBULLET::::- \"The Girl from Farris's\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"The Rider\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"The Efficiency Expert\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"The Girl from Hollywood\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"Marcia of the Doorstep\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"You Lucky Girl!\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"Pirate Blood\" (1970, written in 1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Forgotten Tales of Love and Murder\" (2001, stories from 1910-1944)\nBULLET::::- \"Brother Men\" (2005) (Nonfiction)\n\nBULLET::::- \"\" by Richard A. Lupoff\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan Forever: The Life of Edgar Rice Burroughs, Creator of Tarzan\" by John Taliaferro\nBULLET::::- \"Golden Anniversary Bibliography of Edgar Rice Burroughs\" by the Rev. Henry Hardy Heins\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan Alive\" by Philip Jose Farmer\nBULLET::::- \"Burroughs's Science Fiction\" by Robert R. Kudlay and Joan Leiby\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan and Tradition\" and \"Edgar Rice Burroughs\" by Erling B. Holtsmark\nBULLET::::- \"Edgar Rice Burroughs\" by Irwin Porges\nBULLET::::- \"Edgar Rice Burroughs\" by Robert B. Zeuschner\nBULLET::::- \"The Burroughs Cyclopædia\" ed. by Clark A. Brady\nBULLET::::- \"A Guide to Barsoom\" by John Flint Roy\nBULLET::::- \"Tarzan: the Centennial Celebration\" by Scott Tracy Griffin\nBULLET::::- \"Edgar Rice Burroughs: The Descriptive Bibliography of the Grosset & Dunlap Reprints\" by B. J. Lukes\n\nBULLET::::- Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc.\nBULLET::::- Mars in fiction\nBULLET::::- Otis Adelbert Kline\nBULLET::::- Sword and planet\n\nBULLET::::- Works by Edgar Rice Burroughs at Project Gutenberg Australia\nBULLET::::- Bibliography on SciFan\nBULLET::::- translation\n\nBULLET::::- (Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc.)\nBULLET::::- Mars books (podcasts) at The Fantastic Worlds of Edgar Rice Burroughs\nBULLET::::- ERBzine.com\n"}
{"id": "9658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9658", "title": "Eugène Viollet-le-Duc", "text": "Eugène Viollet-le-Duc\n\nEugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (; 27 January 181417 September 1879) was a French architect and author who restored many prominent medieval landmarks in France, including those which had been damaged or abandoned during the French Revolution. His major restoration projects included Notre-Dame Cathedral, the Basilica of Saint Denis, Mont Saint-Michel, Sainte-Chapelle, and the medieval walls of the city of Carcassonne. His later writings on the relationship between form and function in architecture had a notable influence on a new generation of architects, including Antoni Gaudí, Victor Horta, and Louis Sullivan.\n\nViollet-le-Duc was born in Paris in 1814, in the last year of the Empire of Napoleon Bonaparte. His grandfather was an architect, and his father was a high-ranking civil servant, who in 1816 became the overseer of the royal residences of Louis XVIII. His uncle Étienne-Jean Delécluze was a painter, a former student of Jacques-Louis David, an art critic and hosted a literary salon, which was attended by Stendhal and Sainte-Beuve. His mother hosted her own salon, which women could attend as well as men. There, in 1822 or 1823, Eugène met Prosper Mérimée, a writer who would play a decisive role in his career.\n\nIn 1825 he began his education at the Pension Moran, in Fontenay-aux-Roses. He returned to Paris in 1829 as a student at the College de Bourbon (now the Lycée Condorcet). He passed his baccalaureate examination in 1830. His uncle urged him to enter the École des Beaux-Arts, which had been created in 1806, but the \"École \" had an extremely rigid system, based entirely on copying classical models, and Eugène was not interested. Instead he decided to get practical experience in the architectural offices of Jacques-Marie Huvé and Achille Leclère, while devoting much of his time to drawing medieval churches and monuments around Paris.\n\nHe participated in the July 1830 revolution which overthrew Charles X, building a barricade, his first known construction project. Following the revolution, which brought Louis Philippe to power, his father became chief of the bureau of royal residences. The new government created, for the first time, the position of Inspector General of Historic Monuments. Eugène's uncle Delécluze agreed to take Eugène on a long tour of France to see monuments. They travelled from July to October 1831 throughout the south of France, and he returned with a large collection of detailed paintings and watercolours of churches and monuments.\n\nOn his return to Paris, he moved with his family into the Tuileries Palace, where his father was now governor of royal residences. His family again urged him to attend the École des Beaux-Arts, but he still refused. He wrote in his journal in December 1831, \"the \"École\" is just a mould for architects. they all come out practically identical.\" He was a talented and meticulous artist; he travelled around France to visit monuments, cathedrals, and other medieval architecture, made detailed drawings and watercolours, which he sometimes sold at a high price to members of the Court.\n\nOn May 3, 1834, at age twenty, he married Élisabeth Templier, and in the same year he was named an associate professor of ornamental decoration at the Royal School of Decorative Arts, which gave him a more regular income. With the money from the sale of his drawings and paintings, the couple set off on a long tour of the monuments of Italy, visiting Rome, Venice, Florence and other sites, drawing and painting. His reaction to the Leaning Tower of Pisa was characteristic: \"It was extremely disagreeable to see\", he wrote, \"it would have been infinitely better if it had been straight.\" In 1838, he presented several of his drawings at the Paris Salon, and began making a travel book, \"Picturesque and romantic images of the old France\", for which, between 1838 and 1844, he made nearly three hundred engravings.\n\nIn October 1838, with the recommendation of Achille Leclère, the architect with whom he had trained, he was named deputy inspector of the enlargement of the Hôtel Soubise, the new home of the French National Archives. His uncle, Delécluze, then recommended him to the new Commission of Historic Monuments of France, led by Prosper Mérimée, who had just published a book on medieval French monuments. Though he was just twenty-four years old and had no degree in architecture, he was asked to go to Narbonne to propose a plan for the completion of the cathedral there. He made his first plan, which included not only the completion but also the restoration of the oldest parts of the structure. His first project was rejected by the local authorities as too ambitious and too expensive.\n\nHis next project was a restoration of the Vézelay Abbey, the church of a Benedictine monastery founded in the 12th century to house the reputed relics of Mary Magdalene. The church had been sacked by the Huguenots in 1569, and during the French Revolution, the facade and statuary on the facade were destroyed. The vaults of the roof were weakened, and many of the stones had been carried off for other projects. When Mérimée visited to inspect the structure he heard stones falling around him. In February 1840 Mérimée gave Viollet-le-Duc the mission of restoring and reconstructing the church so it would not collapse, while \"respecting exactly in his project of restoration all the ancient dispositions of the church\".\n\nThe task was all the more difficult because up until that time no scientific studies had been made of medieval building techniques, and there were no schools of restoration. He had no plans for the original building to work from. Viollet-le-Duc had to discover the flaws of construction that had caused the building to start to collapse in the first place and to construct a more solid and stable structure. He lightened the roof and built new arches to stabilize the structure, and slightly changed the shape of the vaults and arches. He was criticized for these modifications in the 1960s, though, as his defenders argued, without them the roof would have collapsed under its own weight.\n\nMérimée's deputy, Lenormant, inspected the construction and reported to Mérimée: \"The young Leduc seems entirely worthy of your confidence. He needed a magnificent audacity to take charge of such a desperate enterprise; it's certain that he arrived just in time, and if we had waited only ten years the church would have been a pile of stones.\"\n\nViollet-le-Duc's work at Vezelay led to a series of larger projects. In 1840, in collaboration with his friend the architect Jean-Baptiste Lassus he began the restoration of Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, which had been turned into a storage depot after the Revolution. His role in this project was relatively minor, with Lassus taking the lead. In February 1843, King Louis Philippe sent him to the Château of Amboise, to restore the stained glass windows in the chapel holding the tomb of Leonardo da Vinci. The windows were unfortunately destroyed in 1940 during World War II.\n\nIn 1843, Mérimée took Viollet-le-Duc with him to Burgundy and the south of France, on one of his long inspection tours of possible monuments. The two men shared the same passion for the gothic. Viollet-le-Duc made drawings of the buildings and wrote detailed accounts of each site, illustrated with his drawing, which were published in architectural journals. These articles were later turned into books; he became the most prominent academic scholar on French medieval architecture.\n\nIn 1844, with the backing of Mérimée, Viollet-le-Duc, just thirty years old, and Lassus, then thirty-seven, won a competition for the restoration of Notre-Dame Cathedral. Their project involved primarily the facade, where many of the statues over the portals had been beheaded or smashed during the Revolution. They proposed two major changes to the interior: rebuilding two of the bays to their original medieval height of four stories, and removing the marble neoclassical structures and decoration which had been added to the choir during the reign of Louis XIV. Mérimée warned them to be careful: \"In such a project, one cannot act with too much prudence or discretion...A restoration may be more disastrous for a monument than the ravages of centuries.\" The Commission on Historical Monuments approved most of Viollet-le-Duc's plans, but rejected his proposal to remove the choir built under Louis XIV. Viollet-le-Duc himself turned down a proposal to add two new spires atop the towers, arguing that such a monument \"would be remarkable but would not be Notre-Dame de Paris\". Instead, he proposed to rebuild the original medieval spire and bell tower over the transept, which had been removed in 1786 because it was unstable in the wind.\n\nOnce the project was approved, Viollet-le-Duc made drawings and photographs of the existing decorative elements; then they were removed and a stream of sculptors began making new statues of saints, gargoyles, chimeras and other architectural elements in a workshop he established, working from his drawings and photographs of similar works in other cathedrals of the same period. Other craftsmen made stained glass windows in Gothic grisaille patterns designed by Viollet-le-Duc to replace the destroyed medieval windows in the chapels of the ground floor of the nave of the cathedral. He also designed a new treasury in the Gothic style to serve as the museum of the cathedral, replacing the residence of the Archbishop, which had been destroyed in a riot in 1831.\n\nThe bells in the two towers had been taken out in 1791 and melted down to make cannons. Viollet-le-Duc had new bells cast for the north tower and a new structure built inside to support them. Viollet-le-Duc and Lassus also rebuilt the sacristy, on the south side of the church, which had been built in 1756, but had been burned by rioters during the July Revolution of 1830. The new spire was completed, taller and more strongly built to withstand the weather; it was decorated with statues of the apostles, and the face of Saint Thomas bore a noticeable resemblance to Viollet-le-Duc. The spire was destroyed on 15 April 2019, as a result of the Notre-Dame de Paris fire.\n\nThe restoration of Notre-Dame continued in this slow and methodical manner for twenty-five years. When not engaged in Paris, Viollet-le-Duc continued his long tours into the French provinces, inspecting, drawing, and making recommendations, and checking the progress of more than twenty different restoration projects that were under his control, including seven in Burgundy alone. His new projects included the Basilica of Saint-Sernin, Toulouse, and the Basilica of Saint-Denis just outside Paris. Saint-Denis had undergone a restoration by a different architect, Francois Debret, who had rebuilt one of the two towers. However, in 1846, the new tower, overloaded with masonry, began to crack, and Viollet-le-Duc was called in. He found no way the building could be saved; he had to oversee the demolition of the tower, saving the stones. He concentrated on restoring the interior of the church, and was able to substantially restore the original burial chamber of the Kings of France.\n\nIn May 1849, he was named the architect for the restoration of Amiens Cathedral, one of the largest in France, which had been built over many centuries in a variety of different styles. He wrote, \"his goal should be to save in each part of the monument its own character, and yet to make it so that the united parts don't conflict with each other; and that can be maintained in a state that is durable and simple.\"\n\nFor his restorations of churches and cathedrals, Viollet-le-Duc designed not only architecture, but new altars and furnishings. His new furnishings were installed in the sacristy of Notre-Dame, and his neo-Gothic altar was placed in the restored Cathedral of Clermont-Ferrand. Thanks largely to Viollet-le-Duc, the neo-Gothic became the standard style for church furnishing throughout France.\n\nThe French coup d'état of 1851 had transformed France from a republic to an empire and brought Napoleon III to power. The coup accelerated some of Viollet-le-Duc's projects. His patron and supervisor, Prosper Mérimée, had introduced the Emperor to the new Empress, and brought Viollet-le-Duc into close contact with the Emperor. The Emperor married the Empress Eugénie in Notre-Dame, and the government voted additional funds to advance the restoration. He moved forward with the slow work of restoration of the Cathedral of Reims and Cathedral of Amiens. In Amiens, he cleared the interior of the French classical decoration added under Louis XIV, and proposed to make it resolutely Gothic. He gave the Emperor and Empress a tour of his project in September 1853; the Empress immediately offered to pay two-thirds of the cost of the restoration. In the same year he undertook the restoration of the Château de Vincennes, long occupied by the military, along with its chapel, similar to Sainte-Chapelle. A devotee of the pure Gothic, he described the chapel as \"one of the finest specimens of Gothic in decline\".\n\nIn November 1853, he provided the costs and plans for the medieval ramparts of Carcassonne, which he had first begun planning in 1849. The first fortifications had been built by the Visigoths; on top of these, in the Middle Ages Louis XI and then Philip the Bold had built a formidable series of towers, galleries, walls, gates and interlocking defences that resisted all sieges until 1355. The fortifications were largely intact, since the surroundings of the city were still a military defensive zone in the 19th century, but the towers were without tops and a large number of structures had been built up against the old walls. Once he obtained funding and made his plans, he began demolishing all structures which had been attached to ramparts over the centuries, and restored the gates, walls and towers to their original form, including the defence platforms, roofs on the towers and shelters for archers that would have been used during a siege. He found many of the original mountings for weapons still in place. To accompany his work, he published a detailed history of the city and its fortifications, with his drawings. Carcassonne became the best example of medieval military architecture in France, and also an important tourist attraction.\n\nNapoleon III provided additional funding for the continued restoration of Notre-Dame. Viollet-le-Duc was also to replace the great bestiary of mythical beasts and animals which had decorated the cathedral in the 18th century. In 1856, using examples from other medieval churches and debris from Notre-Dame as his model, his workshop produced dragons, chimeras, grotesques, and gargoyles, as well as an assortment of picturesque pinnacles and fleurons. He engaged in a new project for restoration of the Cathedral of Clermont-Ferrand, a project which continued for ten years. He also undertook an unusual project for Napoleon III; the design and construction of six railway coaches with neo-Gothic interior décor for the Emperor and his entourage. Two of the cars still exist; the salon of honour car, with a fresco on the ceiling, is at the Château de Compiègne, and the dining car, with a massive golden eagle as the centrepiece of the décor, is at the Railroad Museum of Mulhouse.\n\nNapoleon III asked Viollet-le-Duc if he could restore a medieval chateau for the Emperor's own use near Compiègne, where the Emperor traditionally passed September and October. Viollet-le-Duc first studied a restoration of the Château de Coucy, which had the highest medieval tower in France, later destroyed. When this proved too complicated, he settled upon Château de Pierrefonds, a castle begun by Louis of Orleans in 1396, then dismantled in 1617 after several sieges by Louis XIII of France. Napoleon bought the ruin for 5000 francs in 1812, and Mérimée declared it an historic monument in 1848. In 1857 Viollet-le-Duc began designing an entirely new chateau on the ruins. This structure was not designed to recreate anything exactly that had existed, but a castle which recaptured the spirit of the gothic, with lavish neo-gothic decoration and 19th-century comforts.\n\nWhile most of his attention was devoted to restorations, Viollet-le-Duc designed and built a number of private residences and new buildings in Paris. He also participated in the most important competition of the period, for the new Paris Opera. There were one hundred seventy-one projects proposed in the original competition, presented the 1855 Paris Universal Exposition. A jury of noted architects narrowed it down to five, including projects from Viollet-le-Duc, Charles Rohault de Fleury and Charles Garnier, age thirty-five. The favorites of the Emperor and Empress were de Fleury and Viollet-le-Duc, but both were eliminated in the next round. Viollet-le-Duc was not a good loser, and he dismissed Garnier's style. Garnier wrote of his rival in 1869: \"Monsieur Viollet-le-Duc has produced much, but his best works without doubt are his restorations...One hesitates to appreciate his personal works. You cannot find any personality in them, only compromise. He is broken by archeology and crushed by the weight of the past. If it is difficult to learn, it is even more difficult to forget.\"\n\nNapoleon III called upon Viollet-le-Duc for a wide variety of archeological and architectural tasks. When he wished to put up a monument to mark the Battle of Alesia, where Julius Caesar defeated the Gauls, a battle whose actual site was disputed by historians, he asked Viollet-le-Duc to locate the exact battlefield. Viollet-le-Duc conducted excavations at various purported sites, and finally found vestiges of the walls that Caesar had built. He also designed the metal frame for the six-metre-high statue that would be placed on the site. He later designed a similar frame for a much larger statue, the Statue of Liberty, but died before that statue was finished.\n\nIn 1863, Viollet-le-Duc was named a professor at the École des Beaux-Arts, the school where he had refused to become a student, and the fortress of neoclassical Beaux-Arts architecture. This launched him on a new academic career as an architectural theorist, where he would have as much influence as he did as an architect of restorations. There was much resistance from the traditional faculty, but he attracted two hundred students to his course, who applauded his lecture at the end. He had already published the first volumes of his first major work, \"A Reasoned Dictionary of French Architecture\". This series eventually included ten volumes, published between 1854 and 1868. But while he had many supporters, the faculty and many of the students were strongly against him. His critics complained that, aside from having little formal architectural training himself, he had only built a handful of new buildings. He tired of the confrontations and resigned on 16 May 1863, and continued his writing and teaching outside the Beaux-Arts.\n\nIn the beginning of 1864, he celebrated the conclusion of his most important project, the restoration of Notre-Dame. In January of the same year he completed the first phase of the restoration of the Cathedral of Saint Sernin in Toulouse, one of the landmarks of French Romanesque architecture. Napoleon III invited Viollet-le-Duc to study possible restorations overseas, including in Algeria, Corsica, and in Mexico, where Napoleon had installed a new Emperor, Maximilien, under French sponsorship. He also saw the consecration of the third church that he had designed, the neo-Gothic Church of Saint-Denis de l'Estree, in the Paris suburb of Saint-Denis. Between 1866 and 1870, his major project was the ongoing transformation of Pierrefonds from a ruin into a royal residence. His plans for the metal framework he had designed for Pierrefonds were displayed at the Paris Universal Exposition of 1867. He also completed the tenth and final volume of his monumental dictionary of medieval architecture. He also began a new area of study, researching the geology and geography of the region around Mont Blanc in the Alps. While on his mapping excursion in the Alps in July 1870, he learned that war had been declared between Prussia and France.\n\nAs the Franco-Prussian War commenced, Viollet-le-Duc hurried back to Paris, and offered his services as a military engineer; he was put into service as a colonel of engineers, preparing the defenses of Paris. In September, the Emperor was captured at the Battle of Sedan, a new Republican government took power, and the Empress Eugénie fled into exile, as Germans marched as far as Paris and put it under siege. At the same time, on September 23, Viollet-le-Duc's primary patron and supporter, Prosper Mérimée, died peacefully in the south of France. Viollet-le-Duc supervised the construction of new defensive works outside Paris. On 14 December 1870, he wrote in his journal, \"Disorganization is everywhere. The officers have no confidence in the troops, and the troops have no confidence in the officers. Each day, new orders and new projects which contravene those of the day before.\" He fought with the French army against the Germans at Buzenval on 24 January 1871. The battle was lost, and the French capitulated on 28 January. Viollet-le-Duc wrote to his wife on February 28, \"I don't know what will become of me, but I do not want to return any more to administration. I am disgusted by it forever, and want nothing more than to pass the years that remain to me in study and in the most modest possible life.\"\n\nIn May 1871 he left his home in Paris just before national guardsmen arrived to draft him into the armed force of the Paris Commune. He returned to Pierrefonds, where he had a small apartment. Always the scholar, he wrote a detailed study of the effectiveness and deficiencies of the fortifications of Paris during the siege. He returned to the city shortly after the Commune was suppressed in May, 1871, and saw the ruins of most of the public buildings of the city, burned by the Commune in its last days. He received his only commission from the new government of the French Third Republic; Jules Simon, the new Minister of Culture and Public Instruction, asked him to design a plaque to be placed before Notre-Dame to honor the hostages killed by the Paris Commune in its final days.\n\nThe new government of the French Third Republic made little use of his expertise in the restoration of the major government buildings which had been burned by the Paris Commune, including the Tuileries Palace, the Palace of the Legion of Honor, the Palais Royale, the library of the Louvre, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Finance. The only reconstruction on which he was consulted was that of the Hotel de Ville. The writer Edmond de Goncourt called for leaving the ruin of the Hotel de Ville exactly as it was, \"a ruin of a magical palace, A marvel of the picturesque. The country should not condemn it without appeal to restoration by Viollet-le-Duc.\" The government asked Viollet-le-Duc to organize a competition. He presented two options; to either restore the building to its original state, with its historic interior; or to demolish it and build a new city hall. In July 1872 the government decided to preserve the Renaissance facade, but otherwise to completely demolish and rebuild the building.\n\nIn his later years he devoted most of his time to writing about architectural history. He consulted on many of his earlier projects around France, which were still underway. He also continued his explorations of the Alps around Mount Blanc, making a detailed map and a series of thirty-two drawings of the alpine scenery. He passed by Lausanne, where he was asked to prepare a plan for the restoration of the cathedral, which he did. In 1872, he completed the second volume of his major theoretical work, \"Entretiens sur l'architecture\".\n\nIn his \"Entretiens sur l'architecture\" he concentrated in particular on the use of iron and other new materials, and the importance of designing buildings whose architecture was adapted to their function, rather than to a particular style. The book was translated into English in 1881 and won a large following in the United States. The Chicago architect Louis Sullivan, one of the inventors of the skyscraper, often invoked the phrase, \"Form follows function.\"\n\nThe Lausanne cathedral was his final major restoration project; it was rebuilt following his plans between 1873 and 1876. Work continued after his death. His reconstruction of the bell tower was later criticized; he eliminated the original octagonal base and added a new spire, which rested on the walls, and not on the vaulting, like the original spire. He also added new decoration, crowning the spire at mid-height with gables, another original element, and removing the original tiles. He was also criticized for the materials and ornaments he added to the towers, including gargoyles. His structural design was preserved, but in 1925 his gargoyles and original ornamentation were removed, and the spire was recovered with tiles.\n\nHis reputation had reached outside of France. The spire and roof of Strasbourg Cathedral had been damaged by German artillery during the Franco-Prussian War, and the city was now part of Germany. The German government invited Viollet-le-Duc to comment on their plans for the restoration, which involved a more grandiose Romanesque tower. Viollet-le-Duc informed the German architect that his planned new tower was completely out of character with the original facade and style of the cathedral. His advice was accepted, and the church was restored to its original form.\n\nIn 1872 Viollet-le-Duc was engaged in the reconstruction of the Château d'Amboise, owned by the descendants of the former King, Louis-Philippe. The chateau had been confiscated by Napoleon III in 1848 but was returned to the family in 1872. It was a massive project to turn it into a residence, involving at times three hundred workers. Viollet-le-Duc designed all the work to the finest details, including the floor tiles, the gas lights in the salons, the ovens in the kitchen, and the electric bells for summoning servants.\n\nIn 1874 Viollet-le-Duc resigned as diocesan architect of Paris and was succeeded by his contemporary, Paul Abadie. In his final years, he continued to supervise the restoration projects that were underway for the Commission of Historical Monuments. He engaged in polemics about architecture in the press, and was elected to the Paris municipal council.\n\nHe became engaged in the planning and construction of the Paris Universal Exposition of 1878. He proposed to the Minister of Education, Jules Ferry, that the Palais de Trocadero, the main building of the Exposition on the hilltop of Chaillot, be transformed after the Exposition into a museum of French monuments, displaying models of architecture and sculpture from landmarks around France. This idea was accepted. The National Museum of French Monuments opened in 1882, after his death. The Palais was reconstructed into the Palais de Chaillot in 1937, but the Museum of French Monuments was preserved and can be seen there today.\n\nIn his final years his son Eugène-Louis became the head of the Commission of Historic Monuments. He took on just one new project, the restoration of the cloister of the Augustines at Toulouse. He completed his series of dictionaries of architectural periods, designed for a general audience. He also devoted more time to studying the geography of the Alps around Mont-Blanc. He spent his summers hiking in the mountains and writing articles about his travels. He launched a public campaign for the re-forestation of the Alps, and published a detailed map of the area in 1876. He spent more and more time at \"La Vedette\", the villa he constructed in Lausanne, a house on the model of a Savoyard chalet, but with a minimum of decoration, illustrating his new doctrine of form following function. He made one last visit to inspect Carcassonne, whose work was now under his son's direction. After an exhausting summer of hiking in the Alps in 1879, he became ill and died in Lausanne on 17 September 1879. He was buried in the cemetery of La Sallaz in Lausanne. In 1946 his grave and monument were transferred to the Cemetery of Bois-le-Vaux (Section XVIII) in Lausanne.\n\nViollet-le-Duc married Elisabeth Tempier in Paris on 3 May 1834. The couple had two children, but separated a few years after marriage, and spent little time together; he was continually on the road. The writer Geneviève Viollet-le-Duc (winner of the prix Broquette-Gonin in 1978) was his great-granddaughter.\n\nViollet-le-Duc famously defined restoration in volume eight of his \"Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du XI au XVI siecle\" of 1858: \"To restore a building is not to maintain it, repair it or remake it: it is to re-establish it in a complete state which may never have existed at any given moment.\" He then explained that it had to meet four conditions: (1) The \"re-establishment\" had to be scientifically documented with plans and photographs and archeological records, which would guarantee exactness. (2) The restoration had to involve not just the appearance of the monument, or the effect that it produced, but also its structure; it had to use the most efficient means to assure the long life of the building, including using more solid materials, used more wisely. (3) the restoration had to exclude any modification contrary to obvious evidence; but the structure could be adapted to conform to more modern or rational uses and practices, which meant alterations to the original plan; and (4) The restoration should preserve older modifications made to the building, with the exception of those which compromised its stability or its conservation, or those which gravely violated the value of its historical presence.\n\nHe drew conclusions from medieval architecture that he applied to modern architecture. He noted that it was sometimes necessary to employ an iron frame in restoration to avoid the danger of fires, as long as the new structure was not heavier than the original, and kept the original balance of forces found in medieval structures. \"The monuments of the Middle Ages were carefully calculated, and their organism is delicate. There is nothing in excess in their works, nothing useless. If you change one of the conditions of these organisms, you change all the others. Many people consider this a fault; for us, this is a quality which we too often neglect in our modern construction...Why should we build expensive walls two meters thick, if walls fifty centimeters thick [with reinforced supports], offer sufficient stability? In the structure of the Middle Ages, every portion of a work fulfilled a function and possessed an action.\"\n\nDuring the entire career of Viollet-le-Duc, he was engaged in a dispute with the doctrines of the École des Beaux-Arts, the leading architectural school of France, which he refused to attend as a student, and where he taught briefly as a professor, before being pressured to depart. In 1846 he engaged in a fervent exchange in print with Quatremère de Quincy, the Perpetual Secretary of the French Academy, on the question, \"Is it suitable, in the 19th century, to build churches in the gothic style?\" De Quincy and his followers denounced the gothic style as incoherent, disorderly, unintelligent, decadent and without taste. Viollet-le-Duc responded, \"What we want, \"messieurs\", is the return of an art which was born in our country...Leave to Rome what belongs to Rome, and to Athens what belongs to Athens. Rome didn't want our Gothic (and was perhaps the only one in Europe to reject it) and they were right, because when one has the good fortune to possess a national architecture, the best thing is to keep it.\"\n\n\"If you study for a moment a church of the 13th century\", he wrote, \"you see that all of the construction is carried out according to an invariable system. All the forces and the weights are thrust out to the exterior, a disposition which gives the interior the greatest open space possible. The flying buttresses and contreforts alone support the entire structure, and always have an aspect of resistance, of force and stability which reassures the eye and the spirit; The vaults, built with materials that are easy to mount and to place at a great height, are combined in a easy that places the totality of their weight on the piles; that the most simple means are always employed...and that all the parts of these constructions, independent of each other, even as they rely on each other, present an elasticity and a lightness needed in a building of such great dimensions. We can still see (and this is only found in gothic architecture) that human proportions are the one fixed rule.\"\n\nViollet-le-Duc was accused by his critics, in his own time and later, of pursuing the spirit of the gothic style in some of his restorations instead of strict historical accuracy. The British historian and architectural writer John Ruskin wrote in \"The Seven Lamps of Architecture\" in 1849: \"Neither the public, nor those who are responsible for the maintenance of public monuments, understand the true meaning of 'restoration'. It signifies the most complete destruction that an edifice can suffer; a destruction from which not a single vestige can be recovered; a destruction that comes from the false description of the thing destroyed. It is impossible, as impossible as it is to bring the dead back to life, to restore whatever might have been grand or beautiful in architecture...the enterprise is a lie from the beginning to the end.\" Despite this scepticism, Ruskin expressed his admiration for the historical research and writings of Viollet-le-Duc.\n\nViollet-le-Duc's restorations sometimes involved non-historical additions, either to assure the stability of the building, or sometimes simply to maintain the harmony of the design. The flèche, or spire of Notre-Dame de Paris, which had been constructed in about 1250, was removed in 1786 after it was damaged by the wind. Viollet-le-Duc designed and constructed a new spire, ornamented with statuary, which was taller than the original and modified to resist the weather, but in harmony with the rest of the design. In the 20th century, his flèche was a target for critics.\n\nHe was also criticized later for his modifications of the choir of Notre-Dame, which had been rebuilt in the Louis XIV style during the reign of that king. Viollet-le-Duc took out the old choir, including the altar where Napoleon Bonaparte had been crowned Emperor and replaced them with a gothic altar and decoration which he designed. When he modified the choir, he also constructed new bays with small gothic rose windows modelled on those in the church of Chars, in the Oise Valley. Some historians condemned these restorations as non-historical invention. His defenders pointed out that Viollet-le-Duc did not make any decisions on the restoration of Notre-Dame by himself; all of his plans were approved by Prosper Mérimée, the Inspector of Historical Monuments, and by the Commission of historic monuments.\n\nHe was criticized for the abundance of gothic gargoyles, chimeras, fleurons, and pinnacles which he added to Notre-Dame Cathedral. These decorations had existed in the Middle Ages but had largely been removed during the reign of Louis XIV. The last original gargoyles had been taken down in 1813. He modelled the new gargoyles and monsters on examples from other cathedrals of the period.\n\nHe was later criticized also for the stained glass windows he designed and had made for the chapels around the ground level of the cathedral, which feature intricate gothic designs in grisaille, which allow more light into the church. The contemporary view of the controversy of his restoration is summarized on a descriptive panel near the altar of the cathedral: \"The great restoration, carried to fruition by Viollet-le-Duc following the death of Lassus, supplied new radiance to the Cathedral – whatever reservations one might have about the choices that were made. The work of the nineteenth century is now as much a part of the architectural history of Notre-Dame as that undertaken in previous centuries.\"\n\nThe restoration of ramparts of Carcassonne was also criticized in the 20th century. His critics pointed out that the pointed caps of the towers he constructed were more typical of northern France, not the region where Carcassonne was located, near the Spanish border. Similarly he added roofs of northern slate tiles rather than southern clay tiles, a choice that has been reversed in more recent restorations. His critics also claimed that Viollet-le-Duc sought a \"condition of completeness\" which never actually existed at any given time.\nThe principal counter-argument made by Viollet-le-Duc's defenders was that, without his prompt restorations, many of the buildings that he restored would have been lost, and that he did the best that he could with the knowledge that was then available.\n\nBULLET::::- His residence and studio, 68 Rue Condorcet, 9th arrondissement, Paris (1862)\nBULLET::::- 28 rue de Liège, Paris\nBULLET::::- 15 rue de Douai, Paris\nBULLET::::- 23 rue Chauchat, Paris\n\nBULLET::::- Churches\nBULLET::::- Basilica of St. Mary Magdalene in Vézelay\nBULLET::::- St. Martin in Clamecy\nBULLET::::- Notre-Dame in Paris\nBULLET::::- Sainte-Chapelle in Paris (under Félix Duban)\nBULLET::::- Basilica of St. Denis near Paris\nBULLET::::- St. Louis in Poissy\nBULLET::::- Notre-Dame in Semur-en-Auxois\nBULLET::::- Basilica of St. Nazarius and St. Celsus in Carcassonne\nBULLET::::- Basilica of St. Sernin, Toulouse\nBULLET::::- Notre-Dame in Lausanne, Switzerland\nBULLET::::- Town halls\nBULLET::::- Saint-Antonin-Noble-Val\nBULLET::::- Narbonne\nBULLET::::- Castles\nBULLET::::- Château de Roquetaillade, in Bordeaux\nBULLET::::- Château de Pierrefonds\nBULLET::::- Fortified city of Carcassonne\nBULLET::::- Château de Coucy\nBULLET::::- Antoing in Belgium\nBULLET::::- Château de Vincennes, Paris\nBULLET::::- Château d'Amboise, Amboise\nRestoration of the Château de Pierrefonds, reinterpreted by Viollet-le-Duc for Napoleon III, was interrupted by the departure of the Emperor in 1870.\n\nThroughout his career Viollet-le-Duc made notes and drawings, not only for the buildings he was working on but also on Romanesque, Gothic and Renaissance buildings that were to be soon demolished. His notes were useful when preparing his published works. His study of medieval and Renaissance periods was not limited to architecture but extended also to such areas as furniture, clothing, musical instruments, armament, and geology.\n\nHis work was published, first in serial form, and then as full-scale books, as:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dictionary of French Architecture from 11th to 16th Century\" (1854–1868) (\") – Original language edition, including numerous illustrations.\nBULLET::::- \"Dictionary of French Furnishings\" (1858–1870) (\"Dictionnaire raisonné du mobilier français de l'époque Carolingienne à la Renaissance.\")\nBULLET::::- \"Entretiens sur l'architecture\" (in 2 volumes, 1863–72), in which Viollet-le-Duc systematized his approach to architecture and architectural education, in a system radically opposed to that of the \"École des Beaux-Arts\", which he had avoided in his youth and despised. In Henry Van Brunt's translation, the \"Discourses on Architecture\" was published in 1875, making it available to an American audience little more than a decade after its initial publication in France.\nBULLET::::- \"Histoire de l'habitation humaine, depuis les temps préhistoriques jusqu'à nos jours\" (1875). Published in English in 1876 as \"Habitations of Man in All Ages\". Viollet-Le-Duc traces the history of domestic architecture among the different \"races\" of mankind.\nBULLET::::- \"L'art russe: ses origines, ses éléments constructifs, son apogée, son avenir\" (1877), where Viollet-le-Duc applied his ideas of rational construction to Russian architecture.\n\nViollet-le-Duc is considered by many to be the first theorist of modern architecture. Sir John Summerson wrote that \"there have been two supremely eminent theorists in the history of European architecture – Leon Battista Alberti and Eugène Viollet-le-Duc.\"\n\nHis architectural theory was largely based on finding the ideal forms for specific materials and using these forms to create buildings. His writings centered on the idea that materials should be used \"honestly\". He believed that the outward appearance of a building should reflect the rational construction of the building. In \"Entretiens sur l'architecture\", Viollet-le-Duc praised the Greek temple for its rational representation of its construction. For him, \"Greek architecture served as a model for the correspondence of structure and appearance.\" There is speculation that this philosophy was heavily influenced by the writings of John Ruskin, who championed honesty of materials as one of the seven main emphases of architecture.\n\nAnother component in Viollet-le-Duc's theory was how the design of a building should start from its program and the plan, and end with its decorations. If this resulted in an asymmetrical exterior, so be it. He dismissed the symmetry of classicist buildings as vain, caring too much about appearances at the expense of practicality and convenience for the inhabitants of the house.\n\nIn several unbuilt projects for new buildings, Viollet-le-Duc applied the lessons he had derived from Gothic architecture, applying its rational structural systems to modern building materials such as cast iron. For inspiration, he also examined organic structures, such as leaves and animal skeletons. He was especially interested in the wings of bats, an influence represented by his Assembly Hall project.\n\nViollet-le-Duc's drawings of iron trusswork were innovative for the time. Many of his designs emphasizing iron would later influence the Art Nouveau movement, most noticeably in the work of Hector Guimard, Victor Horta, Antoni Gaudí and Hendrik Petrus Berlage. His writings inspired several American architects, including Frank Furness, John Wellborn Root, Louis Sullivan, and Frank Lloyd Wright.\n\nViollet-le-Duc had a second career in the military, primarily in the defense of Paris during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–71). He was so influenced by the conflict that during his later years he described the idealized defense of France by the analogy of the military history of Le Roche-Pont, an imaginary castle, in his work \"Histoire d'une Forteresse\" (\"Annals of a Fortress\", twice translated into English). Accessible and well researched, it is partly fictional.\n\n\"Annals of a Fortress\" strongly influenced French military defensive thinking. Viollet-le-Duc's critique of the effect of artillery (applying his practical knowledge from the 1870–1871 war) is so complete that it accurately describes the principles applied to the defense of France until World War II. The physical results of his theories are present in the fortification of Verdun prior to World War I and the Maginot Line prior to World War II. His theories are also represented by the French military theory of \"Deliberate Advance\", which stresses that artillery and a strong system of fortresses in the rear of an army are essential.\n\nThe English architect Benjamin Bucknall (1833–95) was a devotee of Viollet-le-Duc and during 1874 to 1881 translated several of his publications into English to popularise his principles in Great Britain. The later works of the English designer and architect William Burges were greatly influenced by Viollet-le-Duc, most strongly in Burges's designs for his own home, The Tower House in London's Holland Park district, and Burges's designs for Castell Coch near Cardiff, Wales.\n\nAn exhibition, \"Eugène Viollet-le-Duc 1814–1879\" was presented in Paris in 1965, and there was a larger, centennial exhibition in 1980.\n\nViollet-le-Duc was the subject of a Google Doodle on January 27, 2014.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Eugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc \"Dictionary of Art Historians\"\n\nBULLET::::- (in English)\nBULLET::::- \"Dictionnaire raisonné de l’architecture française du XIe au XVIe siècle\" (1875 edition, in French) at the Internet Archive:\nBULLET::::- Vol. 1 Abaque – Aronde\nBULLET::::- Vol. 2 Arts – Chapiteau\nBULLET::::- Vol. 3 Charnier – Console\nBULLET::::- Vol. 4 Construction – Cyborium\nBULLET::::- Vol. 5 Dais – Fût\nBULLET::::- Vol. 6 Gable – Ouvrier\nBULLET::::- Vol. 7 Palais – Puits\nBULLET::::- Vol. 8 Quai – Synagogue\nBULLET::::- Vol. 9 Tabernacle – Zodiaque\nBULLET::::- Vol. 10 Table analytique\n"}
{"id": "9659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9659", "title": "Endocarditis", "text": "Endocarditis\n\nEndocarditis is an inflammation of the inner layer of the heart, the endocardium. It usually involves the heart valves. Other structures that may be involved include the interventricular septum, the chordae tendineae, the mural endocardium, or the surfaces of intracardiac devices. Endocarditis is characterized by lesions, known as \"vegetations\", which is a mass of platelets, fibrin, microcolonies of microorganisms, and scant inflammatory cells. In the subacute form of infective endocarditis, the vegetation may also include a center of granulomatous tissue, which may fibrose or calcify.\n\nThere are several ways to classify endocarditis. The simplest classification is based on cause: either \"infective\" or \"non-infective\", depending on whether a microorganism is the source of the inflammation or not. Regardless, the diagnosis of endocarditis is based on clinical features, investigations such as an echocardiogram, and blood cultures demonstrating the presence of endocarditis-causing microorganisms.\n\nSigns and symptoms include fever, chills, sweating, malaise, weakness, anorexia, weight loss, splenomegaly, flu-like feeling, cardiac murmur, heart failure, petechia (red spots on the skin), Osler's nodes (subcutaneous nodules found on hands and feet), Janeway lesions (nodular lesions on palms and soles), and Roth's spots (retinal hemorrhages).\nInfective endocarditis is an infection of the inner surface of the heart, usually the valves. Symptoms may include fever, small areas of bleeding into the skin, heart murmur, feeling tired, and low red blood cells. Complications may include valvular insufficiency, heart failure, stroke, and kidney failure.\nThe cause is typically a bacterial infection and less commonly a fungal infection. Risk factors include valvular heart disease including rheumatic disease, congenital heart disease, artificial valves, hemodialysis, intravenous drug use, and electronic pacemakers. The bacterial most commonly involved are streptococci or staphylococci. Diagnosis is suspected based on symptoms and supported by blood cultures or ultrasound.\nThe usefulness of antibiotics following dental procedures for prevention is unclear. Some recommend them in those at high risk. Treatment is generally with intravenous antibiotics. The choice of antibiotics is based on the blood cultures. Occasionally heart surgery is required.\nThe number of people affected is about 5 per 100,000 per year. Rates, however, vary between regions of the world. Males are affected more often than females. The risk of death among those infected is about 25%. Without treatment it is almost universally fatal.\n\nNonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE) is most commonly found on previously undamaged valves. As opposed to infective endocarditis, the vegetations in NBTE are small, sterile, and tend to aggregate along the edges of the valve or the cusps. Also unlike infective endocarditis, NBTE does not cause an inflammation response from the body. NBTE usually occurs during a hypercoagulable state such as system-wide bacterial infection, or pregnancy, though it is also sometimes seen in patients with venous catheters. NBTE may also occur in patients with cancers, particularly mucinous adenocarcinoma where Trousseau syndrome can be encountered. Typically NBTE does not cause many problems on its own, but parts of the vegetations may break off and embolize to the heart or brain, or they may serve as a focus where bacteria can lodge, thus causing infective endocarditis.\n\nAnother form of sterile endocarditis is termed Libman–Sacks endocarditis; this form occurs more often in patients with lupus erythematosus and is thought to be due to the deposition of immune complexes. Like NBTE, Libman-Sacks endocarditis involves small vegetations, while infective endocarditis is composed of large vegetations. These immune complexes precipitate an inflammation reaction, which helps to differentiate it from NBTE. Also unlike NBTE, Libman-Sacks endocarditis does not seem to have a preferred location of deposition and may form on the undersurfaces of the valves or even on the endocardium.\n\n"}
{"id": "9660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9660", "title": "Euler's sum of powers conjecture", "text": "Euler's sum of powers conjecture\n\nEuler's conjecture is a disproved conjecture in mathematics related to Fermat's last theorem. It was proposed by Leonhard Euler in 1769. It states that for all integers and greater than 1, if the sum of th powers of positive integers is itself a th power, then is greater than or equal to :\n\nThe conjecture represents an attempt to generalize Fermat's last theorem, which is the special case : if , then .\n\nAlthough the conjecture holds for the case (which follows from Fermat's last theorem for the third powers), it was disproved for and . It is unknown whether the conjecture fails or holds for any value .\n\nEuler was aware of the equality involving sums of four fourth powers; this however is not a counterexample because no term is isolated on one side of the equation. He also provided a complete solution to the four cubes problem as in Plato's number or the taxicab number 1729. The general solution of the equation\nis\nwhere and are any integers.\n\nEuler's conjecture was disproven by L. J. Lander and T. R. Parkin in 1966 when, through a direct computer search on a CDC 6600, they found a counterexample for , This was published in a paper comprising just two sentences. A total of three primitive (that is, in which the summands do not all have a common factor) counterexamples are known:\n\nIn 1986, Noam Elkies found a method to construct an infinite series of counterexamples for the case. His smallest counterexample was\n\nA particular case of Elkies' solutions can be reduced to the identity\nwhere\nThis is an elliptic curve with a rational point at . From this initial rational point, one can compute an infinite collection of others. Substituting into the identity and removing common factors gives the numerical example cited above.\n\nIn 1988, Roger Frye found the smallest possible counterexample \nfor by a direct computer search using techniques suggested by Elkies. This solution is the only one with values of the variables below 1,000,000.\n\nIn 1967, L. J. Lander, T. R. Parkin, and John Selfridge conjectured that if \nwhere are positive integers for all and , then . In the special case , the conjecture states that if\n(under the conditions given above) then .\n\nThe special case may be described as the problem of giving a partition of a perfect power into few like powers. For and or , there are many known solutions. Some of these are listed below. As of 2002, there are no solutions for formula_6 whose final term is ≤ 730000. \n\nThis is the smallest solution to the problem by R. Norrie.\n\nBULLET::::- Jacobi–Madden equation\nBULLET::::- Prouhet–Tarry–Escott problem\nBULLET::::- Beal's conjecture\nBULLET::::- Pythagorean quadruple\nBULLET::::- Generalized taxicab number\nBULLET::::- Sums of powers, a list of related conjectures and theorems\n\nBULLET::::- Tito Piezas III, A Collection of Algebraic Identities\nBULLET::::- Jaroslaw Wroblewski, Equal Sums of Like Powers\nBULLET::::- Ed Pegg Jr., Math Games, Power Sums\nBULLET::::- James Waldby, A Table of Fifth Powers equal to a Fifth Power (2009)\nBULLET::::- R. Gerbicz, J.-C. Meyrignac, U. Beckert, All solutions of the Diophantine equation \"a\" + \"b\" = \"c\" + \"d\" + \"e\" + \"f\" + \"g\" for \"a\",\"b\",\"c\",\"d\",\"e\",\"f\",\"g\" < 250000 found with a distributed Boinc project\nBULLET::::- EulerNet: Computing Minimal Equal Sums Of Like Powers\nBULLET::::- Euler's Conjecture at library.thinkquest.org\nBULLET::::- A simple explanation of Euler's Conjecture at Maths Is Good For You!\n"}
{"id": "9662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9662", "title": "Book of Exodus", "text": "Book of Exodus\n\nThe Book of Exodus is the second book of the Bible and describes the Exodus, which includes the Israelites' deliverance from slavery in Egypt through the hand of Yahweh, the revelations at biblical Mount Sinai, and the subsequent \"divine indwelling\" of God with Israel.\n\nExodus is traditionally ascribed to Moses, but modern scholars see its initial composition as a product of the Babylonian exile (6th century BCE), with final revisions in the Persian post-exilic period (5th century BCE). Carol Meyers, in her commentary on Exodus, suggests that it is arguably the most important book in the Bible, as it presents the defining features of Israel's identity—memories of a past marked by hardship and escape, a binding covenant with God, who chooses Israel, and the establishment of the life of the community and the guidelines for sustaining it.\n\nThe English name \"Exodus\" comes from the , \"éxodos\", meaning \"going out\", from ἐξ- (ex, “out”) + ὁδός (hodós, “path, road”). \n\nIn Hebrew the book's title is שְׁמוֹת, \"shemōt\", \"Names\", from the beginning words of the text: \"These are the names of the sons of Israel\" ().\n\nThere is no unanimous agreement among scholars on the structure of Exodus. One strong possibility is that it is a diptych (i.e., divided into two parts), with the division between parts 1 and 2 at the crossing of the Red Sea or at the beginning of the theophany (appearance of God) in chapter 19. On this plan, the first part tells of God's rescue of his people from Egypt and their journey under his care to Sinai (chapters 1–19) and the second tells of the covenant between them (chapters 20–40).\n\nJacob's sons and their families join their brother, Joseph, in Egypt. Once there, the Israelites begin to grow in number. Egypt's Pharaoh, fearful that the Israelites could be a fifth column, forces the Israelites into slavery and orders the throwing of all newborn boys into the Nile. A Levite woman (Jochebed, according to other sources) saves her baby by setting him adrift on the river Nile in an ark of bulrushes. The Pharaoh's daughter finds the child, names him Moses, and brings him up as her own. But Moses is aware of his origins, and one day, when grown, he kills an Egyptian overseer who is beating a Hebrew slave and has to flee into Midian. There he marries Zipporah, the daughter of Midianite priest Jethro, and encounters God in a burning bush. Moses asks God for his name: God replies: \"I AM that I AM\", the explanation of the name \"Yahweh\" as he is thereafter known. God tells Moses to return to Egypt and lead the Hebrews into Canaan, the land promised to Abraham.\n\nMoses returns to Egypt and fails to convince the Pharaoh to release the Israelites. God smites the Egyptians with 10 terrible plagues (Plagues of Egypt) including a river of blood, many frogs, and the death of first-born sons. Moses leads the Israelites out of bondage after a final chase when the Pharaoh reneges on his coerced consent (Crossing the Red Sea and Yam Suph). The desert proves arduous, and the Israelites complain and long for Egypt, but God provides manna and miraculous water for them. The Israelites arrive at the mountain of God, where Moses's father-in-law Jethro visits Moses; at his suggestion Moses appoints judges over Israel. God asks whether they will agree to be his people. They accept. The people gather at the foot of the mountain, and with thunder and lightning, fire and clouds of smoke, and the sound of trumpets, and the trembling of the mountain, God appears on the peak, and the people see the cloud and hear the voice [or possibly \"sound\"] of God. God tells Moses to ascend the mountain. God pronounces the Ten Commandments (the Ethical Decalogue) in the hearing of all Israel. Moses goes up the mountain into the presence of God, who pronounces the Covenant Code (a detailed code of ritual and civil law), and promises Canaan to them if they obey. Moses comes down the mountain and writes down God's words and the people agree to keep them. God calls Moses up the mountain where he remains for 40 days and 40 nights. At the conclusion of the 40 days and 40 nights, Moses returns holding the set of stone tablets.\n\nGod gives Moses instructions for the construction of the tabernacle so that God could dwell permanently among his chosen people, as well as instructions for the priestly vestments, the altar and its appurtenances, the procedure for ordaining the priests, and the daily sacrifice offerings. Aaron becomes the first hereditary high priest. God gives Moses the two tablets of stone containing the words of the ten commandments, written with the \"finger of God\".\nWhile Moses is with God, Aaron makes a golden calf, which the people worship. God informs Moses of their apostasy and threatens to kill them all, but relents when Moses pleads for them. Moses comes down from the mountain, smashes the stone tablets in anger, and commands the Levites to massacre the unfaithful Israelites. God commands Moses to make two new tablets on which He will personally write the words that were on the first tablets. Moses ascends the mountain, God dictates the Ten Commandments (the Ritual Decalogue), and Moses writes them on the tablets.\n\nMoses descends from the mountain with a transformed face; from that time onwards he has to hide his face with a veil. Moses assembles the Hebrews and repeats to them the commandments he has received from God, which are to keep the Sabbath and to construct the Tabernacle. \"And all the construction of the Tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting was finished, and the children of Israel did according to everything that God had commanded Moses\", and from that time God dwelt in the Tabernacle and ordered the travels of the Hebrews.\n\nJewish and Christian tradition viewed Moses as the author of Exodus and the entire Torah, but by the end of the 19th century the increasing awareness of discrepancies, inconsistencies, repetitions and other features of the Pentateuch had led scholars to abandon this idea. In approximate round dates, the process which produced Exodus and the Pentateuch probably began around 600 BCE when existing oral and written traditions were brought together to form books recognisable as those we know, reaching their final form as unchangeable sacred texts around 400 BCE.\n\nThe story of the exodus is the founding myth of the Israelites, telling of their deliverance from slavery by Yahweh which made them his chosen people according to the Mosaic covenant. Fretheim says that it is not a historical narrative in any modern sense, instead its primary concern is theological. It reflects common themes of past communities in exile, including facing foreign captivity and suffering under just judgment because of disloyalty to God. In Exodus, everything is presented as the work of God, who appears frequently in person.\n\nAlthough mythical elements are not so prominent in Exodus as in Genesis, ancient legends may have an influence on the book's form or content: for example, the story of the infant Moses's salvation from the Nile is argued to be based on an earlier legend of king Sargon of Akkad, while the story of the parting of the Red Sea may trade on Mesopotamian creation mythology. Similarly, the Covenant Code (the law code in Exodus 20:22–23:33) has some similarities in both content and structure with the Laws of Hammurabi. These influences serve to reinforce the conclusion that the Book of Exodus originated in the exiled Jewish community of 6th-century BCE Babylon, but not all the sources are Mesopotamian: the story of Moses's flight to Midian following the murder of the Egyptian overseer may draw on the Egyptian \"Story of Sinuhe\".\n\nBiblical scholars describe the Bible's theologically-motivated history writing as \"salvation history\", meaning a history of God's saving actions that give identity to Israel – the promise of offspring and land to the ancestors, the exodus from Egypt (in which God saves Israel from slavery), the wilderness wandering, the revelation at Sinai, and the hope for the future life in the promised land.\n\nA theophany is a manifestation (appearance) of a god – in the Bible, an appearance of the God of Israel, accompanied by storms – the earth trembles, the mountains quake, the heavens pour rain, thunder peals and lightning flashes. The theophany in Exodus begins \"the third day\" from their arrival at Sinai in chapter 19: Yahweh and the people meet at the mountain, God appears in the storm and converses with Moses, giving him the Ten Commandments while the people listen. The theophany is therefore a public experience of divine law.\n\nThe second half of Exodus marks the point at which, and describes the process through which, God's theophany becomes a permanent presence for Israel via the Tabernacle. That so much of the book (chapters 25–31, 35–40) describes the plans of the Tabernacle demonstrates the importance it played in the perception of Second Temple Judaism at the time of the text's redaction by the Priestly writers: the Tabernacle is the place where God is physically present, where, through the priesthood, Israel could be in direct, literal communion with him.\n\nThe heart of Exodus is the Sinaitic covenant. A covenant is a legal document binding two parties to take on certain obligations towards each other. There are several covenants in the Bible, and in each case they exhibit at least some of the elements in real-life treaties of the ancient Middle East: a preamble, historical prologue, stipulations, deposition and reading, list of witnesses, blessings and curses, and ratification by animal sacrifice. Biblical covenants, in contrast to Eastern covenants in general, are between a god, Yahweh, and a people, Israel, instead of between a strong ruler and a weaker vassal.\n\nGod elects Israel for salvation because the \"sons of Israel\" are \"the firstborn son\" of the God of Israel, descended through Shem and Abraham to the chosen line of Jacob whose name is changed to Israel. The goal of the divine plan in Exodus is a return to humanity's state in Eden, so that God can dwell with the Israelites as he had with Adam and Eve through the Ark and Tabernacle, which together form a model of the universe; in later Abrahamic religions Israel becomes the guardian of God's plan for humanity, to bring \"God's creation blessing to mankind\" begun in Adam.\n\nThe overwhelming consensus among scholars is that the Exodus story is best understood as a myth and does not accurately describe historical events. While archaeology has found traces left by even small bands of hunter-gatherers in the Sinai, but there is no evidence at all for the large body of people described in the Exodus story: \"The conclusion – that Exodus did not happen at the time and in the manner described in the Bible – seems irrefutable [...] repeated excavations and surveys throughout the entire area have not provided even the slightest evidence\" (Finkelstein and Silberman, 2001). Instead, modern archaeology suggests continuity between Canaanite and Israelite settlement, indicating a primarily Canaanite origin for Israel.\n\nWhile all but the most conservative scholars reject the biblical account of the Exodus, a majority still believes that the story has some historical basis, with Kenton Sparks referring to it as \"mythologized history.\" Some scholars, associated with the interpretative school of Biblical minimalism, show more skepticism towards ascribing any historicity to the Exodus, with some arguing that the myth has its origins in the exilic and post-exilic Jewish community and has little to no historical basis.\n\nBULLET::::- Film adaptations of the Book of Exodus\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Ancient Egypt\nBULLET::::- Ketef Hinnom\nBULLET::::- Song of the sea\n\nBULLET::::- Newman, Murray L (2000) \"Exodus\" Forward Movement Publications\nBULLET::::- Plaut, Gunther. \"The Torah: A Modern Commentary\" (1981),\n\nBULLET::::- Exodus at BibleGateway.com\nBULLET::::- Exodus at Mechon-Mamre (Jewish Publication Society translation)\nBULLET::::- Exodus (The Living Torah) Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan's translation and commentary at Ort.org\nBULLET::::- Shemot – Exodus (Judaica Press) translation [with Rashi's commentary] at Chabad.org\nBULLET::::- \"Shmot\" (Original Hebrew – English at Mechon-Mamre.org)\nBULLET::::- Various versions\n"}
{"id": "9663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9663", "title": "Electronics", "text": "Electronics\n\nElectronics comprises the physics, engineering, technology and applications that deal with the emission, flow and control of electrons in vacuum and matter.\n\nElectronics is widely used in information processing, telecommunication, and signal processing. The ability of electronic devices to act as switches makes digital information-processing possible. Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards, electronics packaging technology, and other varied forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed electronic components into a regular working system, called an electronic system; examples are computers or control systems. An electronic system may be a component of another engineered system or a standalone device. most electronic devices use semiconductor components to perform electron control.\n\nThe identification of the electron in 1897, along with the invention of the vacuum tube, which could amplify and rectify small electrical signals, inaugurated the field of electronics and the electron age.\n\nCommonly, electronic devices contain circuitry consisting primarily or exclusively of active semiconductors supplemented with passive elements; such a circuit is described as an electronic circuit. Electronics deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes, integrated circuits, optoelectronics, and sensors, associated passive electrical components, and interconnection technologies. The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes amplification of weak signals possible.\n\nElectrical and electromechanical science and technology deals with the generation, distribution, switching, storage, and conversion of electrical energy to and from other energy forms (using wires, motors, generators, batteries, switches, relays, transformers, resistors, and other passive components). This distinction started around 1906 with the invention by Lee De Forest of the triode, which made electrical amplification of weak radio signals and audio signals possible with a non-mechanical device. Until 1950, this field was called \"radio technology\" because its principal application was the design and theory of radio transmitters, receivers, and vacuum tubes.\n\nThe term \"solid-state electronics\" emerged after the first working transistor was invented by William Shockley, Walter Houser Brattain and John Bardeen at Bell Labs in 1947. The MOSFET (MOS transistor) was later invented by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959. The MOSFET was the first truly compact transistor that could be miniaturised and mass-produced for a wide range of uses, revolutionizing the electronics industry, and playing a central role in the microelectronics revolution and Digital Revolution. The MOSFET has since become the basic element in most modern electronic equipment, and is the most widely used electronic device in the world.\n\nThe study of semiconductor devices and related technology is considered a branch of solid-state physics, whereas the design and construction of electronic circuits to solve practical problems come under electronics engineering. This article focuses on engineering aspects of electronics.\n\nElectronics has branches as follows:\n\nBULLET::::1. Digital electronics\nBULLET::::2. Analogue electronics\nBULLET::::3. Microelectronics\nBULLET::::4. Circuit design\nBULLET::::5. Integrated circuits\nBULLET::::6. Power electronics\nBULLET::::7. Optoelectronics\nBULLET::::8. Semiconductor devices\nBULLET::::9. Embedded systems\nBULLET::::10. Audio electronics\nBULLET::::11. Telecommunications\n\nAn electronic component is any physical entity in an electronic system used to affect the electrons or their associated fields in a manner consistent with the intended function of the electronic system. Components are generally intended to be connected together, usually by being soldered to a printed circuit board (PCB), to create an electronic circuit with a particular function (for example an amplifier, radio receiver, or oscillator). Components may be packaged singly, or in more complex groups as integrated circuits. Some common electronic components are capacitors, inductors, resistors, diodes, transistors, etc. Components are often categorized as active (e.g. transistors and thyristors) or passive (e.g. resistors, diodes, inductors and capacitors).\n\nVacuum tubes (Thermionic valves) were among the earliest electronic components. They were almost solely responsible for the electronics revolution of the first half of the twentieth century. They allowed for vastly more complicated systems and gave us radio, television, phonographs, radar, long-distance telephony and much more. They played a leading role in the field of microwave and high power transmission as well as television receivers until the middle of the 1980s. Since that time, solid-state devices have all but completely taken over. Vacuum tubes are still used in some specialist applications such as high power RF amplifiers, cathode ray tubes, specialist audio equipment, guitar amplifiers and some microwave devices.\n\nThe first working point-contact transistor was invented by John Bardeen and Walter Houser Brattain at Bell Labs in 1947. In April 1955, the IBM 608 was the first IBM product to use transistor circuits without any vacuum tubes and is believed to be the first all-transistorized calculator to be manufactured for the commercial market. The 608 contained more than 3,000 germanium transistors. Thomas J. Watson Jr. ordered all future IBM products to use transistors in their design. From that time on transistors were almost exclusively used for computer logic and peripherals. However, early junction transistors were relatively bulky devices that were difficult to manufacture on a mass-production basis, which limited them to a number of specialised applications.\n\nThe MOSFET (MOS transistor) was invented by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959. The MOSFET was the first truly compact transistor that could be miniaturised and mass-produced for a wide range of uses. Its advantages include high scalability, affordability, low power consumption, and high density. It revolutionized the electronics industry, becoming the most widely used electronic device in the world. The MOSFET is the basic element in most modern electronic equipment, and has been central to the electronics revolution, the microelectronics revolution, and the Digital Revolution. The MOSFET has thus been credited as the birth of modern electronics, and possibly the most important invention in electronics.\n\nCircuits and components can be divided into two groups: analog and digital. A particular device may consist of circuitry that has one or the other or a mix of the two types.\n\nMost analog electronic appliances, such as radio receivers, are constructed from combinations of a few types of basic circuits. Analog circuits use a continuous range of voltage or current as opposed to discrete levels as in digital circuits.\n\nThe number of different analog circuits so far devised is huge, especially because a 'circuit' can be defined as anything from a single component, to systems containing thousands of components.\n\nAnalog circuits are sometimes called linear circuits although many non-linear effects are used in analog circuits such as mixers, modulators, etc. Good examples of analog circuits include vacuum tube and transistor amplifiers, operational amplifiers and oscillators.\n\nOne rarely finds modern circuits that are entirely analog. These days analog circuitry may use digital or even microprocessor techniques to improve performance. This type of circuit is usually called \"mixed signal\" rather than analog or digital.\n\nSometimes it may be difficult to differentiate between analog and digital circuits as they have elements of both linear and non-linear operation. An example is the comparator which takes in a continuous range of voltage but only outputs one of two levels as in a digital circuit. Similarly, an overdriven transistor amplifier can take on the characteristics of a controlled switch having essentially two levels of output. In fact, many digital circuits are actually implemented as variations of analog circuits similar to this example – after all, all aspects of the real physical world are essentially analog, so digital effects are only realized by constraining analog behavior.\n\nDigital circuits are electric circuits based on a number of discrete voltage levels. Digital circuits are the most common physical representation of Boolean algebra, and are the basis of all digital computers. To most engineers, the terms \"digital circuit\", \"digital system\" and \"logic\" are interchangeable in the context of digital circuits.\nMost digital circuits use a binary system with two voltage levels labeled \"0\" and \"1\". Often logic \"0\" will be a lower voltage and referred to as \"Low\" while logic \"1\" is referred to as \"High\". However, some systems use the reverse definition (\"0\" is \"High\") or are current based. Quite often the logic designer may reverse these definitions from one circuit to the next as he sees fit to facilitate his design. The definition of the levels as \"0\" or \"1\" is arbitrary.\n\nTernary (with three states) logic has been studied, and some prototype computers made.\n\nComputers, electronic clocks, and programmable logic controllers (used to control industrial processes) are constructed of digital circuits. Digital signal processors are another example.\n\nBuilding blocks:\nBULLET::::- Metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET)\nBULLET::::- Logic gates\nBULLET::::- Adders\nBULLET::::- Flip-flops\nBULLET::::- Counters\nBULLET::::- Registers\nBULLET::::- Multiplexers\nBULLET::::- Schmitt triggers\n\nHighly integrated devices:\nBULLET::::- Memory chip\nBULLET::::- Microprocessors\nBULLET::::- Microcontrollers\nBULLET::::- Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)\nBULLET::::- Digital signal processor (DSP)\nBULLET::::- Field-programmable gate array (FPGA)\n\nHeat generated by electronic circuitry must be dissipated to prevent immediate failure and improve long term reliability. Heat dissipation is mostly achieved by passive conduction/convection. Means to achieve greater dissipation include heat sinks and fans for air cooling, and other forms of computer cooling such as water cooling. These techniques use convection, conduction, and radiation of heat energy.\n\nElectronic noise is defined as unwanted disturbances superposed on a useful signal that tend to obscure its information content. Noise is not the same as signal distortion caused by a circuit. Noise is associated with all electronic circuits. Noise may be electromagnetically or thermally generated, which can be decreased by lowering the operating temperature of the circuit. Other types of noise, such as shot noise cannot be removed as they are due to limitations in physical properties.\n\nMathematical methods are integral to the study of electronics. To become proficient in electronics it is also necessary to become proficient in the mathematics of circuit analysis.\n\nCircuit analysis is the study of methods of solving generally linear systems for unknown variables such as the voltage at a certain node or the current through a certain branch of a network. A common analytical tool for this is the SPICE circuit simulator.\n\nAlso important to electronics is the study and understanding of electromagnetic field theory.\n\nDue to the complex nature of electronics theory, laboratory experimentation is an important part of the development of electronic devices. These experiments are used to test or verify the engineer's design and detect errors. Historically, electronics labs have consisted of electronics devices and equipment located in a physical space, although in more recent years the trend has been towards electronics lab simulation software, such as CircuitLogix, Multisim, and PSpice.\n\nToday's electronics engineers have the ability to design circuits using premanufactured building blocks such as power supplies, semiconductors (i.e. semiconductor devices, such as transistors), and integrated circuits. Electronic design automation software programs include schematic capture programs and printed circuit board design programs. Popular names in the EDA software world are NI Multisim, Cadence (ORCAD), EAGLE PCB and Schematic, Mentor (PADS PCB and LOGIC Schematic), Altium (Protel), LabCentre Electronics (Proteus), gEDA, KiCad and many others.\n\nMany different methods of connecting components have been used over the years. For instance, early electronics often used point to point wiring with components attached to wooden breadboards to construct circuits. Cordwood construction and wire wrap were other methods used. Most modern day electronics now use printed circuit boards made of materials such as FR4, or the cheaper (and less hard-wearing) Synthetic Resin Bonded Paper (SRBP, also known as Paxoline/Paxolin (trade marks) and FR2) – characterised by its brown colour. Health and environmental concerns associated with electronics assembly have gained increased attention in recent years, especially for products destined to the European Union, with its Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive (RoHS) and Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE), which went into force in July 2006.\n\nElectronic systems design deals with the multi-disciplinary design issues of complex electronic devices and systems, such as mobile phones and computers. The subject covers a broad spectrum, from the design and development of an electronic system (new product development) to assuring its proper function, service life and disposal. Electronic systems design is therefore the process of defining and developing complex electronic devices to satisfy specified requirements of the user.\n\nElectrical components are generally mounted in the following ways:\n\nBULLET::::- Through-hole\nBULLET::::- Surface Mount\nBULLET::::- Chassis Mount\nBULLET::::- LGA/BGA/PGA Socket\n\nThe electronics industry consists of various sectors. The central driving force behind the entire electronics industry is the semiconductor industry sector, which has annual sales of over as of 2018. The largest industry sector is e-commerce, which generated over in 2017. The most widely manufactured electronic device is the metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), with an estimated 13sextillion MOSFETs having been manufactured between 1960 and 2018.\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of electronics\nBULLET::::- \"The Art of Electronics\"\n\nBULLET::::- http://www.dictionary.com/browse/electronics\nBULLET::::- Navy 1998 Navy Electricity and Electronics Training Series (NEETS)\nBULLET::::- DOE 1998 Electrical Science, Fundamentals Handbook, 4 vols.\nBULLET::::- Vol. 1, Basic Electrical Theory, Basic DC Theory\nBULLET::::- Vol. 2, DC Circuits, Batteries, Generators, Motors\nBULLET::::- Vol. 3, Basic AC Theory, Basic AC Reactive Components, Basic AC Power, Basic AC Generators\nBULLET::::- Vol. 4, AC Motors, Transformers, Test Instruments & Measuring Devices, Electrical Distribution Systems\n"}
{"id": "9664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9664", "title": "Erewhon", "text": "Erewhon\n\nErewhon: or, Over the Range () is a novel by Samuel Butler which was first published anonymously in 1872. The title is also the name of a country, supposedly discovered by the protagonist. In the novel, it is not revealed where Erewhon is, but it is clear that it is a fictional country. Butler meant the title to be understood as the word \"nowhere\" backwards even though the letters \"h\" and \"w\" are transposed. The book is a satire on Victorian society.\n\nThe first few chapters of the novel dealing with the discovery of Erewhon are in fact based on Butler's own experiences in New Zealand where, as a young man, he worked as a sheep farmer on Mesopotamia Station for about four years (1860–64), and explored parts of the interior of the South Island and which he wrote about in his \"A First Year in Canterbury Settlement\" (1863).\n\nThe greater part of the book consists of a description of Erewhon. The nature of this nation is intended to be ambiguous. At first glance, Erewhon appears to be a Utopia, yet it soon becomes clear that this is far from the case. Yet for all the failings of Erewhon, it is also clearly not a dystopia, such as that depicted in George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". As a satirical utopia, \"Erewhon\" has sometimes been compared to \"Gulliver's Travels\" (1726), a classic novel by Jonathan Swift; the image of Utopia in this latter case also bears strong parallels with the self-view of the British Empire at the time. It can also be compared to the William Morris novel, \"News from Nowhere\".\n\n\"Erewhon\" satirises various aspects of Victorian society, including criminal punishment, religion and anthropocentrism. For example, according to Erewhonian law, offenders are treated as if they were ill, whereas ill people are looked upon as criminals. Another feature of Erewhon is the absence of machines; this is due to the widely shared perception by the Erewhonians that they are potentially dangerous. This last aspect of \"Erewhon\" reveals the influence of Charles Darwin's evolution theory; Butler had read \"On the Origin of Species\" soon after it was published in 1859.\n\nButler developed the three chapters of \"Erewhon\" that make up \"The Book of the Machines\" from a number of articles that he had contributed to \"The Press\", which had just begun publication in Christchurch, New Zealand, beginning with \"Darwin among the Machines\" (1863). Butler was the first to write about the possibility that machines might develop consciousness by Darwinian selection. Many dismissed this as a joke; but, in his preface to the second edition, Butler wrote, \"I regret that reviewers have in some cases been inclined to treat the chapters on Machines as an attempt to reduce Mr. Darwin's theory to an absurdity. Nothing could be further from my intention, and few things would be more distasteful to me than any attempt to laugh at Mr. Darwin.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Higgs—The narrator who informs the reader of the nature of Erewhonian society.\nBULLET::::- Chowbok (Kahabuka)—Higgs' guide into the mountains; he is a native who greatly fears the Erewhonians. He eventually abandons Higgs.\nBULLET::::- Yram—The daughter of Higgs' jailer who takes care of him when he first enters Erewhon. Her name is Mary spelled backwards.\nBULLET::::- Senoj Nosnibor—Higgs' host after he is released from prison; he hopes that Higgs will marry his elder daughter. His name is Robinson Jones backwards.\nBULLET::::- Zulora—Senoj Nosnibor's elder daughter—Higgs finds her unpleasant, but her father hopes Higgs will marry her. Her name is Aroluz backwards.\nBULLET::::- Arowhena—Senoj Nosnibor's younger daughter; she falls in love with Higgs and runs away with him.\nBULLET::::- Mahaina—A woman who claims to suffer from alcoholism but is believed to have a weak temperament.\nBULLET::::- Ydgrun—The incomprehensible goddess of the Erewhonians. Her name is an anagram of Grundy (from Mrs. Grundy, a character in Thomas Morton's play \"Speed the Plough\").\n\nAfter its first release, this book sold far better than any of Butler's other works, perhaps because the British public assumed that the anonymous author was some better-known figure (the favourite being Edward Bulwer-Lytton, who had published \"The Coming Race\" two years previously). In a 1945 broadcast, George Orwell praised the book and said that when Butler wrote \"Erewhon\" it needed \"imagination of a very high order to see that machinery could be dangerous as well as useful.\" He recommended the novel, though not its sequel, \"Erewhon Revisited\".\n\nThe French philosopher Gilles Deleuze used ideas from Butler's book at various points in the development of his philosophy of difference. In \"Difference and Repetition\" (1968), Deleuze refers to what he calls \"Ideas\" as \"Erewhon\". \"Ideas are not concepts\", he argues, but rather \"a form of eternally positive differential multiplicity, distinguished from the identity of concepts.\" \"Erewhon\" refers to the \"nomadic distributions\" that pertain to simulacra, which \"are not universals like the categories, nor are they the \"hic et nunc\" or \"nowhere\", the diversity to which categories apply in representation.\" \"Erewhon\", in this reading, is \"not only a disguised \"no-where\" but a rearranged \"now-here\".\"\n\nIn his collaboration with Félix Guattari, \"Anti-Oedipus\" (1972), Deleuze draws on Butler's \"The Book of the Machines\" to \"go beyond\" the \"usual polemic between vitalism and mechanism\" as it relates to their concept of \"desiring-machines\":\nIn 1994, a group of ex-Yugoslavian writers in Amsterdam, who had established the PEN centre of Yugoslav Writers in Exile, published a single issue of a literary journal \"Erewhon\".\n\nNew Zealand sound art organisation, the Audio Foundation, published in 2012 an anthology edited by Bruce Russell named \"Erewhon Calling\" after Butler's book.\n\nIn 2014, New Zealand artist Gavin Hipkins released his first feature film, titled \"Erewhon\" and based on Butler's book. It premiered at the New Zealand International Film Festival and the Edinburgh Art Festival.\n\nIn \"Smile\", the second episode of the 2017 season of \"Doctor Who\", the Doctor and Bill explore a spaceship named \"Erehwon\". Despite the slightly different spelling, the episode writer Frank Cottrell-Boyce confirmed that this was a reference to Butler's novel.\n\n'The Butlerian Jihad' is the name of the crusade to wipeout 'thinking machines' in the novel, Dune, by Frank Herbert. \n\n'Erewhon' is the name of Los Angeles based natural foods grocery store.\n\n'Erewhon' is also the name of an independent speculative fiction publishing company founded in 2018 by Liz Gorinsky.\n\nBULLET::::- Rangitata River – the location of the Erewhon sheep station named by Butler who was the first white settler in the area and lived at the Mesopotamia Sheep Station\nBULLET::::- Nacirema - another piece of satirical writing with a similar backwards pun\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mesopotamia Station\", Newton, P. (1960)\nBULLET::::- \"Early Canterbury Runs\", Acland, L. G. D. (1946)\nBULLET::::- \"Samuel Butler of Mesopotamia\", Maling, P. B. (1960)\nBULLET::::- \"The Cradle of Erewhon\", Jones, J. (1959)\nBULLET::::- “The Day of the Dolphin” (1973 movie starring George C. Scott); it’s the name of a motorboat that appears approx. 12 min. into the film.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Erewhon: or Over the Range\" Jonathan Cape, 1921 edition from the New Zealand Electronic Text Centre\nBULLET::::- \"Darwin Among the Machines\" (To the Editor of \"The Press\", Christchurch, New Zealand, 13 June 1863) from the New Zealand Electronic Text Centre\n"}
{"id": "9665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9665", "title": "Ectopia (medicine)", "text": "Ectopia (medicine)\n\nAn ectopia () is a displacement or malposition of an organ or other body part, which is then referred to as ectopic (). Most ectopias are congenital, but some may happen later in life.\n\nBULLET::::- Ectopic ACTH syndrome, also known as small-cell carcinoma.\nBULLET::::- Ectopic calcification, a pathologic deposition of calcium salts in tissues or bone growth in soft tissues\nBULLET::::- Cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, aka Chiari malformation, a herniation of the brain through the foramen magnum, which may be congenital or caused by trauma.\nBULLET::::- Ectopic cilia, a hair growing where it isn't supposed to be, commonly an eyelash on an abnormal spot on the eyelid, distichia\nBULLET::::- Ectopia cordis, the displacement of the heart outside the body during fetal development\nBULLET::::- Ectopic enamel, a tooth abnormality, where enamel is found in an unusual location, such as at the root of a tooth\nBULLET::::- Ectopic expression, the expression of a gene in an abnormal place in an organism\nBULLET::::- Ectopic hormone, a hormone produced by a tumor, such as small-cell carcinoma, can cause Cushing's syndrome\nBULLET::::- Ectopia lentis, the displacement of the crystalline lens of the eye\nBULLET::::- Neuronal ectopia\nBULLET::::- Ectopic pancreas, displacement of pancreatic tissue in the body with no connection, anatomical or vascular, to the pancreas\nBULLET::::- Ectopic recombination, the recombination between sequences (like leu2 sequences) present at different genomic locations\nBULLET::::- Renal ectopia occurs when both kidneys are on the same side of the body\nBULLET::::- Ectopic testis, a testis that has moved to an unusual location\nBULLET::::- Ectopic thymus, where thymus tissue is found in an abnormal location\nBULLET::::- Ectopic thyroid, where an entire or parts of the thyroid are located elsewhere in the body\nBULLET::::- Ectopic tooth\nBULLET::::- Ectopic ureter, where the ureter terminates somewhere other than the urinary bladder\nBULLET::::- Ectopia vesicae, a congenital anomality in which part of the urinary bladder is present outside the body\n\nBULLET::::- Ectopic beat of the heart\nBULLET::::- Cervical ectropion\nBULLET::::- Ectopic pregnancy, where the fertilized egg implants anywhere other than the uterine wall\nBULLET::::- Heterotopia (medicine)\n"}
{"id": "9667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9667", "title": "Entorhinal cortex", "text": "Entorhinal cortex\n\nThe entorhinal cortex (EC) is an area of the brain located in the medial temporal lobe and functions as a hub in a widespread network for memory, navigation and the perception of time. The EC is the main interface between the hippocampus and neocortex. The EC-hippocampus system plays an important role in declarative (autobiographical/episodic/semantic) memories and in particular spatial memories including memory formation, memory consolidation, and memory optimization in sleep. The EC is also responsible for the pre-processing (familiarity) of the input signals in the reflex nictitating membrane response of classical trace conditioning, the association of impulses from the eye and the ear occurs in the entorhinal cortex.\n\nIn rodents, the EC is located at the caudal end of the temporal lobe. In primates it is located at the rostral end of the temporal lobe and stretches dorsolaterally. It is usually divided into medial and lateral regions with three bands with distinct properties and connectivity running perpendicular across the whole area. A distinguishing characteristic of the EC is the lack of cell bodies where layer IV should be; this layer is called the \"lamina dissecans\".\n\nThe superficial layers – layers II and III – of EC project to the dentate gyrus and hippocampus: Layer II projects primarily to dentate gyrus and hippocampal region CA3; layer III projects primarily to hippocampal region CA1 and the subiculum. These layers receive input from other cortical areas, especially associational, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices, as well as prefrontal cortex. EC as a whole, therefore, receives highly processed input from every sensory modality, as well as input relating to ongoing cognitive processes, though it should be stressed that, within EC, this information remains at least partially segregated.\n\nThe deep layers, especially layer V, receive one of the three main outputs of the hippocampus and, in turn, reciprocate connections from other cortical areas that project to superficial EC.\n\nThe rodent entorhinal cortex shows a modular organization, with different properties and connections in different areas.\n\nBULLET::::- Brodmann area 28 is known as the \"area entorhinalis\"\nBULLET::::- Brodmann area 34 is known as the \"area entorhinalis dorsalis\"\n\nIn 2005, it was discovered that entorhinal cortex contains a neural map of the spatial environment in rats. In 2014, John O'Keefe, May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, partly because of this discovery.\n\nNeurons in the lateral entorhinal cortex exhibit little spatial selectivity, whereas neurons of the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC), exhibit multiple \"place fields\" that are arranged in a hexagonal pattern, and are, therefore, called \"grid cells\". These fields and spacing between fields increase from the dorso-lateral MEA to the ventro-medial MEA.\n\nThe same group of researchers have found speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex of rats. The speed of movement is translated from proprioceptive information and is represented as firing rates in these cells. The cells are known to fire in correlation to future speed of the rodent.\n\nSingle-unit recording of neurons in humans playing video games find path cells in the EC, the activity of which indicates whether a person is taking a clockwise or counterclockwise path. Such EC \"direction\" path cells show this directional activity irrespective of the location of where a person experiences themselves, which contrasts them to place cells in the hippocampus, which are activated by specific locations.\n\nEC neurons process general information such as directional activity in the environment, which contrasts to that of the hippocampal neurons, which usually encode information about specific places. This suggests that EC encodes general properties about current contexts that are then used by hippocampus to create unique representations from combinations of these properties.\n\nResearch generally highlights a useful distinction in which the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) mainly supports processing of space, whereas the lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC) mainly supports the processing of time. \n\nIndividual variation in the volume of EC is linked to taste perception. People with a larger EC in the left hemisphere found quinine, the source of bitterness in tonic water, less bitter. \n\nThe entorhinal cortex is the first area of the brain to be affected in Alzheimer's disease; a recent functional magnetic resonance imaging study has localised the area to the lateral entorhinal cortex. Lopez \"et al.\" have shown, in a multimodal study, that there are differences in the volume of the left entorhinal cortex between progressing (to Alzheimer's disease) and stable mild cognitive impairment patients. These authors also found that the volume of the left entorhinal cortex inversely correlates with the level of alpha band phase synchronization between the right anterior cingulate and temporo-occipital regions.\n\nIn 2012, neuroscientists at UCLA conducted an experiment using a virtual taxi video game connected to seven epilepsy patients with electrodes already implanted in their brains, allowing the researchers to monitor neuronal activity whenever memories were being formed. As the researchers stimulated the nerve fibers of each of the patients' entorhinal cortex as they were learning, they were then able to better navigate themselves through various routes and recognize landmarks more quickly. This signified an improvement in the patients' spatial memory.\n\nA study finds that regardless of gender, young adults who have greater aerobic fitness also have greater volume of their entorhinal cortex. It suggests that aerobic exercise may have a positive effect on the medial temporal lobe memory system (which includes the entorhinal cortex) in healthy young adults. This also suggests that exercise training, when designed to increase aerobic fitness, might have a positive effect on the brain in healthy young adults\n\nBULLET::::- NIF Search - Entorhinal Cortex via the Neuroscience Information Framework\n\nFor delineating the Entorhinal cortex, see Desikan RS, Ségonne F, Fischl B, Quinn BT, Dickerson BC, Blacker D, Buckner RL, Dale AM, Maguire RP, Hyman BT, Albert MS, Killiany RJ. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. 2006 Jul 1;31(3):968-80.\n"}
{"id": "9668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9668", "title": "Ernst Haeckel", "text": "Ernst Haeckel\n\nErnst Heinrich Philipp August Haeckel (; 16 February 1834 – 9 August 1919) was a German zoologist, naturalist, philosopher, physician, professor, marine biologist, and artist who discovered, described and named thousands of new species, mapped a genealogical tree relating all life forms, and coined many terms in biology, including \"ecology\", \"phylum\", \"phylogeny\", and \"Protista.\" Haeckel promoted and popularised Charles Darwin's work in Germany and developed the influential but no longer widely held recapitulation theory (\"ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny\") claiming that an individual organism's biological development, or ontogeny, parallels and summarises its species' evolutionary development, or phylogeny.\n\nThe published artwork of Haeckel includes over 100 detailed, multi-colour illustrations of animals and sea creatures, collected in his \"Kunstformen der Natur\" (\"Art Forms of Nature\"). As a philosopher, Ernst Haeckel wrote \"Die Welträthsel\" (1895–1899; in English: \"The Riddle of the Universe\", 1901), the genesis for the term \"world riddle\" (\"Welträtsel\"); and \"Freedom in Science and Teaching\" to support teaching evolution.\n\nErnst Haeckel was born on 16 February 1834, in Potsdam (then part of the Kingdom of Prussia).\nIn 1852 Haeckel completed studies at the \"Domgymnasium\", the cathedral high-school of Merseburg. He then studied medicine in Berlin and Würzburg, particularly with Albert von Kölliker, Franz Leydig, Rudolf Virchow (with whom he later worked briefly as assistant), and with the anatomist-physiologist Johannes Peter Müller (1801–1858). Together with Hermann Steudner he attended botany lectures in Würzburg. In 1857 Haeckel attained a doctorate in medicine, and afterwards he received the license to practice medicine. The occupation of physician appeared less worthwhile to Haeckel after contact with suffering patients.\n\nHaeckel studied under Karl Gegenbaur at the University of Jena for three years, earning a habilitation in comparative anatomy in 1861, before becoming a professor of zoology at Jena, where he remained for 47 years, from 1862 to 1909. Between 1859 and 1866 Haeckel worked on many phyla, such as radiolarians, poriferans (sponges) and annelids (segmented worms). During a trip to the Mediterranean, Haeckel named nearly 150 new species of radiolarians.\n\nFrom 1866 to 1867 Haeckel made an extended journey to the Canary Islands with Hermann Fol. During this period, he met with Charles Darwin (in 1866 at Down House in Kent), Thomas Huxley and Charles Lyell. In 1867 he married Agnes Huschke. Their son Walter was born in 1868, their daughters Elizabeth in 1871 and Emma in 1873. In 1869 he traveled as a researcher to Norway, in 1871 to Croatia (where he lived on the island of Hvar in a monastery), and in 1873 to Egypt, Turkey, and Greece. In 1907 he had a museum built in Jena to teach the public about evolution. Haeckel retired from teaching in 1909, and in 1910 he withdrew from the Evangelical Church of Prussia.\n\nOn the occasion of his 80th birthday celebration he was presented with a two-volume work entitled \"Was wir Ernst Haeckel verdanken (What We Owe to Ernst Haeckel)\", edited at the request of the German Monistenbund by Heinrich Schmidt of Jena.\n\nHaeckel's wife, Agnes, died in 1915, and he became substantially frailer, breaking his leg and arm. He sold his \"Villa Medusa\" in Jena in 1918 to the Carl Zeiss foundation, which preserved his library. Haeckel died on 9 August 1919.\n\nHaeckel became the most famous proponent of Monism in Germany.\n\nHaeckel's affinity for the German Romantic movement, coupled with his acceptance of a form of Lamarckism, influenced his political beliefs. Rather than being a strict Darwinian, Haeckel believed that the characteristics of an organism were acquired through interactions with the environment and that ontogeny reflected phylogeny. He saw the social sciences as instances of \"applied biology\", and that phrase was picked up and used for Nazi propaganda.\nIn 1906 Haeckel founded a group called the Monist League () to promote his religious and political beliefs. This group lasted until 1933 and included such notable members as Wilhelm Ostwald, Georg von Arco (1869-1940), Helene Stöcker and Walter Arthur Berendsohn. He was the first person to use the term \"first world war\".\n\nHaeckel was a zoologist, an accomplished artist and illustrator, and later a professor of comparative anatomy. Although Haeckel's ideas are important to the history of evolutionary theory, and although he was a competent invertebrate anatomist most famous for his work on radiolaria, many speculative concepts that he championed are now considered incorrect. For example, Haeckel described and named hypothetical ancestral microorganisms that have never been found.\n\nHe was one of the first to consider psychology as a branch of physiology. He also proposed the kingdom \"Protista\" in 1866. His chief interests lay in evolution and life development processes in general, including development of nonrandom form, which culminated in the beautifully illustrated \"Kunstformen der Natur\" (\"Art forms of nature\"). Haeckel did not support natural selection, rather believing in Lamarckism.\n\nHaeckel advanced a version of the earlier recapitulation theory previously set out by Étienne Serres in the 1820s and supported by followers of Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire including Robert Edmond Grant. It proposed a link between ontogeny (development of form) and phylogeny (evolutionary descent), summed up by Haeckel in the phrase \"ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny\". His concept of recapitulation has been refuted in the form he gave it (now called \"strong recapitulation\"), in favour of the ideas first advanced by Karl Ernst von Baer. The strong recapitulation hypothesis views ontogeny as repeating forms of adult ancestors, while weak recapitulation means that what is repeated (and built upon) is the ancestral embryonic development process. Haeckel supported the theory with embryo drawings that have since been shown to be oversimplified and in part inaccurate, and the theory is now considered an oversimplification of quite complicated relationships, however comparison of embryos remains a powerful way to demonstrate that all animals are related. Haeckel introduced the concept of heterochrony, the change in timing of embryonic development over the course of evolution.\n\nHaeckel was a flamboyant figure, who sometimes took great, non-scientific leaps from available evidence. For example, at the time when Darwin published \"On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection\" (1859), Haeckel postulated that evidence of human evolution would be found in the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). At that time, no remains of human ancestors had yet been identified. He described these theoretical remains in great detail and even named the as-yet unfound species, \"Pithecanthropus alalus\", and instructed his students such as Richard and Oskar Hertwig to go and find it.\n\nOne student did find some remains: a Dutchman named Eugène Dubois searched the East Indies from 1887 to 1895, discovering the remains of Java Man in 1891, consisting of a skullcap, thighbone, and a few teeth. These remains are among the oldest hominid remains ever found. Dubois classified Java Man with Haeckel's \"Pithecanthropus\" label, though they were later reclassified as \"Homo erectus\". Some scientists of the day suggested Dubois' Java Man as a potential intermediate form between modern humans and the common ancestor we share with the other great apes. The current consensus of anthropologists is that the direct ancestors of modern humans were African populations of \"Homo erectus\" (possibly \"Homo ergaster\"), rather than the Asian populations exemplified by Java Man and Peking Man. (Ironically, a new human species, Homo floresiensis, a dwarf human type, has recently been discovered in the island of Flores).\n\nThe creationist polygenism of Samuel George Morton and Louis Agassiz, which presented human races as separately created species, was rejected by Charles Darwin, who argued for the monogenesis of the human species and the African origin of modern humans. In contrast to most of Darwin's supporters, Haeckel put forward a doctrine of evolutionary polygenism based on the ideas of the linguist August Schleicher, in which several different language groups had arisen separately from speechless prehuman \"Urmenschen\" (), which themselves had evolved from simian ancestors. These separate languages had completed the transition from animals to man, and, under the influence of each main branch of languages, humans had evolved – in a kind of Lamarckian use-inheritance – as separate species, which could be subdivided into races. From this, Haeckel drew the implication that languages with the most potential yield the human races with the most potential, led by the Semitic and Indo-Germanic groups, with Berber, Jewish, Greco-Roman and Germanic varieties to the fore. As Haeckel stated:\n\nHaeckel's view can be seen as a forerunner of the views of Carleton Coon, who also believed that human races evolved independently and in parallel with each other. These ideas eventually fell from favour.\n\nHaeckel also applied the hypothesis of polygenism to the modern diversity of human groups. He became a key figure in social darwinism and leading proponent of scientific racism, stating for instance:\n\nHaeckel divided human beings into ten races, of which the Caucasian was the highest and the primitives were doomed to extinction. Haeckel claimed that '[t]he Negro' had stronger and more freely movable toes than any other race, which, he argued, was evidence of their being less evolved, and which led him to compare them to four-handed\" Apes'. Haeckel also believed 'Negroes' were savages and that Whites were the most civilised.\n\nHowever, Robert J. Richards notes: \"Haeckel, on his travels to Ceylon and Indonesia, often formed closer and more intimate relations with natives, even members of the untouchable classes, than with the European colonials.\"\n\nIn his \"Ontogeny and Phylogeny\" Harvard paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould wrote: \"[Haeckel's] evolutionary racism; his call to the German people for racial purity and unflinching devotion to a 'just' state; his belief that harsh, inexorable laws of evolution ruled human civilization and nature alike, conferring upon favored races the right to dominate others ... all contributed to the rise of Nazism.\"\n\nIn his introduction to the Nazi party ideologue Alfred Rosenberg's 1930 book, \"The Myth of the Twentieth Century\", Peter Peel affirms that Rosenberg had indeed read Haeckel.\n\nIn the same line of thought, historian Daniel Gasman states that Haeckel's ideology stimulated the birth of Fascist ideology in Italy and France.\n\nHaeckel claimed the origin of humanity was to be found in Asia: he believed that Hindustan (Indian subcontinent) was the actual location where the first humans had evolved. Haeckel argued that humans were closely related to the primates of Southeast Asia and rejected Darwin's hypothesis of Africa.\n\nHaeckel later claimed that the missing link was to be found on the lost continent of Lemuria located in the Indian Ocean. He believed that Lemuria was the home of the first humans and that Asia was the home of many of the earliest primates; he thus supported that Asia was the cradle of hominid evolution. Haeckel also claimed that Lemuria connected Asia and Africa which allowed the migration of humans to the rest of the world.\n\nIn Haeckel’s book \"The History of Creation\" (1884) he included migration routes which he thought the first humans had used outside of Lemuria.\n\nWhen Haeckel was a student in the 1850s he showed great interest in embryology, attending the rather unpopular lectures twice and in his notes sketched the visual aids: textbooks had few illustrations, and large format plates were used to show students how to see the tiny forms under a reflecting microscope, with the translucent tissues seen against a black background. Developmental series were used to show stages within a species, but inconsistent views and stages made it even more difficult to compare different species. It was agreed by all European evolutionists that all vertebrates looked very similar at an early stage, in what was thought of as a common ideal type, but there was a continuing debate from the 1820s between the Romantic recapitulation theory that human embryos developed through stages of the forms of all the major groups of adult animals, literally manifesting a sequence of organisms on a linear chain of being, and Karl Ernst von Baer's opposing view, stated in von Baer's laws of embryology, that the early general forms diverged into four major groups of specialised forms without ever resembling the adult of another species, showing affinity to an archetype but no relation to other types or any transmutation of species. By the time Haeckel was teaching he was able to use a textbook with woodcut illustrations written by his own teacher Albert von Kölliker, which purported to explain human development while also using other mammalian embryos to claim a coherent sequence. Despite the significance to ideas of transformism, this was not really polite enough for the new popular science writing, and was a matter for medical institutions and for experts who could make their own comparisons.\n\nDarwin's \"On the Origin of Species\", which made a powerful impression on Haeckel when he read it in 1864, was very cautious about the possibility of ever reconstructing the history of life, but did include a section reinterpreting von Baer's embryology and revolutionising the field of study, concluding that \"Embryology rises greatly in interest, when we thus look at the embryo as a picture, more or less obscured, of the common parent-form of each great class of animals.\" It mentioned von Baer's 1828 anecdote (misattributing it to Louis Agassiz) that at an early stage embryos were so similar that it could be impossible to tell whether an unlabelled specimen was of a mammal, a bird, or of a reptile, and Darwin's own research using embryonic stages of barnacles to show that they are crustaceans, while cautioning against the idea that one organism or embryonic stage is \"higher\" or \"lower\", or more or less evolved. Haeckel disregarded such caution, and in a year wrote his massive and ambitious \"Generelle Morphologie\", published in 1866, presenting a revolutionary new synthesis of Darwin's ideas with the German tradition of \"Naturphilosophie\" going back to Goethe and with the progressive evolutionism of Lamarck in what he called \"Darwinismus\". He used morphology to reconstruct the evolutionary history of life, in the absence of fossil evidence using embryology as evidence of ancestral relationships. He invented new terms, including ontogeny and phylogeny, to present his evolutionised recapitulation theory that \"ontogeny recapitulated phylogeny\". The two massive volumes sold poorly, and were heavy going: with his limited understanding of German, Darwin found them impossible to read. Haeckel's publisher turned down a proposal for a \"strictly scholarly and objective\" second edition.\n\nHaeckel's aim was a reformed morphology with evolution as the organising principle of a cosmic synthesis unifying science, religion, and art. He was giving successful \"popular lectures\" on his ideas to students and townspeople in Jena, in an approach pioneered by his teacher Rudolf Virchow. To meet his publisher's need for a popular work he used a student's transcript of his lectures as the basis of his \"Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte\" of 1868, presenting a comprehensive presentation of evolution. In the Spring of that year he drew figures for the book, synthesising his views of specimens in Jena and published pictures to represent types. After publication he told a colleague that the images \"are completely exact, partly copied from nature, partly assembled from all illustrations of these early stages that have hitherto become known\". There were various styles of embryological drawings at that time, ranging from more schematic representations to \"naturalistic\" illustrations of specific specimens. Haeckel believed privately that his figures were both exact and synthetic, and in public asserted that they were schematic like most figures used in teaching. The images were reworked to match in size and orientation, and though displaying Haeckel's own views of essential features, they support von Baer's concept that vertebrate embryos begin similarly and then diverge. Relating different images on a grid conveyed a powerful evolutionary message. As a book for the general public, it followed the common practice of not citing sources.\nThe book sold very well, and while some anatomical experts hostile to Haeckel's evolutionary views expressed some private concerns that certain figures had been drawn rather freely, the figures showed what they already knew about similarities in embryos. The first published concerns came from Ludwig Rütimeyer, a professor of zoology and comparative anatomy at the University of Basel who had placed fossil mammals in an evolutionary lineage early in the 1860s and had been sent a complimentary copy. At the end of 1868 his review in the \"Archiv für Anthropologie\" wondered about the claim that the work was \"popular and scholarly\", doubting whether the second was true, and expressed horror about such public discussion of man's place in nature with illustrations such as the evolutionary trees being shown to non-experts. Though he made no suggestion that embryo illustrations should be directly based on specimens, to him the subject demanded the utmost \"scrupulosity and conscientiousness\" and an artist must \"not arbitrarily model or generalise his originals for speculative purposes\" which he considered proved by comparison with works by other authors. In particular, \"one and the same, moreover incorrectly interpreted woodcut, is presented to the reader three times in a row and with three different captions as [the] embryo of the dog, the chick, [and] the turtle\". He accused Haeckel of \"playing fast and loose with the public and with science\", and failing to live up to the obligation to the truth of every serious researcher. Haeckel responded with angry accusations of bowing to religious prejudice, but in the second (1870) edition changed the duplicated embryo images to a single image captioned \"embryo of a mammal or bird\". Duplication using galvanoplastic stereotypes (clichés) was a common technique in textbooks, but not on the same page to represent different eggs or embryos. In 1891 Haeckel made the excuse that this \"extremely rash foolishness\" had occurred in undue haste but was \"bona fide\", and since repetition of incidental details was obvious on close inspection, it is unlikely to have been intentional deception.\n\nThe revised 1870 second edition of 1,500 copies attracted more attention, being quickly followed by further revised editions with larger print runs as the book became a prominent part of the optimistic, nationalist, anticlerical \"culture of progress\" in Otto von Bismarck's new German Empire. The similarity of early vertebrate embryos became common knowledge, and the illustrations were praised by experts such as Michael Foster of the University of Cambridge. In the introduction to his 1871 \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\", Darwin gave particular praise to Haeckel, writing that if \"Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte\" \"had appeared before my essay had been written, I should probably never have completed it\". The first chapter included an illustration: \"As some of my readers may never have seen a drawing of an embryo, I have given one of man and another of a dog, at about the same early stage of development, carefully copied from two works of undoubted accuracy\" with a footnote citing the sources and noting that \"Häckel has also given analogous drawings in his \"Schöpfungsgeschichte.\"\" The fifth edition of Haeckel's book appeared in 1874, with its frontispiece a heroic portrait of Haeckel himself, replacing the previous controversial image of the heads of apes and humans.\n\nLater in 1874, Haeckel's simplified embryology textbook \"Anthropogenie\" made the subject into a battleground over Darwinism aligned with Bismarck's \"Kulturkampf\" (\"culture struggle\") against the Catholic Church. Haeckel took particular care over the illustrations, changing to the leading zoological publisher Wilhelm Engelmann of Leipzig and obtaining from them use of illustrations from their other textbooks as well as preparing his own drawings including a dramatic double page illustration showing \"early\", \"somewhat later\" and \"still later\" stages of 8 different vertebrates. Though Haeckel's views had attracted continuing controversy, there had been little dispute about the embryos and he had many expert supporters, but Wilhelm His revived the earlier criticisms and introduced new attacks on the 1874 illustrations. Others joined in: both expert anatomists and Catholic priests and supporters were politically opposed to Haeckel's views.\n\nWhile it has been widely claimed that Haeckel was charged with fraud by five professors and convicted by a university court at Jena, there does not appear to be an independently verifiable source for this claim. Recent analyses (Richardson 1998, Richardson and Keuck 2002) have found that some of the criticisms of Haeckel's embryo drawings were legitimate, but others were unfounded. There were multiple versions of the embryo drawings, and Haeckel rejected the claims of fraud. It was later said that \"there is evidence of sleight of hand\" on both sides of the feud between Haeckel and Wilhelm His. Robert J. Richards, in a paper published in 2008, defends the case for Haeckel, shedding doubt against the fraud accusations based on the material used for comparison with what Haeckel could access at the time.\n\nHaeckel was awarded the title of Excellency by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1907 and the Linnean Society of London's prestigious Darwin-Wallace Medal in 1908. In the United States, \"Mount Haeckel\", a summit in the Eastern Sierra Nevada, overlooking the Evolution Basin, is named in his honour, as is another \"Mount Haeckel\", a summit in New Zealand; and the asteroid 12323 Haeckel. \n\nIn Jena he is remembered with a monument at Herrenberg (erected in 1969), an exhibition at Ernst-Haeckel-Haus, and at the Jena Phyletic Museum, which continues to teach about evolution and share his work to this day.\n\nDarwin's 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\" had immense popular influence, but although its sales exceeded its publisher's hopes it was a technical book rather than a work of popular science: long, difficult and with few illustrations. One of Haeckel's books did a great deal to explain his version of \"Darwinism\" to the world. It was a bestselling, provocatively illustrated book in German, titled \"Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte\", published in Berlin in 1868, and translated into English as \"The History of Creation\" in 1876. It was frequently reprinted until 1926.\n\nHaeckel argued that human evolution consisted of precisely 22 phases, the 21st – the \"missing link\" – being a halfway step between apes and humans. He even formally named this missing link \"Pithecanthropus alalus\", translated as \"ape man without speech\".\n\nHaeckel's literary output was extensive, including many books, scientific papers, and illustrations.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Radiolaria\" (1862)\nBULLET::::- \"Siphonophora\" (1869)\nBULLET::::- \"Monera\" (1870)\nBULLET::::- \"Calcareous Sponges\" (1872)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Deep-Sea Medusae\" (1881)\nBULLET::::- \"Siphonophora\" (1888)\nBULLET::::- \"Deep-Sea Keratosa\" (1889)\nBULLET::::- \"Radiolaria\" (1887)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Generelle Morphologie der Organismen: allgemeine Grundzüge der organischen Formen-Wissenschaft, mechanisch begründet durch die von Charles Darwin reformirte Descendenz-Theorie.\" (1866) Berlin (\"General morphology of organisms: general foundations of form-science, mechanically grounded by the descendance theory reformed by Charles Darwin\")\nBULLET::::- \"Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte\" (1868); in English \"The History of Creation\" (1876; 6th ed.: New York, D. Appleton and Co., 1914, 2 volumes)\nBULLET::::- \"Freie Wissenschaft und freie Lehre\" (1877), in English, \"Free Science and Free Teaching\"\nBULLET::::- \"Die systematische Phylogenie\" (1894) – \"Systematic Phylogeny\"\nBULLET::::- \"Anthropogenie oder Entwickelungsgeschichte des Menschen\" (\"Anthropogeny: Or, the Evolutionary History of Man\", 1874)\nBULLET::::- \"Die Welträthsel\" (1895–1899), also spelled \"Die Welträtsel\" – in English \"The Riddle of the Universe\", 1901\nBULLET::::- \"Über unsere gegenwärtige Kenntnis vom Ursprung des Menschen\" (1898) (\"On our current understanding of the origin of man\") – in English \"The Last Link\", 1898\nBULLET::::- \"Der Kampf um den Entwickelungsgedanken\" (1905) (\"The struggle over thought on evolution\") – in English \"Last Words on Evolution\", 1906\nBULLET::::- \"Die Lebenswunder\" (1904) — in English \"The Wonders of Life\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kristallseelen : Studien über das anorganische Leben\" (1917) (\"Crystal souls: studies on inorganic life\")\n\nBULLET::::- \"Indische Reisebriefe\" (1882) – \"Travel notes of India\"\nBULLET::::- \"Aus Insulinde: Malayische Reisebriefe\" (1901) – \"Travel notes of Malaysia\"\nBULLET::::- \"Kunstformen der Natur\" (1904) – \"Art forms of Nature\", Digital Edition (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Wanderbilder\" (1905) – \"Travel Images\"\nBULLET::::- \"A visit to Ceylon\"\n\nFor a fuller list of works of and about Haeckel, see his entry in the .\n\nSome historians have seen Haeckel's social Darwinism as a forerunner to National Socialist ideology. Others have denied the relationship all together.\n\nThe evidence is in some respects ambiguous. On one hand, Haeckel was an advocate of scientific racism. He held that evolutionary biology had definitively proven that races were unequal in intelligence and ability, and that their lives were also of unequal value. As a result of the \"struggle for existence\", it followed that the \"lower\" races would eventually be exterminated. He was also a social Darwinist who believed that \"survival of the fittest\" was a natural law, and that struggle led to improvement of the race. As an advocate of eugenics, he also believed that about 200,000 mentally-ill and congenitally-ill should be murdered by a medical control board. (This idea was later put into practice by the Third Reich, as part of the Aktion T4 program.) Alfred Ploetz, founder of the German Society for Racial Hygiene, praised Haeckel repeatedly, and invited him to become an honorary member. Haeckel accepted the invitation. Haeckel also believed that Germany should be governed by an authoritarian political system, and that inequalities both within and between societies were an inevitable product of evolutionary law. Haeckel was also an extreme German nationalist who believed strongly in the superiority of German culture.\n\nOn the other hand, Haeckel was not an anti-Semite. In the racial hierarchies he constructed Jews tended to appear closer to the top, rather than closer to the bottom as in National Socialist racial thought. He was also a pacifist until the First World War, when he wrote propaganda in favor of the war. The principal arguments of historians who deny a meaningful connection between Haeckel and National Socialism are that Haeckel's ideas were very common at the time, that National Socialists were much more strongly influenced by other thinkers, and that Haeckel is properly classified as a 19th century German liberal, rather than a forerunner to 20th century National Socialism. They also point to incompatibilities between evolutionary biology and National Socialist ideology.\n\nNazis themselves divided on the question of whether Haeckel should be counted as a pioneer of their ideology. SS captain and biologist Heinz Brücher wrote a biography of Haeckel in 1936, in which he praised Haeckel as a \"pioneer in biological state thinking\". This opinion was also shared by the scholarly journal, \"Der Biologie\", which celebrated Haeckel's 100th birthday, in 1934, with several essays acclaiming him as a pioneering thinker of National Socialism. Other Nazis kept their distance from Haeckel. Nazi propaganda guidelines issued in 1935 listed books which popularized Darwin and evolution on an \"expunged list\". Haeckel was included by name as a forbidden author. Gunther Hecht, a member of the Nazi Department of Race Politics, also issued a memorandum rejecting Haeckel as a forerunner of National Socialism. Kurt Hildebrandt, a Nazi political philosopher, also rejected Haeckel. Eventually Nazis rejected Haeckel because his evolutionary ideas could not be reconciled with Nazi ideology.\n\nBULLET::::- Dysteleology\nBULLET::::- Embryology\nBULLET::::- Haeckelites\nBULLET::::- \"Haeckel's Tale\"\nBULLET::::- Heinrich Schmidt (philosopher)\nBULLET::::- Karl Blossfeldt\nBULLET::::- List of wildlife artists\nBULLET::::- \"Proteus\" (2004 film)\n\n\nBULLET::::- E. Haeckel: Natürliche Schöpfungsgeschichte 1868 (front page of 1st edition, German)\nBULLET::::- E. Haeckel: Die Welträthsel 1899 (front page of 1st edition, German)\nBULLET::::- University of California, Berkeley — biography\nBULLET::::- Ernst Haeckel – Evolution's controversial artist. A slide-show essay\nBULLET::::- \"Kunstformen der Natur\" (from biolib.de)\nBULLET::::- \"Kunstformen der Natur\" (Digitization from Phaidra)\nBULLET::::- PNG alpha-transparencies of Haeckel's \"Kustformen der natur\"\nBULLET::::- Proteus — Animated documentary film on Haeckel's life and work\nBULLET::::- Ernst Haeckel Haus and Museum in Jena\nBULLET::::- View works by Haeckel at the Biodiversity Heritage Library\nBULLET::::- aDiatomea: artificial life experiment with 3d generated diatoms, influenced by Haeckel\nBULLET::::- Images from \"Anthropogenie, oder, Entwickelungsgeschichte des menschen\"\nBULLET::::- article on Haeckel in Villefranche-sur-Mer\n"}
{"id": "9670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9670", "title": "Evolutionism", "text": "Evolutionism\n\nEvolutionism is a term used (often derogatorily) to denote the theory of evolution. Its exact meaning has changed over time as the study of evolution has progressed. In the 19th century, it was used to describe the belief that organisms deliberately improved themselves through progressive inherited change (orthogenesis). The teleological belief went on to include cultural evolution and social evolution. In the 1970s the term Neo-Evolutionism was used to describe the idea \"that human beings sought to preserve a familiar style of life unless change was forced on them by factors that were beyond their control\".\n\nThe term is most often used by creationists to describe adherence to the scientific consensus on evolution as equivalent to a secular religion. The term is very seldom used within the scientific community, since the scientific position on evolution is accepted by the overwhelming majority of scientists. Because evolutionary biology is the default scientific position, it is assumed that \"scientists\" or \"biologists\" are \"evolutionists\" unless specifically noted otherwise. In the creationevolution controversy, creationists often call those who accept the validity of the modern evolutionary synthesis \"evolutionists\" and the theory itself \"evolutionism\".\n\nBefore its use to describe biological evolution, the term \"evolution\" was originally used to refer to any orderly sequence of events with the outcome somehow contained at the start. The first five editions of Darwin's in \"Origin of Species\" used the word \"evolved\", but the word \"evolution\" was only used in its sixth edition in 1872. By then, Herbert Spencer had developed the concept theory that organisms strive to evolve due to an internal \"driving force\" (orthogenesis) in 1862. Edward B. Tylor and Lewis H Morgan brought the term \"evolution\" to anthropology though they tended toward the older pre-Spencerian definition helping to form the concept of unilineal (social) evolution used during the later part of what Trigger calls the Antiquarianism-Imperial Synthesis period (c1770-c1900). The term evolutionism subsequently came to be used for the now discredited theory that evolution contained a deliberate component, rather than the selection of beneficial traits from random variation by differential survival.\n\nThe term \"evolution\" is widely used, but the term \"evolutionism\" is not used in the scientific community to refer to evolutionary biology as it is redundant and anachronistic.\n\nHowever, the term has been used by creationists in discussing the creation-evolution controversy. For example, the Institute for Creation Research, in order to imply placement of evolution in the category of 'religions', including atheism, fascism, humanism and occultism, commonly uses the words \"evolutionism\" and \"evolutionist\" to describe the consensus of mainstream science and the scientists subscribing to it, thus implying through language that the issue is a matter of religious belief. The BioLogos Foundation, an organization that promotes the idea of theistic evolution, uses the term \"evolutionism\" to describe \"the atheistic worldview that so often accompanies the acceptance of biological evolution in public discourse.\" It views this as a subset of scientism.\n\nBULLET::::- Darwinism\nBULLET::::- Social Darwinism\n\nBULLET::::- Carneiro, Robert, \"Evolutionism in Cultural Anthropology: A Critical History\"\nBULLET::::- (on the applicability of this notion to the study of social evolution)\nBULLET::::- Review of \"Buckland's Bridgewater Treatise\", \"The Times\" Tuesday, November 15, 1836; pg. 3; Issue 16261; col E. (\"annihilates the doctrine of spontaneous and progressive evolution of life, and its impious corollary, chance\")\nBULLET::::- Review of Charles Darwin's \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\" \"The Times\" Friday, December 13, 1872; pg. 4; Issue 27559; col A. (\"His [Darwin's] thorough-going 'evolutionism' tends to eliminate...\")\nBULLET::::- Ruse, Michael. 2003. \"Is Evolution a Secular Religion?\" Science 299:1523-1524 (concluding that evolutionary biology is not a religion in any sense but noting that several evolutionary biologists, such as Edward O. Wilson, in their roles as citizens concerned about getting the public to deal with reality, have made statements like \"evolution is a myth that is now ready to take over Christianity\").\n"}
{"id": "9672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9672", "title": "Entscheidungsproblem", "text": "Entscheidungsproblem\n\nIn mathematics and computer science, the (, German for \"decision problem\") is a challenge posed by David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann in 1928. \nThe problem asks for an algorithm that takes, as input, a statement and answers \"Yes\" or \"No\" according to whether the statement is \"universally valid\", i.e., valid in every structure satisfying the axioms. \nBy the completeness theorem of first-order logic, a statement is universally valid if and only if it can be deduced from the axioms, so the \"\" can also be viewed as asking for an algorithm to decide whether a given statement is provable from the axioms using the rules of logic.\n\nIn 1936, Alonzo Church and Alan Turing published independent papers showing that a general solution to the \" is impossible, assuming that the intuitive notion of \"effectively calculable\" is captured by the functions computable by a Turing machine (or equivalently, by those expressible in the lambda calculus). This assumption is now known as the Church–Turing thesis.\n\nThe origin of the \" goes back to Gottfried Leibniz, who in the seventeenth century, after having constructed a successful mechanical calculating machine, dreamt of building a machine that could manipulate symbols in order to determine the truth values of mathematical statements. He realized that the first step would have to be a clean formal language, and much of his subsequent work was directed towards that goal. In 1928, David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann posed the question in the form outlined above.\n\nIn continuation of his \"program\", Hilbert posed three questions at an international conference in 1928, the third of which became known as \"Hilbert's \".\" In 1929, Moses Schönfinkel published one paper on special cases of the decision problem, that was prepared by Paul Bernays.\n\nAs late as 1930, Hilbert believed that there would be no such thing as an unsolvable problem.\n\nBefore the question could be answered, the notion of \"algorithm\" had to be formally defined. This was done by Alonzo Church in 1936 with the concept of \"effective calculability\" based on his λ-calculus and by Alan Turing in the same year with his concept of Turing machines. Turing immediately recognized that these are equivalent models of computation.\n\nThe negative answer to the ' was then given by Alonzo Church in 1935–36 and independently shortly thereafter by Alan Turing in 1936. Church proved that there is no computable function which decides for two given λ-calculus expressions whether they are equivalent or not. He relied heavily on earlier work by Stephen Kleene. Turing reduced the question of the existence of a 'general method' which decides whether any given Turing Machine halts or not (the halting problem) to the question of the existence of an 'algorithm' or 'general method' able to solve the '. If 'Algorithm' is understood as being equivalent to a Turing Machine, and with the answer to the latter question negative (in general), the question about the existence of an Algorithm for the \" also must be negative (in general). In his 1936 paper, Turing says: \"\"Corresponding to each computing machine 'it' we construct a formula 'Un(it)' and we show that, if there is a general method for determining whether 'Un(it)' is provable, then there is a general method for determining whether 'it' ever prints 0\"\".\n\nThe work of both Church and Turing was heavily influenced by Kurt Gödel's earlier work on his incompleteness theorem, especially by the method of assigning numbers (a Gödel numbering) to logical formulas in order to reduce logic to arithmetic.\n\nThe \"\" is related to Hilbert's tenth problem, which asks for an algorithm to decide whether Diophantine equations have a solution. The non-existence of such an algorithm, established by Yuri Matiyasevich in 1970, also implies a negative answer to the Entscheidungsproblem.\n\nSome first-order theories are algorithmically decidable; examples of this include Presburger arithmetic, real closed fields and static type systems of many programming languages. The general first-order theory of the natural numbers expressed in Peano's axioms cannot be decided with an algorithm, however.\n\nHaving practical decision procedures for classes of logical formulas is of considerable interest for program verification and circuit verification. Pure Boolean logical formulas are usually decided using SAT-solving techniques based on the DPLL algorithm. Conjunctive formulas over linear real or rational arithmetic can be decided using the simplex algorithm, formulas in linear integer arithmetic (Presburger arithmetic) can be decided using Cooper's algorithm or William Pugh's Omega test. Formulas with negations, conjunctions and disjunctions combine the difficulties of satisfiability testing with that of decision of conjunctions; they are generally decided nowadays using SMT-solving techniques, which combine SAT-solving with decision procedures for conjunctions and propagation techniques. Real polynomial arithmetic, also known as the theory of real closed fields, is decidable; this is the Tarski–Seidenberg theorem, which has been implemented in computers by using the cylindrical algebraic decomposition.\n\nBULLET::::- Automated theorem proving\nBULLET::::- Hilbert's second problem\nBULLET::::- Oracle machine\nBULLET::::- Turing's proof\n\nBULLET::::- David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann (1928). \"Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik\" (\"Principles of Mathematical Logic\"). Springer-Verlag, .\nBULLET::::- Alonzo Church, \"An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory\", American Journal of Mathematics, 58 (1936), pp 345–363\nBULLET::::- Alonzo Church, \"A note on the Entscheidungsproblem\", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1 (1936), pp 40–41.\nBULLET::::- Martin Davis, 2000, \"Engines of Logic\", W.W. Norton & Company, London, pbk.\nBULLET::::- Alan Turing, \"On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem\", Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 42 (1936–7), pp 230–265. Online versions: from journal website, from Turing Digital Archive, from abelard.org. Errata appeared in Series 2, 43 (1937), pp 544–546.\nBULLET::::- Martin Davis, \"The Undecidable, Basic Papers on Undecidable Propositions, Unsolvable Problems And Computable Functions\", Raven Press, New York, 1965. Turing's paper is #3 in this volume. Papers include those by Gödel, Church, Rosser, Kleene, and Post.\nBULLET::::- Andrew Hodges, , Simon and Schuster, New York, 1983. Alan M. Turing's biography. Cf Chapter \"The Spirit of Truth\" for a history leading to, and a discussion of, his proof.\nBULLET::::- Robert Soare, \"Computability and recursion\", Bull. Symbolic Logic 2 (1996), no. 3, 284–321.\nBULLET::::- Stephen Toulmin, \"Fall of a Genius\", a book review of \" by Andrew Hodges\", in The New York Review of Books, 19 January 1984, p. 3ff.\nBULLET::::- Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica to *56, Cambridge at the University Press, 1962. Re: the problem of paradoxes, the authors discuss the problem of a set not be an object in any of its \"determining functions\", in particular \"Introduction, Chap. 1 p. 24 \"...difficulties which arise in formal logic\", and Chap. 2.I. \"The Vicious-Circle Principle\" p. 37ff, and Chap. 2.VIII. \"The Contradictions\" p. 60 ff.\n"}
{"id": "9674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9674", "title": "Einhard", "text": "Einhard\n\nEinhard (also Eginhard or Einhart; ; 775 – March 14, 840) was a Frankish scholar and courtier. Einhard was a dedicated servant of Charlemagne and his son Louis the Pious; his main work is a biography of Charlemagne, the \"Vita Karoli Magni\", \"one of the most precious literary bequests of the early Middle Ages.\"\n\nEinhard was from the eastern German-speaking part of the Frankish Kingdom. Born into a family of landowners of some importance, his parents sent him to be educated by the monks of Fulda, one of the most impressive centers of learning in the Frank lands. Perhaps due to his small stature, which restricted his riding and sword-fighting ability, Einhard concentrated his energies on scholarship, especially the mastering of Latin. He was accepted into the hugely wealthy court of Charlemagne around 791 or 792. Charlemagne actively sought to amass scholarly men around him and established a royal school led by the Northumbrian scholar Alcuin. Einhard evidently was a talented builder and construction manager, because Charlemagne put him in charge of the completion of several palace complexes including Aachen and Ingelheim. Despite the fact that Einhard was on intimate terms with Charlemagne, he never achieved office in his reign. In 814, on Charlemagne's death, his son Louis the Pious made Einhard his private secretary. Einhard retired from court during the time of the disputes between Louis and his sons in the spring of 830.\n\nHe died at Seligenstadt in 840.\n\nEinhard was married to Emma, of whom little is known. There is a possibility that their marriage bore a son, Vussin. Their marriage also appears to have been exceptionally liberal for the period, with Emma being as active as Einhard, if not more so, in the handling of their property. It is said that in the later years of their marriage Emma and Einhard abstained from sexual relations, choosing instead to focus their attentions on their many religious commitments. Though he was undoubtedly devoted to her, Einhard wrote nothing of his wife until after her death on 13 December 835, when he wrote to a friend that he was reminded of her loss in ‘every day, in every action, in every undertaking, in all the administration of the house and household, in everything needing to be decided upon and sorted out in my religious and earthly responsibilities’.\nEinhard made numerous references to himself as a \"sinner\" according to his strong Christian faith. He erected churches at both of his estates in Michelstadt and Mulinheim. In Michelstadt, he also saw fit to build a basilica completed in 827 and then sent a servant, Ratleic, to Rome with an end to find relics for the new building. Once in Rome, Ratleic robbed a catacomb of the bones of the Martyrs Marcellinus and Peter and had them translated to Michelstadt. Once there, the relics made it known they were unhappy with their new tomb and thus had to be moved again to Mulinheim. Once established there, they proved to be miracle workers. Although unsure as to why these saints should choose such a \"sinner\" as their patron, Einhard nonetheless set about ensuring they continued to receive a resting place fitting of their honour. Between 831 and 834 he founded a Benedictine Monastery and, after the death of his wife, served as its Abbot until his own death in 840.\n\nLocal lore from Seligenstadt portrays Einhard as the lover of Emma, one of Charlemagne's daughters, and has the couple elope from court. Charlemagne found them at Seligenstadt (then called Obermühlheim) and forgave them. This account is used to explain the name \"Seligenstadt\" by folk etymology. Einhard and his wife were originally buried in one sarcophagus in the choir of the church in Seligenstadt, but in 1810 the sarcophagus was presented by the Grand Duke of Hesse to the count of Erbach, who claims descent from Einhard as the husband of Imma, the reputed daughter of Charlemagne. The count put it in the famous chapel of his castle at Erbach in the Odenwald.\n\nThe most famous of Einhard's works is his biography of Charlemagne, the \"Vita Karoli Magni\", \"The Life of Charlemagne\" (c. 817–836), which provides much direct information about Charlemagne's life and character, written sometime between 817 and 830. In composing this he relied heavily upon the Royal Frankish Annals. Einhard's literary model was the classical work of the Roman historian Suetonius, the \"Lives of the Caesars\", though it is important to stress that the work is very much Einhard's own, that is to say he adapts the models and sources for his own purposes. His work was written as a praise of Charlemagne, whom he regarded as a foster-father (\"nutritor\") and to whom he was a debtor \"in life and death\". The work thus contains an understandable degree of bias, Einhard taking care to exculpate Charlemagne in some matters, not mention others, and to gloss over certain issues which would be of embarrassment to Charlemagne, such as the morality of his daughters; by contrast, other issues are curiously not glossed over, like his concubines.\n\nEinhard is also responsible for three other extant works: a collection of letters, \"On the Translations and the Miracles of SS. Marcellinus and Petrus\", and \"On the Adoration of the Cross\". The latter dates from ca. 830 and was not rediscovered until 1885, when Ernst Dümmler identified a text in a manuscript in Vienna as the missing \"Libellus de adoranda cruce\", which Einhard had dedicated to his pupil Lupus Servatus.\n\nBULLET::::- Royal Frankish Annals\n\nBULLET::::- Tischler, Matthias M. (2001) \"Einharts Vita Karoli. Studien zur Entstehung, Überlieferung und Rezeption\" (MGH. Schriften 48, I–II), Hanover: Hahn. .\n\nBULLET::::- Einhard at the Catholic Encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- \"Vita Karoli Magni\"—Einhard's \"Life of Charlemagne,\" Latin text at The Latin Library\nBULLET::::- , translated by\nBULLET::::- Einhard-Preis Literature prize awarded by the Einhard-Foundation of Seligenstadt to authors for writing an outstanding biography\nBULLET::::- Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Latina with analytical indexes\nBULLET::::- Einhardi vita Karoli Magni in Bibliotheca Augustana\nBULLET::::- The Einhard Way from Michelstadt to Seligenstadt\nBULLET::::- Home page of the Einhard Foundation at Seligenstadt\nBULLET::::- Home page of the Einhard Society, Seligenstadt\n"}
{"id": "9675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9675", "title": "Ester", "text": "Ester\n\nIn chemistry, an ester is a chemical compound derived from an acid (organic or inorganic) in which at least one –OH (hydroxyl) group is replaced by an –O–alkyl (alkoxy) group. Usually, esters are derived from a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. Glycerides, which are fatty acid esters of glycerol, are important esters in biology, being one of the main classes of lipids, and making up the bulk of animal fats and vegetable oils. Esters with low molecular weight are commonly used as fragrances and found in essential oils and pheromones. Phosphoesters form the backbone of DNA molecules. Nitrate esters, such as nitroglycerin, are known for their explosive properties, while polyesters are important plastics, with monomers linked by ester moieties. Esters usually have a sweet smell and are considered high-quality solvents for a broad array of plastics, plasticizers, resins, and lacquers. They are also one of the largest classes of synthetic lubricants on the commercial market.\n\nThe word \"ester\" was coined in 1848 by a German chemist Leopold Gmelin, probably as a contraction of the German \"Essigäther\", \"acetic ether\".\n\nEster names are derived from the parent alcohol and the parent acid, where the latter may be organic or inorganic. Esters derived from the simplest carboxylic acids are commonly named according to the more traditional, so-called \"trivial names\" e.g. as formate, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, as opposed to the IUPAC nomenclature methanoate, ethanoate, propanoate and butanoate. Esters derived from more complex carboxylic acids are, on the other hand, more frequently named using the systematic IUPAC name, based on the name for the acid followed by the suffix \"-oate\". For example, the ester hexyl octanoate, also known under the trivial name hexyl caprylate, has the formula CH(CH)CO(CH)CH.\n\nThe chemical formulas of organic esters usually take the form RCOR′, where R and R′ are the hydrocarbon parts of the carboxylic acid and the alcohol, respectively. For example, butyl acetate (systematically butyl ethanoate), derived from butanol and acetic acid (systematically ethanoic acid) would be written CHCOCH. Alternative presentations are common including BuOAc and CHCOOCH.\n\nCyclic esters are called lactones, regardless of whether they are derived from an organic or an inorganic acid. One example of an organic lactone is γ-valerolactone.\n\nAn uncommon class of organic esters are the orthoesters, which have the formula RC(OR′). Triethylorthoformate (HC(OCH)) is derived, in terms of its name (but not its synthesis) from orthoformic acid (HC(OH)) and ethanol.\n\nEsters can also be derived from an inorganic acid and an alcohol. Thus, the nomenclature extends to inorganic oxo acids and their corresponding esters: phosphoric acid and phosphate esters/organophosphates, sulfuric acid and sulfate esters/organosulfates, nitric acid and nitrate, and boric acid and borates. For example, triphenyl phosphate is the ester derived from phosphoric acid and phenol. Organic carbonates are derived from carbonic acid; for example, ethylene carbonate is derived from carbonic acid and ethylene glycol.\n\nSo far an alcohol and inorganic acid are linked via oxygen atoms. The definition of inorganic acid ester that feature inorganic chemical elements links between alcohols and the inorganic acid – the phosphorus atom linking to three alkoxy functional groups in organophosphate – can be extended to the same elements in various combinations of covalent bonds between carbons and the central inorganic atom and carbon–oxygen bonds to central inorganic atoms. For example, phosphorus features three carbon–oxygen–phosphorus bonds and one phosphorus–oxygen \"double bond\" in organophosphates, three carbon–oxygen–phosphorus bonds and no phosphorus–oxygen double bonds in phosphite esters or organophosphites, two carbon–oxygen–phosphorus bonds, no phosphorus–oxygen double bonds but one phosphorus–carbon bond in phosphonites, one carbon–oxygen–phosphorus bonds, no phosphorus–oxygen double bonds but two phosphorus–carbon bonds in phosphinites.\n\nIn corollary, boron features borinic esters (\"n\" = 2), boronic esters (\"n\" = 1), and borates (\"n\" = 0).\n\nAs oxygen is a group 16 chemical element, sulfur atoms can replace some oxygen atoms in carbon–oxygen–central inorganic atom covalent bonds of an ester. As a result, thiosulfinates and thiosulfonates, with a central inorganic sulfur atom, demonstrate clearly the assortment of sulfur esters, that also includes sulfates, sulfites, sulfonates, sulfinates, sulfenates esters.\n\nEsters contain a carbonyl center, which gives rise to 120° C–C–O and O–C–O angles. Unlike amides, esters are structurally flexible functional groups because rotation about the C–O–C bonds has a low barrier. Their flexibility and low polarity is manifested in their physical properties; they tend to be less rigid (lower melting point) and more volatile (lower boiling point) than the corresponding amides. The p\"K\" of the alpha-hydrogens on esters is around 25.\n\nMany esters have the potential for conformational isomerism, but they tend to adopt an \"s\"-cis (or Z) conformation rather than the \"s\"-trans (or E) alternative, due to a combination of hyperconjugation and dipole minimization effects. The preference for the Z conformation is influenced by the nature of the substituents and solvent, if present. Lactones with small rings are restricted to the \"s\"-trans (i.e. E) conformation due to their cyclic structure.\n\nEsters are more polar than ethers but less polar than alcohols. They participate in hydrogen bonds as hydrogen-bond acceptors, but cannot act as hydrogen-bond donors, unlike their parent alcohols. This ability to participate in hydrogen bonding confers some water-solubility. Because of their lack of hydrogen-bond-donating ability, esters do not self-associate. Consequently, esters are more volatile than carboxylic acids of similar molecular weight.\n\nEsters are generally identified by gas chromatography, taking advantage of their volatility. IR spectra for esters feature an intense sharp band in the range 1730–1750 cm assigned to \"ν\". This peak changes depending on the functional groups attached to the carbonyl. For example, a benzene ring or double bond in conjugation with the carbonyl will bring the wavenumber down about 30 cm.\n\nEsters are widespread in nature and are widely used in industry. In nature, fats are in general triesters derived from glycerol and fatty acids. Esters are responsible for the aroma of many fruits, including apples, durians, pears, bananas, pineapples, and strawberries. Several billion kilograms of polyesters are produced industrially annually, important products being polyethylene terephthalate, acrylate esters, and cellulose acetate.\n\nEsterification is the general name for a chemical reaction in which two reactants (typically an alcohol and an acid) form an ester as the reaction product. Esters are common in organic chemistry and biological materials, and often have a pleasant characteristic, fruity odor. This leads to their extensive use in the fragrance and flavor industry. Ester bonds are also found in many polymers.\n\nThe classic synthesis is the Fischer esterification, which involves treating a carboxylic acid with an alcohol in the presence of a dehydrating agent:\nThe equilibrium constant for such reactions is about 5 for typical esters, e.g., ethyl acetate. The reaction is slow in the absence of a catalyst. Sulfuric acid is a typical catalyst for this reaction. Many other acids are also used such as polymeric sulfonic acids. Since esterification is highly reversible, the yield of the ester can be improved using Le Chatelier's principle:\nBULLET::::- Using the alcohol in large excess (i.e., as a solvent).\nBULLET::::- Using a dehydrating agent: sulfuric acid not only catalyzes the reaction but sequesters water (a reaction product). Other drying agents such as molecular sieves are also effective.\nBULLET::::- Removal of water by physical means such as distillation as a low-boiling azeotropes with toluene, in conjunction with a Dean-Stark apparatus.\n\nReagents are known that drive the dehydration of mixtures of alcohols and carboxylic acids. One example is the Steglich esterification, which is a method of forming esters under mild conditions. The method is popular in peptide synthesis, where the substrates are sensitive to harsh conditions like high heat. DCC (dicyclohexylcarbodiimide) is used to activate the carboxylic acid to further reaction. 4-Dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) is used as an acyl-transfer catalyst.\n\nAnother method for the dehydration of mixtures of alcohols and carboxylic acids is the Mitsunobu reaction:\n\nCarboxylic acids can be esterified using diazomethane:\nUsing this diazomethane, mixtures of carboxylic acids can be converted to their methyl esters in near quantitative yields, e.g., for analysis by gas chromatography. The method is useful in specialized organic synthetic operations but is considered too hazardous and expensive for large-scale applications.\n\nCarboxylic acids are esterified by treatment with epoxides, giving β-hydroxyesters:\nThis reaction is employed in the production of vinyl ester resin resins from acrylic acid.\n\nAlcohols react with acyl chlorides and acid anhydrides to give esters:\n\nThe reactions are irreversible simplifying work-up. Since acyl chlorides and acid anhydrides also react with water, anhydrous conditions are preferred. The analogous acylations of amines to give amides are less sensitive because amines are stronger nucleophiles and react more rapidly than does water. This method is employed only for laboratory-scale procedures, as it is expensive.\n\nAlthough not widely employed for esterifications, salts of carboxylate anions can be alkylating agent with alkyl halides to give esters. In the case that an alkyl chloride is used, an iodide salt can catalyze the reaction (Finkelstein reaction). The carboxylate salt is often generated \"in situ\". In difficult cases, the silver carboxylate may be used, since the silver ion coordinates to the halide aiding its departure and improving the reaction rate. This reaction can suffer from anion availability problems and, therefore, can benefit from the addition of phase transfer catalysts or highly polar aprotic solvents such as DMF.\n\nTransesterification, which involves changing one ester into another one, is widely practiced:\nLike the hydrolysation, transesterification is catalysed by acids and bases. The reaction is widely used for degrading triglycerides, e.g. in the production of fatty acid esters and alcohols. Poly(ethylene terephthalate) is produced by the transesterification of dimethyl terephthalate and ethylene glycol: \n\nAlkenes undergo \"hydroesterification\" in the presence of metal carbonyl catalysts. Esters of propionic acid are produced commercially by this method:\nA preparaton of methyl propionate is one illustrative example. \n\nThe carbonylation of methanol yields methyl formate, which is the main commercial source of formic acid. The reaction is catalyzed by sodium methoxide:\n\nIn the presence of palladium-based catalysts, ethylene, acetic acid, and oxygen react to give vinyl acetate:\nDirect routes to this same ester are not possible because vinyl alcohol is unstable.\n\nCarboxylic acids also add across alkynes to give the same products.\n\nSilicotungstic acid is used to manufacture ethyl acetate by the alkylation of acetic acid by ethylene:\n\nBULLET::::- Favorskii rearrangement of α-haloketones in presence of base\nBULLET::::- Baeyer–Villiger oxidation of ketones with peroxides\nBULLET::::- Pinner reaction of nitriles with an alcohol\nBULLET::::- Nucleophilic abstraction of a metal–acyl complex\nBULLET::::- Hydrolysis of orthoesters in aqueous acid\nBULLET::::- Cellulolysis via esterification\nBULLET::::- Ozonolysis of alkenes using a work up in the presence of hydrochloric acid and various alcohols.\nBULLET::::- Anodic oxidation of methyl ketones leading to methyl esters.\n\nEsters react with nucleophiles at the carbonyl carbon. The carbonyl is weakly electrophilic but is attacked by strong nucleophiles (amines, alkoxides, hydride sources, organolithium compounds, etc.). The C–H bonds adjacent to the carbonyl are weakly acidic but undergo deprotonation with strong bases. This process is the one that usually initiates condensation reactions. The carbonyl oxygen in esters is weakly basic, less so than the carbonyl oxygen in amides due to resonance donation of an electron pair from nitrogen in amides, but forms adducts.\n\nEsterification is a reversible reaction. Esters undergo hydrolysis under acid and basic conditions. Under acidic conditions, the reaction is the reverse reaction of the Fischer esterification. Under basic conditions, hydroxide acts as a nucleophile, while an alkoxide is the leaving group. This reaction, saponification, is the basis of soap making.\n\nThe alkoxide group may also be displaced by stronger nucleophiles such as ammonia or primary or secondary amines to give amides: (ammonolysis reaction)\nThis reaction is not usually reversible. Hydrazines and hydroxylamine can be used in place of amines. Esters can be converted to isocyanates through intermediate hydroxamic acids in the Lossen rearrangement.\n\nSources of carbon nucleophiles, e.g., Grignard reagents and organolithium compounds, add readily to the carbonyl.\n\nCompared to ketones and aldehydes, esters are relatively resistant to reduction. The introduction of catalytic hydrogenation in the early part of the 20th century was a breakthrough; esters of fatty acids are hydrogenated to fatty alcohols.\nA typical catalyst is copper chromite. Prior to the development of catalytic hydrogenation, esters were reduced on a large scale using the Bouveault–Blanc reduction. This method, which is largely obsolete, uses sodium in the presence of proton sources.\n\nEspecially for fine chemical syntheses, lithium aluminium hydride is used to reduce esters to two primary alcohols. The related reagent sodium borohydride is slow in this reaction. DIBAH reduces esters to aldehydes.\n\nDirect reduction to give the corresponding ether is difficult as the intermediate hemiacetal tends to decompose to give an alcohol and an aldehyde (which is rapidly reduced to give a second alcohol). The reaction can be achieved using triethylsilane with a variety of Lewis acids.\n\nAs for aldehydes, the hydrogen atoms on the carbon adjacent (\"α to\") the carboxyl group in esters are sufficiently acidic to undergo deprotonation, which in turn leads to a variety of useful reactions. Deprotonation requires relatively strong bases, such as alkoxides. Deprotonation gives a nucleophilic enolate, which can further react, e.g., the Claisen condensation and its intramolecular equivalent, the Dieckmann condensation. This conversion is exploited in the malonic ester synthesis, wherein the diester of malonic acid reacts with an electrophile (e.g., alkyl halide), and is subsequently decarboxylated. Another variation is the Fráter–Seebach alkylation.\n\nBULLET::::- Phenyl esters react to hydroxyarylketones in the Fries rearrangement.\nBULLET::::- Specific esters are functionalized with an α-hydroxyl group in the Chan rearrangement.\nBULLET::::- Esters with β-hydrogen atoms can be converted to alkenes in ester pyrolysis.\nBULLET::::- A direct conversion of esters to nitriles.\n\nAs a class, esters serve as protecting groups for carboxylic acids. Protecting a carboxylic acid is useful in peptide synthesis, to prevent self-reactions of the bifunctional amino acids. Methyl and ethyl esters are commonly available for many amino acids; the \"t\"-butyl ester tends to be more expensive. However, \"t\"-butyl esters are particularly useful because, under strongly acidic conditions, the \"t\"-butyl esters undergo elimination to give the carboxylic acid and isobutylene, simplifying work-up.\n\nMany esters have distinctive fruit-like odors, and many occur naturally in the essential oils of plants. This has also led to their common use in artificial flavorings and fragrances which aim to mimic those odors.\n\n! valign=\"top\" align=\"left\" Ester name\n! valign=\"top\" align=\"left\" Formula\n! valign=\"top\" align=\"left\" Odor or occurrence\n\nBULLET::::- Amide, an ester analog with oxygen replaced by nitrogen\nBULLET::::- Cyanate ester\nBULLET::::- Oligoester\nBULLET::::- Polyolester\nBULLET::::- Thioester, an ester analog with oxygen replaced by sulfur\nBULLET::::- Transesterification\nBULLET::::- Ether lipid\n\nBULLET::::- An introduction to esters\nBULLET::::- Molecule of the month: Ethyl acetate and other esters\n"}
{"id": "9677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9677", "title": "Endosymbiont", "text": "Endosymbiont\n\nAn endosymbiont or endobiont is any organism that lives within the body or cells of another organism most often, though not always, in a mutualistic relationship.\n(The term endosymbiosis is from the Greek: ἔνδον \"endon\" \"within\", σύν \"syn\" \"together\" and βίωσις \"biosis\" \"living\".) Examples are nitrogen-fixing bacteria (called rhizobia), which live in the root nodules of legumes; single-cell algae inside reef-building corals, and bacterial endosymbionts that provide essential nutrients to about 10–15% of insects.\n\nThere are two types of symbiont transmissions. In horizontal transmission, each new generation acquires free living symbionts from the environment. An example is the nitrogen-fixing bacteria in certain plant roots. Vertical transmission takes place when the symbiont is transferred directly from parent to offspring. There is also a combination of these types, where symbionts are transferred vertically for some generation before a switch of host occurs and new symbionts are horizontally acquired from the environment. In vertical transmissions, the symbionts often have a reduced genomes and are no longer able to survive on their own. As a result, the symbiont depends on the host, resulting in a highly intimate co-dependent relationship. For instance, pea aphid symbionts have lost genes for essential molecules, now relying on the host to supply them with nutrients. In return, the symbionts synthesize essential amino acids for the aphid host . Other examples include \"Wigglesworthia\" nutritional symbionts of tse-tse flies, or in sponges. When a symbiont reaches this stage, it begins to resemble a cellular organelle, similar to mitochondria or chloroplasts.\n\nMany instances of endosymbiosis are obligate; that is, either the endosymbiont or the host cannot survive without the other, such as the gutless marine worms of the genus \"Riftia\", which get nutrition from their endosymbiotic bacteria. The most common examples of obligate endosymbioses are mitochondria and chloroplasts. Some human parasites, e.g. \"Wuchereria bancrofti\" and \"Mansonella perstans\", thrive in their intermediate insect hosts because of an obligate endosymbiosis with \"Wolbachia spp\". They can both be eliminated from said hosts by treatments that target this bacterium. However, not all endosymbioses are obligate and some endosymbioses can be harmful to either of the organisms involved.\n\nTwo major types of organelle in eukaryotic cells, mitochondria and plastids such as chloroplasts, are considered to be bacterial endosymbionts. This process is commonly referred to as symbiogenesis.\n\nSymbiogenesis explains the origins of eukaryotes, whose cells contain two major kinds of organelle: mitochondria and chloroplasts. The theory proposes that these organelles evolved from certain types of bacteria that eukaryotic cells engulfed through phagocytosis. These cells and the bacteria trapped inside them entered an endosymbiotic relationship, meaning that the bacteria took up residence and began living exclusively within the eukaryotic cells.\n\nNumerous insect species have endosymbionts at different stages of symbiogenesis. A common theme of symbiogenesis involves the reduction of the genome to only essential genes for the host and symbiont collective genome. An incredible example of this is the fractionation of the \"Hodgkinia\" genome of \"Magicicada\" cicadas. Because the cicada life cycle takes years underground, natural selection on endosymbiont populations is relaxed for many bacterial generations. This allows the symbiont genomes to diversify within the host for years with only punctuated periods of selection when the cicadas reproduce. As a result, the ancestral \"Hodgkinia\" genome has split into three groups of primary endosymbiont, each encoding only a fraction of the essential genes for the symbiosis. The host now requires all three sub-groups of symbiont, each with degraded genomes lacking most essential genes for bacterial viability.\n\nThe best-studied examples of endosymbiosis are known from invertebrates. These symbioses affect organisms with global impact, including \"symbiodinium\" of corals, or \"Wolbachia\" of insects. Many insect agricultural pests and human disease vectors have intimate relationships with primary endosymbionts.\n\nScientists classify insect endosymbionts in two broad categories, 'Primary' and 'Secondary'. Primary endosymbionts (sometimes referred to as P-endosymbionts) have been associated with their insect hosts for many millions of years (from 10 to several hundred million years in some cases). They form obligate associations (see below), and display cospeciation with their insect hosts. Secondary endosymbionts exhibit a more recently developed association, are sometimes horizontally transferred between hosts, live in the hemolymph of the insects (not specialized bacteriocytes, see below), and are not obligate.\n\nAmong primary endosymbionts of insects, the best-studied are the pea aphid (\"Acyrthosiphon pisum\") and its endosymbiont \"Buchnera sp.\" APS, the tsetse fly \"Glossina morsitans morsitans\" and its endosymbiont \"Wigglesworthia glossinidia brevipalpis\" and the endosymbiotic protists in lower termites. As with endosymbiosis in other insects, the symbiosis is obligate in that neither the bacteria nor the insect is viable without the other. Scientists have been unable to cultivate the bacteria in lab conditions outside of the insect. With special nutritionally-enhanced diets, the insects can survive, but are unhealthy, and at best survive only a few generations.\n\nIn some insect groups, these endosymbionts live in specialized insect cells called bacteriocytes (also called \"mycetocytes\"), and are maternally-transmitted, i.e. the mother transmits her endosymbionts to her offspring. In some cases, the bacteria are transmitted in the egg, as in \"Buchnera\"; in others like \"Wigglesworthia\", they are transmitted via milk to the developing insect embryo. In termites, the endosymbionts reside within the hindguts and are transmitted through trophallaxis among colony members.\n\nThe primary endosymbionts are thought to help the host either by providing nutrients that the host cannot obtain itself or by metabolizing insect waste products into safer forms. For example, the putative primary role of \"Buchnera\" is to synthesize essential amino acids that the aphid cannot acquire from its natural diet of plant sap. Likewise, the primary role of \"Wigglesworthia\", it is presumed, is to synthesize vitamins that the tsetse fly does not get from the blood that it eats. In lower termites, the endosymbiotic protists play a major role in the digestion of lignocellulosic materials that constitute a bulk of the termites' diet.\n\nBacteria benefit from the reduced exposure to predators and competition from other bacterial species, the ample supply of nutrients and relative environmental stability inside the host.\n\nGenome sequencing reveals that obligate bacterial endosymbionts of insects have among the smallest of known bacterial genomes and have lost many genes that are commonly found in closely related bacteria. Several theories have been put forth to explain the loss of genes. It is presumed that some of these genes are not needed in the environment of the host insect cell. A complementary theory suggests that the relatively small numbers of bacteria inside each insect decrease the efficiency of natural selection in 'purging' deleterious mutations and small mutations from the population, resulting in a loss of genes over many millions of years. Research in which a parallel phylogeny of bacteria and insects was inferred supports the belief that the primary endosymbionts are transferred only vertically (i.e., from the mother), and not horizontally (i.e., by escaping the host and entering a new host).\n\nAttacking obligate bacterial endosymbionts may present a way to control their insect hosts, many of which are pests or carriers of human disease. For example, aphids are crop pests and the tsetse fly carries the organism \"Trypanosoma brucei\" that causes African sleeping sickness. Other motivations for their study involve understanding the origins of symbioses in general, as a proxy for understanding e.g. how chloroplasts or mitochondria came to be obligate symbionts of eukaryotes or plants.\n\nThe pea aphid (\"Acyrthosiphon pisum\") is known to contain at least three secondary endosymbionts, \"Hamiltonella defensa\", \"Regiella insecticola\", and \"Serratia symbiotica\". \"Hamiltonella defensa\" defends its aphid host from parasitoid wasps. This defensive symbiosis improves the survival of aphids, which have lost some elements of the insect immune response.\n\nOne of the best-understood defensive symbionts is the spiral bacteria \"Spiroplasma poulsonii\". \"Spiroplasma sp.\" can be reproductive manipulators, but also defensive symbionts of \"Drosophila\" flies. In \"Drosophila neotestacea\", \"S. poulsonii\" has spread across North America owing to its ability to defend its fly host against nematode parasites. This defence is mediated by toxins called \"ribosome-inactivating proteins\" that attack the molecular machinery of invading parasites. These \"Spiroplasma\" toxins represent one of the first examples of a defensive symbiosis with a mechanistic understanding for defensive symbiosis between an insect endosymbiont and its host.\n\n\"Sodalis glossinidius\" is a secondary endosymbiont of tsetse flies that lives inter- and intracellularly in various host tissues, including the midgut and hemolymph. Phylogenetic studies have not indicated a correlation between evolution of \"Sodalis\" and tsetse. Unlike tsetse's primary symbiont \"Wigglesworthia\", though, \"Sodalis\" has been cultured \"in vitro\".\n\nMany other insects have secondary endosymbionts not reviewed here.\n\nExtracellular endosymbionts are also represented in all four extant classes of Echinodermata (Crinoidea, Ophiuroidea, Echinoidea, and Holothuroidea). Little is known of the nature of the association (mode of infection, transmission, metabolic requirements, etc.) but phylogenetic analysis indicates that these symbionts belong to the alpha group of the class Proteobacteria, relating them to \"Rhizobium\" and \"Thiobacillus\". Other studies indicate that these subcuticular bacteria may be both abundant within their hosts and widely distributed among the Echinoderms in general.\n\nSome marine oligochaeta (e.g., \"Olavius algarvensis\" and \"Inanidrillus spp.\") have obligate extracellular endosymbionts that fill the entire body of their host. These marine worms are nutritionally dependent on their symbiotic chemoautotrophic bacteria lacking any digestive or excretory system (no gut, mouth, or nephridia).\n\nThe sea slug \"Elysia chlorotica\" lives in endosymbiotic relationship with the algae \"Vaucheria litorea\", and the jellyfish \"Mastigias\" have a similar relationship with an algae.\n\nDinoflagellate endosymbionts of the genus \"Symbiodinium\", commonly known as zooxanthellae, are found in corals, mollusks (esp. giant clams, the \"Tridacna\"), sponges, and foraminifera. These endosymbionts drive the formation of coral reefs by capturing sunlight and providing their hosts with energy for carbonate deposition.\n\nPreviously thought to be a single species, molecular phylogenetic evidence over the past couple decades has shown there to be great diversity in \"Symbiodinium\". In some cases, there is specificity between host and \"Symbiodinium\" clade. More often, however, there is an ecological distribution of \"Symbiodinium\", the symbionts switching between hosts with apparent ease. When reefs become environmentally stressed, this distribution of symbionts is related to the observed pattern of coral bleaching and recovery. Thus, the distribution of \"Symbiodinium\" on coral reefs and its role in coral bleaching presents one of the most complex and interesting current problems in reef ecology.\n\nIn marine environments, bacterial endosymbionts have more recently been discovered. These endosymbiotic relationships are especially prevalent in oligotrophic or nutrient-poor regions of the ocean like that of the North Atlantic.  In these oligotrophic waters, cell growth of larger phytoplankton like that of diatoms is limited by low nitrate concentrations.  Endosymbiotic bacteria fix nitrogen for their diatom hosts and in turn receive organic carbon from photosynthesis. These symbioses play an important role in global carbon cycling in oligotrophic regions.\n\nOne known symbiosis between the diatom \"Hemialus\" spp. and the cyanobacterium \"Richelia intracellularis\" has been found in the North Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Pacific Ocean. The \"Richelia\" endosymbiont is found within the diatom frustule of \"Hemiaulus\" spp., and has a reduced genome likely losing genes related to pathways the host now provides.  Research by Foster et al. (2011) measured nitrogen fixation by the cyanobacterial host \"Richelia intracellularis\" well above intracellular requirements, and found the cyanobacterium was likely fixing excess nitrogen for Hemiaulus host cells.  Additionally, both host and symbiont cell growth were much greater than free-living \"Richelia intracellularis\" or symbiont-free \"Hemiaulus\" spp.  The \"Hemaiulus\"-\"Richelia\" symbiosis is not obligatory especially in areas with excess nitrogen (nitrogen replete).\n\n\"Richelia intracellularis\" is also found in \"Rhizosolenia\" spp., a diatom found in oligotrophic oceans. Compared to the \"Hemaiulus\" host, the endosymbiosis with \"Rhizosolenia\" is much more consistent, and \"Richelia intracellularis\" is generally found in \"Rhizosolenia\". There are some asymbiotic (occurs without an endosymbiont) Rhizosolenia, however there appears to be mechanisms limiting growth of these organisms in low nutrient conditions. Cell division for both the diatom host and cyanobacterial symbiont can be uncoupled and mechanisms for passing bacterial symbionts to daughter cells during cell division are still relatively unknown.\n\nOther endosymbiosis with nitrogen fixers in open oceans include Calothrix in Chaetocerous spp. and UNCY-A in prymnesiophyte microalga.  The Chaetocerous-Calothrix endosymbiosis is hypothesized to be more recent, as the Calothrix genome is generally intact. While other species like that of the UNCY-A symbiont and Richelia have reduced genomes.  This reduction in genome size occurs within nitrogen metabolism pathways indicating endosymbiont species are generating nitrogen for their hosts and losing the ability to use this nitrogen independently. This endosymbiont reduction in genome size, might be a step that occurred in the evolution of organelles (above).\n\n\"Mixotricha paradoxa\" is a protozoan that lacks mitochondria. However, spherical bacteria live inside the cell and serve the function of the mitochondria. \"Mixotricha\" also has three other species of symbionts that live on the surface of the cell.\n\n\"Paramecium bursaria\", a species of ciliate, has a mutualistic symbiotic relationship with green alga called Zoochlorella. The algae live inside the cell, in the cytoplasm.\n\n\"Paulinella chromatophora\" is a freshwater amoeboid which has recently (evolutionarily speaking) taken on a cyanobacterium as an endosymbiont.\n\nMany foraminifera are hosts to several types of algae, such as red algae, diatoms, dinoflagellates and chlorophyta. These endosymbionts can be transmitted vertically to the next generation via asexual reproduction of the host, but because the endosymbionts are larger than the foraminiferal gametes, they need to acquire new algae again after sexual reproduction.\n\nSeveral species of radiolaria have photosynthetic symbionts. In some species the host will sometimes digest algae to keep their population at a constant level.\n\nHatena arenicola is a flagellate protist with a complicated feeding apparaturs that feed on other microbes. But when it engulf a green alga from the genus Nephroselmis, the feeding apparatus disappears and it becomes photosyntethic. During mitosis the algae is transferred to only one of the two cells, and the cell without the algae needs to start the cycle all over again.\n\nIn 1966, biologist Kwang W. Jeon found that a lab strain of Amoeba proteus had been infected by bacteria that lived inside the cytoplasmic vacuoles. This infection killed all the protists except from a few individuals. After the equivalent of 40 host generations, the two organisms gradually became mutually interdependent. Over many years of study, it has been confirmed that a genetic exchenge between the prokaryotes and protists has occurred.\n\nThe spotted salamander (\"Ambystoma maculatum\") lives in a relationship with the algae \"Oophila amblystomatis\", which grows in the egg cases.\n\nChloroplasts are primary endosymbionts of plants that provide energy to the plant by generating sugars.\n\nOf all the plants, \"Azolla\" has the most intimate relationship with a symbiont, as its cyanobacterium symbiont \"Anabaena\" is passed on directly from one generation to the next.\n\nThe human genome project found several thousand endogenous retroviruses, endogenous viral elements in the genome that closely resemble and can be derived from retroviruses, organized into 24 families.\n\nBULLET::::- Anagenesis\nBULLET::::- Endophyte\nBULLET::::- Ectosymbiosis\nBULLET::::- List of symbiotic organisms\nBULLET::::- List of symbiotic relationships\nBULLET::::- Multigenomic organism\nBULLET::::- Protocell\n"}
{"id": "9678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9678", "title": "Exponential function", "text": "Exponential function\n\nIn mathematics, an exponential function is a function of the form\n\nwhere is a positive real number, and in which the argument occurs as an exponent. For real numbers and a function of the form formula_1 is also an exponential function, as it can be rewritten as \n\nAs functions of a real variable, exponential functions are uniquely characterized by the fact that the growth rate of such a function (that is, its derivative) is directly proportional to the value of the function. The constant of proportionality of this relationship is the natural logarithm of the base :\n\nFor the real exponential function is a constant and the derivative is zero because formula_3 for positive and the real exponential functions are monotonically increasing (as depicted for and ), because the derivative is greater than zero for all arguments, and for they are monotonically decreasing (as depicted for ), because the derivative is less than zero for all arguments.\n\nThe constant is the unique base for which the constant of proportionality is 1, so that the function's derivative is itself:\n\nSince changing the base of the exponential function merely results in the appearance of an additional constant factor, it is computationally convenient to reduce the study of exponential functions in mathematical analysis to the study of this particular function, conventionally called the \"natural exponential function\", or simply, \"the exponential function\" and denoted by\n\nWhile both notations are common, the former notation is generally used for simpler exponents, while the latter tends to be used when the exponent is a complicated expression.\n\nThe exponential function satisfies the fundamental multiplicative identity\n\nThis identity extends to complex-valued exponents. It can be shown that every continuous, nonzero solution of the functional equation formula_4 is an exponential function, formula_5 with formula_6 The fundamental multiplicative identity, along with the definition of the number as , shows that formula_7 for positive integers and relates the exponential function to the elementary notion of exponentiation.\n\nThe argument of the exponential function can be any real or complex number or even an entirely different kind of mathematical object (for example, a matrix).\n\nIts ubiquitous occurrence in pure and applied mathematics has led mathematician W. Rudin to opine that the exponential function is \"the most important function in mathematics\". In applied settings, exponential functions model a relationship in which a constant change in the independent variable gives the same proportional change (that is, percentage increase or decrease) in the dependent variable. This occurs widely in the natural and social sciences; thus, the exponential function also appears in a variety of contexts within physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematical biology, and economics. \n\nThe graph of formula_8 is upward-sloping, and increases faster as increases. The graph always lies above the -axis but can be arbitrarily close to it for negative ; thus, the -axis is a horizontal asymptote. The slope of the tangent to the graph at each point is equal to its -coordinate at that point, as implied by its derivative function (\"see above\"). Its inverse function is the natural logarithm, denoted formula_9 formula_10 or formula_11 because of this, some old texts refer to the exponential function as the antilogarithm.\n\nThe real exponential function formula_12 can be characterized in a variety of equivalent ways. Most commonly, it is defined by the following power series:\n\nSince the radius of convergence of this power series is infinite, this definition is, in fact, applicable to all complex numbers formula_14 (see below for the extension of formula_15 to the complex plane). The constant can then be defined as formula_16\n\nThe term-by-term differentiation of this power series reveals that formula_17 for all real , leading to another common characterization of formula_15 as the unique solution of the differential equation\n\nsatisfying the initial condition formula_20\n\nBased on this characterization, the chain rule shows that its inverse function, the natural logarithm, satisfies formula_21 for formula_22 or formula_23 This relationship leads to a less common definition of the real exponential function formula_15 as the solution formula_25 to the equation\n\nBy way of the binomial theorem and the power series definition, the exponential function can also be defined as the following limit:\n\nThe exponential function arises whenever a quantity grows or decays at a rate proportional to its current value. One such situation is continuously compounded interest, and in fact it was this observation that led Jacob Bernoulli in 1683 to the number\n\nnow known as . Later, in 1697, Johann Bernoulli studied the calculus of the exponential function.\n\nIf a principal amount of 1 earns interest at an annual rate of compounded monthly, then the interest earned each month is times the current value, so each month the total value is multiplied by , and the value at the end of the year is . If instead interest is compounded daily, this becomes . Letting the number of time intervals per year grow without bound leads to the limit definition of the exponential function,\n\nfirst given by Leonhard Euler.\nThis is one of a number of characterizations of the exponential function; others involve series or differential equations.\n\nFrom any of these definitions it can be shown that the exponential function obeys the basic exponentiation identity,\n\nwhich justifies the notation .\n\nThe derivative (rate of change) of the exponential function is the exponential function itself. More generally, a function with a rate of change \"proportional\" to the function itself (rather than equal to it) is expressible in terms of the exponential function. This function property leads to exponential growth or exponential decay.\n\nThe exponential function extends to an entire function on the complex plane. Euler's formula relates its values at purely imaginary arguments to trigonometric functions. The exponential function also has analogues for which the argument is a matrix, or even an element of a Banach algebra or a Lie algebra.\n\nThe importance of the exponential function in mathematics and the sciences stems mainly from its definition as the unique function which is equal to its derivative and is equal to 1 when . That is,\n\nFunctions of the form for constant are the only functions that are equal to their derivative (by the Picard–Lindelöf theorem). Other ways of saying the same thing include:\nBULLET::::- The slope of the graph at any point is the height of the function at that point.\nBULLET::::- The rate of increase of the function at is equal to the value of the function at .\nBULLET::::- The function solves the differential equation .\nBULLET::::- is a fixed point of derivative as a functional.\n\nIf a variable's growth or decay rate is proportional to its size—as is the case in unlimited population growth (see Malthusian catastrophe), continuously compounded interest, or radioactive decay—then the variable can be written as a constant times an exponential function of time. Explicitly for any real constant , a function satisfies if and only if for some constant .\n\nFurthermore, for any differentiable function , we find, by the chain rule:\n\nA continued fraction for can be obtained via an identity of Euler:\n\nThe following generalized continued fraction for converges more quickly:\n\nor, by applying the substitution :\n\nwith a special case for :\n\nThis formula also converges, though more slowly, for . For example:\n\nAs in the real case, the exponential function can be defined on the complex plane in several equivalent forms. The most common definition of the complex exponential function parallels the power series definition for real arguments, where the real variable is replaced by a complex one:\n\nTerm-wise multiplication of two copies of these power series in the Cauchy sense, permitted by Mertens' theorem, shows that the defining multiplicative property of exponential functions continues to hold for all complex arguments:\n\nThe definition of the complex exponential function in turn leads to the appropriate definitions extending the trigonometric functions to complex arguments.\n\nIn particular, when formula_41 (formula_42 real), the series definition yields the expansion\n\nIn this expansion, the rearrangement of the terms into real and imaginary parts is justified by the absolute convergence of the series. The real and imaginary parts of the above expression in fact correspond to the series expansions of formula_44 and formula_45, respectively. \n\nThis correspondence provides motivation for \"defining\" cosine and sine for all complex arguments in terms of formula_46 and the equivalent power series:\n\nThe functions exp, cos, and sin so defined have infinite radii of convergence by the ratio test and are therefore entire functions (\"i.e.\", holomorphic on formula_50). The range of the exponential function is formula_51, while the ranges of the complex sine and cosine functions are both formula_50 in its entirety, in accord with Picard's theorem, which asserts that the range of a nonconstant entire function is either all of formula_50, or formula_50 excluding one lacunary value.\n\nThese definitions for the exponential and trigonometric functions lead trivially to Euler's formula:\n\nWe could alternatively define the complex exponential function based on this relationship. If formula_57, where formula_58 and formula_25 are both real, then we could define its exponential as\n\nwhere exp, cos, and sin on the right-hand side of the definition sign are to be interpreted as functions of a real variable, previously defined by other means.\n\nFor formula_61, the relationship formula_62 holds, so that formula_63 for real formula_42 and formula_65 maps the real line (mod formula_66) to the unit circle. Based on the relationship between formula_67 and the unit circle, it is easy to see that, restricted to real arguments, the definitions of sine and cosine given above coincide with their more elementary definitions based on geometric notions.\n\nThe complex exponential function is periodic with period formula_68 and formula_69 holds for all formula_70. \n\nWhen its domain is extended from the real line to the complex plane, the exponential function retains the following properties:\nBULLET::::- formula_71\nBULLET::::- formula_72\nBULLET::::- formula_73\nBULLET::::- formula_74\nBULLET::::- formula_75\nfor all formula_40.\n\nExtending the natural logarithm to complex arguments yields the complex logarithm , which is a multivalued function.\n\nWe can then define a more general exponentiation:\n\nfor all complex numbers and . This is also a multivalued function, even when is real. This distinction is problematic, as the multivalued functions and are easily confused with their single-valued equivalents when substituting a real number for . The rule about multiplying exponents for the case of positive real numbers must be modified in a multivalued context:\n\nSee failure of power and logarithm identities for more about problems with combining powers.\n\nThe exponential function maps any line in the complex plane to a logarithmic spiral in the complex plane with the center at the origin. Two special cases exist: when the original line is parallel to the real axis, the resulting spiral never closes in on itself; when the original line is parallel to the imaginary axis, the resulting spiral is a circle of some radius.\n\nConsidering the complex exponential function as a function involving four real variables:\nthe graph of the exponential function is a two-dimensional surface curving through four dimensions.\n\nStarting with a color-coded portion of the formula_79 domain, the following are depictions of the graph as variously projected into two or three dimensions.\n\nThe second image shows how the domain complex plane is mapped into the range complex plane:\nBULLET::::- zero is mapped to 1\nBULLET::::- the real formula_58 axis is mapped to the positive real formula_81 axis\nBULLET::::- the imaginary formula_25 axis is wrapped around the unit circle at a constant angular rate\nBULLET::::- values with negative real parts are mapped inside the unit circle\nBULLET::::- values with positive real parts are mapped outside of the unit circle\nBULLET::::- values with a constant real part are mapped to circles centered at zero\nBULLET::::- values with a constant imaginary part are mapped to rays extending from zero\n\nThe third and fourth images show how the graph in the second image extends into one of the other two dimensions not shown in the second image.\n\nThe third image shows the graph extended along the real formula_58 axis. It shows the graph is a surface of revolution about the formula_58 axis of the graph of the real exponential function, producing a horn or funnel shape.\n\nThe fourth image shows the graph extended along the imaginary formula_25 axis. It shows that the graph's surface for positive and negative formula_25 values doesn't really meet along the negative real formula_81 axis, but instead forms a spiral surface about the formula_25 axis. Because its formula_25 values have been extended to ±2π, this image also better depicts the 2π periodicity in the imaginary formula_25 value.\n\nComplex exponentiation can be defined by converting to polar coordinates and using the identity :\n\nHowever, when is not an integer, this function is multivalued, because is not unique (see failure of power and logarithm identities).\n\nThe power series definition of the exponential function makes sense for square matrices (for which the function is called the matrix exponential) and more generally in any unital Banach algebra . In this setting, , and is invertible with inverse for any in . If , then , but this identity can fail for noncommuting and .\n\nSome alternative definitions lead to the same function. For instance, can be defined as\n\nOr can be defined as , where is the solution to the differential equation , with initial condition ; it follows that for every in \n\nGiven a Lie group and its associated Lie algebra formula_93, the exponential map is a map formula_93 satisfying similar properties. In fact, since is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of all positive real numbers under multiplication, the ordinary exponential function for real arguments is a special case of the Lie algebra situation. Similarly, since the Lie group of invertible matrices has as Lie algebra , the space of all matrices, the exponential function for square matrices is a special case of the Lie algebra exponential map.\n\nThe identity can fail for Lie algebra elements and that do not commute; the Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula supplies the necessary correction terms.\n\nThe function is not in (i.e., is not the quotient of two polynomials with complex coefficients).\n\nFor distinct complex numbers }, the set } is linearly independent over .\n\nThe function is transcendental over .\n\nWhen computing (an approximation of) the exponential function near the argument , the result will be close to 1, and computing the value of the difference formula_95 with floating-point arithmetic may lead to the loss of (possibly all) significant figures, producing a large calculation error, possibly even a meaningless result. \n\nFollowing a proposal by William Kahan, it may thus be useful to have a dedicated routine, often called codice_1, for computing directly, bypassing computation of . For example, if the exponential is computed by using its Taylor series\none may use the Taylor series of formula_97\n\nThis was first implemented in 1979 in the Hewlett-Packard HP-41C calculator, and provided by several calculators, operating systems (for example Berkeley UNIX 4.3BSD), computer algebra systems, and programming languages (for example C99).\n\nIn addition to base , the IEEE 754-2008 standard defines similar exponential functions near 0 for base 2 and 10: formula_99 and formula_100.\n\nA similar approach has been used for the logarithm (see lnp1).\n\nAn identity in terms of the hyperbolic tangent,\ngives a high-precision value for small values of on systems that do not implement .\n\nBULLET::::- Approximating natural exponents (log base )\nBULLET::::- Carlitz exponential, a characteristic analogue\nBULLET::::- Double exponential function\nBULLET::::- Exponential field\nBULLET::::- Half-exponential function, a compositional square root of an exponential function\nBULLET::::- Linear function\nBULLET::::- List of exponential topics\nBULLET::::- List of integrals of exponential functions\nBULLET::::- Mittag-Leffler function, a generalization of the exponential function\nBULLET::::- Multiplicative calculus\nBULLET::::- -adic exponential function\nBULLET::::- Polynomial function\nBULLET::::- Padé table for exponential function – Padé approximation of exponential function by a fraction of polynomial functions\nBULLET::::- Tetration\nBULLET::::- Unrestricted algorithm for the computation of the exponential function\n"}
{"id": "9679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9679", "title": "Prince Eugene of Savoy", "text": "Prince Eugene of Savoy\n\nPrince Eugene Francis of Savoy–Carignano (, , ; 18 October 1663 – 21 April 1736) was a member of the House of Savoy and \"Generalfeldmarschall\" of the Imperial Army and statesman of the Holy Roman Empire and the Archduchy of Austria and one of the most successful military commanders in modern European history, rising to the highest offices of state at the Imperial court in Vienna.\n\nBorn in Paris, Eugene grew up around the court of King Louis XIV of France. Based on his poor physique and bearing, the Prince was initially prepared for a clerical career, but by the age of 19 he had determined on a military career. Following a scandal involving his mother Olympe, he was rejected by Louis XIV for service in the French army. Eugene moved to Austria and transferred his loyalty to the Habsburg Monarchy.\n\nSpanning six decades, Eugene served three Holy Roman Emperors: Leopold I, Joseph I, and Charles VI. He first saw action against the Ottoman Turks at the Siege of Vienna in 1683 and the subsequent War of the Holy League, before serving in the Nine Years' War, fighting alongside his cousin, the Duke of Savoy. However, the Prince's fame was secured with his decisive victory against the Ottomans at the Battle of Zenta in 1697, earning him Europe-wide fame. Eugene enhanced his standing during the War of the Spanish Succession, where his partnership with the Duke of Marlborough secured victories against the French on the fields of Blenheim (1704), Oudenarde (1708), and Malplaquet (1709); he gained further success in the war as Imperial commander in northern Italy, most notably at the Battle of Turin (1706). Renewed hostilities against the Ottomans in the Austro-Turkish War consolidated his reputation, with victories at the battles of Petrovaradin (1716), and the decisive encounter at Belgrade (1717).\n\nThroughout the late 1720s, Eugene's influence and skillful diplomacy managed to secure the Emperor powerful allies in his dynastic struggles with the Bourbon powers, but physically and mentally fragile in his later years, Eugene enjoyed less success as commander-in-chief of the army during his final conflict, the War of the Polish Succession. Nevertheless, in Austria, Eugene's reputation remains unrivalled. Although opinions differ as to his character, there is no dispute over his great achievements: he helped to save the Habsburg Empire from French conquest; he broke the westward thrust of the Ottomans, liberating central Europe after a century and a half of Turkish occupation; and he was one of the great patrons of the arts whose building legacy can still be seen in Vienna today. Eugene died in his sleep at his home on 21 April 1736, aged 72.\n\n! colspan=\"1\" Genealogy\n\nPrince Eugene was born in the Hôtel de Soissons in Paris on 18 October 1663. His mother, Olympia Mancini, was one of Cardinal Mazarin's nieces whom he had brought to Paris from Rome in 1647 to further his, and, to a lesser extent, their ambitions. The Mancinis were raised at the Palais-Royal along with the young Louis XIV, with whom Olympia formed an intimate relationship. Yet to her great disappointment, her chance to become queen passed by, and in 1657, Olympia married Eugene Maurice, Count of Soissons, Count of Dreux and Prince of Savoy. Together they had had five sons (Eugene being the youngest) and three daughters, but neither parent spent much time with the children: his father, a brave, unglamorous French soldier, spent much of his time away campaigning, while Olympia's passion for court intrigue meant the children received little attention from her.\n\nThe King remained strongly attached to Olympia, so much so that many believed them to be lovers; but her scheming eventually led to her downfall. After falling out of favour at court, Olympia turned to Catherine Deshayes (known as \"La Voisin\"), and the arts of black magic and astrology. It was a fatal relationship. Embroiled in the \"affaire des poisons\", suspicions now abounded of her involvement in her husband's premature death in 1673, and even implicated her in a plot to kill the King himself. Whatever the truth, Olympia, rather than face trial, subsequently fled France for Brussels in January 1680, leaving Eugene in the care of his father's mother, Marie de Bourbon, and her daughter, Hereditary Princess of Baden, mother of Prince Louis of Baden.\n\nFrom the age of ten, Eugene had been brought up for a career in the church; a personal choice of the King, basing the decision on the young Prince's poor physique and bearing. Certainly Eugene's appearance was not impressive — \"He was never good-looking …\" wrote the Duchess of Orléans, \"It is true that his eyes are not ugly, but his nose ruins his face; he has two large teeth which are visible at all times.\"\n\nIn February 1683, to the surprise of his family, Eugene declared his intention of joining the army. Now 19 years old, Eugene applied directly to Louis XIV for command of a company in French service, but the King—who had shown no compassion for Olympia's children since her disgrace—refused him out of hand. \"The request was modest, not so the petitioner,\" he remarked. \"No one else ever presumed to stare me out so insolently.\" Whatever the case, Louis XIV's choice would cost him dearly twenty years later, for it would be precisely Eugene, in collaboration with the Duke of Marlborough, who would defeat the French army at Blenheim, a decisive battle which checked French military supremacy and political power.\n\nDenied a military career in France, Eugene decided to seek service abroad. One of Eugene's brothers, Louis Julius, had entered Imperial service the previous year, but he had been immediately killed fighting the Ottoman Turks in 1683. When news of his death reached Paris, Eugene decided to travel to Austria in the hope of taking over his brother's command. It was not an unnatural decision: his cousin, Louis of Baden, was already a leading general in the Imperial army, as was a more distant cousin, Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria. On the night of July 26, 1683, Eugene left Paris and headed east.\n\nBy May 1683, the Ottoman threat to Emperor Leopold I's capital, Vienna, was very real. The Grand Vizier, Kara Mustafa Pasha—encouraged by Imre Thököly's Magyar rebellion—had invaded Hungary with between 100,000–200,000 men; within two months approximately 90,000 were beneath Vienna's walls. With the 'Turks at the gates', the Emperor fled for the safe refuge of Passau up the Danube, a more distant and secure part of his dominion. It was at Leopold I's camp that Eugene arrived in mid-August.\n\nAlthough Eugene was not of Austrian extraction, he did have Habsburg antecedents. His grandfather, Thomas Francis, founder of the Carignano line of the House of Savoy, was the son of Catherine Michelle—a daughter of Philip II of Spain—and the great-grandson of the Emperor Charles V. But of more immediate consequence to Leopold I was the fact that Eugene was the second cousin of Victor Amadeus, the Duke of Savoy, a connection that the Emperor hoped might prove useful in any future confrontation with France. These ties, together with his ascetic manner and appearance (a positive advantage to him at the sombre court of Leopold I), ensured the refugee from the hated French king a warm welcome at Passau, and a position in Imperial service. Though French was his favored language, he communicated with Leopold in Italian, as the Emperor (though he knew it perfectly) disliked French. But Eugene also had a reasonable command of German, which he understood very easily, something that helped him much in the military.\n\nEugene was in no doubt where his new allegiance lay—\"I will devote all my strength, all my courage, and if need be, my last drop of blood, to the service of your Imperial Majesty.\" This loyalty was immediately put to the test. By September, the Imperial forces under the Duke of Lorraine, together with a powerful Polish army under King John III Sobieski, were poised to strike the Sultan's army. On the morning of 12 September, the Christian forces drew up in line of battle on the south-eastern slopes of the Vienna Woods, looking down on the massed enemy camp. The day-long Battle of Vienna resulted in the lifting of the 60-day siege, and the Sultan's forces were routed and in retreat. Serving under Baden, Eugene distinguished himself in the battle, earning commendation from Lorraine and the Emperor; he later received the nomination for the colonelcy of the Dragoon Regiment Kufstein.\n\nIn March 1684, Leopold I formed the Holy League with Poland and Venice to counter the Ottoman threat. For the next two years, Eugene continued to perform with distinction on campaign and establish himself as a dedicated, professional soldier; by the end of 1685, still only 22 years old, he was made a Major-General. However, little is known of Eugene's life during these early campaigns. Contemporary observers make only passing comments of his actions, and his own surviving correspondence, largely to his cousin Victor Amadeus, are typically reticent about his own feelings and experiences. Nevertheless, it is clear that Baden was impressed with Eugene's qualities—\"This young man will, with time, occupy the place of those whom the world regards as great leaders of armies.\"\n\nIn June 1686, the Duke of Lorraine besieged Buda (Budapest), the centre of the Ottoman occupation in Hungary. After resisting for 78 days, the city fell on 2 September, and Turkish resistance collapsed throughout the region as far away as Transylvania and Serbia. Further success followed in 1687, where, commanding a cavalry brigade, Eugene made an important contribution to the victory at the Battle of Mohács on 12 August. Such was the scale of their defeat that the Ottoman army mutinied—a revolt which spread to Constantinople. The Grand Vizier, Suluieman Pasha, was executed and Sultan Mehmed IV, deposed. Once again, Eugene's courage earned him recognition from his superiors, who granted him the honour of personally conveying the news of victory to the Emperor in Vienna. For his services, Eugene was promoted to Lieutenant-General in November 1687. He was also gaining wider recognition. King Charles II of Spain bestowed upon him the Order of the Golden Fleece, while his cousin, Victor Amadeus, provided him with money and two profitable abbeys in Piedmont. However, Eugene's military career suffered a temporary setback in 1688 when, on 6 September, the Prince suffered a severe wound to his knee by a musket ball during the Siege of Belgrade. It was not until January 1689 that he could return to active service.\n\nJust as Belgrade was falling to Imperial forces under Max Emmanuel in the east, French troops in the west were crossing the Rhine into the Holy Roman Empire. Louis XIV had hoped that a show of force would lead to a quick resolution to his dynastic and territorial disputes with the princes of the Empire along his eastern border, but his intimidatory moves only strengthened German resolve, and in May 1689, Leopold I and the Dutch signed an offensive compact aimed at repelling French aggression.\n\nThe Nine Years' War was professionally and personally frustrating for the Prince. Initially fighting on the Rhine with Max Emmanuel—receiving a slight head wound at the Siege of Mainz in 1689—Eugene subsequently transferred himself to Piedmont after Victor Amadeus joined the Alliance against France in 1690. Promoted to general of cavalry, he arrived in Turin with his friend the Prince of Commercy; but it proved an inauspicious start. Against Eugene's advice, Amadeus insisted on engaging the French at Staffarda and suffered a serious defeat—only Eugene's handling of the Savoyard cavalry in retreat saved his cousin from disaster. Eugene remained unimpressed with the men and their commanders throughout the war in Italy. \"The enemy would long ago have been beaten,\" he wrote to Vienna, \"if everyone had done their duty.\" So contemptuous was he of the Imperial commander, Count Caraffa, he threatened to leave Imperial service.\n\nIn Vienna, Eugene's attitude was dismissed as the arrogance of a young upstart, but so impressed was the Emperor by his passion for the Imperial cause, he promoted him to Field-Marshal in 1693. When Caraffa's replacement, Count Caprara, was himself transferred in 1694, it seemed that Eugene's chance for command and decisive action had finally arrived. But Amadeus, doubtful of victory and now more fearful of Habsburg influence in Italy than he was of French, had begun secret dealings with Louis XIV aimed at extricating himself from the war. By 1696, the deal was done, and Amadeus transferred his troops and his loyalty to the enemy. Eugene was never to fully trust his cousin again; although he continued to pay due reverence to the Duke as head of his family, their relationship would forever after remain strained.\n\nMilitary honours in Italy undoubtedly belonged to the French commander Marshal Catinat, but Eugene, the one Allied general determined on action and decisive results, did well to emerge from the Nine Years' War with an enhanced reputation. With the signing of the Treaty of Ryswick in September/October 1697, the desultory war in the west was finally brought to an inconclusive end, and Leopold I could once again devote all his martial energies into defeating the Ottoman Turks in the east.\n\nThe distractions of the war against Louis XIV had enabled the Turks to recapture Belgrade in 1690. In August 1691, the Austrians, under Louis of Baden, regained the advantage by heavily defeating the Turks at the Battle of Slankamen on the Danube, securing Habsburg possession of Hungary and Transylvania. However, when Baden was transferred west to fight the French in 1692, his successors, first Caprara, then from 1696, Frederick Augustus, the Elector of Saxony, proved incapable of delivering the final blow. On the advice of the President of the Imperial War Council, Rüdiger Starhemberg, Eugene was offered supreme command of Imperial forces in April 1697. This was Eugene's first truly independent command—no longer need he suffer under the excessively cautious generalship of Caprara and Caraffa, or be thwarted by the deviations of Victor Amadeus. But on joining his army, he found it in a state of 'indescribable misery'. Confident and self-assured, the Prince of Savoy (ably assisted by Commercy and Guido Starhemberg) set about restoring order and discipline.\n\nLeopold I had warned Eugene to act cautiously, but when the Imperial commander learnt of Sultan Mustafa II's march on Transylvania, Eugene abandoned all ideas of a defensive campaign and moved to intercept the Turks as they crossed the River Tisza at Zenta on 11 September 1697. It was late in the day before the Imperial army struck. The Turkish cavalry had already crossed the river so Eugene decided to attack immediately, arranging his men in a half-moon formation. The vigour of the assault wrought terror and confusion amongst the Turks, and by nightfall, the battle was won. For the loss of some 2,000 dead and wounded, Eugene had inflicted approximately 25,000 casualties on his enemy—including the Grand Vizier, Elmas Mehmed Pasha—annihilating the Turkish army. Although the Ottomans lacked western organisation and training, the Savoyard prince had revealed his tactical skill, his capacity for bold decision, and his ability to inspire his men to excel in battle against a dangerous foe.\n\nAfter a brief terror-raid into Ottoman-held Bosnia, culminating in the sack of Sarajevo, Eugene returned to Vienna in November to a triumphal reception. His victory at Zenta had turned him into a European hero, and with victory came reward. Land in Hungary, given him by the Emperor, yielded a good income, enabling the Prince to cultivate his newly acquired tastes in art and architecture (see below); but for all his new-found wealth and property, he was, nevertheless, without personal ties or family commitments. Of his four brothers, only one was still alive at this time. His fourth brother, Emmanuel, had died aged 14 in 1676; his third, Louis Julius (already mentioned) had died on active service in 1683, and his second brother, Philippe, died of smallpox in 1693. Eugene's remaining brother, Louis Thomas—ostracised for incurring the displeasure of Louis XIV—travelled Europe in search of a career, before arriving in Vienna in 1699. With Eugene's help, Louis found employment in the Imperial army, only to be killed in action against the French in 1702. Of Eugene's sisters, the youngest had died in childhood. The other two, Marie Jeanne-Baptiste and Louise Philiberte, led dissolute lives. Expelled from France, Marie joined her mother in Brussels, before eloping with a renegade priest to Geneva, living with him unhappily until her premature death in 1705. Of Louise, little is known after her early salacious life in Paris, but in due course, she lived for a time in a convent in Savoy before her death in 1726.\n\nThe Battle of Zenta proved to be the decisive victory in the long war against the Turks. With Leopold I's interests now focused on Spain and the imminent death of Charles II, the Emperor terminated the conflict with the Sultan, and signed the Treaty of Karlowitz on 26 January 1699.\n\nWith the death of the infirm and childless Charles II of Spain on 1 November 1700, the succession of the Spanish throne and subsequent control over her empire once again embroiled Europe in war—the War of the Spanish Succession. On his deathbed Charles II had bequeathed the entire Spanish inheritance to Louis XIV's grandson, Philip, Duke of Anjou. This threatened to unite the Spanish and French kingdoms under the House of Bourbon—something unacceptable to England, the Dutch Republic, and Leopold I, who had himself a claim to the Spanish throne. From the beginning, the Emperor had refused to accept the will of Charles II, and he did not wait for England and the Dutch Republic to begin hostilities. Before a new Grand Alliance could be concluded Leopold I prepared to send an expedition to seize the Spanish lands in Italy.\n\nEugene crossed the Alps with some 30,000 men in May/June 1701. After a series of brilliant manoeuvres the Imperial commander defeated Catinat at the Battle of Carpi on 9 July. \"I have warned you that you are dealing with an enterprising young prince,\" wrote Louis XIV to his commander, \"he does not tie himself down to the rules of war.\" On 1 September Eugene defeated Catinat's successor, Marshal Villeroi, at the Battle of Chiari, in a clash as destructive as any in the Italian theatre. But as so often throughout his career the Prince faced war on two fronts—the enemy in the field and the government in Vienna. Starved of supplies, money and men, Eugene was forced into unconventional means against the vastly superior enemy. During a daring raid on Cremona on the night of 31 January/1 February 1702 Eugene captured the French commander-in-chief. Yet the coup was less successful than hoped: Cremona remained in French hands, and the Duke of Vendôme, whose talents far exceeded Villeroi's, became the theatre's new commander. Villeroi's capture caused a sensation in Europe, and had a galvanising effect on English public opinion. \"The surprise at Cremona,\" wrote the diarist John Evelyn, \"… was the greate discourse of this weeke\"; but appeals for succour from Vienna remained unheeded, forcing Eugene to seek battle and gain a 'lucky hitt'. The resulting Battle of Luzzara on 15 August proved inconclusive. Although Eugene's forces inflicted double the number of casualties on the French the battle settled little except to deter Vendôme trying an all-out assault on Imperial forces that year, enabling Eugene to hold on south of the Alps. With his army rotting away, and personally grieving for his long standing friend Prince Commercy who had died at Luzzara, Eugene returned to Vienna in January 1703.\n\nEugene's European reputation was growing (Cremona and Luzzara had been celebrated as victories throughout the Allied capitals), yet because of the condition and morale of his troops the 1702 campaign had not been a success. Austria itself was now facing the direct threat of invasion from across the border in Bavaria where the state's Elector, Maximilian Emanuel, had declared for the Bourbons in August the previous year. Meanwhile, in Hungary a small-scale revolt had broken out in May and was fast gaining momentum. With the monarchy at the point of complete financial breakdown Leopold I was at last persuaded to change the government. At the end of June 1703 Gundaker Starhemberg replaced Gotthard Salaburg as President of the Treasury, and Prince Eugene succeeded Henry Mansfeld as the new President of the Imperial War Council (\"Hofkriegsratspräsident\").\n\nAs head of the war council Eugene was now part of the Emperor's inner circle, and the first president since Montecuccoli to remain an active commander. Immediate steps were taken to improve efficiency within the army: encouragement and, where possible, money, was sent to the commanders in the field; promotion and honours were distributed according to service rather than influence; and discipline improved. But the Austrian monarchy faced severe peril on several fronts in 1703: by June the Duke of Villars had reinforced the Elector of Bavaria on the Danube thus posing a direct threat to Vienna, while Vendôme remained at the head of a large army in northern Italy opposing Guido Starhemberg's weak Imperial force. Of equal alarm was Francis II Rákóczi's revolt which, by the end of the year, had reached as far as Moravia and Lower Austria.\n\nDissension between Villars and the Elector of Bavaria had prevented an assault on Vienna in 1703, but in the Courts of Versailles and Madrid, ministers confidently anticipated the city's fall. The Imperial ambassador in London, Count Wratislaw, had pressed for Anglo-Dutch assistance on the Danube as early as February 1703, but the crisis in southern Europe seemed remote from the Court of St. James's where colonial and commercial considerations were more to the fore of men's minds. Only a handful of statesmen in England or the Dutch Republic realised the true implications of Austria's peril; foremost amongst these was the English Captain-General, the Duke of Marlborough.\n\nBy early 1704 Marlborough had resolved to march south and rescue the situation in southern Germany and on the Danube, personally requesting the presence of Eugene on campaign so as to have \"a supporter of his zeal and experience\". The Allied commanders met for the first time at the small village of Mundelsheim on 10 June, and immediately formed a close rapport—the two men becoming, in the words of Thomas Lediard, 'Twin constellations in glory'. This professional and personal bond ensured mutual support on the battlefield, enabling many successes during the Spanish Succession war. The first of these victories, and the most celebrated, came on 13 August 1704 at the Battle of Blenheim. Eugene commanded the right wing of the Allied army, holding the Elector of Bavaria's and Marshal Marsin's superior forces, while Marlborough broke through the Marshal Tallard's center, inflicting over 30,000 casualties. The battle proved decisive: Vienna was saved and Bavaria was knocked out of the war. Both Allied commanders were full of praise for each other's performance. Eugene's holding operation, and his pressure for action leading up to the battle, proved crucial for the Allied success.\n\nIn Europe Blenheim is regarded as much a victory for Eugene as it is for Marlborough, a sentiment echoed by Sir Winston Churchill (Marlborough's descendant and biographer), who pays tribute to \"the glory of Prince Eugene, whose fire and spirit had exhorted the wonderful exertions of his troops.\" France now faced the real danger of invasion, but Leopold I in Vienna was still under severe strain: Rákóczi's revolt was a major threat; and Guido Starhemberg and Victor Amadeus (who had once again switched loyalties and rejoined the Grand Alliance in 1703) had been unable to halt the French under Vendôme in northern Italy. Only Amadeus' capital, Turin, held on.\n\nEugene returned to Italy in April 1705, but his attempts to move west towards Turin were thwarted by Vendôme's skillful manoeuvres. Lacking boats and bridging materials, and with desertion and sickness rife within his army, the outnumbered Imperial commander was helpless. Leopold I's assurances of money and men had proved illusory, but desperate appeals from Amadeus and criticism from Vienna goaded the Prince into action, resulting in the Imperialists' bloody defeat at the Battle of Cassano on 16 August. However, following Leopold I's death and the accession of Joseph I to the Imperial throne in May 1705, Eugene at last began to receive the personal backing he desired. Joseph I proved to be a strong supporter of Eugene's supremacy in military affairs; he was the most effective emperor the Prince served and the one he was happiest under. Promising support, Joseph I persuaded Eugene to return to Italy and restore Habsburg honour.\n\nThe Imperial commander arrived in theatre in mid-April 1706, just in time to organise an orderly retreat of what was left of Count Reventlow's inferior army following his defeat by Vendôme at the Battle of Calcinato on 19 April. Vendôme now prepared to defend the lines along the river Adige, determined to keep Eugene cooped to the east while the Marquis of La Feuillade threatened Turin. However, feigning attacks along the Adige, Eugene descended south across the river Po in mid-July, outmanoeuvring the French commander and gaining a favourable position from which he could at last move west towards Piedmont and relieve Savoy's capital.\n\nEvents elsewhere were now to have major consequences for the war in Italy. With Villeroi's crushing defeat by Marlborough at the Battle of Ramillies on 23 May, Louis XIV recalled Vendôme north to take command of French forces in Flanders. It was a transfer that Saint-Simon considered something of a deliverance for the French commander who was \"now beginning to feel the unlikelihood of success [in Italy] … for Prince Eugene, with the reinforcements that had joined him after the Battle of Calcinato, had entirely changed the outlook in that theatre of the war.\" The Duke of Orléans, under the direction of Marsin, replaced Vendôme, but indecision and disorder in the French camp led to their undoing. After uniting his forces with Victor Amadeus at Villastellone in early September, Eugene attacked, overwhelmed, and decisively defeated the French forces besieging Turin on 7 September. Eugene's success broke the French hold on northern Italy, and the whole Po valley fell under Allied control. Eugene had gained a victory as signal as his colleague had at Ramillies—\"It is impossible for me to express the joy it has given me;\" wrote Marlborough, \"for I not only esteem but I really love the prince. This glorious action must bring France so low, that if our friends could but be persuaded to carry on the war with vigour one year longer, we cannot fail, with the blessing of God, to have such a peace as will give us quiet for all our days.\"\n\nThe Imperial victory in Italy marked the beginning of Austrian rule in Lombardy, and earned Eugene the Governorship of Milan. But the following year was to prove a disappointment for the Prince and the Grand Alliance as a whole. The Emperor and Eugene (whose main goal after Turin was to take Naples and Sicily from Philip duc d'Anjou's supporters), reluctantly agreed to Marlborough's plan for an attack on Toulon—the seat of French naval power in the Mediterranean. However, disunion between the Allied commanders—Victor Amadeus, Eugene, and the English Admiral Shovell—doomed the Toulon enterprise to failure. Although Eugene favoured some sort of attack on France's south-eastern border it was clear he felt the expedition impractical, and had shown none of the \"alacrity which he had displayed on other occasions.\" Substantial French reinforcements finally brought an end to the venture, and on 22 August 1707 the Imperial army began its retirement. The subsequent capture of Susa could not compensate for the total collapse of the Toulon expedition and with it any hope of an Allied war-winning blow that year.\n\nAt the beginning of 1708 Eugene successfully evaded calls for him to take charge in Spain (in the end Guido Starhemberg was sent), thus enabling him to take command of the Imperial army on the Moselle and once again unite with Marlborough in the Spanish Netherlands. Eugene (without his army) arrived at the Allied camp at Assche, west of Brussels, in early July, providing a welcome boost to morale after the early defection of Bruges and Ghent to the French. \" … our affairs improved through God's support and Eugene's aid,\" wrote the Prussian General Natzmer, \"whose timely arrival raised the spirits of the army again and consoled us.\" Heartened by the Prince's confidence the Allied commanders devised a bold plan to engage the French army under Vendôme and the Duke of Burgundy. On 10 July the Anglo-Dutch army made a forced march to surprise the French, reaching the river Scheldt just as the enemy were crossing to the north. The ensuing battle on 11 July—more a contact action rather than a set-piece engagement—ended in a resounding success for the Allies, aided by the dissension of the two French commanders. While Marlborough remained in overall command, Eugene had led the crucial right flank and centre. Once again the Allied commanders had co-operated remarkably well. \"Prince Eugene and I,\" wrote the Duke, \"shall never differ about our share of the laurels.\"\n\nMarlborough now favoured a bold advance along the coast to bypass the major French fortresses, followed by a march on Paris. But fearful of unprotected supply-lines, the Dutch and Eugene favoured a more cautious approach. Marlborough acquiesced and resolved upon the siege of Vauban's great fortress, Lille. While the Duke commanded the covering force, Eugene oversaw the siege of the town which surrendered on 22 October; however, it was not until 10 December that the resolute Marshal Boufflers yielded the citadel. Yet for all the difficulties of the siege (Eugene was badly wounded above his left eye by a musket ball, and even survived an attempt to poison him), the campaign of 1708 had been a remarkable success. The French were driven out of almost all the Spanish Netherlands. \"He who has not seen this,\" wrote Eugene, \"has seen nothing.\"\n\nThe recent defeats, together with the severe winter of 1708–09, had caused extreme famine and privation in France. Louis XIV was close to accepting Allied terms, but the conditions demanded by the leading Allied negotiators, Anthonie Heinsius, Charles Townshend, Marlborough, and Eugene—principally that Louis XIV should use his own troops to force Philip V off the Spanish throne—proved unacceptable to the French. Neither Eugene nor Marlborough had objected to the Allied demands at the time, but neither wanted the war with France to continue, and would have preferred further talks to deal with the Spanish issue. But the French King offered no further proposals. Lamenting the collapse of the negotiations, and aware of the vagaries of war, Eugene wrote to the Emperor in mid-June 1709. \"There can be no doubt that the next battle will be the biggest and bloodiest that has yet been fought.\"\n\nAfter the fall of Tournai on 3 September (itself a major undertaking), the Allied generals turned their attention towards Mons. Marshal Villars, recently joined by Boufflers, moved his army south-west of the town and began to fortify his position. Marlborough and Eugene favoured an engagement before Villars could render his position impregnable; but they also agreed to wait for reinforcements from Tournai which did not arrive until the following night, thus giving the French further opportunity to prepare their defences. Notwithstanding the difficulties of the attack, however, the Allied generals did not shrink from their original determination. The subsequent Battle of Malplaquet, fought on 11 September 1709, was the bloodiest engagement of the war. On the left flank, the Prince of Orange led his Dutch infantry in desperate charges only to have it cut to pieces; on the other flank, Eugene attacked and suffered almost as severely. But sustained pressure on his extremities forced Villars to weaken his centre, thus enabling Marlborough to breakthrough and claim victory. Villars was unable to save Mons, which subsequently capitulated on 21 October, but his resolute defence at Malplaquet—inflicting up to 25% casualties on the Allies—may have saved France from destruction.\n\nIn August 1709 Eugene's chief political opponent and critic in Vienna, Prince Salm, retired as court chamberlain. Eugene and Wratislaw were now the undisputed leaders of the Austrian government: all major departments of state were in their hands or those of their political allies. However, another attempt at a negotiated settlement at Geertruidenberg in April 1710 failed, largely because the English Whigs still felt strong enough to refuse concessions, while Louis XIV saw little reason to accept what he had refused the previous year. Eugene and Marlborough could not be accused of wrecking the negotiations, but neither showed regret at the breakdown of the talks. There was no alternative but to continue the war, and in June the Allied commanders captured Douai. This success was followed by a series of minor sieges, and by the close of 1710 the Allies had cleared much of France's protective ring of fortresses. Yet there had been no final, decisive breakthrough, and this was to be the last year that Eugene and Marlborough would work together.\n\nFollowing the death of Joseph I on 17 April 1711 his brother, Charles, the pretender to the Spanish throne, became emperor. In England the new Tory government (the 'peace party' who had deposed the Whigs in October 1710) declared their unwillingness to see Charles VI become Emperor as well as King of Spain, and had already begun secret negotiations with the French. In January 1712 Eugene arrived in England hoping to divert the government away from its peace policy, but despite the social success the visit was a political failure: Queen Anne and her ministers remained determined to end the war regardless of the Allies. Eugene had also arrived too late to save Marlborough who, seen by the Tories as the main obstacle to peace, had already been dismissed on charges of embezzlement. Elsewhere, however, the Austrians had made some progress—the Hungarian revolt had finally came to end. Although Eugene would have preferred to crush the rebels the Emperor had offered lenient conditions, leading to the signing of the Treaty of Szatmár on 30 April 1711.\n\nHoping to influence public opinion in England and force the French into making substantial concessions, Eugene prepared for a major campaign. However, on 21 May 1712—when the Tories felt they had secured favourable terms with their unilateral talks with the French—the Duke of Ormonde (Marlborough's successor) received the so-called 'restraining orders', forbidding him to take part in any military action. Eugene took the fortress of Le Quesnoy in early July, before besieging Landrecies, but Villars, taking advantage of Allied disunity, outmanoeuvred Eugene and defeated the Earl of Albermarle's Dutch garrison at Denain on 24 July. The French followed the victory by seizing the Allies' main supply magazine at Marchiennes, before reversing their earlier losses at Douai, Le Quesnoy and Bouchain. In one summer the whole forward Allied position laboriously built up over the years to act as the springboard into France had been precipitously abandoned.\n\nWith the death in December of his friend and close political ally, Count Wratislaw, Eugene became undisputed 'first minister' in Vienna. His position was built on his military successes, but his actual power was expressed through his role as president of the war council, and as \"de facto\" president of the conference which dealt with foreign policy. In this position of influence Eugene took the lead in pressing Charles VI towards peace. The government had come to accept that further war in the Netherlands or Spain was impossible without the aid of the Maritime Powers; yet the Emperor, still hoping that somehow he could place himself on the throne in Spain, refused to make peace at the Utrecht conference along with the other Allies. Reluctantly, Eugene prepared for another campaign, but lacking troops, finance, and supplies his prospects in 1713 were poor. Villars, with superior numbers, was able to keep Eugene guessing as to his true intent. Through successful feints and stratagems Landau fell to the French commander in August, followed in November by Freiburg. Eugene was reluctant to carry on the war, and wrote to the Emperor in June that a bad peace would be better than being 'ruined equally by friend and foe'. With Austrian finances exhausted and the German states reluctant to continue the war, Charles VI was compelled to enter into negotiations. Eugene and Villars (who had been old friends since the Turkish campaigns of the 1680s) initiated talks on 26 November. Eugene proved an astute and determined negotiator, and gained favourable terms by the Treaty of Rastatt signed on 7 March 1714 and the Treaty of Baden signed on 7 September 1714. Despite the failed campaign in 1713 the Prince was able to declare that, \"in spite of the military superiority of our enemies and the defection of our Allies, the conditions of peace will be more advantageous and more glorious than those we would have obtained at Utrecht.\"\n\nEugene's main reason for desiring peace in the west was the growing danger posed by the Turks in the east. Turkish military ambitions had revived after 1711 when they had mauled Peter the Great's army on the river Pruth: in December 1714 Sultan Ahmed III's forces attacked the Venetians in the Morea. To Vienna it was clear that the Turks intended to attack Hungary and undo the whole Karlowitz settlement of 1699. After the Porte rejected an offer of mediation in April 1716, Charles VI despatched Eugene to Hungary to lead his relatively small but professional army. Of all Eugene's wars this was the one in which he exercised most direct control; it was also a war which, for the most part, Austria fought and won on her own.\nEugene left Vienna in early June 1716 with a field army of between 80,000–90,000 men. By early August 1716 the Ottoman Turks, some 200,000 men under the sultan's son-in-law, the Grand Vizier Damat Ali Pasha, were marching from Belgrade towards Eugene's position west of the fortress of Petrovaradin on the north bank of the Danube. The Grand Vizier had intended to seize the fortress; but Eugene gave him no chance to do so. After resisting calls for caution and forgoing a council of war, the Prince decided to attack immediately on the morning of 5 August with approximately 70,000 men. The Turkish janissaries had some initial success, but after an Imperial cavalry attack on their flank, Ali Pasha's forces fell into confusion. Although the Imperials lost almost 5,000 dead or wounded, the Turks, who retreated in disorder to Belgrade, seem to have lost double that amount, including the Grand Vizier himself who had entered the mêlée and subsequently died of his wounds.\n\nEugene proceeded to take the Banat fortress of Timișoara (Temeswar in German) in mid-October 1716 (thus ending 164 years of Turkish rule), before turning his attention to the next campaign and to what he considered the main goal of the war, Belgrade. Situated at the confluence of the Rivers Danube and Sava, Belgrade held a garrison of 30,000 men under Mustapha Pasha. Imperial troops besieged the place in mid-June 1717, and by the end of July large parts of the city had been destroyed by artillery fire. By the first days of August, however, a huge Turkish field army (150,000–200,000 strong), under the new Grand Vizier, Halil Pasha, had arrived on the plateau east of the city to relieve the garrison. News spread through Europe of Eugene's imminent destruction; but he had no intention of lifting the siege. With his men suffering from dysentery, and continuous bombardment from the plateau, Eugene, aware that a decisive victory alone could extricate his army, decided to attack the relief force. On the morning of 16 August 40,000 Imperial troops marched through the fog, caught the Turks unaware, and routed Halil Pasha's army; a week later Belgrade surrendered, effectively bringing an end to the war. The victory was the crowning point of Eugene's military career and had confirmed him as the leading European general. His ability to snatch victory at the moment of defeat had shown the Prince at his best.\n\nThe principal objectives of the war had been achieved: the task Eugene had begun at Zenta was complete, and the Karlowitz settlement secured. By the terms of the Treaty of Passarowitz, signed on 21 July 1718, the Turks surrendered the Banat of Temeswar, along with Belgrade and most of Serbia, although they regained the Morea from the Venetians. The war had dispelled the immediate Turkish threat to Hungary, and was a triumph for the Empire and for Eugene personally.\n\nWhile Eugene fought the Turks in the east, unresolved issues following the Utrecht/Rastatt settlements led to hostilities between the Emperor and Philip V of Spain in the west. Charles VI had refused to recognise Philip V as King of Spain, a title which he himself claimed; in return, Philip V had refused to renounce his claims to Naples, Milan, and the Netherlands, all of which had transferred to the House of Austria following the Spanish Succession war. Philip V was roused by his influential wife, Elisabeth Farnese, daughter of the Hereditary Prince of Parma, who personally held dynastic claims in the name of her son, Don Charles, to the duchies of Tuscany, Parma and Piacenza. Representatives from a newly formed Anglo-French alliance—who were desirous of European peace for their own dynastic securities and trade opportunities—called on both parties to recognise each other's sovereignty. Yet Philip V remained intractable, and on 22 August 1717 his chief minister, Alberoni, effected the invasion of Austrian Sardinia in what seemed like the beginning of the reconquest of Spain's former Italian empire.\n\nEugene returned to Vienna from his recent victory at Belgrade (before the conclusion of the Turkish war) determined to prevent an escalation of the conflict, complaining that, \"two wars cannot be waged with one army\"; only reluctantly did the Prince release some troops from the Balkans for the Italian campaign. Rejecting all diplomatic overtures Philip V unleashed another assault in June 1718, this time against Savoyard Sicily as a preliminary to attacking the Italian mainland. Realising that only the British fleet could prevent further Spanish landings, and that pro-Spanish groups in France might push the regent, Duke of Orléans, into war against Austria, Charles VI had no option but to sign the Quadruple Alliance on 2 August 1718, and formally renounce his claim to Spain. Despite the Spanish fleet's destruction off Cape Passaro, Philip V and Elisabeth remained resolute, and rejected the treaty.\n\nAlthough Eugene could have gone south after the conclusion of the Turkish war, he chose instead to conduct operations from Vienna; but Austria's military effort in Sicily proved derisory, and Eugene's chosen commanders, Zum Jungen, and later Count Mercy, performed poorly. It was only from pressure exerted by the French army advancing into the Basque provinces of northern Spain in April 1719, and the British Navy's attacks on the Spanish fleet and shipping, that compelled Philip V and Elisabeth to dismiss Alberoni and join the Quadruple Alliance on 25 January 1720. Nevertheless, the Spanish attacks had strained Charles VI's government, causing tension between the Emperor and his Spanish Council on the one hand, and the conference, headed by Eugene, on the other. Despite Charles VI's own personal ambitions in the Mediterranean it was clear to the Emperor that Eugene had put the safeguarding of his conquests in Hungary before everything else, and that military failure in Sicily also had to rest on Eugene. Consequently, the Prince's influence over the Emperor declined considerably.\n\nEugene had become governor of the Southern Netherlands—then the Austrian Netherlands—in June 1716, but he was an absent ruler, directing policy from Vienna through his chosen representative the Marquis of Prié. De Prié proved unpopular with the local population and the guilds who, following the Barrier Treaty of 1715, were obliged to meet the financial demands of the administration and the Dutch barrier garrisons; with Eugene's backing and encouragement civil disturbances in Antwerp and Brussels were forcibly suppressed. After displeasing the Emperor over his initial opposition to the formation of the Ostend Company, de Prié also lost the support of the native nobility from within his own council of state in Brussels, particularly from the Marquis de Mérode-Westerloo. One of Eugene's former favourites, General Bonneval, also joined the nobles in opposition to de Prié, further undermining the Prince. When de Prié's position became untenable Eugene felt compelled to resign his post as governor on 16 November 1724. As compensation Charles VI conferred on him the honorary position as vicar-general of Italy, worth 140,000 gulden a year, and an estate at Siebenbrunn in Lower Austria said to be worth double that amount. But his resignation distressed him, and to compound his concerns Eugene caught a severe bout of influenza that Christmas, marking the beginning of permanent bronchitis and acute infections every winter for the remaining twelve years of his life.\n\nThe 1720s saw rapidly changing alliances between the European powers and almost constant diplomatic confrontation, largely over unsolved issues regarding the Quadruple Alliance. The Emperor and the Spanish King continued to use each other's titles, and Charles VI still refused to remove the remaining legal obstacles to Don Charles' eventual succession to the duchies of Parma and Tuscany. Yet in a surprise move Spain and Austria moved closer with the signing of the Treaty of Vienna in April/May 1725. In response Britain, France, and Prussia joined together in the Alliance of Hanover to counter the danger to Europe of an Austro-Spanish hegemony. For the next three years there was the continual threat of war between the Hanover Treaty powers and the Austro-Spanish bloc.\n\nFrom 1726 Eugene gradually began to regain his political influence. With his many contacts throughout Europe Eugene, backed by Gundaker Starhemberg and Count Schönborn, the Imperial vice-chancellor, managed to secure powerful allies and strengthen the Emperor's position—his skill in managing the vast secret diplomatic network over the coming years was the main reason why Charles VI once again came to depend upon him. In August 1726 Russia acceded to the Austro-Spanish alliance, and in October Frederick William of Prussia followed suit by defecting from the Allies with the signing of a mutual defensive treaty with the Emperor. Despite the conclusion of the brief Anglo-Spanish conflict, war between the European powers persisted throughout 1727–28. However, in 1729 Elisabeth Farnese abandoned the Austro-Spanish alliance. Realizing that Charles VI could not be drawn into the marriage pact she wanted, Elisabeth concluded that the best way to secure her son's succession to Parma and Tuscany now lay with Britain and France. To Eugene it was 'an event that which is seldom to be found in history'. Following the Prince's determined lead to resist all pressure, Charles VI sent troops into Italy to prevent the entry of Spanish garrisons into the contested duchies. By the beginning of 1730 Eugene, who had remained bellicose throughout the whole period, was again in control of Austrian policy.\nIn Britain there now emerged a new political re-alignment as the Anglo-French \"entente\" became increasingly defunct. Believing that a resurgent France now posed the greatest danger to their security British ministers, headed by Robert Walpole, moved to reform the Anglo-Austrian alliance, leading to the signing of the Second Treaty of Vienna on 16 March 1731. Eugene had been the Austrian minister most responsible for the alliance, believing once again it would provide security against France and Spain. The treaty compelled Charles VI to sacrifice the Ostend Company (a rival to the English and Dutch trading companies) and accept, unequivocally, the accession of Don Charles to Parma and Tuscany. In return King George II as King of Great Britain and Elector of Hanover guaranteed the Pragmatic Sanction, the device to secure the rights of the Emperor's daughter, Maria Theresa, to the entire Habsburg inheritance. It was largely through Eugene's diplomacy that in January 1732 the Imperial diet also guaranteed the Pragmatic Sanction which, together with the Treaties with Britain, Russia, and Prussia, marked the culmination of the Prince's diplomacy. But the Treaty of Vienna had infuriated the court of King Louis XV: the French had been ignored and the Pragmatic Sanction guaranteed, thus increasing Habsburg influence and confirming Austria's vast territorial size. The Emperor also intended Maria Theresa to marry Francis Stephen of Lorraine which would present an unacceptable threat on France's border. By the beginning of 1733 the French army was ready for war: all that was needed was the excuse.\n\nIn 1733 the Polish King and Elector of Saxony, Augustus the Strong, died. There were two candidates for his successor: first, Stanisław Leszczyński, the father-in-law of Louis XV; second, the Elector of Saxony's son, Augustus, supported by Russia, Austria, and Prussia. The Polish succession had afforded Louis XV's chief minister, Fleury, the opportunity to attack Austria and take Lorraine from Francis Stephen. In order to gain Spanish support France backed the succession of Elisabeth Farnese's sons to further Italian lands.\n\nEugene entered the War of the Polish Succession as President of the Imperial War Council and commander-in-chief of the army, but he was severely handicapped by the quality of his troops and the shortage of funds; now in his seventies, the Prince was also burdened by rapidly declining physical and mental powers. France declared war on Austria on 10 October 1733, but without the funds from the Maritime Powers—who, despite the Vienna treaty, remained neutral throughout the war—Austria could not hire the necessary troops to wage an offensive campaign. \"The danger to the monarchy,\" wrote Eugene to the Emperor in October, \"cannot be exaggerated\". By the end of the year Franco-Spanish forces had seized Lorraine and Milan; by early 1734 Spanish troops had taken Sicily.\n\nEugene took command on the Rhine in April 1734, but vastly outnumbered he was forced onto the defensive. In June Eugene set out to relieve Philippsburg, yet his former drive and energy was now gone. Accompanying Eugene was a young Frederick the Great, sent by his father to learn the art of war. Frederick gained considerable knowledge from Eugene, recalling in later life his great debt to his Austrian mentor, but the Prussian prince was aghast at Eugene's condition, writing later, \"his body was still there but his soul had gone.\" Eugene conducted another cautious campaign in 1735, once again pursuing a sensible defensive strategy on limited resources; but his short-term memory was by now practically non-existent, and his political influence disappeared completely—Gundaker Starhemberg and Johann Christoph von Bartenstein now dominated the conference in his place. However, fortunately for Charles VI Fleury was determined to limit the scope of the war, and in October 1735 he granted generous peace preliminaries to the Emperor.\n\nDuring the last 20 years of his life Eugene was particularly close to Countess Eleonora Batthyány, daughter of Count Theodor von Strattman.\nMuch about their acquaintance remains speculative (Eugene never mentions her in any of his surviving letters), and there is certainly no suggestion of a sexual relationship, but although they lived apart most foreign diplomats regarded Eleonora as his \"official lover\". Eugene and Eleonora were constant companions, meeting for dinner, receptions and card games almost every day till his death. But their surviving correspondence does not indicate any real intimacy in the relationship. Eugene's other friends such as the papal nuncio, Passionei, made up for the family he still lacked.\n\nFor his only surviving nephew, Emmanuel, the son of his brother Louis Thomas, Eugene arranged a marriage with one of the daughters of Prince Liechtenstein, but Emmanuel died of smallpox in 1729. With the death of Emmanuel's son in 1734, no close male relatives remained to succeed the Prince. His closest relative, therefore, was Louis Thomas's unmarried daughter, Princess Maria Anna Victoria of Savoy, whom Eugene had never met and, as he had heard nothing but bad of her, made no effort to do so.\n\nEugene returned to Vienna from the War of the Polish Succession in October 1735, weak and feeble; when Maria Theresa and Francis Stephen married in February 1736 Eugene was too ill to attend. After playing cards at Countess Batthyány's on the evening of 20 April he returned to his bed at the Stadtpalais. When his servants arrived to wake him the next morning, 21 April 1736, they found Prince Eugene dead after choking from phlegm in his throat, presumably after suffering from pneumonia. Eugene's heart was buried with those of others of his family in Turin. His remains were carried in a long procession to St. Stephen's Cathedral, where the body was interred in the \"Kreuzkapelle\".\n\nCountess Batthyány expressed in a letter dated 23 December 1720, that at the \"Kreuzkapelle\" a solemn requiem would be held annually. She dedicated for this purpose two thousand guilders.\n\nDespite being one of the richest and most celebrated men of his age, Eugene never married and the suggestion is that he was predominantly homosexual. History knows little of his life before 1683. In his early boyhood in Paris \"he belonged to a small, effeminate set that included such unabashed perverts as the young abbé de Choisy who was invariably dressed as a girl\" wrote the English historian Nicholas Henderson in the 1960s. The Duchess of Orléans, who had known Eugene from those days, would later write to her aunt, Princess Sophia of Hanover, describing Eugene's antics with lackeys and pages. He was \"a vulgar whore\" along with the Prince of Turenne, and \"often played the woman with young people\" with the nickname of 'Madame Simone' or 'Madam l'Ancienne'. He preferred a \"couple of fine page boys\" to any woman, and was refused an ecclesiastical benefice due to his \"depravity\".\n\nOf related interest is a popular soldier's song which parodied an imaginary voyage by Eugene and the marquis de la Moussaye on the Rhine. A storm breaks and the general fears the worst, but the Marquis consoles him: \"Our lives are safe/ For we are sodomites/ Destined to perish only by fire/ We shall land.\" A comment made by Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg in 1709, who had served under Eugene, could be read that the prince enjoyed \"la petite débauche et la p[ine] au-delà de tout,\" or that he derived his sexual gratification from the virile member of others.\n\nEugene's rewards for his victories, his share of booty, his revenues from his abbeys in Savoy, and a steady income from his Imperial offices and governorships, enabled him to contribute to the landscape of Baroque architecture. Eugene spent most of his life in Vienna at his Winter Palace, the Stadtpalais, built by Fischer von Erlach. The palace acted as his official residence and home, but for reasons that remain speculative the Prince's association with Fischer ended before the building was complete, favouring instead Johann Lukas von Hildebrandt as his chief architect. Eugene first employed Hildebrandt to finish the Stadtpalais before commissioning him to prepare plans for a palace (Savoy Castle) on his Danubian island at Ráckeve. Began in 1701 the single-story building took twenty years to complete; yet, probably because of the Rákóczi revolt, the Prince seems to have visited it only once—after the siege of Belgrade in 1717.\n\nOf more importance was the grandiose complex of the two Belvedere palaces in Vienna. The single-storey Lower Belvedere, with its exotic gardens and zoo, was completed in 1716. The Upper Belvedere, completed between 1720 and 1722, is a more substantial building; with sparkling white stucco walls and copper roof it became a wonder of Europe. Eugene and Hildebrandt also converted an existing structure on his Marchfeld estate into a country seat, the Schlosshof, situated between the Rivers Danube and Morava. The building, completed in 1729, was far less elaborate than his other projects but it was strong enough to serve as a fortress in case of need. Eugene spent much of his spare time there in his last years accommodating large hunting parties.\n\nIn the years following the Peace of Rastatt Eugene became acquainted with a large number of scholarly men. Given his position and responsiveness they were keen to meet him: few could exist without patronage and this was probably the main reason for Gottfried Leibniz's association with him in 1714. Eugene also befriended the French writer Jean-Baptiste Rousseau who, by 1716, was receiving financial support from Eugene. Rousseau stayed on attached to the Prince's household, probably helping in the library, until he left for the Netherlands in 1722. Another acquaintance, Montesquieu, already famous for his \"Persian Letters\" when he arrived in Vienna in 1728, favourably recalled his time spent at the Prince's table. Nevertheless, Eugene had no literary pretensions of his own, and was not tempted like Maurice de Saxe or Marshal Villars to write his memoirs or books on the art of war. He did, however, become a collector on the grandest scale: his picture galleries were filled with 16th- and 17th-century Italian, Dutch and Flemish art; his library at the Stadtpalais crammed with over 15,000 books, 237 manuscripts as well as a huge collection of prints (of particular interest were books on natural history and geography). \"It is hardly believable,\" wrote Rousseau, \"that a man who carries on his shoulders the burden of almost all the affairs of Europe … should find as much time to read as though he had nothing else to do.\" At Eugene's death his possessions and estates, except those in Hungary which the crown reclaimed, went to his niece, Princess Maria Anna Victoria, who at once decided to sell everything. The artwork was bought by Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia. Eugene's library, prints and drawings were purchased by the Emperor in 1737 and have since passed into Austrian national collections.\n\nNapoleon considered Eugene one of the seven greatest commanders of history. Although later military critics have disagreed with that assessment, Eugene was undoubtedly the greatest Austrian general. He was no military innovator, but he had the ability to make an inadequate system work. He was equally adept as an organizer, strategist, and tactician, believing in the primacy of battle and his ability to seize the opportune moment to launch a successful attack. \"The important thing,\" wrote Maurice de Saxe in his \"Reveries\", \"is to see the opportunity and to know how to use it. Prince Eugene possessed this quality which is the greatest in the art of war and which is the test of the most elevated genius.\" This fluidity was key to his battlefield successes in Italy and in his wars against the Turks. Nevertheless, in the Low Countries, particularly after the battle of Oudenarde in 1708, Eugene, like his cousin Louis of Baden, tended to play safe and become bogged down in a conservative strategy of sieges and defending supply lines. After the attempt on Toulon in 1707, he also became very wary of combined land/sea operations. To historian Derek McKay, however, the main criticism of him as a general is his legacy—he left no school of officers nor an army able to function without him.\n\nEugene was a disciplinarian—when ordinary soldiers disobeyed orders he was prepared to shoot them himself—but he rejected blind brutality, writing \"you should only be harsh when, as often happens, kindness proves useless\". On the battlefield Eugene demanded courage in his subordinates, and expected his men to fight where and when he wanted; his criteria for promotion were based primarily on obedience to orders and courage on the battlefield rather than social position. On the whole his men responded because he was willing to push himself as hard as them. However, his position as President of the Imperial War Council proved less successful. Following the long period of peace after the Austro-Turkish War, the idea of creating a separate field army or providing garrison troops with effective training for them to be turned into such an army quickly was never considered by Eugene. By the time of the War of the Polish Succession, therefore, the Austrians were outclassed by a better prepared French force. For this Eugene was largely to blame—in his view (unlike the drilling and manoeuvres carried out by the Prussians which to Eugene seemed irrelevant to real warfare) the time to create actual fighting men was when war came. But although Frederick the Great had been struck by the muddle of the Austrian army and its poor organisation during the Polish Succession war, he later amended his initial harsh judgements. \"If I understand anything of my trade,\" commented Frederick in 1758, \"especially in the more difficult aspects, I owe that advantage to Prince Eugene. From him I learnt to hold grand objectives constantly in view, and direct all my resources to those ends.\" To historian Christopher Duffy it was this awareness of the 'grand strategy' that was Eugene's legacy to Frederick.\n\nTo his responsibilities Eugene attached his own personal values—physical courage, loyalty to his sovereign, honesty, self-control in all things—and he expected these qualities from his commanders. Eugene's approach was dictatorial, but he was willing to co-operate with someone he regarded as his equal, such as Baden or Marlborough. Yet the contrast to his co-commander of the Spanish Succession war were stark. \"Marlborough,\" wrote Churchill, \"was the model husband and father, concerned with building up a home, founding a family, and gathering a fortune to sustain it\"; whereas Eugene, the bachelor, was \"disdainful of money, content with his bright sword and his lifelong animosities against Louis XIV\". The result was an austere figure, inspiring respect and admiration rather than affection. The huge equestrian statue in the centre of Vienna commemorates Eugene's achievements. It is inscribed on one side, 'To the wise counsellor of three Emperors', and on the other, 'To the glorious conqueror of Austria's enemies'.\n\nSeveral ships have been named in Eugene's honour: , an Austrian World War I battleship; an Austrian central battery ship with the same name from 1878; , British Royal Navy World War I monitor; Italian light cruiser and the (later USS \"Prinz Eugen\"), a World War II heavy cruiser. \n\nThe 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen, a German mountain infantry division of the Waffen-SS formed in 1941 from \"Volksdeutsche\" volunteers and conscripts from the Banat, Independent State of Croatia, Hungary and Romania, was named after him.\n\nBULLET::::- Prinz Eugen, der edle Ritter\nBULLET::::- 20 euro Baroque commemorative coin\nBULLET::::- 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen\n\nBULLET::::- Lediard, Thomas (1736). \"The Life of John, Duke of Marlborough.\" 3 Volumes. London\nBULLET::::- Saint-Simon, Louis de Rouvroy, duc de (1999 [1739–50]). \"Memoirs: 1691–1709.\" Volume 1. Prion Books Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Saxe, Maurice de (2007 [1757]). \"Reveries on the Art of War.\" Dover Publications Inc.\n\nBULLET::::- Chandler, David G (1990). \"The Art of Warfare in the Age of Marlborough.\" Spellmount Limited.\nBULLET::::- Chandler, David G (2003). \"Marlborough as Military Commander.\" Spellmount Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Childs, John (2003). \"Warfare in the Seventeenth Century.\" Cassell.\nBULLET::::- Churchill, Winston (2002). \", Bk. 1, vols. i & ii\". University of Chicago Press.\nBULLET::::- Churchill, Winston (2002). \"Marlborough: His Life and Times, Bk. 2, vols. iii & iv\". University of Chicago Press.\nBULLET::::- Coxe, William (1864). \"History of the House of Austria.\" 6 Volumes. Henry G. Bohn\nBULLET::::- Duffy, Christopher (1985). \"Frederick the Great: A Military Life.\" Routledge & Kegan Paul.\nBULLET::::- Falkner, James. \"The War of the Spanish Succession 1701 - 1714\" (2015) excerpt\nBULLET::::- Hatton, Ragnhild (2001). \"George I.\" Yale University Press.\nBULLET::::- Heer, Friedrich (2002). \"The Holy Roman Empire\" (trans. George Weidenfeld & Nicolson). Phoenix Press.\nBULLET::::- Henderson, Nicholas (1966). \"Prince Eugen of Savoy.\" Weidenfeld & Nicolson.\nBULLET::::- Lynn, John A (1999). \"The Wars of Louis XIV, 1667–1714.\" Longman.\nBULLET::::- MacMunn, George (1933). \"Prince Eugene: Twin Marshal with Marlborough.\" Sampson Low, Marston & CO., Ltd.\nBULLET::::- McKay, Derek (1977). \"Prince Eugene of Savoy.\" Thames and Hudson Ltd.\nBULLET::::- McKay, Derek & Scott, H. M (1984). \"The Rise of the Great Powers: 1648–1815.\" Longman.\nBULLET::::- Paoletti, Ciro. \"Prince Eugene of Savoy, the Toulon Expedition of 1707, and the English Historians--A Dissenting View.\" \"Journal of Military History\" 70.4 (2006): 939-962. online\nBULLET::::- Setton, Kenneth M. (1991). \"Venice, Austria, and the Turks in the Seventeenth Century.\" American Philosophical Society.\nBULLET::::- Simms, Brendan (2008). \"Three Victories and a Defeat: The Rise and Fall of the First British Empire.\" Penguin.\nBULLET::::- Somerset, Anne (2004). \"The Affair of the Poisons: Murder, Infanticide and Satanism at the Court of Louis XIV.\" Phoenix.\nBULLET::::- Spielman, John (1977). \"Leopold I of Austria.\" Thames and Hudson Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Stoye, John (2000). \"The Siege of Vienna.\" Birlinn Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Sweet, Paul R. \"Prince Eugene of Savoy and Central Europe.\" \"American Historical Review\" 57.1 (1951): 47-62. in JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Sweet, Paul R. \"Prince Eugene of Savoy: Two New Biographies.\" \"Journal of Modern History\" 38.2 (1966): 181-186. in JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Wolf, John B (1962). \"The Emergence of the Great Powers: 1685–1715.\" Harper & Row.\n\nBULLET::::- Arneth, Alfred. (1858–64). \"Prinz Eugen von Savoyen.\" 3 Volumes. Vienna\nBULLET::::- Braubach, Max. (1963–65). \"Prinz Eugen von Savoyen.\" 5 Volumes. Vienna\n"}
{"id": "9683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9683", "title": "Emanuel Leutze", "text": "Emanuel Leutze\n\nEmanuel Gottlieb Leutze (May 24, 1816July 18, 1868) was a German American history painter best known for his 1851 painting \"Washington Crossing the Delaware\". He is associated with the Düsseldorf school of painting.\n\nLeutze was born in Schwäbisch Gmünd, Württemberg, Germany, and was brought to the United States as a child. His parents settled first in Fredericksburg, Virginia, and then at Philadelphia. The first development of his artistic talent occurred while he was attending the sickbed of his father, when he attempted drawing to occupy the long hours of waiting. His father died in 1831. At 14, he was painting portraits for $5 apiece. Through such work, he supported himself after the death of his father. In 1834, he received his first instruction in art in classes of John Rubens Smith, a portrait painter in Philadelphia. He soon became skilled, and promoted a plan for publishing, in Washington, portraits of eminent American statesmen; however, he met with but slight encouragement.\n\nIn 1840, one of his paintings attracted attention and procured him several orders, which enabled him to go to the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf. Due to his anti-academic attitude, he studied only one year at the academy (in the class of Director Schadow). Mainly Leutze was affected by the painter Lessing. In 1842 he went to Munich, studying the works of Cornelius and Kaulbach, and, while there, finished his \"Columbus before the Queen\". The following year he visited Venice and Rome, making studies from Titian and Michelangelo. His first work, \"Columbus before the Council of Salamanca\" (1841) was purchased by the Düsseldorf Art Union. A companion picture, \"Columbus in Chains\", procured him the gold medal of the Brussels Art Exhibition, and was subsequently purchased by the Art Union in New York; it was the basis of the 1893 $2 Columbian Issue stamp. In 1845, after a tour in Italy, he returned to Düsseldorf, marrying Juliane Lottner and making his home there for 14 years.\n\nDuring his years in Düsseldorf, he was a resource for visiting Americans: he found them places to live and work, provided introductions, and emotional and even financial support. For many years, he was the president of the Düsseldorf Artists' Association; in 1848, he was an early promoter of the \"Malkasten\" art association; and in 1857, he led the call for a gathering of artists which led to the founding of the Allgemeine deutsche Kunstgenossenschaft.\n\nA strong supporter of Europe's Revolutions of 1848, Leutze decided to paint an image that would encourage Europe's liberal reformers with the example of the American Revolution. Using American tourists and art students as models and assistants, Leutze finished a first version of \"Washington Crossing the Delaware\" in 1850. Just after it was completed, the first version was damaged by fire in his studio, subsequently restored, and acquired by the Kunsthalle Bremen. On September 5, 1942, during World War II, it was destroyed in a bombing raid by the Allied forces. The second painting, a replica of the first, only larger, was ordered 1850 by the Parisian art trader Adolphe Goupil for his New York branch and placed on exhibition on Broadway in October 1851. It is owned by the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. In 1854, Leutze finished his depiction of the Battle of Monmouth, \"Washington rallying the troops at Monmouth,\" commissioned by an important Leutze patron, banker David Leavitt of New York City and Great Barrington, Massachusetts.\n\nIn 1859, Leutze returned to the United States and opened a studio in New York City. He divided his time between New York City and Washington, D.C. In 1859, he painted a portrait of Chief Justice Roger Brooke Taney which hangs in the Harvard Law School. In a 1992 opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia described the portrait of Taney, made two years after Taney's infamous decision in \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\", as showing Taney \"in black, sitting in a shadowed red armchair, left hand resting upon a pad of paper in his lap, right hand hanging limply, almost lifelessly, beside the inner arm of the chair. He sits facing the viewer and staring straight out. There seems to be on his face, and in his deep-set eyes, an expression of profound sadness and disillusionment.\"\n\nLeutze also executed other portraits, including one of fellow painter William Morris Hunt. That portrait was owned by Hunt's brother Leavitt Hunt, a New York attorney and sometime Vermont resident, and was shown at an exhibition devoted to William Morris Hunt's work at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston in 1878.\n\nIn 1860 Leutze was commissioned by the U.S. Congress to decorate a stairway in the Capitol Building in Washington, DC, for which he painted a large composition, \"Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way\", which is also commonly known as \"Westward Ho!\".\n\nLate in life, he became a member of the National Academy of Design. He was also a member of the Union League Club of New York, which has a number of his paintings. At age 52, he died in Washington, D.C. of heat stroke. He was interred at Glenwood Cemetery. At the time of his death, a painting, \"The Emancipation of the Slaves\", was in preparation.\n\nLeutze's portraits are known less for their artistic quality than for their patriotic emotionalism. \"Washington Crossing the Delaware\" firmly ranks among the American national iconography, and is thus often caricatured.\nAdditional References:\nBULLET::::- Wierich, Jochen. \"Grand Themes: Emanuel Leutze, \"Washington Crossing the Delaware,\" and American History Painting\" (Penn State University Press; 2012) 240 pages; Argues that the painting was a touchstone for debates over history painting at a time of intense sectionalism.\nBULLET::::- Irre, Heidrun. \"Emanuel Gottlob Leutze: Von der Rems zum Delaware\", einhorn-Verlag+Druck GmbH, Schwäbisch Gmünd 2016, https://einhornverlag.de/shop/buecher/von-der-rems-zum-delaware/\nBULLET::::- New International Encyclopedia\n\nBULLET::::- Leutze Gallery at MuseumSyndicate\nBULLET::::- Emanuel Leutze\nBULLET::::- Introduction to \"Washington's Crossing\" by David Hackett Fischer at the Oxford University Press blog, discusses Leutze's most famous painting.\nBULLET::::- Reynolda House Museum of American Art\nBULLET::::- \"Art and the empire city: New York, 1825-1861\", an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Leutze (see index)\n"}
{"id": "9684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9684", "title": "Erasmus Alberus", "text": "Erasmus Alberus\n\nErasmus Alberus (c. 15005 May 1553) was a German humanist, Lutheran reformer, and poet.\n\nHe was born in the village of Bruchenbrücken (now part of Friedberg, Hesse) about the year 1500. Although his father Tilemann Alber was a schoolmaster, his early education was neglected.\nUltimately in 1518 he found his way to the University of Wittenberg, where he studied theology. He had the good fortune to attract the attention of Martin Luther and Philipp Melanchthon, and subsequently became one of Luther's most active helpers in the Protestant Reformation.\n\nNot only did he fight for the Protestant cause as a preacher and theologian, but he was almost the only member of Luther's party who was able to confront the Roman Catholics with the weapon of literary satire. In 1542 he published a prose satire to which Luther wrote the preface, \"Der Barfusser Monche Eulenspiegel und Alkoran,\" a parodic adaptation of the \"Liber conformitatum\" of the Franciscan Bartolommeo Rinonico of Pisa, in which the Franciscan order is held up to ridicule.\nOf higher literary value is the didactic and satirical \"Buch von der Tugend und Weisheit\" (1550), a collection of forty-nine fables in which Alberus embodies his views on the relations of Church and State. His satire is incisive, but in a scholarly and humanistic way; it does not appeal to popular passions with the fierce directness which enabled the master of Catholic satire, Thomas Murner, to inflict such telling blows.\n\nSeveral of Alberus's hymns, all of which show the influence of his master Luther, have been retained in the German Protestant hymnal.\n\nAfter Luther's death, Alberus was for a time a deacon in Wittenberg; he became involved, however, in the political conflicts of the time, and was in Magdeburg in 1550–1551, while that town was besieged by Maurice, Elector of Saxony. In 1552 he was appointed Generalsuperintendent at Neubrandenburg in Mecklenburg, where he died on 5 May 1553.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Alberus' Thanksgiving Hymn: To You, O God, Our Thanks We Give\", translated by Nathaniel J. Biebert (Red Brick Parsonage, 2014).\n\nAttribution:\n"}
{"id": "9685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9685", "title": "Earley parser", "text": "Earley parser\n\nIn computer science, the Earley parser is an algorithm for parsing strings that belong to a given context-free language, though (depending on the variant) it may suffer problems with certain nullable grammars. The algorithm, named after its inventor, Jay Earley, is a chart parser that uses dynamic programming; it is mainly used for parsing in computational linguistics. It was first introduced in his dissertation in 1968 (and later appeared in an abbreviated, more legible, form in a journal).\n\nEarley parsers are appealing because they can parse all context-free languages, unlike LR parsers and LL parsers, which are more typically used in compilers but which can only handle restricted classes of languages. The Earley parser executes in cubic time in the general case formula_1, where \"n\" is the length of the parsed string, quadratic time for unambiguous grammars formula_2, and linear time for all LR(k) grammars. It performs particularly well when the rules are written left-recursively.\n\nThe following algorithm describes the Earley recogniser. The recogniser can be easily modified to create a parse tree as it recognises, and in that way can be turned into a parser.\n\nIn the following descriptions, α, β, and γ represent any string of terminals/nonterminals (including the empty string), X and Y represent single nonterminals, and \"a\" represents a terminal symbol.\n\nEarley's algorithm is a top-down dynamic programming algorithm. In the following, we use Earley's dot notation: given a production X → αβ, the notation X → α • β represents a condition in which α has already been parsed and β is expected.\n\nInput position 0 is the position prior to input. Input position \"n\" is the position after accepting the \"n\"th token. (Informally, input positions can be thought of as locations at token boundaries.) For every input position, the parser generates a \"state set\". Each state is a tuple (X → α • β, \"i\"), consisting of\n\nBULLET::::- the production currently being matched (X → α β)\nBULLET::::- the current position in that production (represented by the dot)\nBULLET::::- the position \"i\" in the input at which the matching of this production began: the \"origin position\"\n\nThe state set at input position \"k\" is called S(\"k\"). The parser is seeded with S(0) consisting of only the top-level rule. The parser then repeatedly executes three operations: \"prediction\", \"scanning\", and \"completion\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"Prediction\": For every state in S(\"k\") of the form (X → α • Y β, \"j\") (where \"j\" is the origin position as above), add (Y → • γ, \"k\") to S(\"k\") for every production in the grammar with Y on the left-hand side (Y → γ).\nBULLET::::- \"Scanning\": If \"a\" is the next symbol in the input stream, for every state in S(\"k\") of the form (X → α • \"a\" β, \"j\"), add (X → α \"a\" • β, \"j\") to S(\"k\"+1).\nBULLET::::- \"Completion\": For every state in S(\"k\") of the form (Y → γ •, \"j\"), find all states in S(\"j\") of the form (X → α • Y β, \"i\") and add (X → α Y • β, \"i\") to S(\"k\").\n\nIt is important to note that duplicate states are not added to the state set, only new ones. These three operations are repeated until no new states can be added to the set. The set is generally implemented as a queue of states to process, with the operation to be performed depending on what kind of state it is.\n\nThe algorithm accepts if (X → γ •, 0) ends up in S(\"n\"), where (X → γ) is the top level-rule and \"n\" the input length, otherwise it rejects.\n\nAdapted from Speech and Language Processing by Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin, \nDECLARE ARRAY S;\n\nfunction INIT(words)\n\nfunction EARLEY-PARSE(words, grammar)\n\nprocedure PREDICTOR((A → α•Bβ, j), k, grammar)\n\nprocedure SCANNER((A → α•aβ, j), k, words)\n\nprocedure COMPLETER((B → γ•, x), k)\nConsider the following simple grammar for arithmetic expressions:\n\n<P> ::= <S> # the start rule\n<S> ::= <S> \"+\" <M>  <M>\n<M> ::= <M> \"*\" <T>  <T>\n<T> ::= \"1\"  \"2\"  \"3\"  \"4\"\n\nWith the input:\n\nThis is the sequence of state sets:\n! (state no.) !! Production !! (Origin) !! Comment\n! scope=\"row\" colspan=\"4\" style=\"text-align:left; background:#e9e9e9;font-family:monospace\"  S(0): • 2 + 3 * 4\n! scope=\"row\" colspan=\"4\" style=\"text-align:left; background:#e9e9e9;font-family:monospace\"  S(1): 2 • + 3 * 4\n! scope=\"row\" colspan=\"4\" style=\"text-align:left; background:#e9e9e9;font-family:monospace\"  S(2): 2 + • 3 * 4\n! scope=\"row\" colspan=\"4\" style=\"text-align:left; background:#e9e9e9;font-family:monospace\"  S(3): 2 + 3 • * 4\n! scope=\"row\" colspan=\"4\" style=\"text-align:left; background:#e9e9e9;font-family:monospace\"  S(4): 2 + 3 * • 4\n! scope=\"row\" colspan=\"4\" style=\"text-align:left; background:#e9e9e9;font-family:monospace\"  S(5): 2 + 3 * 4 •\nThe state (P → S •, 0) represents a completed parse. This state also appears in S(3) and S(1), which are complete sentences.\n\nEarley's dissertation briefly describes an algorithm for constructing parse trees by adding a set of pointers from each non-terminal in an Earley item back to the items that caused it to be recognized. But Tomita noticed that this does not take into account the relations between symbols, so if we consider the grammar S → SS  b and the string bbb, it only notes that each S can match one or two b's, and thus produces spurious derivations for bb and bbbb as well as the two correct derivations for bbb.\n\nAnother method is to build the parse forest as you go, augmenting each Earley item with a pointer to a shared packed parse forest (SPPF) node labelled with a triple (s, i, j) where s is a symbol or an LR(0) item (production rule with dot), and i and j give the section of the input string derived by this node. A node's contents are either a pair of child pointers giving a single derivation, or a list of \"packed\" nodes each containing a pair of pointers and representing one derivation. SPPF nodes are unique (there is only one with a given label), but may contain more than one derivation for ambiguous parses. So even if an operation does not add an Earley item (because it already exists), it may still add a derivation to the item's parse forest.\n\nBULLET::::- Predicted items have a null SPPF pointer.\nBULLET::::- The scanner creates an SPPF node representing the non-terminal it is scanning.\nBULLET::::- Then when the scanner or completer advance an item, they add a derivation whose children are the node from the item whose dot was advanced, and the one for the new symbol that was advanced over (the non-terminal or completed item).\n\nNote also that SPPF nodes are never labeled with a completed LR(0) item: instead they are labelled with the symbol that is produced so that all derivations are combined under one node regardless of which alternative production they come from.\n\nBULLET::::- CYK algorithm\nBULLET::::- Context-free grammar\nBULLET::::- Parsing algorithms\n\n\nBULLET::::- 'Yet Another Earley Parser (YAEP)' – C/C++ libraries\nBULLET::::- 'C Earley Parser' – an Earley parser C\n\nBULLET::::- 'Earley' – an Earley parser DSL in Haskell\n\nBULLET::::- – a Java implementation of the Earley algorithm\nBULLET::::- PEN – a Java library that implements the Earley algorithm\nBULLET::::- Pep – a Java library that implements the Earley algorithm and provides charts and parse trees as parsing artifacts\nBULLET::::- digitalheir/java-probabilistic-earley-parser - a Java library that implements the probabilistic Earley algorithm, which is useful to determine the most likely parse tree from an ambiguous sentence\n\nBULLET::::- coonsta/earley - An Earley parser in C#\nBULLET::::- patrickhuber/pliant - An Earley parser that integrates the improvements adopted by Marpa and demonstrates Elizabeth Scott's tree building algorithm.\nBULLET::::- ellisonch/CFGLib - Probabilistic Context Free Grammar (PCFG) Library for C# (Earley + SPPF, CYK)\n\nBULLET::::- Nearley – an Earley parser that's starting to integrate the improvements that Marpa adopted\nBULLET::::- A Pint-sized Earley Parser – a toy parser (with annotated pseudocode) to demonstrate Elizabeth Scott's technique for building the shared packed parse forest\nBULLET::::- lagodiuk/earley-parser-js – a tiny JavaScript implementation of Earley parser (including generation of the parsing-forest)\nBULLET::::- digitalheir/probabilistic-earley-parser-javascript - JavaScript implementation of the probabilistic Earley parser\n\nBULLET::::- Simple Earley - An implementation of a simple Earley-like parsing algorithm, with documentation.\n\nBULLET::::- Marpa::R2 – a Perl module. Marpa is an Earley's algorithm that includes the improvements made by Joop Leo, and by Aycock and Horspool.\nBULLET::::- Parse::Earley – a Perl module implementing Jay Earley's original algorithm\n\nBULLET::::- Lark – an object-oriented, procedural implementation of an Earley parser in under 200 lines of code\nBULLET::::- NLTK – a Python toolkit with an Earley parser\nBULLET::::- Spark – an object-oriented \"little language framework\" for Python implementing an Earley parser\nBULLET::::- spark_parser – updated and packaged version of the Spark parser above, which runs in both Python 3 and Python 2\nBULLET::::- earley3.py – a stand-alone implementation of the algorithm in less than 150 lines of code, including generation of the parsing-forest and samples\nBULLET::::- tjr_python_earley_parser - a minimal Earley parser in Python\n\nBULLET::::- CL-Earley-parser – a Common Lisp library implementing an Earley parser\n\nBULLET::::- Charty-Racket – a Scheme-Racket implementation of an Earley parser\n\nBULLET::::- The Accent compiler-compiler\n"}
{"id": "9686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9686", "title": "Ethiopian cuisine", "text": "Ethiopian cuisine\n\nEthiopian cuisine () characteristically consists of vegetable and often very spicy meat dishes. This is usually in the form of \"wat,\" a thick stew, served atop \"injera\", a large sourdough flatbread, which is about in diameter and made out of fermented teff flour. Ethiopians eat most of the time with their right hands, using pieces of \"injera\" to pick up bites of entrées and side dishes.\n\nThe Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church prescribes a number of fasting periods (\"tsom\", \"ṣōm\") from any kind of animal products (including dairy products and eggs) on Wednesdays, Fridays, and the entire Lenten season, so Ethiopian cuisine contains many dishes that are vegan.\n\nA typical dish consists of injera accompanied by a spicy stew, which frequently includes beef, lamb, vegetables and various types of legumes, such as lentils. Gurage cuisine also makes use of the false banana plant (\"enset\", Ge'ez: እንሰት \"inset\"), a type of ensete. The plant is pulverized and fermented to make a bread-like food called \"qocho\" or \"kocho\" (Ge'ez: ቆጮ \"ḳōč̣ō\"), which is eaten with kitfo. The root of this plant may be powdered and prepared as a hot drink called \"bulla\" (Ge'ez: ቡላ \"būlā\"), which is often given to those who are tired or ill. Another typical Gurage preparation is coffee with butter (\"kebbeh\"). \"Kita\" herb bread is also baked.\n\nPasta is frequently available throughout Ethiopia, including rural areas. Coffee is also a large part of Ethiopian culture and cuisine. After every meal, a coffee ceremony is enacted and coffee is served.\n\nEthiopian Orthodox Christians, Ethiopian Jews and Ethiopian Muslims avoid eating pork or shellfish, for religious reasons. Pork is considered unclean in Ethiopian Orthodox Christianity, Judaism and Islam. Many Ethiopians abstain from eating certain meats, and mostly eat vegetarian and vegan foods.\n\n\"Berbere\", a combination of powdered chili pepper and other spices (somewhat analogous to Southwestern American chili powder), is an important ingredient used in many dishes. Also essential is \"niter kibbeh\", a clarified butter infused with ginger, garlic, and several spices.\n\n\"Mitmita\" (, ) is a powdered seasoning mix used in Ethiopian cuisine. It is orange-red in color and contains ground birdseye chili peppers (piri piri), cardamom seed, cloves and salt. It occasionally has other spices including cinnamon, cumin and ginger.\n\nIn their adherence to strict fasting, Ethiopian cooks have developed a rich array of cooking oil sources—besides sesame and safflower—for use as a substitute for animal fats which are forbidden during fasting periods. Ethiopian cuisine also uses \"nug\" (also spelled \"noog\", also known as \"niger seed\").\n\n\"Wat\" begins with a large amount of chopped red onion, which is simmered or sauteed in a pot. Once the onions have softened, \"niter kebbeh\" (or, in the case of vegan dishes, vegetable oil) is added. Following this, \"berbere\" is added to make a spicy \"keiy wat\" or \"keyyih tsebhi\". Turmeric is used instead of \"berbere\" for a milder \"alicha wat\" or both spices are omitted when making vegetable stews, such as atkilt wat. Meat such as beef (\"ሥጋ\", \"səga\"), chicken (\"ዶሮ\", \"doro\" or \"derho\"), fish (\"ዓሣ\", \"asa\"), goat or lamb (\"በግ\", \"beg\" or \"beggi\") is also added. Legumes such as split peas (\"ክክ\", \"kək\" or \"kikki\") and lentils (\"ምስር\", \"məsər\" or \"birsin\"); or vegetables such as potatoes (\"ድንች\", \"Dənəch\"), carrots and chard (ቆስጣ) are also used instead in vegan dishes.\n\nEach variation is named by appending the main ingredient to the type of wat (e.g. \"kek alicha wat\"). However, the word \"keiy\" is usually not necessary, as the spicy variety is assumed when it is omitted (e.g. \"doro wat\"). The term \"atkilt wat\" is sometimes used to refer to all vegetable dishes, but a more specific name can also be used (as in \"dinich'na caroht wat\", which translates to \"potatoes and carrots stew\"; but notice the word \"atkilt\" is usually omitted when using the more specific term).\n\nMeat along with vegetables are sautéed to make \"tibs\" (also \"tebs\", \"t'ibs\", \"tibbs\", etc., Ge'ez: ጥብስ \"ṭibs\"). Tibs is served in a variety of manners, and can range from hot to mild or contain little to no vegetables. There are many variations of the delicacy, depending on type, size or shape of the cuts of meat used. \nThe mid-18th century European visitor to Ethiopia describes \"tibs\" as a portion of grilled meat served \"to pay a particular compliment or show especial respect to someone.\" It may still be seen this way; today the dish is prepared to commemorate special events and holidays.\n\nKinche (Qinch’e) is a very common Ethiopian breakfast, its equivalent of oatmeal. It is incredibly simple, inexpensive, and nutritious. It is made from cracked wheat, Ethiopian oats, barley or a mixture of those. It can be boiled in either milk or water. The flavor of the Kinche comes from the nit'ir qibe, which is a spiced butter.\n\nBULLET::::- Waadii – also known as \"tibs\"; specially seasoned\nBULLET::::- Anchotte – a common dish in the western part of Oromia (Wallaga)\nBULLET::::- Baduu – also known as \"aybe\"\nBULLET::::- Marqaa – also known as \"genfo\"\nBULLET::::- Chechebsa – also known as \"kita\"\nBULLET::::- Qoocco – although also known as \"kocho\", it is not the Gurage type of kocho but a different kind; a common dish in the western part of Oromia (Wallaga)\nBULLET::::- Itto – also known as \"wat\"; comprises all sorts of wat, including vegetables and mea\nBULLET::::- Chuuco – also known as \"besso\"; a sweet flavor of whole grain, seasoned with butter and spices\nBULLET::::- Chororsaa – a common dish in western part of Oromia (Wallaga)\n\nAnother distinctively Ethiopian dish is \"kitfo\" (frequently spelled \"ketfo\"). It consists of raw (or rare) beef mince marinated in \"mitmita\" (Ge'ez: ሚጥሚጣ \"mīṭmīṭā\" a very spicy chili powder similar to the \"berbere\") and \"niter kibbeh\". \"Gored gored\" is very similar to \"kitfo\", but uses cubed rather than ground beef.\n\n\"Ayibe\" is a cottage cheese that is mild and crumbly. It is much closer in texture to crumbled feta. Although not quite pressed, the whey has been drained and squeezed out. It is often served as a side dish to soften the effect of very spicy food. It has little to no distinct taste of its own. However, when served separately, ayibe is often mixed with a variety of mild or hot spices typical of Gurage cuisine.\n\n\"Gomen kitfo\" is another typical Gurage dish. Collard greens (ጎመን \"gōmen\") are boiled, dried and then finely chopped and served with butter, chili and spices. It is a dish specially prepared for the occasion of Meskel, a very popular holiday marking the discovery of the True Cross. It is served along with \"ayibe\" or sometimes even \"kitfo\" in this tradition called \"dengesa\".\n\n\"Fit-fit\" or \"fir-fir\" is a common breakfast dish. It is made from shredded \"injera\" or \"kitcha\" stir-fried with spices or wat. Another popular breakfast food is \"fatira\". The delicacy consists of a large fried pancake made with flour, often with a layer of egg. It is eaten with honey. \"Chechebsa\" (or \"kita firfir\") resembles a pancake covered with \"berbere\" and \"niter kibbeh\", or other spices, and may be eaten with a spoon. \"Genfo\" is a kind of porridge, which is another common breakfast dish. It is usually served in a large bowl with a dug-out made in the middle of the genfo and filled with spiced \"niter kibbeh\". A variation of \"ful\", a fava bean stew with condiments, served with baked rolls instead of \"injera\", is also common for breakfast.\n\nTypical Ethiopian snacks are Dabo Kolo (small pieces of baked bread that are similar to pretzels) or \"kolo\" (roasted barley sometimes mixed with other local grains). \"Kolo\" made from roasted and spiced barley, safflower kernels, chickpeas and/or peanuts are often sold by kiosks and street vendors, wrapped in a paper cone. Snacking on popcorn is also common.\n\nA \"gursha\" (var. \"gorsha\", \"goorsha\") is an act of friendship and love. When eating injera, a person uses his or her right hand to strip off a piece, wraps it around some \"wat\" or \"kitfo\", and then puts it into his or her mouth. During a meal with friends or family, it is a common custom to feed others in the group with one's hand by putting the rolled injera or a spoon full of other dishes into another's mouth. This is called a \"gursha\", and the larger the gursha, the stronger the friendship or bond (only surpassed by the brewing of Tej together). This tradition was featured in \"The Food Wife,\" an episode of \"The Simpsons\" that uses Ethiopian cuisine as a plot point.\n\nThere are many different traditional alcoholic drinks which are home made and of natural ingredients.\n\nTella is a home-brewed beer served in \"tella bet\" (\"tella houses\") which specialize in serving only tella. Tella is the most common beverage made and served in households during holidays.\n\nIt is an alcoholic drink which is prepared from bikil (barley) as main ingredient and gesho (\"Rhamnus prinoides\") for fermentation purpose.\n\nIn Oromiffaa the drink is called \"farso\" and in Tigrinya \"siwa\".\n\nTej is a potent honey wine. It is similar to mead, and is frequently served in bars, particularly in a \"tej bet\" or \"tej house\".\n\nIt is prepared from honey and gesho. It has a sweet taste and the alcoholic content is relatively higher than tella. This drink can be stored for a long time; the longer it is stored, the higher the alcohol content, and the stronger the taste.\n\nAreki, also known as katikala, is probably the strongest alcoholic drink of Ethiopia.\n\nEthiopians have diverse traditional non-alcoholic drinks which include natural and healthy ingredients.\n\nKenetto, also known as keribo, is a non-alcoholic traditional drink. It is mostly used as substitute for tella for those who don't drink alcohol.\n\nBorde is a cereal-based traditional fermented beverage famous in southern Ethiopia.\n\nJust like the rest of the world Ethiopians also enjoy several locally manufactured beers, wine and non alcoholic products like Coca-Cola and other similar products.\nAmbo Mineral Water or \"Ambo wuha\" is a bottled carbonated mineral water, sourced from the springs in Ambo Senkele near the town of Ambo.\n\n\"Atmet\" is a barley and oat-flour based drink that is cooked with water, sugar and \"kibe\" (Ethiopian clarified butter) until the ingredients have combined to create a consistency slightly thicker than egg-nog. Though this drink is often given to women who are nursing, the sweetness and smooth texture make it a comfort drink for anyone who enjoys its flavor.\n\nAccording to some sources, drinking of coffee (\"buna\") is likely to have originated in Ethiopia. A key national beverage, it is an important part of local commerce.\n\nThe coffee ceremony is the traditional serving of coffee, usually after a big meal. It often involves the use of a \"jebena\" (ጀበና), a clay coffee pot in which the coffee is boiled. The preparer roasts the coffee beans in front of guests, then walks around wafting the smoke throughout the room so participants may sample the scent of coffee. Then the preparer grinds the coffee beans in a traditional tool called a \"mokecha\". The coffee is put into the jebena, boiled with water, and then served in small cups called \"si'ni\". Coffee is usually served with sugar, but is also served with salt in many parts of Ethiopia. In some parts of the country, \"niter kibbeh\" is added instead of sugar or salt.\n\nSnacks, such as popcorn or toasted barley (or \"kolo\"), are often served with the coffee. In most homes, a dedicated coffee area is surrounded by fresh grass, with special furniture for the coffee maker. A complete ceremony has three rounds of coffee (abol, tona and bereka) and is accompanied by the burning of frankincense.\n\nTea will most likely be served if coffee is declined.\n\nBULLET::::- List of African cuisines\nBULLET::::- Ethiopian Jewish cuisine\nBULLET::::- Mesob Across America: Ethiopian Food in the U.S.A. A book about the history and culture of Ethiopian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Ethiopian Restaurant Guide A guide to Ethiopian restaurants in the USA. Includes video visits to some restaurants\nBULLET::::- All About Tej An extensive website about the Ethiopian honey wine\nBULLET::::- Raw Meat, a Manly Ethiopian Dish The Los Angeles Times, 14 July 2011\nBULLET::::- Ethiopian Spices by Fassica - Authentic Ethiopian Food and Spices\n"}
{"id": "9688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9688", "title": "Epistle of James", "text": "Epistle of James\n\nThe Letter of James (), the Epistle of James, or simply James, is one of the 21 epistles (didactic letters) in the New Testament.\n\nThe author identifies himself as \"James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ\" who is writing to \"the twelve tribes scattered abroad\". The epistle is traditionally attributed to James the brother of Jesus (James the Just), and the audience is generally considered to be Jewish Christians, who were dispersed outside Palestine.\n\nFraming his letter within an overall theme of patient perseverance during trials and temptations, James writes to encourage his readers to live consistently with what they have learned in Christ. He wants his readers to mature in their faith in Christ by living what they say they believe. He condemns various sins, including pride, hypocrisy, favouritism, and slander. He encourages and implores believers to humbly live by godly, rather than worldly wisdom and to pray in all situations.\n\nWithin the New Testament canon, the Epistle of James is noteworthy because it makes no explicit reference to the death, resurrection, or divine sonship of Jesus. It refers to Jesus twice, as \"the Lord Jesus Christ\" and as \"our glorious Lord Jesus Christ\" (James 1:1, 2:1).\n\nAccording to Robert J. Foster, \"there is little consensus as to the genre, structure, dating, and authorship of the book of James.\" There are four \"commonly espoused\" views concerning authorship and dating of the Epistle of James:\nBULLET::::1. the letter was written by James before the Pauline epistles,\nBULLET::::2. the letter was written by James after the Pauline epistles,\nBULLET::::3. the letter is pseudonymous,\nBULLET::::4. the letter comprises material originally from James but reworked by a later editor.\n\nSee also:\n\nThe writer refers to himself only as \"James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ\" (). Jesus had two apostles named James: James, the son of Zebedee and James, the son of Alphaeus, but it is unlikely that either of these wrote the letter. According to the Book of Acts, James, the brother of John, was killed by Herod Agrippa I (). James, the son of Alphaeus is a more viable candidate for authorship, although he is not prominent in the scriptural record, and relatively little is known about him. Hippolytus, writing in the early third century, asserted in his work \"On the 12 Apostles\": \nThe similarity of his alleged martyrdom to the stoning of James the Just has led some scholars, such as Robert Eisenman and James Tabor, to assume that these \"two Jameses\" were one and the same. This identification of James of Alphaeus with James the Just (as well as James the Less) has long been asserted, as evidenced by their conflation in Jacobus de Voragine's medieval hagiography the \"Golden Legend\".\n\nSome have said the authorship of this epistle points to James, the brother of Jesus, to whom Jesus evidently had made a special appearance after his resurrection described in the New Testament as this James was prominent among the disciples. James the brother of Jesus was not a follower of Jesus before Jesus died according to John 7:2-5, which states that during Jesus' life \"not even his brothers believed in him\".\n\nFrom the middle of the 3rd century, patristic authors cited the epistle as written by James, the brother of Jesus and a leader of the Jerusalem church. Not numbered among the Twelve Apostles unless he is identified as James the Less, James was nonetheless a very important figure: Paul the Apostle described him as \"the brother of the Lord\" in Galatians 1:19 and as one of the three \"pillars of the Church\" in 2:9.\n\nPseudonymous authorship (3 above) implies that the person named \"James\" is respected and doubtless well known. Moreover, this James, brother of Jesus, is honored by the epistle written and distributed after the lifetime of James, the brother of Jesus.\n\nJohn Calvin and others suggested that the author was the James, son of Alphaeus, who is referred to as James the Less. The Protestant reformer Martin Luther denied it was the work of an apostle and termed it an \"epistle of straw\".\n\nThe Holy Tradition of the Orthodox Church teaches that the Book of James was \"written not by either of the apostles, but by the 'brother of the Lord' who was the first bishop of the Church in Jerusalem (see , ).\"\n\nMany scholars consider the epistle to be pseudepigrapha:\nBULLET::::- The author introduces himself merely as \"a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ\" without invoking any special family relationship to Jesus.\nBULLET::::- The cultured Greek language of the Epistle, it is contended, could not have been written by a Jerusalem Jew. Some scholars argue for a primitive version of the letter composed by James and then later polished by another writer.\nBULLET::::- The epistle was only gradually accepted into the canon of the New Testament.\nBULLET::::- Some see parallels between James and 1 Peter, 1 Clement, and the Shepherd of Hermas and take this to reflect the socio-economic situation Christians were dealing with in the late 1st or early 2nd century. It thus could have been written anywhere in the Empire that Christians spoke Greek. There are some scholars who argued for Syria.\n\nScholars, such as Luke Timothy Johnson, suggest an early dating for the Epistle of James:\nThe Letter of James also, according to the majority of scholars who have carefully worked through its text in the past two centuries, is among the earliest of New Testament compositions. It contains no reference to the events in Jesus' life, but it bears striking testimony to Jesus' words. Jesus' sayings are embedded in James' exhortations in a form that is clearly not dependent on the written Gospels.\n\nIf written by James the brother of Jesus, it would have been written sometime before AD 69 (or AD 62), when he was martyred.\n\nThe earliest extant manuscripts of James usually date to the mid-to-late 3rd century.\n\nJames is considered New Testament wisdom literature: \"like Proverbs and Sirach, it consists largely of moral exhortations and precepts of a traditional and eclectic nature.\"\n\nThe content of James is directly parallel, in many instances, to sayings of Jesus found in the gospels of Luke and Matthew, i.e., those attributed to the hypothetical Q source. Compare, e.g., \"Do not swear at all, either by heaven...or by the earth...Let your word be 'Yes, Yes' or 'No, No'; anything more than this comes from the evil one\" (Matthew 5:34, 37) and \"...do not swear either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath, but let your 'Yes' be yes and your 'No' be no, so that you may not fall under condemnation\" (James 5:12). According to James Tabor, the epistle of James contains \"no fewer than thirty direct references, echoes, and allusions to the teachings of Jesus found in the Q source.\"\n\nSome view the epistle as having no overarching outline: \"James may have simply grouped together small 'thematic essays' without having more linear, Greco-Roman structures in mind.\" That view is generally supported by those who believe that the epistle may not be a true piece of correspondence between specific parties but an example of wisdom literature, formulated as a letter for circulation. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" says, \"the subjects treated of in the Epistle are many and various; moreover, St. James not infrequently, whilst elucidating a certain point, passes abruptly to another, and presently resumes once more his former argument.\"\n\nOthers view the letter as having only broad topical or thematic structure. They generally organize James under three (Ralph Martin) to seven (Luke Johnson) general key themes or segments.\n\nA third group believes that James was more purposeful in structuring his letter, linking each paragraph theologically and thematically:\n\nThe third view of the structuring of James is a historical approach that is supported by scholars who are not content with leaving the book as \"New Testament wisdom literature, like a small book of proverbs\" or \"like a loose collection of random pearls dropped in no particular order onto a piece of string.\"\n\nA fourth group uses modern discourse analysis or Greco-Roman rhetorical structures to describe the structure of James.\n\nThe United Bible Societies' \"Greek New Testament\" divides the letter into the following sections:\n\nBULLET::::- \"Salutation\" (1:1)\nBULLET::::- \"Faith and Wisdom\" (1:2–8)\nBULLET::::- \"Poverty and Riches\" (1:9-11)\nBULLET::::- \"Trial and Temptation\" (1:12–18)\nBULLET::::- \"Hearing and Doing the Word\" (1:19–27)\nBULLET::::- \"Warning against Partiality\" (2:1–13)\nBULLET::::- \"Faith and Works\" (2:14–26)\n valign\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Tongue\" (3:1–12)\nBULLET::::- \"The Wisdom from Above\" (3:13–18)\nBULLET::::- \"Friendship with the World\" (4:1–10)\nBULLET::::- \"Judging a Brother\" (4:11–12)\nBULLET::::- \"Warning against Boasting\" (4:13–17)\nBULLET::::- \"Warning to the Rich\" (5:1–6)\nBULLET::::- \"Patience and Prayer\" (5:7–20)\n\nA 2013 article in the \"Evangelical Quarterly\" explores a violent historical background behind the epistle and offers the suggestion that it was indeed written by James, the brother of Jesus, and it was written before AD 62, the year he was killed. The 50s saw the growth of turmoil and violence in Roman Judea, as Jews became more and more frustrated with corruption, injustice and poverty. It continued into the 60s, four years before James was killed. War broke out with Rome and would lead to the destruction of Jerusalem and the scattering of the people. The epistle is renowned for exhortions on fighting poverty and caring for the poor in practical ways (1:26–27; 2:1-4; 2:14-19; 5:1-6), standing up for the oppressed (2:1-4; 5:1-6) and not being \"like the world\" in the way one responds to evil in the world (1:26-27; 2:11; 3:13-18; 4:1-10). Worldly wisdom is rejected and people are exhorted to embrace heavenly wisdom, which includes peacemaking and pursuing righteousness and justice (3:13-18).\n\nThis approach sees the epistle as a real letter with a real immediate purpose: to encourage Christian Jews not to revert to violence in their response to injustice and poverty but to stay focused on doing good, staying holy and to embrace the wisdom of heaven, not that of the world.\n\nThe epistle contains the following famous passage concerning salvation and justification:\nThat passage has been cited in Christian theological debates, especially regarding the doctrine of justification. Gaius Marius Victorinus (4th century) associated James's teaching on works with the heretical Symmachian sect, followers of Symmachus the Ebionite, and openly questioned whether James' teachings were heretical. This passage has also been contrasted with the teachings of Paul the Apostle on justification. Some scholars even believe that the passage is a response to Paul. One issue in the debate is the meaning of the Greek word δικαιόω (dikaiόō) 'render righteous or such as he ought to be', with some among the participants taking the view that James is responding to a misunderstanding of Paul.\n\nRoman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy have historically argued that the passage disproves the doctrine of justification by faith alone (\"sola fide\"). The early (and many modern) Protestants resolve the apparent conflict between James and Paul regarding faith and works in alternate ways from the Catholics and Orthodox:\n\nAccording to Ben Witherington III, differences exist between the Apostle Paul and James, but both used the law of Moses, the teachings of Jesus and other Jewish and non-Jewish sources, and \"Paul was not anti-law any more than James was a legalist\".\n\nThe epistle is also the chief biblical text for the Anointing of the Sick. James wrote:\nG. A. Wells suggested that the passage was evidence of late authorship of the epistle, on the grounds that the healing of the sick being done through an official body of presbyters (elders) indicated a considerable development of ecclesiastical organisation \"whereas in Paul's day to heal and work miracles pertained to believers indiscriminately (I Corinthians, XII:9).\"\n\nThe Epistle was first explicitly referred to and quoted by Origen of Alexandria , and possibly a bit earlier by Irenaeus of Lyons as well as Clement of Alexandria in a lost work according to Eusebius , although it was not mentioned by Tertullian, who was writing at the end of the Second Century. It is also absent from the Muratorian fragment, the earliest known list of New Testament books.\n\n\"The Epistle of James was included among the twenty-seven New Testament books first listed by Athanasius of Alexandria in his \"Thirty-Ninth Festal Epistle\" (AD 367) and was confirmed as a canonical epistle of the New Testament by a series of councils in the fourth century. Today, virtually all denominations of Christianity consider this book to be a canonical epistle of the New Testament.\"\n\nIn the first centuries of the Church the authenticity of the Epistle was doubted by some, including Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia in Cilicia. Because of the silence of several of the western churches regarding it, Eusebius classes it among the Antilegomena or contested writings (\"Historia ecclesiae\", 3.25; 2.23). Jerome gives a similar appraisal but adds that with time it had been universally admitted. Gaius Marius Victorinus, in his commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians, openly questioned whether the teachings of James were heretical.\n\nIts late recognition in the Church, especially in the West, may be explained by the fact that it was written for or by Jewish Christians, and therefore not widely circulated among the Gentile Churches. There is some indication that a few groups distrusted the book because of its doctrine. In Reformation times a few theologians, most notably Martin Luther in his early career, argued that this epistle should not be part of the canonical New Testament.\n\nMartin Luther's description of the Epistle of James varies. In some cases, Luther argues that it was not written by an apostle; but in other cases, he describes James as the work of an apostle. He even cites it as authoritative teaching from God and describes James as \"a good book, because it sets up no doctrines of men but \"vigorously promulgates the law of God\".\" Lutherans hold that the Epistle is rightly part of the New Testament, citing its authority in the Book of Concord; however, it remains part of the Lutheran antilegomena.\n\nBULLET::::- Abrogation of Old Covenant laws\nBULLET::::- Protevangelium of James\nBULLET::::- Jacob (name)\nBULLET::::- Pauline Christianity\nBULLET::::- Textual variants in the Epistle of James\n\nBULLET::::- Various versions\n"}
{"id": "9689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9689", "title": "Epistle of Jude", "text": "Epistle of Jude\n\nThe Epistle of Jude, often shortened to Jude, is the penultimate book of the New Testament and is traditionally attributed to Jude, the servant of Jesus and the brother of James the Just.\n\nThe letter of Jude was one of the disputed books of the biblical canon. The links between the Epistle and 2 Peter, its use of the biblical apocrypha, and its brevity raised concern. It is one of the shortest books in the Bible: only 1 chapter of 25 verses long.\n\nJude urges his readers to defend the deposit of Christ's doctrine that had been closed by the time he wrote his epistle, and to remember the words of the apostles spoken somewhat before. Jude then asks the reader to recall how even after the Lord saved his own people out of the land of Egypt, he did not hesitate to destroy those who fell into unbelief, much as he punished the angels who fell from their original exalted status and Sodom and Gomorrah. He describes in vivid terms the apostates of his day. He exhorts believers to remember the words spoken by the Apostles, using language similar to the second epistle of Peter to answer concerns that the Lord seemed to tarry, \"How that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts...\", and to keep themselves in God's love, before delivering a doxology.\n\nJude quotes directly from the Book of Enoch, part of the scripture of the Ethiopian and Eritrean churches but rejected by other churches. He cites Enoch's prophecy that the Lord would come with many thousands of his saints to render judgment on the whole world. He also paraphrases (verse 9) an incident in a text that has been lost about Satan and Michael the Archangel quarreling over the body of Moses.\n\nI. Salutation (1–3)\n\nII. Occasion for the Letter (3–4)<br>\n  A. The change of Subject (3) <br>\n  B. The Reason for the Change: The Presence of Godless Apostates (4)\n\nIII. Warning against the False Teachers (5–16)<br>\n  A. Historical Examples of the Judgement of Apostates (5–7) <br>\n    1. Unbelieving Israel (5) <br>\n    2. Angels who fell (6) <br>\n    3. Sodom and Gomorrah (7) <br>\n  B. Description of the Apostates of Jude's Day (8–16)<br>\n    1. Their slanderous speech deplored (8–10) <br>\n    2. Their character graphically portrayed (11–13) <br>\n    3. Their destruction prophesied (14–16)\n\nIV. Exhortation to Believers (17–23)\n\nV. Concluding Doxology (24–25)\n\nThe Epistle of Jude is held as canonical in the Christian Church. Conservative scholars date it between 70 and 90. Some scholars consider the letter a pseudonymous work written between the end of the 1st century and the first quarter of the 2nd century because of its references to the apostles and to tradition and because of its competent Greek style.\n\n\"More remarkable is the evidence that by the end of the second century Jude was widely accepted as canonical.\" Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, and the Muratorian canon considered the letter canonical. The first historical record of doubts as to authorship are found in the writings of Origen of Alexandria, who spoke of the doubts held by some, albeit not him. Eusebius classified it with the \"disputed writings, the \"antilegomena.\"\" The letter was eventually accepted as part of the Canon by Church Fathers such as Athanasius and the Synods of Laodicea (c. 363) and Carthage (397).\n\nThe epistle title is written as follows: \"Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James\" (NRSV). \"James\" is generally taken to mean James the Just, a prominent leader in the early church. Not a lot is known of Jude, which would explain the apparent need to identify him by reference to his better-known brother.\n\nAs the brother of James the Just, it has traditionally meant Jude was also the brother of Jesus, since James is described as being the brother of Jesus. For instance Clement of Alexandria (c. 150–215 AD) wrote in his work \"\"Comments on the Epistle of Jude\"\" that Jude, the Epistle of Jude's author, was a son of Joseph and a brother of Jesus (without specifying whether he was a son of Joseph by a previous marriage or of Joseph and Mary).\n\nThere is also a dispute as to whether \"brother\" means someone who has the same father and mother, or a half-brother or cousin or more distant familial relationship. This dispute over the true meaning of \"brother\" grew as the doctrine of the Virgin Birth evolved.\n\nOutside the book of Jude, a \"Jude\" is mentioned five times in the New Testament: three times as Jude the Apostle (Luke 6:16, Acts 1:13, John 14:22), and twice as Jude the brother of Jesus (Matthew 13:55, Mark 6:3) (aside from references to Judas Iscariot and Judah (son of Jacob)). Debate continues as to whether the author of the epistle is either, both, or neither. Some scholars have argued that since the author of the letter has not identified himself as an apostle and actually refers to the apostles as a third party, he cannot be identified with Jude the Apostle. Others have drawn the opposite conclusion, i.e., that, as an apostle, he would not have made a claim of apostleship on his own behalf.\n\nThe Epistle of Jude is a brief book of only a single chapter with 25 verses. It was composed as an \"encyclical letter\"—that is, one not directed to the members of one church in particular, but intended rather to be circulated and read in all churches.\n\nThe wording and syntax of this epistle in its original Greek demonstrates that the author was capable and fluent. The epistle is addressed to Christians in general, and it warns them about the doctrine of certain errant teachers to whom they were exposed.\n\nThe epistle's style is combative, impassioned, and rushed. Many examples of evildoers and warnings about their fates are given in rapid succession.\n\nThe epistle concludes with a doxology, which is considered by Peter H. Davids to be one of the highest in quality contained in the Bible.\n\nPart of Jude is very similar to 2 Peter (mainly 2 Peter chapter 2), so much so that most scholars agree that there is a dependence between the two, i.e., that either one letter used the other directly, or they both drew on a common source.\n\nBecause this epistle is much shorter than 2 Peter, and due to various stylistic details, some writers consider Jude the source for the similar passages of 2 Peter. However, other writers, arguing that Jude 18 quotes as past tense, consider Jude to have come after 2 Peter.\n\nSome scholars who consider Jude to predate 2 Peter note that the latter appears to quote the former but omits the reference to the non-canonical book of Enoch.\n\nThe Epistle of Jude references at least two other books, with one being non-canonical in all churches and the other non-canonical in most churches.\n\nVerse 9 refers to a dispute between Michael the Archangel and the devil about the body of Moses. Some interpreters understand this reference to be an allusion to the events described in . The classical theologian Origen attributes this reference to the non-canonical Assumption of Moses. According to James Charlesworth, there is no evidence the surviving book of this name ever contained any such content. Others believe it to be in the lost ending of the book.\n\nVerses 14–15 contain a direct quotation of a prophecy from 1 Enoch 1:9. The title \"Enoch, the seventh from Adam\" is also sourced from 1 En. 60:1. Most commentators assume that this indicates that Jude accepts the antediluvian patriarch Enoch as the author of the Book of Enoch which contains the same quotation. However, an alternative explanation is that Jude quotes the Book of Enoch aware that verses 14–15 are in fact an expansion of the words of Moses from Deuteronomy 33:2. This is supported by Jude's unusual Greek statement that \"Enoch the Seventh from Adam prophesied \"to\" the false teachers\", not \"concerning\" them.\n\nThe Book of Enoch is not considered canonical by most churches, although it is by the Ethiopian Orthodox church. According to Western scholars, the older sections of the Book of Enoch (mainly in the \"Book of the Watchers\") date from about 300 BC and the latest part (\"Book of Parables\") probably was composed at the end of the 1st century BC. 1 Enoch 1:9, mentioned above, is part of the pseudepigrapha and is among the Dead Sea Scrolls [4Q Enoch (4Q204[4QENAR]) COL I 16–18]. It is generally accepted by scholars that the author of the Epistle of Jude was familiar with the Book of Enoch and was influenced by it in thought and diction.\n\nBULLET::::- Textual variants in the Epistle of Jude\nBULLET::::- Oiketerion ()\n\nOnline translations of the Epistle of Jude:\nBULLET::::- Jude in New American Bible\nBULLET::::- \"Online Bible\" at GospelHall.org\nBULLET::::- Jude at Bible Gateway (various versions)\nBULLET::::- Early Christian writings: \"Epistle of Jude:\" comparable translations and interpretations\nAudiobook Version:\n\nAdditional information:\nBULLET::::- Catholic Encyclopedia\nBULLET::::- Comprehensive study the Epistle of Jude\nBULLET::::- An Exegesis of Jude by Michael Quandt\n"}
{"id": "9692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9692", "title": "Eusebius Amort", "text": "Eusebius Amort\n\nEusebius Amort (November 15, 1692 – February 5, 1775) was a German Roman Catholic theologian.\n\nAmort was born at Bibermuhle, near Tolz, in Upper Bavaria. He studied at Munich, and at an early age joined the Canons Regular at Polling, where, shortly after his ordination in 1717, he taught theology and philosophy.\nThe Parnassus Boicus learned society was based on a plan started in 1720 by three Augustinian fathers: Eusebius Amort, Gelasius Hieber (1671-1731), a famous preacher in the German language and Agnellus Kandler (1692-1745), a genealogist and librarian. The initial plans fell through, but in 1722 they issued the first volume of the \"Parnassus Boicus\" journal, communicating interesting information from the arts and sciences.\n\nIn 1733 Amort went to Rome as theologian to Cardinal Niccolo Maria Lercari (d. 1757).\nHe returned to Polling in 1735 and devoted the rest of his life to the revival of learning in Bavaria. He died at Polling in 1775.\n\nAmort, who had the reputation of being the most learned man of his age, was a voluminous writer on every conceivable subject, from poetry to astronomy, from dogmatic theology to mysticism. His best known works are:\n\nBULLET::::- A manual of theology in 4 vols, \"Theologia eclectica, moralis et scholastica\" (Augsburg, 1752; revised by Pope Benedict XIV for the 1753 edition published at Bologna)\nBULLET::::- A defence of Catholic doctrine, entitled \"Demonstratio critica religionis Catholicae\" (Augsburg, 1751)\nBULLET::::- A work on indulgences, which has often been criticized by Protestant writers, \"De Origine, Progressu, Valore, et Fructu Indulgentiorum\" (Augsburg, 1735)\nBULLET::::- A treatise on mysticism, \"De Revelationibus et Visionibus, etc.\" (2 vols, 1744)\nBULLET::::- The astronomical work \"Nova philosophiae planetarum et artis criticae systemata\" (Nuremberg, 1723).\n\nThe list of his other works, including his three erudite contributions to the question of authorship of the \"Imitatio Christi\", will be found in C. Toussaint's scholarly article in Alfred Vacant's \"Dictionnaire de theologie\" (1900, cols 1115-1117).\n\nCitations\n\nSources\n"}
{"id": "9693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9693", "title": "Episcopus vagans", "text": "Episcopus vagans\n\nThe \"Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church\" mentions as the main lines of succession deriving from \"\" in the 20th century those founded by Arnold Mathew, Joseph René Vilatte and Leon Chechemian. Others that could be added are those derived from Aftimios Ofiesh, Carlos Duarte Costa, Emmanuel Milingo, Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục and Marcel Lefebvre.\n\nIn Western Christianity it has traditionally been taught, since as far back as the time of the Donatist controversy of the fourth and fifth centuries, that any bishop can consecrate any other baptised man as a bishop provided the bishop observes the minimum requirements for the sacramental validity of the ceremony. This means that the consecration is considered valid even if it flouts certain ecclesiastical laws, and even if the participants are schismatics or heretics.\n\nAccording to a theological view affirmed, for instance, by the International Bishops' Conference of the Old Catholic Church with regard to ordinations by Arnold Mathew, an episcopal ordination is for service within a specific Christian church, and an ordination ceremony that concerns only the individual himself does not make him truly a bishop. The Holy See has not commented on the validity of this theory, but has declared with regard to ordinations of this kind carried out, for example, by Emmanuel Milingo, that the Church \"does not recognize and does not intend to recognize in the future those ordinations or any of the ordinations derived from them and therefore the canonical state of the alleged bishops remains that in which they were before the ordination conferred by Mr Milingo\". Other theologians, notably those of the Eastern Orthodox Church, dispute the notion that such ordinations have effect, a notion that opens up the possibility of valid but irregular consecrations proliferating outside the structures of the \"official\" denominations.\n\nA Catholic ordained to the episcopacy without a mandate from the Pope is automatically excommunicated and is thereby forbidden to celebrate the sacraments, according to canon law.\n\nVlassios Pheidas, on an official Church of Greece site, uses the canonical language of the Orthodox tradition, to describe the conditions in ecclesial praxis when sacraments, including Holy Orders, are real, valid, and efficacious. He notes language is itself part of the ecclesiological problem.\nThis applies to the validity and efficacy of the ordination of bishops and the other sacraments, not only of the Independent Catholic Churches, but also of all other Christian churches, including the Roman Catholic Church, Oriental Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the East.\n\nAnglican bishop Colin Buchanan, in the \"Historical Dictionary of Anglicanism\", says that the Anglican Communion has held an Augustinian view of orders, by which \"the validity of Episcopal ordinations (to whichever order) is based solely upon the historic succession in which the ordaining bishop stands, irrespective of their contemporary ecclesial context\".\nHe describes the circumstances of Archbishop Matthew Parker's consecration as one of the reasons why this theory is \"generally held\". Parker was chosen by Queen Elizabeth I of England to be the first Church of England Archbishop of Canterbury after the death of the previous office holder, Cardinal Reginald Pole, the last Roman Catholic Archbishop of Canterbury. Buchanan notes the Roman Catholic Church also focuses on issues of intention and not just breaks in historical succession. He does not explain whether intention has an ecclesiological role, for Anglicans, in conferring or receiving sacraments.\n\nAccording to Buchanan, \"the real rise of the problem\" happened in the 19th century, in the \"wake of the Anglo-Catholic movement\", \"through mischievous activities of a tiny number of independently acting bishops\". They exist worldwide, he writes, \"mostly without congregations\", and \"many in different stages of delusion and fantasy, not least in the Episcopal titles they confer on themselves\"; \"the distinguishing mark\" to \"specifically identif[y]\" an \"episcopus vagans\" is \"the lack of a true see or the lack of a real church life to oversee\". Paul Halsall, on the Internet History Sourcebooks Project, did not list a single church edifice of independent bishops, in a 1996–1998 New York City building architecture survey of religious communities, which maintain bishops claiming apostolic succession and claim cathedral status but noted there \"are now literally hundreds of these \", of lesser or greater spiritual probity. They seem to have a tendency to call living room sanctuaries 'cathedrals';\" those buildings were not perceived as cultural symbols and did not meet the survey criteria. David V. Barrett wrote, in \"A Brief Guide to Secret Religions\", that \"one hallmark of such bishops is that they often collect as many lineages as they can to strengthen their Episcopal legitimacy—at least in their own eyes\" and their groups have more clergy than members.\n\nMany \"episcopi vagantes\" claim succession from the Old Catholic See of Utrecht, or from Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, or Eastern Catholic Churches. A few others derive their orders from Roman Catholic bishops who have consecrated their own bishops after disputes with the Holy See.\n\nBarrett wrote that leaders \"of some esoteric movements, are also priests or bishops in small non-mainstream Christian Churches\"; he explains, this type of \"independent or autocephalous\" group has \"little in common with the Church it developed from, the Old Catholic Church, and even less in common with the Roman Catholic Church\" but still claims its authority from Apostolic succession.\n\nMany, if not most, \"episcopi vagantes\" are associated with Independent Catholic Churches. They may be very liberal or very conservative. \"Episcopi vagantes\" may also include some conservative \"Continuing Anglicans\" who have broken with the Anglican Communion over various issues such as Prayer Book revision, the ordination of women and the ordination of unmarried, non-celibate individuals (including homosexuals).\n\nBuchanan writes that based the criteria of having \"a true see\" or having \"a real church life to oversee\", the bishops of most forms of the Continuing Anglican movement are not necessarily classified as vagantes, but \"are always in danger of becoming such\".\n\nArnold Mathew, according to Buchanan, \"lapsed into the vagaries of an \"\"\" Stephen Edmonds, in the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\", wrote that in 1910 Mathew's wife separated from him; that same year, he declared himself and his church seceded from the Union of Utrecht. Within a few months, on 2 November 1911, he was excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church; sued \"The Times\" for libel based on the words \"pseudo-bishop\" used to describe him in the newspaper's translation from the Latin text \"\"\"\"; and, lost his case in 1913. Henry R.T. Brandreth wrote, in \"Episcopi Vagantes and the Anglican Church\", \"[o]ne of the most regrettable features of Mathew's episcopate was the founding of the Order of Corporate Reunion (OCR) in 1908. This claimed to be a revival of Frederick George Lee's movement, but was in fact unconnected with it.\" Brandreth thought it \"seems still to exist in a shadowy underground way\" in 1947, but disconnected. Colin Holden, in \"Ritualist on a Tricycle\", places Mathew and his into perspective, he wrote Mathew was an \"\", lived in a cottage provided for him, and performed his conditional acts, sometimes called according to Holden \"bedroom ordinations\", in his cottage. Mathew questioned the validity of Anglican ordinations and became involved with the OCR, in 1911 according to Edmonds, and he openly advertised his offer to reordain Anglican clergy who requested it. This angered the Church of England. In 1912, D. J. Scannell O'Neill wrote in \"The Fortnightly Review\" that London \"seems to have more than her due share of bishops\" and enumerates what he refers to as \"these hireling shepherds\". He also announces that one of them, Mathew, revived the OCR and published \"The Torch\", a monthly review, advocating the reconstruction of Western Christianity and reunion with Eastern Christianity. \"The Torch\" stated \"that the ordinations of the Church of England are not recognized by any church claiming to be Catholic\" so the promoters involved Mathew to conditionally ordain group members who are \"clergy of the Established Church\" and \"sign a profession of the Catholic Faith\". It stipulated Mathew's services were not a system of simony and given without simoniac expectations. The group sought to enroll \"earnest-minded Catholics who sincerely desire to help forward the work of [c]orporate [r]eunion with the Holy See\". Nigel Yates, in \"Anglican Ritualism in Victorian Britain, 1830-1910\", described it as \"an even more bizarre scheme to promote a Catholic Uniate Church in Britain\" than Lee and Ambrose Lisle March Phillipps de Lisle's Association for the Promotion of the Unity of Christendom. It was editorialized by O'Neill that the \"most charitable construction to be placed on this latest move of Mathew is that he is not mentally sound. Being an Irishman, it is strange that he has not sufficient humor to see the absurdity of falling away from the Catholic Church in order to assist others to unite with the Holy See.\" Edmonds reports that \"anything between 4 and 265 was suggested\" as to how many took up his offer of reordination.\n\nWhen it declared devoid of canonical effect the consecration ceremony conducted by Archbishop Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục for the Carmelite Order of the Holy Face group at midnight of 31 December 1975, the Holy See refrained from pronouncing on its validity. It also made the same statement with regard to later ordinations by those bishops, saying that, \"as for those who have already thus unlawfully received ordination or any who may yet accept ordination from these, whatever may be the validity of the orders (\"quidquid sit de ordinum validitate\"), the Church does not and will not recognise their ordination (\"ipsorum ordinationem\"), and will consider them, for all legal effects, as still in the state in which they were before, except that the ... penalties remain until they repent\".\n\nA similar declaration was issued with regard to Archbishop Emmanuel Milingo's conferring of episcopal ordination on four men - all of whom, by virtue of previous Independent Catholic consecrations, claimed already to be bishops - on 24 September 2006: the Holy See, as well as stating that, in accordance with Canon 1382 of the Code of Canon Law, all five men involved incurred automatic (\"\"latae sententiae\"\") excommunication through their actions, declared that \"the Church does not recognise and does not intend in the future to recognise these ordinations or any ordinations derived from them, and she holds that the canonical state of the four alleged bishops is the same as it was prior to the ordination.\"\n\nIn contrast, the Holy See has not questioned the validity of the consecrations that the late Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre performed in 1988 for the service of the relatively numerous followers of the Traditionalist Catholic Society of St. Pius X that he had founded, and of the bishops who, under pressure from the Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association, \"have been ordained without the Pontifical mandate and who have not asked for, or have not yet obtained, the necessary legitimation\", and who consequently, Pope Benedict XVI declared, \"are to be considered illegitimate, but validly ordained\".\n\nVictor LaValle, in the novel \"Big Machine\" (2009), included three \"\" as part of his character's childhood involvement with an independent church:\nCalvin Baker, in his novel \"Dominion\" (2006), includes an \"\" as one of his characters:\nIntertextuality of ' language. Jim Higgins saw, in \"More Years for the Locust\", \"similarities between Marxist obscurantism and an addiction to Christian arcana\" and used ' pejoratively as his example of \"the ever-growing proliferation of sects, sectlets and insects claiming direct descent from the master\" with \"fissiparous tendencies\". He saw humor in the ludicrous characters and farce in their titles.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Episcopi vagantes in Church History\". A.J. Macdonald. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1945.\nBULLET::::- \"Episcopi Vagantes and the Anglican Church\" (1947, 1961)\nBULLET::::- \"Bishops at Large\". Peter Anson. New York City: October House Publishing, 1963.\nBULLET::::- \"Independent Bishops: An International Directory\", edited by Gary L. Ward, Bertil Persson, and Alan Bain. Apogee Books, 1990\nBULLET::::- \"Episcopi Vagantes and the Challenge to Catholic Ministry\", an MA thesis by James Ford, Pacific School of Religion, Berkeley, California, 1991.\nBULLET::::- \"The Priesthood Renewed: The Personal Journey of a Married Priest\", by Archbishop Emmanuel Milingo, HSA Publications, New York, NY, 2005.\n"}
{"id": "9695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9695", "title": "Elizabeth Garrett Anderson", "text": "Elizabeth Garrett Anderson\n\nElizabeth Garrett Anderson (9 June 1836 – 17 December 1917) was an English physician and suffragist. She was the first woman to qualify in Britain as a physician and surgeon. She was the co-founder of the first hospital staffed by women, the first dean of a British medical school, the first woman in Britain to be elected to a school board and, as Mayor of Aldeburgh, the first female mayor and magistrate in Britain.\n\nGarrett was born in Whitechapel, London, the second of eleven children of Newson Garrett (1812–1893), from Leiston, Suffolk, and his wife, Louisa (born Dunnell; 1813–1903), from London.\n\nThe Garrett ancestors had been ironworkers in East Suffolk since the early seventeenth century. Newson was the youngest of three sons and not academically inclined, although he possessed the family's entrepreneurial spirit. When he finished school, the town of Leiston offered little to Newson, so he left for London to make his fortune. There, he fell in love with his brother's sister-in-law, Louisa Dunnell, the daughter of an innkeeper of Suffolk origin. After their wedding, the couple went to live in a pawnbroker's shop at 1 Commercial Road, Whitechapel. The Garretts had their first three children in quick succession: Louie, Elizabeth and their brother (Dunnell Newson) who died at the age of six months. While Louisa grieved the loss of her third child, it was not easy to raise their two daughters in the city of London at that time. When Garrett was three years old, the family moved to 142 Long Acre, where they lived for two years, whilst one more child was born and her father moved up in the world, becoming not only the manager of a larger pawnbroker's shop, but also a silversmith. Garrett's grandfather, owner of the family engineering works, Richard Garrett & Sons, had died in 1837, leaving the business to his eldest son, Garrett's uncle. Despite his lack of capital, Newson was determined to be successful and in 1841, at the age of 29, he moved his family to Suffolk, where he bought a barley and coal merchants business in Snape, constructing Snape Maltings, a fine range of buildings for malting barley.\n\nThe Garretts lived in a square Georgian house opposite the church in Aldeburgh until 1852. Newson's malting business expanded and more children were born, Edmund (1840), Alice (1842), Agnes (1845), Millicent (1847), who was to become a leader in the constitutional campaign for women's suffrage, Sam (1850), Josephine (1853) and George (1854). By 1850, Newson was a prosperous businessman and was able to build Alde House, a mansion on a hill behind Aldeburgh. A \"by-product of the industrial revolution\", Garrett grew up in an atmosphere of \"triumphant economic pioneering\" and the Garrett children were to grow up to become achievers in the professional classes of late-Victorian England. Garrett was encouraged to take an interest in local politics and, contrary to practices at the time, was allowed the freedom to explore the town with its nearby salt-marshes, beach and the small port of Slaughden with its boatbuilders' yards and sailmakers' lofts.\n\nThere was no school in Aldeburgh so Garrett learned the three Rs from her mother. When she was 10 years old, a governess, Miss Edgeworth, a poor gentlewoman, was employed to educate Garrett and her sister. Mornings were spent in the schoolroom; there were regimented afternoon walks; educating the young ladies continued at mealtimes when Edgeworth ate with the family; at night, the governess slept in a curtained off area in the girls' bedroom. Garrett despised her governess and sought to outwit the teacher in the classroom. When Garrett was 13 and her sister 15, they were sent to a private school, the Boarding School for Ladies in Blackheath, London, which was run by the step aunts of the poet Robert Browning. There, English literature, French, Italian and German as well as deportment, were taught.\nLater in life, Garrett recalled the stupidity of her teachers there, though her schooling there did help establish a love of reading. Her main complaint about the school was the lack of science and mathematics instruction. Her reading matter included Tennyson, Wordsworth, Milton, Coleridge, Trollope, Thackeray and George Eliot. Elizabeth and Louie were known as \"the bathing Garretts\", as their father had insisted they be allowed a hot bath once a week. However, they made what were to be lifelong friends there. When they finished in 1851, they were sent on a short tour abroad, ending with a memorable visit to the Great Exhibition in Hyde Park, London.\n\nAfter this formal education, Garrett spent the next nine years tending to domestic duties, but she continued to study Latin and arithmetic in the mornings and also read widely. Her sister Millicent recalled Garrett's weekly lectures, \"Talks on Things in General\", when her younger siblings would gather while she discussed politics and current affairs from Garibaldi to Macaulay's \"History of England\". In 1854, when she was eighteen, Garrett and her sister went on a long visit to their school friends, Jane and Anne Crow, in Gateshead where she met Emily Davies, the early feminist and future co-founder of Girton College, Cambridge. Davies was to be a lifelong friend and confidante, always ready to give sound advice during the important decisions of Garrett's career. It may have been in the \"English Woman's Journal\", first issued in 1858, that Garrett first read of Elizabeth Blackwell, who had become the first female doctor in the United States in 1849. When Blackwell visited London in 1859, Garrett travelled to the capital. By then, her sister Louie was married and living in London. Garrett joined the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women, which organised Blackwell's lectures on \"Medicine as a Profession for Ladies\" and set up a private meeting between Garrett and the doctor. It is said that during a visit to Alde House around 1860, one evening while sitting by the fireside, Garrett and Davies selected careers for advancing the frontiers of women's rights; Garrett was to open the medical profession to women, Davies the doors to a university education for women, while 13-year-old Millicent was allocated politics and votes for women. At first Newson was opposed to the radical idea of his daughter becoming a physician but came round and agreed to do all in his power, both financially and otherwise, to support Garrett.\n\nAfter an initial unsuccessful visit to leading doctors in Harley Street, Garrett decided to first spend six months as a surgery nurse at Middlesex Hospital, London in August 1860. On proving to be a good nurse, she was allowed to attend an outpatients' clinic, then her first operation. She unsuccessfully attempted to enroll in the hospital's Medical School but was allowed to attend private tuition in Latin, Greek and \"materia medica\" with the hospital's apothecary, while continuing her work as a nurse. She also employed a tutor to study anatomy and physiology three evenings a week. Eventually she was allowed into the dissecting room and the chemistry lectures. Gradually, Garrett became an unwelcome presence among the male students, who in 1861 presented a memorial to the school against her admittance as a fellow student, despite the support she enjoyed from the administration. She was obliged to leave the Middlesex Hospital but she did so with an honours certificate in chemistry and \"materia medica\". Garrett then applied to several medical schools, including Oxford, Cambridge, Glasgow, Edinburgh, St Andrews and the Royal College of Surgeons, all of which refused her admittance.\n\nA companion to her in this struggle was the lesser known Dr. Sophia Jex-Blake. While both are considered \"outstanding\" medical figures of the late 19th century, Garrett was able to obtain her credentials by way of a \"side door\" through a loophole in admissions at the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries. Having privately obtained a certificate in anatomy and physiology, she was admitted in 1862 by the Society of Apothecaries who, as a condition of their charter, could not legally exclude her on account of her sex. She continued her battle to qualify by studying privately with various professors, including some at the University of St Andrews, the Edinburgh Royal Maternity and the London Hospital Medical School.\n\nIn 1865, she finally took her exam and obtained a licence (LSA) from the Society of Apothecaries to practise medicine, the first woman qualified in Britain to do so openly (previously there was Dr James Barry who was born and raised female but presented as male from the age of 20 in order to go to medical school, and lived his adult life as a man). On the day, three out of seven candidates passed the exam, Garrett with the highest marks. The Society of Apothecaries immediately amended its regulations to prevent other women obtaining a licence meaning that Jex-Blake however could not follow this same path; the new rule disallowed privately educated women to be eligible for examination. It was not until 1876 that the new Medical Act (39 and 40 Vict, Ch. 41) passed which allowed British medical authorities to license all qualified applicants whatever their gender.\n\nThough she was now a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries, as a woman, Garrett could not take up a medical post in any hospital. So in late 1865, Garrett opened her own practice at 20 Upper Berkeley Street, London. At first patients were scarce, but the practice gradually grew. After six months in practice, she wished to open an outpatients dispensary, to enable poor women to obtain medical help from a qualified practitioner of their own gender. In 1865, there was an outbreak of cholera in Britain, affecting both rich and poor, and in their panic, some people forgot any prejudices they had in relation to a female physician. The first death due to cholera occurred in 1866, but by then Garrett had already opened St Mary's Dispensary for Women and Children, at 69 Seymour Place. In the first year, she tended to 3,000 new patients, who made 9,300 outpatient visits to the dispensary. On hearing that the Dean of the faculty of medicine at the University of Sorbonne, Paris was in favour of admitting women as medical students, Garrett studied French so that she could apply for a medical degree, which she obtained in 1870 after some difficulty.\nThe same year she was elected to the first London School Board, an office newly opened to women; Garrett's was the highest vote among all the candidates. Also in that year, she was made one of the visiting physicians of the East London Hospital for Children (later the Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children), becoming the first woman in Britain to be appointed to a medical post, but she found the duties of these two positions to be incompatible with her principal work in her private practice and the dispensary, as well as her role as a new mother, so she resigned from these posts by 1873. In 1872, the dispensary became the New Hospital for Women and Children, treating women from all over London for gynaecological conditions; the hospital moved to new premises in Marylebone Street in 1874. Around this time, Garrett also entered into discussion with male medical views regarding women. In 1874, Henry Maudsley’s article on Sex and Mind in Education appeared, which argued that education for women caused over-exertion and thus reduced their reproductive capacity, sometimes causing \"nervous and even mental disorders\". Garrett's counter-argument was that the real danger for women was not education but boredom and that fresh air and exercise were preferable to sitting by the fire with a novel. In the same year, she co-founded London School of Medicine for Women with Sophia Jex-Blake and became a lecturer in what was the only teaching hospital in Britain to offer courses for women. She continued to work there for the rest of her career and was dean of the school from 1883 to 1902. This school was later called the Royal Free Hospital of Medicine, which later became part of what is now the medical school of University College London.\n\nIn 1873 she gained membership of the British Medical Association (BMA). In 1878 a motion was proposed to exclude women following the election of Garrett Anderson and Frances Hoggan. The motion was opposed by Dr Norman Kerr who maintained the equal rights of members. This was \"one of several instances where Garrett, uniquely, was able to enter a hitherto all male medical institution which subsequently moved formally to exclude any women who might seek to follow her.\" In 1892, women were again admitted to the British Medical Association. In 1897, Garrett Anderson was elected president of the East Anglian branch of the BMA.\n\nGarrett Anderson worked steadily at the development of the New Hospital for Women, and (from 1874) at the creation of the London School of Medicine for Women, where she served as its dean. Both institutions were handsomely and suitably housed and equipped. The New Hospital for Women was able to commission a building in the Euston Road; the architect was J. M. Brydon, who took into his employment at this time Anderson's sister Agnes Garrett and her cousin Rhoda Garrett, who contributed to its design. The hospital was for many years worked entirely by medical women. The schools (in Hunter Street, WC1) had over 200 students, most of them preparing for the medical degree of London University (the present-day University College London), which was opened to women in 1877.\n\nGarrett Anderson was also active in the women's suffrage movement. In 1866, Garrett Anderson and Davies presented petitions signed by more than 1,500 asking that female heads of household be given the vote. That year, Garrett Anderson joined the first British Women's Suffrage Committee. She was not as active as her sister, Millicent Garrett Fawcett, though Garrett Anderson became a member of the Central Committee of the National Society for Women's Suffrage in 1889. After her husband's death in 1907, she became more active. As mayor of Aldeburgh, she gave speeches for suffrage, before the increasing militant activity in the movement led to her withdrawal in 1911. Her daughter Louisa, also a physician, was more active and more militant, spending time in prison in 1912 for her suffrage activities.\n\nElizabeth Garrett Anderson once remarked that \"a doctor leads two lives, the professional and the private, and the boundaries between the two are never traversed\". In 1871, she married James George Skelton Anderson (died 1907) of the Orient Steamship Company co-owned by his uncle Arthur Anderson, but she did not give up her medical practice. She had three children, Louisa (1873–1943), Margaret (1874–1875), who died of meningitis, and Alan (1877–1952). Louisa also became a pioneering doctor of medicine and feminist activist.\n\nThey retired to Aldeburgh in 1902, moving to Alde House in 1903, after the death of Elizabeth's mother. Skelton died of a stroke in 1907. She enjoyed a happy marriage and in later life, devoted time to Alde House, gardening, and travelling with younger members of the extended family.\n\nOn 9 November 1908, she was elected mayor of Aldeburgh, the first female mayor in England. Her father had been mayor in 1889.\n\nShe died in 1917 and is buried in the churchyard of St Peter and St Paul's Church, Aldeburgh.\n\nThe New Hospital for Women was renamed the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital in 1918 and amalgamated with the Obstetric Hospital in 2001 to form the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital before relocating to become the University College Hospital Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Wing at UCH.\n\nThe former Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital buildings are incorporated into the new National Headquarters for the public service trade union UNISON. The Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Gallery, a permanent installation set within the restored hospital building, uses a variety of media to set the story of Garrett Anderson, her hospital, and women's struggle to achieve equality in the field of medicine within the wider framework of 19th and 20th century social history.\n\nThe critical care centre at Ipswich Hospital was named the Garrett Anderson Centre in her honour, in recognition of her connection to the county of Suffolk.\n\nElizabeth Garrett Anderson School, a secondary school for girls in Islington, London, is named after her.\n\nThe archives of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson are held at the Women's Library at the London School of Economics. The archives of the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital (formerly the New Hospital for Women) are held at the London Metropolitan Archives.\n\nOn 9 June 2016, Google Doodle commemorated her 180th birthday.\n\nThe Elizabeth Garrett Anderson programme of the NHS Leadership Academy is a master's degree in leadership and management.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Garrett Anderson\nBULLET::::- BBC page on Elizabeth Garrett Anderson.\nBULLET::::- Picture of The United Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital and Hospital for Women Soho, near Euston Station in London.\n"}
{"id": "9696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9696", "title": "Erosion", "text": "Erosion\n\nIn earth science, erosion is the action of surface processes (such as water flow or wind) that removes soil, rock, or dissolved material from one location on the Earth's crust, and then transports it to another location (not to be confused with weathering which involves no movement). This natural process is caused by the dynamic activity of erosive agents, that is, water, ice (glaciers), snow, air (wind), plants, animals, and humans. In accordance with these agents, erosion is sometimes divided into water erosion, glacial erosion, snow erosion, wind (aeolic) erosion, zoogenic erosion, and anthropogenic erosion. The particulate breakdown of rock or soil into clastic sediment is referred to as \"physical\" or \"mechanical\" erosion; this contrasts with \"chemical\" erosion, where soil or rock material is removed from an area by its dissolving into a solvent (typically water), followed by the flow away of that solution. Eroded sediment or solutes may be transported just a few millimetres, or for thousands of kilometres.\n\nNatural rates of erosion are controlled by the action of geological weathering geomorphic drivers, such as rainfall; bedrock wear in rivers; coastal erosion by the sea and waves; glacial plucking, abrasion, and scour; areal flooding; wind abrasion; groundwater processes; and mass movement processes in steep landscapes like landslides and debris flows. The rates at which such processes act control how fast a surface is eroded. Typically, physical erosion proceeds fastest on steeply sloping surfaces, and rates may also be sensitive to some climatically-controlled properties including amounts of water supplied (e.g., by rain), storminess, wind speed, wave fetch, or atmospheric temperature (especially for some ice-related processes). Feedbacks are also possible between rates of erosion and the amount of eroded material that is already carried by, for example, a river or glacier. Processes of erosion that produce sediment or solutes from a place contrast with those of deposition, which control the arrival and emplacement of material at a new location.\n\nWhile erosion is a natural process, human activities have increased by 10-40 times the rate at which erosion is occurring globally. At well-known agriculture sites such as the Appalachian Mountains, intensive farming practices have caused erosion up to 100x the speed of the natural rate of erosion in the region. Excessive (or accelerated) erosion causes both \"on-site\" and \"off-site\" problems. On-site impacts include decreases in agricultural productivity and (on natural landscapes) ecological collapse, both because of loss of the nutrient-rich upper soil layers. In some cases, the eventual end result is desertification. Off-site effects include sedimentation of waterways and eutrophication of water bodies, as well as sediment-related damage to roads and houses. Water and wind erosion are the two primary causes of land degradation; combined, they are responsible for about 84% of the global extent of degraded land, making excessive erosion one of the most significant environmental problems worldwide.\n\nIntensive agriculture, deforestation, roads, anthropogenic climate change and urban sprawl are amongst the most significant human activities in regard to their effect on stimulating erosion. However, there are many prevention and remediation practices that can curtail or limit erosion of vulnerable soils.\n\nRainfall, and the surface runoff which may result from rainfall, produces four main types of soil erosion: \"splash erosion\", \"sheet erosion\", \"rill erosion\", and \"gully erosion\". Splash erosion is generally seen as the first and least severe stage in the soil erosion process, which is followed by sheet erosion, then rill erosion and finally gully erosion (the most severe of the four).\n\nIn \"splash erosion\", the impact of a falling raindrop creates a small crater in the soil, ejecting soil particles. The distance these soil particles travel can be as much as 0.6 m (two feet) vertically and 1.5 m (five feet) horizontally on level ground.\n\nIf the soil is saturated, or if the rainfall rate is greater than the rate at which water can infiltrate into the soil, surface runoff occurs. If the runoff has sufficient flow energy, it will transport loosened soil particles (sediment) down the slope. \"Sheet erosion\" is the transport of loosened soil particles by overland flow.\n\n\"Rill erosion\" refers to the development of small, ephemeral concentrated flow paths which function as both sediment source and sediment delivery systems for erosion on hillslopes. Generally, where water erosion rates on disturbed upland areas are greatest, rills are active. Flow depths in rills are typically of the order of a few centimetres (about an inch) or less and along-channel slopes may be quite steep. This means that rills exhibit hydraulic physics very different from water flowing through the deeper, wider channels of streams and rivers.\n\"Gully erosion\" occurs when runoff water accumulates and rapidly flows in narrow channels during or immediately after heavy rains or melting snow, removing soil to a considerable depth.\n\n\"Valley\" or \"stream erosion\" occurs with continued water flow along a linear feature. The erosion is both downward, deepening the valley, and headward, extending the valley into the hillside, creating head cuts and steep banks. In the earliest stage of stream erosion, the erosive activity is dominantly vertical, the valleys have a typical V cross-section and the stream gradient is relatively steep. When some base level is reached, the erosive activity switches to lateral erosion, which widens the valley floor and creates a narrow floodplain. The stream gradient becomes nearly flat, and lateral deposition of sediments becomes important as the stream meanders across the valley floor. In all stages of stream erosion, by far the most erosion occurs during times of flood when more and faster-moving water is available to carry a larger sediment load. In such processes, it is not the water alone that erodes: suspended abrasive particles, pebbles, and boulders can also act erosively as they traverse a surface, in a process known as \"traction\".\n\n\"Bank erosion\" is the wearing away of the banks of a stream or river. This is distinguished from changes on the bed of the watercourse, which is referred to as \"scour\". Erosion and changes in the form of river banks may be measured by inserting metal rods into the bank and marking the position of the bank surface along the rods at different times.\n\n\"Thermal erosion\" is the result of melting and weakening permafrost due to moving water. It can occur both along rivers and at the coast. Rapid river channel migration observed in the Lena River of Siberia is due to thermal erosion, as these portions of the banks are composed of permafrost-cemented non-cohesive materials. Much of this erosion occurs as the weakened banks fail in large slumps. Thermal erosion also affects the Arctic coast, where wave action and near-shore temperatures combine to undercut permafrost bluffs along the shoreline and cause them to fail. Annual erosion rates along a segment of the Beaufort Sea shoreline averaged per year from 1955 to 2002.\n\nMost river erosion happens nearer to the mouth of a river. On a river bend, the longest least sharp side has slower moving water. Here deposits build up. On the narrowest sharpest side of the bend, there is faster moving water so this side tends to erode away mostly.\n\nShoreline erosion, which occurs on both exposed and sheltered coasts, primarily occurs through the action of currents and waves but sea level (tidal) change can also play a role.\n\"Hydraulic action\" takes place when the air in a joint is suddenly compressed by a wave closing the entrance of the joint. This then cracks it. \"Wave pounding\" is when the sheer energy of the wave hitting the cliff or rock breaks pieces off. \"Abrasion\" or \"corrasion\" is caused by waves launching sea load at the cliff. It is the most effective and rapid form of shoreline erosion (not to be confused with \"corrosion\"). \"Corrosion\" is the dissolving of rock by carbonic acid in sea water. Limestone cliffs are particularly vulnerable to this kind of erosion. \"Attrition\" is where particles/sea load carried by the waves are worn down as they hit each other and the cliffs. This then makes the material easier to wash away. The material ends up as shingle and sand. Another significant source of erosion, particularly on carbonate coastlines, is boring, scraping and grinding of organisms, a process termed \"bioerosion\".\n\nSediment is transported along the coast in the direction of the prevailing current (longshore drift). When the upcurrent amount of sediment is less than the amount being carried away, erosion occurs. When the upcurrent amount of sediment is greater, sand or gravel banks will tend to form as a result of deposition. These banks may slowly migrate along the coast in the direction of the longshore drift, alternately protecting and exposing parts of the coastline. Where there is a bend in the coastline, quite often a buildup of eroded material occurs forming a long narrow bank (a spit). Armoured beaches and submerged offshore sandbanks may also protect parts of a coastline from erosion. Over the years, as the shoals gradually shift, the erosion may be redirected to attack different parts of the shore.\n\nChemical erosion is the loss of matter in a landscape in the form of solutes. Chemical erosion is usually calculated from the solutes found in streams. Anders Rapp pioneered the study of chemical erosion in his work about Kärkevagge published in 1960.\n\nGlaciers erode predominantly by three different processes: abrasion/scouring, plucking, and ice thrusting. In an abrasion process, debris in the basal ice scrapes along the bed, polishing and gouging the underlying rocks, similar to sandpaper on wood. Scientists have shown that, in addition to the role of temperature played in valley-deepening, other glaciological processes, such as erosion also control cross-valley variations. In a homogeneous bedrock erosion pattern, curved channel cross-section beneath the ice is created. Though the glacier continues to incise vertically, the shape of the channel beneath the ice eventually remain constant, reaching a U-shaped parabolic steady-state shape as we now see in glaciated valleys. Scientists also provide a numerical estimate of the time required for the ultimate formation of a steady-shaped U-shaped valley—approximately 100,000 years. In a weak bedrock (containing material more erodible than the surrounding rocks) erosion pattern, on the contrary, the amount of over deepening is limited because ice velocities and erosion rates are reduced.\n\nGlaciers can also cause pieces of bedrock to crack off in the process of plucking. In ice thrusting, the glacier freezes to its bed, then as it surges forward, it moves large sheets of frozen sediment at the base along with the glacier. This method produced some of the many thousands of lake basins that dot the edge of the Canadian Shield. Differences in the height of mountain ranges are not only being the result tectonic forces, such as rock uplift, but also local climate variations. Scientists use global analysis of topography to show that glacial erosion controls the maximum height of mountains, as the relief between mountain peaks and the snow line are generally confined to altitudes less than 1500 m. The erosion caused by glaciers worldwide erodes mountains so effectively that the term \"glacial buzzsaw\" has become widely used, which describes the limiting effect of glaciers on the height of mountain ranges. As mountains grow higher, they generally allow for more glacial activity (especially in the accumulation zone above the glacial equilibrium line altitude), which causes increased rates of erosion of the mountain, decreasing mass faster than isostatic rebound can add to the mountain. This provides a good example of a negative feedback loop. Ongoing research is showing that while glaciers tend to decrease mountain size, in some areas, glaciers can actually reduce the rate of erosion, acting as a \"glacial armor\". Ice can not only erode mountains but also protect them from erosion. Depending on glacier regime, even steep alpine lands can be preserved through time with the help of ice. Scientists have proved this theory by sampling eight summits of northwestern Svalbard using Be10 and Al26, showing that northwestern Svalbard transformed from a glacier-erosion state under relatively mild glacial maxima temperature, to a glacier-armor state occupied by cold-based, protective ice during much colder glacial maxima temperatures as the Quaternary ice age progressed.\n\nThese processes, combined with erosion and transport by the water network beneath the glacier, leave behind glacial landforms such as moraines, drumlins, ground moraine (till), kames, kame deltas, moulins, and glacial erratics in their wake, typically at the terminus or during glacier retreat.\n\nThe best-developed glacial valley morphology appears to be restricted to landscapes with low rock uplift rates (less than or equal to 2 mm per year) and high relief, leading to long-turnover times. Where rock uplift rates exceed 2 mm per year, glacial valley morphology has generally been significantly modified in postglacial time. Interplay of glacial erosion and tectonic forcing governs the morphologic impact of glaciations on active orogens, by both influencing their height, and by altering the patterns of erosion during subsequent glacial periods via a link between rock uplift and valley cross-sectional shape.\n\nAt extremely high flows, kolks, or vortices are formed by large volumes of rapidly rushing water. Kolks cause extreme local erosion, plucking bedrock and creating pothole-type geographical features called Rock-cut basins. Examples can be seen in the flood regions result from glacial Lake Missoula, which created the channeled scablands in the Columbia Basin region of eastern Washington.\n\nWind erosion is a major geomorphological force, especially in arid and semi-arid regions. It is also a major source of land degradation, evaporation, desertification, harmful airborne dust, and crop damage—especially after being increased far above natural rates by human activities such as deforestation, urbanization, and agriculture.\n\nWind erosion is of two primary varieties: \"deflation\", where the wind picks up and carries away loose particles; and \"abrasion\", where surfaces are worn down as they are struck by airborne particles carried by wind. Deflation is divided into three categories: (1) \"surface creep\", where larger, heavier particles slide or roll along the ground; (2) \"saltation\", where particles are lifted a short height into the air, and bounce and saltate across the surface of the soil; and (3) \"suspension\", where very small and light particles are lifted into the air by the wind, and are often carried for long distances. Saltation is responsible for the majority (50-70%) of wind erosion, followed by suspension (30-40%), and then surface creep (5-25%).\n\nWind erosion is much more severe in arid areas and during times of drought. For example, in the Great Plains, it is estimated that soil loss due to wind erosion can be as much as 6100 times greater in drought years than in wet years.\n\n\"Mass movement\" is the downward and outward movement of rock and sediments on a sloped surface, mainly due to the force of gravity.\n\nMass movement is an important part of the erosional process and is often the first stage in the breakdown and transport of weathered materials in mountainous areas. It moves material from higher elevations to lower elevations where other eroding agents such as streams and glaciers can then pick up the material and move it to even lower elevations. Mass-movement processes are always occurring continuously on all slopes; some mass-movement processes act very slowly; others occur very suddenly, often with disastrous results. Any perceptible down-slope movement of rock or sediment is often referred to in general terms as a landslide. However, landslides can be classified in a much more detailed way that reflects the mechanisms responsible for the movement and the velocity at which the movement occurs. One of the visible topographical manifestations of a very slow form of such activity is a scree slope.\n\n\"Slumping\" happens on steep hillsides, occurring along distinct fracture zones, often within materials like clay that, once released, may move quite rapidly downhill. They will often show a spoon-shaped isostatic depression, in which the material has begun to slide downhill. In some cases, the slump is caused by water beneath the slope weakening it. In many cases it is simply the result of poor engineering along highways where it is a regular occurrence.\n\n\"Surface creep\" is the slow movement of soil and rock debris by gravity which is usually not perceptible except through extended observation. However, the term can also describe the rolling of dislodged soil particles in diameter by wind along the soil surface.\n\nThe amount and intensity of precipitation is the main climatic factor governing soil erosion by water. The relationship is particularly strong if heavy rainfall occurs at times when, or in locations where, the soil's surface is not well protected by vegetation. This might be during periods when agricultural activities leave the soil bare, or in semi-arid regions where vegetation is naturally sparse. Wind erosion requires strong winds, particularly during times of drought when vegetation is sparse and soil is dry (and so is more erodible). Other climatic factors such as average temperature and temperature range may also affect erosion, via their effects on vegetation and soil properties. In general, given similar vegetation and ecosystems, areas with more precipitation (especially high-intensity rainfall), more wind, or more storms are expected to have more erosion.\n\nIn some areas of the world (e.g. the mid-western USA), rainfall intensity is the primary determinant of erosivity (for a definition of \"erosivity\" check,) with higher intensity rainfall generally resulting in more soil erosion by water. The size and velocity of rain drops is also an important factor. Larger and higher-velocity rain drops have greater kinetic energy, and thus their impact will displace soil particles by larger distances than smaller, slower-moving rain drops.\n\nIn other regions of the world (e.g. western Europe), runoff and erosion result from relatively low intensities of stratiform rainfall falling onto the previously saturated soil. In such situations, rainfall amount rather than intensity is the main factor determining the severity of soil erosion by water.\n\nIn Taiwan, where typhoon frequency increased significantly in the 21st century, a strong link has been drawn between the increase in storm frequency with an increase in sediment load in rivers and reservoirs, highlighting the impacts climate change can have on erosion.\n\nVegetation acts as an interface between the atmosphere and the soil. It increases the permeability of the soil to rainwater, thus decreasing runoff. It shelters the soil from winds, which results in decreased wind erosion, as well as advantageous changes in microclimate. The roots of the plants bind the soil together, and interweave with other roots, forming a more solid mass that is less susceptible to both water and wind erosion. The removal of vegetation increases the rate of surface erosion.\n\nThe topography of the land determines the velocity at which surface runoff will flow, which in turn determines the erosivity of the runoff. Longer, steeper slopes (especially those without adequate vegetative cover) are more susceptible to very high rates of erosion during heavy rains than shorter, less steep slopes. Steeper terrain is also more prone to mudslides, landslides, and other forms of gravitational erosion processes.\n\nTectonic processes control rates and distributions of erosion at the Earth's surface. If the tectonic action causes part of the Earth's surface (e.g., a mountain range) to be raised or lowered relative to surrounding areas, this must necessarily change the gradient of the land surface. Because erosion rates are almost always sensitive to the local slope (see above), this will change the rates of erosion in the uplifted area. Active tectonics also brings fresh, unweathered rock towards the surface, where it is exposed to the action of erosion.\n\nHowever, erosion can also affect tectonic processes. The removal by erosion of large amounts of rock from a particular region, and its deposition elsewhere, can result in a lightening of the load on the lower crust and mantle. Because tectonic processes are driven by gradients in the stress field developed in the crust, this unloading can in turn cause tectonic or isostatic uplift in the region. In some cases, it has been hypothesised that these twin feedbacks can act to localize and enhance zones of very rapid exhumation of deep crustal rocks beneath places on the Earth's surface with extremely high erosion rates, for example, beneath the extremely steep terrain of Nanga Parbat in the western Himalayas. Such a place has been called a \"tectonic aneurysm\".\n\nHuman land development, in forms including agricultural and urban development, is considered a significant factor in erosion and sediment transport. In Taiwan, increases in sediment load in the northern, central, and southern regions of the island can be tracked with the timeline of development for each region throughout the 20th century.\n\nMountain ranges are known to take many millions of years to erode to the degree they effectively cease to exist. Scholars Pitman and Golovchenko estimate that it takes probably more than 450 million years to erode a mountain mass similar to the Himalaya into an almost-flat peneplain if there are no major sea-level changes. Erosion of mountains massifs can create a pattern of equally high summits called summit accordance. It has been argued that extension during post-orogenic collapse is a more effective mechanism of lowering the height of orogenic mountains than erosion.\n\nExamples of heavily eroded mountain ranges include the Timanides of Northern Russia. Erosion of this orogen has produced sediments that are now found in the East European Platform, including the Cambrian Sablya Formation near Lake Ladoga. Studies of these sediments indicate that it is likely that the erosion of the orogen began in the Cambrian and then intensified in the Ordovician.\n\nIf the rate of erosion is higher than the rate of soil formation the soils are being destroyed by erosion. Where soil is not destroyed by erosion, erosion can in some cases prevent the formation of soil features that form slowly. Inceptisols are common soils that form in areas of fast erosion.\n\nWhile erosion of soils is a natural process, human activities have increased by 10-40 times the rate at which erosion is occurring globally. Excessive (or accelerated) erosion causes both \"on-site\" and \"off-site\" problems. On-site impacts include decreases in agricultural productivity and (on natural landscapes) ecological collapse, both because of loss of the nutrient-rich upper soil layers. In some cases, the eventual end result is desertification. Off-site effects include sedimentation of waterways and eutrophication of water bodies, as well as sediment-related damage to roads and houses. Water and wind erosion are the two primary causes of land degradation; combined, they are responsible for about 84% of the global extent of degraded land, making excessive erosion one of the most significant environmental problems.\n\n\nBULLET::::- The Soil Erosion Site\nBULLET::::- International Erosion Control Association\nBULLET::::- Soil Erosion Data in the European Soil Portal\nBULLET::::- USDA National Soil Erosion Laboratory\nBULLET::::- The Soil and Water Conservation Society\n"}
{"id": "9697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9697", "title": "Euclidean space", "text": "Euclidean space\n\nEuclidean space is the fundamental space of classical geometry. Originally it was the three-dimensional space of Euclidean geometry, but in modern mathematics there are Euclidean spaces of any nonnegative integer dimension, including the three-dimensional space and the \"Euclidean plane\" (dimension two). It was introduced by the Ancient Greek mathematician Euclid of Alexandria, and the qualifier \"Euclidean\" is used to distinguish it from other spaces that were later discovered in physics and modern mathematics. \n\nAncient Greek geometers introduced Euclidean space for modeling the physical universe. Their great innovation was to \"prove\" all properties of the space as theorems by starting from a few fundamental properties, called \"postulates\", which either were considered as evident (for example, there is exactly one straight line passing through two points), or seemed impossible to prove (parallel postulate).\n\nAfter the introduction at the end of 19th century of non-Euclidean geometries, the old postulates were re-formalized to define Euclidean spaces through axiomatic theory. Another definition of Euclidean spaces by mean of vector spaces and linear algebra has been shown to be equivalent to the axiomatic definition. It is this definition that is more commonly used in modern mathematics, and detailed in this article.\n\nIn all definitions, Euclidean spaces consist of points, which are defined only by the properties that they must have for forming a Euclidean space.\n\nThere is essentially only one Euclidean space of each dimension; that is, all Euclidean spaces of a given dimension are isomorphic. Therefore, in many cases, it is possible to work with a specific Euclidean space, which is generally the real -space formula_1 equipped with the dot product. An isomorphism from a Euclidean space to formula_2 associates with each point an -tuple of real numbers, which locate them in the Euclidean space and are called \"Cartesian coordinates\".\n\nEuclidean space was introduced by ancient Greeks as an abstraction of our physical space. Their great innovation, appearing in Euclid's \"Elements\" was to build and \"prove\" all geometry by starting from a few very basic properties, which are abstracted from the physical world, and cannot be mathematically proved because of the lack of more basic tools. These properties are called postulates, or axioms in modern language. This way of defining Euclidean space is still in use under the name of synthetic geometry.\n\nIn 1637, René Descartes introduced Cartesian coordinates and showed that this allows reducing geometric problems to algebraic computations with numbers. This reduction of geometry to algebra was a major change of point of view, as, until then, the real numbers—that is, rational numbers and non-rational numbers together–were defined in terms of geometry, as lengths and distance. \n\nEuclidean geometry was not applied in spaces of more than three dimensions until the 19th century. Ludwig Schläfli generalized Euclidean geometry to spaces of \"n\" dimensions using both synthetic and algebraic methods, and discovered all of the regular polytopes (higher-dimensional analogues of the Platonic solids) that exist in Euclidean spaces of any number of dimensions.\n\nDespite the wide use of Descartes' approach, which was called analytic geometry, the definition of Euclidean space remained unchanged until the end of 19th century. The introduction of abstract vector spaces allowed their use in defining Euclidean spaces with a purely algebraic definition. This new definition has been shown to be equivalent to the classical definition in terms of geometric axioms. It is this algebraic definition that is now most often used for introducing Euclidean spaces.\n\nOne way to think of the Euclidean plane is as a set of points satisfying certain relationships, expressible in terms of distance and angles. For example, there are two fundamental operations (referred to as motions) on the plane. One is translation, which means a shifting of the plane so that every point is shifted in the same direction and by the same distance. The other is rotation around a fixed point in the plane, in which all points in the plane turn around that fixed point through the same angle. One of the basic tenets of Euclidean geometry is that two figures (usually considered as subsets) of the plane should be considered equivalent (congruent) if one can be transformed into the other by some sequence of translations, rotations and reflections (see below).\n\nIn order to make all of this mathematically precise, the theory must clearly define what is a Euclidean space, and the related notions of distance, angle, translation, and rotation. Even when used in physical theories, Euclidean space is an abstraction detached from actual physical locations, specific reference frames, measurement instruments, and so on. A purely mathematical definition of Euclidean space also ignores questions of units of length and other physical dimensions: the distance in a \"mathematical\" space is a number, not something expressed in inches or metres. \n\nThe standard way to mathematically define a Euclidean space, as carried out in the remainder of this article, is to define a Euclidean space as a set of points on which acts a real vector space, the \"space of translations\" which is equipped with an inner product. The action of translations makes the space an affine space, and this allows defining lines, planes, subspaces, dimension, and parallelism. The inner product allows defining distance and angles.\n\nThe set formula_2 of -tuples of real numbers equipped with the dot product is a Euclidean space of dimension . Conversely, the choice of a point called the \"origin\" and an orthonormal basis of the space of translations is equivalent with defining an isomorphism between a Euclidean space of dimension and formula_2 viewed as a Euclidean space.\n\nIt follows that everything that can be said about a Euclidean space can also be said about formula_5 Therefore, many authors, specially at elementary level, call formula_2 the \"standard Euclidean space\" of dimension , or simply \"the\" Euclidean space of dimension . \n\nA reason for introducing such an abstract definition of Euclidean spaces, and for working with it instead of formula_2 is that it is often preferable to work in a \"coordinate-free\" and \"origin-free\" manner (that is, without choosing a preferred basis and a preferred origin). Another reason is that there is no origin nor any basis in the physical world.\n\nA Euclidean vector space is a finite-dimensional inner product space over the real numbers.\n\nA Euclidean space is an affine space over the reals such that the associated vector space is a Euclidean vector space. Euclidean spaces are sometimes called \"Euclidean spaces\" for distinguishing them from Euclidean vector spaces.\n\nThe \"dimension\" of a Euclidean space is the dimension of its associated vector space.\n\nIf is a Euclidean space, its associated vector space is also called its space of translations, and often denoted formula_8 \n\nThe elements of are called \"points\" and are commonly denoted by capital letters. The elements of formula_9 are called \"translations\", \"Euclidean vectors\" or \"free vectors\". \n\nThe action of a translation on a point provides a point that is denoted . This action satisfies \n\nThe fact that the action is free and transitive means that for every pair of points there is exactly one vector such that . This vector is denoted or formula_11\n\nAs previously explained, some of the basic properties of Euclidean spaces result of the structure of affine space. They are described in and its subsections. The properties resulting from the inner product are explained in and its subsections.\n\nFor any vector space, the addition acts freely and transitively on the vector space itself. Thus a Euclidean vector space can be viewed as a Euclidean space that has itself as associated vector space.\n\nA typical case of Euclidean vector space is formula_2 viewed as a vector space equipped with the dot product as an inner product. The importance of this particular example of Euclidean space lies is the fact that every Euclidean space is isomorphic to it. More precisely, given a Euclidean space of dimension , the choice of a point, called a \"origin\" and an orthonormal basis of formula_9 defines an isomorphism of Euclidean spaces from to formula_5\n\nAs every Euclidean space of dimension is isomorphic to it, the Euclidean space formula_2 is sometimes called the \"standard Euclidean space\" of dimension . \n\nSome basic properties of Euclidean spaces depend only of the fact that a Euclidean space is an affine space. they are called affine properties and include the concepts of lines, subspaces, and parallelism. which are detailed in next subsections.\n\nLet a Euclidean space, and formula_9 its associated vector space. \n\nA \"flat\", \"Euclidean subspace\" or \"affine subspace\" of is a subset of such that \nis a linear subspace of formula_8 A Euclidean subspace is a Euclidean space, with formula_19 as associated vector space. This linear subspace formula_19 is called the \"direction\" of .\n\nIf is a point of then \nConversely, if is a point of , and is a linear subspace of formula_22 then \nis a Euclidean subspace of direction .\n\nA Euclidean vector space (that is a Euclidean space such that formula_24) has two sorts of subspaces, its Euclidean subspaces and its linear subspaces. Linear subspaces are Euclidean subspaces, and a Euclidean subspace is a linear subspace if and only if it contains the zero vector.\n\nIn a Euclidean space, a \"line\" is a Euclidean subspace of dimension one. Since a vector space of dimension one is spanned by any nonzero vector a line is a set of the form\nwhere and are two distinct points.\n\nIt follows that \"there is exactly one line that passes through (contains) two distinct points.\" This implies that two distinct lines intersect in at most one point.\n\nA more symmetric representation of the line passing through and is \nwhere is an arbitrary point (not necessary on the line).\n\nIn a Euclidean vector space, the zero vector is usually chosen for ; this allows simplifying the preceding formula into\nA standard convention allows using this formula in every Euclidean space, see .\n\nThe \"line segment\", or simply \"segment\", joining the points and is the subset of the points such that in the preceding formulas. It is denoted or ; that is\n\nTwo subspaces and of the same dimension in a Euclidean space are \"parallel\" if they have the same direction. Equivalently, they are parallel, if there is a translation vector that maps one to the other:\n\nGiven a point and a subspace , there exists exactly one subspace that contains and is parallel to , which is formula_30 In the case where is a line (subspace of dimension one), this property is Playfair's axiom.\n\nIt follows that in a Euclidean plane, two lines either meet in one point or are parallel.\n\nThe concept of parallel subspaces has been extended to subspaces of different dimensions: two subspaces are parallel if the direction of one of them is contained in the direction to the other.\n\nThe vector space formula_9 associated to a Euclidean space is an inner product space. This implies a symmetric bilinear form \nthat is positive definite (that is formula_33 is always positive for ). \n\nThe inner product of a Euclidean space is often called \"dot product\" and denoted . This is specially the case when a Cartesian coordinate system has been chosen, as, in this case, the inner product of two vectors is the dot product of their coordinate vectors. For this reason, and for historical reasons, the dot notation is more commonly used than the bracket notation for the inner product of Euclidean spaces. This article will follow this usage; that is formula_34 will be denoted in the remainder of this article.\n\nThe Euclidean norm of a vector is \n\nThe inner product and the norm allows expressing and proving all metric and topological properties of Euclidean geometry. The next subsection describe the most fundamental ones. \"In these subsections,\" \"denotes an arbitrary Euclidean space, and formula_9 denotes its vector space of translations.\"\n\nThe \"distance\" (more precisely the \"Euclidean distance\") between two points of a Euclidean space is the norm of the translation vector that maps one point to the other; that is\nThe \"length\" of a segment is the distance between its endpoints. It is often denoted .\n\nThe distance is a metric, as it satisfies the triangular inequality\nMoreover, the equality is true if and only if belongs to the segment . \nThis inequality means that the length of any edge of a triangle is smaller than the sum of the lengths of the other edges. This is the origin of the term \"triangular inequality\".\n\nWith the Euclidean distance, every Euclidean space is a complete metric space.\n\nTwo nonzero vectors and of formula_9 are \"perpendicular\" or \"orthogonal\" if their inner product is zero:\n\nTwo linear subspaces of formula_9 are orthogonal if every nonzero vector of the first one is perpendicular to every nonzero vector of the second one. This implies that the intersection of the linear subspace is reduced to the zero vector.\n\nTwo lines, and more generally two Euclidean subspaces are orthogonal if their direction are orthogonal. Two orthogonal lines that intersect are said \"perpendicular\".\n\nTwo segments and that share a common endpoint are \"perpendicular\" or \"form a right angle\" if the vectors formula_42 and formula_43 are orthogonal.\n\nIf and form a right angle, one has\nThis is the Pythagorean theorem. Its proof is easy in this context, as, expressing this in terms of the inner product, one has, using bilinearity and symmetry of the inner product:\n\nThe (non-oriented) \"angle\" between two nonzero vectors and in formula_9 is \nwhere is the principal value of the arccosine function. By Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, the argument of the arcsine is in the interval . Therefore is real, and (or } if angles are measured in degrees).\n\nAngles are not useful in a Euclidean line, as they can be only 0 or \"\". \n\nIn an oriented Euclidean plane, one can define the \"oriented angle\" of two vectors. The oriented angle of two vectors and is then the opposite of the oriented angle of and . In this case, the angle of two vectors can have any value modulo an integer multiple of . In particular, a reflex angle equals the negative angle .\n\nThe angle of two vectors does not change if they are multiplied by positive numbers. More precisely, if and are two vectors, and and are real numbers, then\n\nIf and are three points in a Euclidean space, the angle of the segments and is the angle of the vectors formula_42 and formula_50 As the multiplication of vectors by positive numbers do not change the angle, the angle of two half-lines with initial point can be defined: it is the angle of the segments and , where and are arbitrary points, one on each half-line. Although this is less used, one can define similarly the angle of segments or half-lines that do not share an initial points.\n\nThe angle of two lines is defined as follows. If is the angle of two segments, one on each line, the angle of any two other segments, one on each line, is either or . One of these angles is in the interval , and the other being in . The \"non-oriented angle\" of the two lines is the one in the interval . In an oriented Euclidean plane, the \"oriented angle\" of two lines belongs to the interval .\n\nEvery Euclidean vector space has an orthonormal basis (in fact, infinitely many in dimension higher than one, and two in dimension one), that is a basis formula_51 of unit vectors (formula_52) that are pairwise orthogonal (formula_53 for ). More precisely, given any basis formula_54 the Gram–Schmidt process computes an orthonormal basis such that, for every , the linear spans of formula_55 and formula_56 are equal.\n\nGiven a Euclidean space , a \"Cartesian frame\" is a set of data consisting of an orthonormal basis of formula_22 and a point of , called the \"origin\" and often denoted . A Cartesian frame formula_58 allows defining Cartesian coordinates for both and formula_9 in the following way.\n\nThe Cartesian coordinates of a vector are the coefficients of on the basis formula_60 As the basis is orthonormal, the th coefficient is the dot product formula_61\n\nThe Cartesian coordinates of a point of are the Cartesian coordinates of the vector formula_62\n\nAs a Euclidean space is an affine space, one can consider an affine frame on it, which is the same as a Euclidean frame, except that the basis is not required to be orthonormal. This define affine coordinates, sometimes called \"skew coordinates\" for emphasizing that the basis vectors are not pairwise orthogonal.\n\nAn affine basis of a Euclidean space of dimension is a set of points that are not contained in a hyperplan. An affine basis define barycentric coordinates for every point. \n\nMany other coordinates systems can be defined on a Euclidean space of dimension , in the following way. Let be a homeomorphism (or, more often, a diffeomorphism) from a dense open subset of to an open subset of formula_5 The \"coordinates\" of a point of are the components of . The polar coordinate system (dimension 2) and the spherical and cylindrical coordinate systems (dimension 3) are defined this way.\n\nFor points that are outside the domain of , coordinates may sometimes be defined as the limit of coordinates of neighbour points, but these coordinates may be not uniquely defined, and may be not continuous in the neighborhood of the point. For example, for the spherical coordinate system, the longitude is not defined at the pole, and on the antimeridian, the longitude passes discontinuousely from –180° to +180°.\n\nThis way of defining coordinates extends easily to other mathematical structures, and in particular to manifolds.\n\nAn isometry between two metric spaces is a bijection preserving the distance, that is \n\nIn the case of a Euclidean vector space, an isometry preserves the norm\nsince the norm of a vector is its distance from the zero vector. It preserves also the inner product\nsince \n\nAn isometry Euclidean vector spaces is a linear isomorphism.\n\nAn isometry formula_68 of Euclidean spaces defines an isometry \nformula_69 of the associated Euclidean vector spaces. This implies that two isometric Euclidean spaces have the same dimension. Conversely, if and are Euclidean spaces, , , and formula_69 is an isometry, then the map formula_68 defined by \nis an isometry of Euclidean spaces.\n\nIt follows from the preceding results that an isometry of Euclidean spaces maps lines to lines, and, more generally Euclidean subspaces to Euclidean subspaces of the same dimension, and that the restriction of the isometry on these subspaces are isometries of these subspaces.\n\nIf is a Euclidean space, it associated vector space formula_9 can be considered as a Euclidean space. Every point defines an isometry of Euclidean spaces\nwhich maps to the zero vector and has the identity as associated linear map. The inverse isometry is the map \n\nA Euclidean frame allows defining the map\nwhich is an isometry of Euclidean spaces. The inverse isometry is \n\n\"This means that, up to an isomorphism, there is exactly one Euclidean space of a given dimension.\" \n\nThis justifies that many authors talk of formula_2 as \"the\" Euclidean space of dimension .\n\nAn isometry from a Euclidean space onto itself is called \"Euclidean isometry\", \"Euclidean transformation\" or \"rigid transformation\". The rigid transformations of a Euclidean space form a group (under composition), called the \"Euclidean group\" and often denoted of .\n\nThe simplest Euclidean transformations are translations \nThey are in bijective correspondence with vectors. This is a reason for calling \"space of translations\" the vector space associated to a Euclidean space. The translations form a normal subgroup of the Euclidean group.\n\nA Euclidean isometry of a Euclidean space defines a linear isometry formula_80 of the associated vector space (by \"linear isometry\", it is meant an isometry that is also a linear map) in the following way: denoting by the vector formula_81, if is an arbitrary point of , one has \nIt is straightforward to prove that this is a linear map that does not depend from the choice of \n\nThe map formula_83 is a group homomorphism from the Euclidean group onto the group of linear isometries, called the orthogonal group. The kernel of this homomorphism is the translation group, showing that it is a normal subgroup of the Euclidean group.\n\nThe isometries that fix a given point form the stabilizer subgroup of the Euclidean group with respect to . The restriction to this stabilizer of above group homomorphism is an isomorphism. So the isometries that fix a given point form a group isomorphic to the orthogonal group.\n\nLet be a point, an isometry, and the translation that maps to . The isometry formula_84 fixes . So formula_85 and \"the Euclidean group is the semidirect product of the translation group and the orthogonal group.\"\n\nThe special orthogonal group is the normal subgroup of the orthogonal group that preserves handeness. It is a subgroup of index two ion the orthogonal group. Its inverse image by the group homomorphism formula_83 is a normal subgroup of index two of the Euclidean group, which is called the \"special Euclidean group\" or the \"displacement group\". Its elements are called \"rigid motions\" or \"displacements\".\n\nRigid motions include the identity, translations, rotations (the rigid motions that fix at least a point), and also screw motions.\n\nTypical examples of rigid transformations that are not rigid motions are reflections, which are rigid transformations that fix a hyperplane and are not the identity. They are also the transformations consisting in changing the sign of one coordinate over some Euclidean frame.\n\nAs the special Euclidean group is a subgroup of index two of the Euclidean group, given a reflection , every rigid transformation that is not a rigid motion is the product of and a rigid motion. A glide reflection is an example of a rigid transformation that is not a rigid motion not a reflection.\n\nAll groups that have been considered in this section are Lie groups and algebraic groups.\n\nThe Euclidean distance makes a Euclidean space a metric space, and thus a topological space. This topology is called the Euclidean topology. In the case of formula_1 this topology is also the product topology. \n\nThe open sets are the subsets that contains an open ball around each of their points. In other words, open balls form a base of the topology.\n\nThe topological dimension of a Euclidean space equals its dimension. This implies that Euclidean spaces of different dimensions are not homeomorphic. Moreover, the theorem of invariance of domain asserts that a subset of a Euclidean space is open (for the subspace topology) if and only if it is homeomorphic to an open subset of a Euclidean space of the same dimension.\n\nEuclidean spaces are complete and locally compact. That is, a closed subset of a Euclidean space is compact if it is bounded (that is, contained in a ball). In particular, closed balls are compact.\n\nThe definition of Euclidean spaces that has been described in this article differs fundamentally of Euclid's one. In reality, Euclid did not define formally the space, because it was thought as a description of the physical world that exists independently of human mind. The need of a formal definition appeared only at the end of 19th century, with the introduction of non-Euclidean geometries. \n\nTwo different approaches have been used. Felix Klein suggested to define geometries through their symmetries. The presentation of Euclidean spaces given in this article, is essentially issued from his Erlangen program, with the emphasis given on the groups of translations and isometries.\n\nOn the other hand, David Hilbert proposed a set of axioms, inspired by Euclid's postulates. They belong to synthetic geometry, as they do not involve any definition of real numbers. Later G. D. Birkhoff and Alfred Tarski proposed simpler sets of axioms, which use real numbers (see Birkhoff's axioms and Tarski's axioms).\n\nIn \"Geometric Algebra\", Emil Artin has proved that all these definitions of a Euclidean space are equivalent. It is rather easy to prove that all definitions of Euclidean spaces satisfy Hilbert's axioms, and that those involving real numbers (including the above given definition) are equivalent. The difficult part of Artin's proof is the following. In Hilbert's axioms, congruence is an equivalence relation on segments. One can thus define the \"length\" of a segment as its equivalence class. One must thus prove that this length satisfies properties that characterize nonnegative real numbers. It is what did Artin, with axioms that are not Hilbert's ones, but are equivalent.\n\nSince ancient Greeks, Euclidean space is used for modeling shapes in the physical world. It is thus used in many sciences such as physics, mechanics, astronomy, ... It is also widely used in all technical areas that are concerned with shapes, figure, location and position, such as architecture, geodesy, topography, navigation, industrial design, technical drawing, robotics...\n\nSpace-time of general relativity is not a Euclidean space, but it is a manifold, and, as such, is locally approximated by Euclidean spaces.\n\nSpace of dimensions higher than three occurs in several modern theories of physics; see Higher dimension. They occur also in configuration spaces of physical systems.\n\nBeside Euclidean geometry, Euclidean spaces are also widely used in mathematics. Tangent spaces of differentiable manifolds are Euclidean vector spaces. More generally, a manifold is a space that is locally an approximated by Euclidean spaces. Most non-Euclidean geometries can be modeled by a manifold, and embedded in a Euclidean space of higher dimension. For example, an elliptic space can be modeled by an ellipsoid. It is common to represent in a Euclidean space mathematics objects that are \"a priori\" not of a geometrical nature. An example among many is the usual representation of graphs.\n\nSince the introduction, at the end of 19th century, of Non-Euclidean geometries, many sorts of spaces have been considered, about which one can do geometric reasoning in the same way as with Euclidean spaces. In general, they share some properties with Euclidean spaces, but may also have properties that could appear as rather strange. Some of these spaces use Euclidean geometry for their definition, or can be modeled as subspaces of a Euclidean space of higher dimension. When such a space is defined by geometrical axioms, embedding the space in a Euclidean space is a standard way for proving consistency of its definition, or, more precisely for proving that its theory is consistent, if Euclidean geometry is consistent (which cannot be proved).\n\nA Euclidean space is an affine space equipped with a metric. Affine spaces have many other uses in mathematics. In particular, as they are defined over any field, they allow doing geometry in other contexts.\n\nAs soon as non-linear questions are considered, it is generally useful to consider affine spaces over the complex numbers as an extension of Euclidean spaces. For example, a circle and a line have always two intersection points (possibly not distinct) in the complex affine space. Therefore, most of algebraic geometry is built in complex affine spaces and affine spaces over algebraically closed fields. The shapes that are studied in algebraic geometry in these affine spaces are therefore called affine algebraic varieties.\n\nAffine spaces over the rational numbers and more generally over algebraic number fields provide a link between (algebraic) geometry and number theory. For example, the Fermat's Last Theorem can be stated \"a Fermat curve of degree higher than two has no point in the affine plane over the rationals.\"\n\nGeometry in affine spaces over a finite fields has also been widely studied. For example, elliptic curves over finite fields are widely used in cryptography.\n\nOriginally, projective spaces have been introduced by adding \"points at infinity\" to Euclidean spaces, and, more generally to affine spaces, in order to make true the assertion \"two coplanar lines meet in exactly in one point\". Projective space share with Euclidean and affine spaces the property of being isotropic, that is, there is no property of the space that allows distinguishing between two points or two lines. Therefore, a more isotropic definition is commonly used, which consists as defining a projective space as the set of the vector lines in a vector space of dimension one more.\n\nAs for affine spaces, projective spaces are defined over any field, and are fundamental spaces of algebraic geometry.\n\n\"Non-Euclidean geometry\" refers usually to geometrical spaces where the parallel postulate is false. They include elliptic geometry, where the sum of the angles of a triangle is less than 180°, and hyperbolic geometry, where this sum is more than 180°. Their introduction in the second half of 19th century, and the proof that their theory is consistent (if Euclidean geometry is not contradictory) is one of the paradoxes that are at the origin of the foundational crisis in mathematics of the beginning of 20th century, and motivated the systematization of axiomatic theories in mathematics.\n\nA manifold is a space that in the neighborhood of each point resembles a Euclidean space. In technical terms, a manifold is a topological space, such that each point has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to an open subset of a Euclidean space. Manifold can be classified by increasing degree of this \"resemblance\" into topological manifolds, differentiable manifolds, smooth manifolds, and analytic manifolds. However, none of these types of \"resemblance\" respect distances and angles, even approximately. \n\nDistances and angles can be defined on a smooth manifold by providing a smoothly varying Euclidean metric on the tangent spaces at the points of the manifold (these tangent are thus Euclidean vector spaces). This results in a Riemannian manifold. Generally, straight lines do not exist in a Riemannian manifold, but their role is played by geodesics, which are the \"shortest paths\" between two points. This allows defining distances, which are measured along geodesics, and angles between geodesics, which are the angle of their tangents in the tangent space at their intersection. So, Riemannian manifolds behave locally like a Euclidean that has been bended.\n\nEuclidean spaces are trivially Riemannian manifolds. An example illustrating this well is the surface of a sphere. In this case, geodesics are arcs of great circle, which are called orthodromes in the context of navigation. More generally, the spaces of non-Euclidean geometries can be realized as Riemannian manifolds.\n\nThe inner product that is defined to define Euclidean spaces is a positive definite bilinear form. If it is replaced by an indefinite quadratic form which is non-degenerate, one gets a pseudo-Euclidean space. \n\nA fundamental example of such a space is the Minkowski space, which is the space-time of Einstein's special relativity. It is a four-dimensional space, where the metric is defined by the quadratic form\n\nwhere the last coordinate (\"t\") is temporal, and the other three (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") are spacial.\n\nTo take the gravity into account, general relativity uses a pseudo-Riemannian manifold that has Minkowski spaces as tangent spaces. The curvature of this manifold at a point is a function of the value of the gravitational field at this point.\n\nBULLET::::- Hilbert space, a generalization to infinite dimension, used in functional analysis\n\n"}
{"id": "9700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9700", "title": "Edwin Austin Abbey", "text": "Edwin Austin Abbey\n\nEdwin Austin Abbey (April 1, 1852August 1, 1911) was an American muralist, illustrator, and painter. He flourished at the beginning of what is now referred to as the \"golden age\" of illustration, and is best known for his drawings and paintings of Shakespearean and Victorian subjects, as well as for his painting of Edward VII's coronation. His most famous set of murals, \"The Quest and Achievement of the Holy Grail\", adorns the Boston Public Library.\n\nAbbey was born in Philadelphia in 1852. He studied art at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts under Christian Schuessele. Abbey began as an illustrator, producing numerous illustrations and sketches for such magazines as Harper's Weekly (1871–1874) and Scribner's Magazine. His illustrations began appearing in Harper's Weekly at an early age: before Abbey was twenty years old. He moved to New York City in 1871. His illustrations were strongly influenced by French and German black and white art. He also illustrated several best-selling books, including \"Christmas Stories\" by Charles Dickens (1875), \"Selections from the Poetry of Robert Herrick\" (1882), and \"She Stoops to Conquer\" by Oliver Goldsmith (1887). Abbey also illustrated a four-volume set of \"The Comedies of Shakespeare\" for Harper & Brothers in 1896.\n\nHe moved to England in 1878, at the request of his employers, to gather material for illustrations of the poems of Robert Herrick, published in 1882, and he settled permanently there in 1883. In 1883, he was elected to the Royal Institute of Painters in Water-Colours. About this time, he was appraised critically by the American writer, S.G.W. Benjamin:\nHe also created illustrations for Goldsmith's \"She Stoops to Conquer\" (1887), for a volume of \"Old Songs\" (1889), and for the comedies (and a few of the tragedies) of Shakespeare. Among his water-colours are \"The Evil Eye\" (1877), \"The Rose in October\" (1879), \"An Old Song\" (1886), \"The Visitors\" (1890), and \"The Jongleur\" (1892). Possibly his best known pastels are \"Beatrice,\" \"Phyllis,\" and \"Two Noble Kinsmen.\"\nIn 1890 he made his first appearance with an oil painting, \"A May Day Morn,\" at the Royal Academy in London. He exhibited \"Richard duke of Gloucester and the Lady Anne\" there in 1896, and in that year was elected A.R.A., becoming a full member in 1898. In 1902 he was chosen to paint the coronation of King Edward VII. It was the official painting of the occasion and, hence, resides at Buckingham Palace. He did receive a knighthood, although some say he refused it in 1907. Friendly with other expatriate American artists, he summered at Broadway, Worcestershire, England, where he painted and vacationed alongside John Singer Sargent at the home of Francis Davis Millet.\n\nHe completed murals for the Boston Public Library in the 1890s. The frieze for the Library was titled \"The Quest and Achievement of the Holy Grail\". It took Abbey eleven years to complete this series of murals in his England studio.\n\nIn 1904 he painted a mural for the Royal Exchange, London \"Reconciliation of the Skinners & Merchant Taylors' Companies by Lord Mayor Billesden, 1484\".\n\nIn 1908–09, Abbey began an ambitious program of murals and other artworks for the newly completed Pennsylvania State Capitol in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. These included allegorical medallion murals representing \"Science\", \"Art\", \"Justice\", and \"Religion\" for the dome of the Rotunda, four large lunette murals beneath the dome, and multiple works for the House and Senate Chambers. For the Senate chamber he finished only one painting, \"Von Steuben Training the American Soldiers at Valley Forge\", and he was working on the \"Reading of the Declaration of Independence\" mural in early 1911, when his health began to fail. He was diagnosed with cancer. Studio assistant William Simmonds continued work on the mural with little supervision from Abbey, and with small contributions by John Singer Sergeant.\n\nAbbey died in August 1911. William Simmonds travelled from England to install the completed murals with Abbey's widow Gertrude. The remaining two rooms, which Abbey had been unable to finish, were given to Violet Oakley, who completed the commission using her own designs.\nAbbey was elected to the National Academy of Design, in 1902, and The American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was honorary member of the Royal Bavarian Society and the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts, and was made a chevalier of the French Legion of Honour. He was a prolific illustrator, and attention to detail, including historical accuracy, influenced successive generations of illustrators.\n\nIn 1890, Edwin married Gertrude Mead, the daughter of a wealthy New York merchant. Mrs Abbey encouraged her husband to secure more ambitious commissions, although with their marriage commencing when both were in their forties, the couple remained childless. After her husband's death, Gertrude was active in preserving her husband's legacy, writing about his work and giving her substantial collection and archive to Yale. Edwin had been a keen supporter of the newly founded British School at Rome (BSR), so, in his memory, she donated £6000 to assist in building the artists' studio block and, in 1926, founded the Incorporated Edwin Austin Abbey Memorial Scholarships. The scholarships were established to enable British and American painters to pursue their practice. Recipients of Abbey funding – Scholars and, more recently, Fellows – devote their scholarship to working in the studios at the BSR, where there has, ever since, been at least one Abbey-funded artist in residence. Previous award holders include Stephen Farthing, Chantal Joffe and Spartacus Chetwynd. The Abbey Fellowships (formerly 'Awards') were established in their present form in 1990, and the Abbey studios also host the BSR's other fine art residencies, such as the Derek Hill Foundation Scholarship and the Sainsbury Scholarship in Painting and Drawing. A bust of Edwin Abbey, by Sir Thomas Brock, stands in the courtyard of the BSR. Edwin also left bequests of his works to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston and to the National Gallery in London.\n\nAbbey is buried in the churchyard of Old St Andrew's Church in Kingsbury, London. His grave is Grade II listed.\n\nBULLET::::- http://www.columbia.edu/cu/record/archives/vol19/vol19_iss24/record1924.33\nBULLET::::- Nancy Mendes. \"Edwin Austin Abbey: A Capital Artist.\" \"Pennsylvania Heritage\" magazine 32, no. 3 (Summer 2006): 6–15.\nBULLET::::- Elisa Tamarkin. \"The Chestnuts of Edwin Austin Abbey: History Painting and the Transference of Culture in Turn-of-the-Century America.\" \"Prospects\" 24 (1999): 417-448.\nBULLET::::- Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.\n\nBULLET::::- Edwin Austin Abbey at American Art Gallery\nBULLET::::- Jim Vadeboncoeur's biography of Edwin Austin Abbey\nBULLET::::- Pennsylvania Capitol Preservation Committee's E.A. Abbey Bio\nBULLET::::- \"Drawings by Edwin A. Abbey: illustrating the comedies of Shakespeare\"\nBULLET::::- \"Who Is Sylvia? What Is She, That All the Swains Commend Her?\" (1896–99; reworked 1900), Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.\nBULLET::::- Edwin Austin Abbey letters, 1874–(ca. 1887) from the Archives of American Art\nBULLET::::- Edwin Austin Abbey paintings\n"}
{"id": "9703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9703", "title": "Evolutionary psychology", "text": "Evolutionary psychology\n\nEvolutionary psychology is a theoretical approach in the social and natural sciences that examines psychological structure from a modern evolutionary perspective. It seeks to identify which human psychological traits are evolved adaptations – that is, the functional products of natural selection or sexual selection in human evolution. Adaptationist thinking about physiological mechanisms, such as the heart, lungs, and immune system, is common in evolutionary biology. Some evolutionary psychologists apply the same thinking to psychology, arguing that the modularity of mind is similar to that of the body and with different modular adaptations serving different functions. Evolutionary psychologists argue that much of human behavior is the output of psychological adaptations that evolved to solve recurrent problems in human ancestral environments.\n\nEvolutionary psychology is not simply a subdiscipline of psychology but its evolutionary theory can provide a foundational, metatheoretical framework that integrates the entire field of psychology in the same way evolutionary biology has for biology.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists hold that behaviors or traits that occur universally in all cultures are good candidates for evolutionary adaptations including the abilities to infer others' emotions, discern kin from non-kin, identify and prefer healthier mates, and cooperate with others. There have been studies of human social behaviour related to infanticide, intelligence, marriage patterns, promiscuity, perception of beauty, bride price, and parental investment, with impressive findings. The theories and findings of evolutionary psychology have applications in many fields, including economics, environment, health, law, management, psychiatry, politics, and literature.\n\nCriticism of evolutionary psychology involves questions of testability, cognitive and evolutionary assumptions (such as modular functioning of the brain, and large uncertainty about the ancestral environment), importance of non-genetic and non-adaptive explanations, as well as political and ethical issues due to interpretations of research results.\n\nEvolutionary psychology is an approach that views human nature as the product of a universal set of evolved psychological adaptations to recurring problems in the ancestral environment. Proponents suggest that it seeks to integrate psychology into the other natural sciences, rooting it in the organizing theory of biology (evolutionary theory), and thus understanding psychology as a branch of biology. Anthropologist John Tooby and psychologist Leda Cosmides note:\n\nEvolutionary psychology is the long-forestalled scientific attempt to assemble out of the disjointed, fragmentary, and mutually contradictory human disciplines a single, logically integrated research framework for the psychological, social, and behavioral sciences – a framework\nthat not only incorporates the evolutionary sciences on a full and equal basis, but that systematically works out all of the revisions in existing belief and research practice that such a synthesis requires.\n\nJust as human physiology and evolutionary physiology have worked to identify physical adaptations of the body that represent \"human physiological nature,\" the purpose of evolutionary psychology is to identify evolved emotional and cognitive adaptations that represent \"human psychological nature.\" According to Steven Pinker, it is \"not a single theory but a large set of hypotheses\" and a term that \"has also come to refer to a particular way of applying evolutionary theory to the mind, with an emphasis on adaptation, gene-level selection, and modularity.\" Evolutionary psychology adopts an understanding of the mind that is based on the computational theory of mind. It describes mental processes as computational operations, so that, for example, a fear response is described as arising from a neurological computation that inputs the perceptional data, e.g. a visual image of a spider, and outputs the appropriate reaction, e.g. fear of possibly dangerous animals. Under this view, any Domain-general learning is impossible because of the Combinatorial explosion. This implies Domain-specific learning. Evolutionary Psychology specifies the domain as the problems of survival and reproduction.\n\nWhile philosophers have generally considered the human mind to include broad faculties, such as reason and lust, evolutionary psychologists describe evolved psychological mechanisms as narrowly focused to deal with specific issues, such as catching cheaters or choosing mates. The discipline views the human brain as comprising many functional mechanisms, called \"psychological adaptations\" or evolved cognitive mechanisms or \"cognitive modules\", designed by the process of natural selection. Examples include language-acquisition modules, incest-avoidance mechanisms, cheater-detection mechanisms, intelligence and sex-specific mating preferences, foraging mechanisms, alliance-tracking mechanisms, agent-detection mechanisms, and others. Some mechanisms, termed \"domain-specific\", deal with recurrent adaptive problems over the course of human evolutionary history. \"Domain-general\" mechanisms, on the other hand, are proposed to deal with evolutionary novelty.\n\nEvolutionary psychology has roots in cognitive psychology and evolutionary biology but also draws on behavioral ecology, artificial intelligence, genetics, ethology, anthropology, archaeology, biology, and zoology. It is closely linked to sociobiology, but there are key differences between them including the emphasis on \"domain-specific\" rather than \"domain-general\" mechanisms, the relevance of measures of current fitness, the importance of mismatch theory, and psychology rather than behavior. Most of what is now labeled as sociobiological research is now confined to the field of behavioral ecology.\n\nNikolaas Tinbergen's four categories of questions can help to clarify the distinctions between several different, but complementary, types of explanations. Evolutionary psychology focuses primarily on the \"why?\" questions, while traditional psychology focuses on the \"how?\" questions.\n\n! colspan=\"2\" \"Sequential vs. Static Perspective\"\n! rowspan=\"2\" \"How vs. Why Questions\"\n\nEvolutionary psychology is founded on several core premises.\n\nBULLET::::1. The brain is an information processing device, and it produces behavior in response to external and internal inputs.\nBULLET::::2. The brain's adaptive mechanisms were shaped by natural and sexual selection.\nBULLET::::3. Different neural mechanisms are specialized for solving problems in humanity's evolutionary past.\nBULLET::::4. The brain has evolved specialized neural mechanisms that were designed for solving problems that recurred over deep evolutionary time, giving modern humans stone-age minds.\nBULLET::::5. Most contents and processes of the brain are unconscious; and most mental problems that seem easy to solve are actually extremely difficult problems that are solved unconsciously by complicated neural mechanisms.\nBULLET::::6. Human psychology consists of many specialized mechanisms, each sensitive to different classes of information or inputs. These mechanisms combine to produce manifest behavior.\n\nEvolutionary psychology has its historical roots in Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection. In \"The Origin of Species\", Darwin predicted that psychology would develop an evolutionary basis:\n\nTwo of his later books were devoted to the study of animal emotions and psychology; \"The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex\" in 1871 and \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\" in 1872. Darwin's work inspired William James's functionalist approach to psychology. Darwin's theories of evolution, adaptation, and natural selection have provided insight into why brains function the way they do.\n\nThe content of evolutionary psychology has derived from, on the one hand, the biological sciences (especially evolutionary theory as it relates to ancient human environments, the study of paleoanthropology and animal behavior) and, on the other, the human sciences, especially psychology.\n\nEvolutionary biology as an academic discipline emerged with the modern synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s. In the 1930s the study of animal behavior (ethology) emerged with the work of the Dutch biologist Nikolaas Tinbergen and the Austrian biologists Konrad Lorenz and Karl von Frisch.\n\nW.D. Hamilton's (1964) papers on inclusive fitness and Robert Trivers's (1972) theories on reciprocity and parental investment helped to establish evolutionary thinking in psychology and the other social sciences. In 1975, Edward O. Wilson combined evolutionary theory with studies of animal and social behavior, building on the works of Lorenz and Tinbergen, in his book \"\".\n\nIn the 1970s, two major branches developed from ethology. Firstly, the study of animal \"social\" behavior (including humans) generated sociobiology, defined by its pre-eminent proponent Edward O. Wilson in 1975 as \"the systematic study of the biological basis of all social behavior\" and in 1978 as \"the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization.\" Secondly, there was behavioral ecology which placed less emphasis on \"social\" behavior; it focused on the ecological and evolutionary basis of animal and human behavior.\n\nIn the 1970s and 1980s university departments began to include the term \"evolutionary biology\" in their titles. The modern era of evolutionary psychology was ushered in, in particular, by Donald Symons' 1979 book \"The Evolution of Human Sexuality\" and Leda Cosmides and John Tooby's 1992 book \"The Adapted Mind\". David Buller observed that the term \"evolutionary psychology\" is sometimes seen as denoting research based on the specific methodological and theoretical commitments of certain researchers from the Santa Barbara school (University of California), thus some evolutionary psychologists prefer to term their work \"human ecology\", \"human behavioural ecology\" or \"evolutionary anthropology\" instead.\n\nFrom psychology there are the primary streams of developmental, social and cognitive psychology. Establishing some measure of the relative influence of genetics and environment on behavior has been at the core of behavioral genetics and its variants, notably studies at the molecular level that examine the relationship between genes, neurotransmitters and behavior. Dual inheritance theory (DIT), developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, has a slightly different perspective by trying to explain how human behavior is a product of two different and interacting evolutionary processes: genetic evolution and cultural evolution. DIT is seen by some as a \"middle-ground\" between views that emphasize human universals versus those that emphasize cultural variation.\n\nThe theories on which evolutionary psychology is based originated with Charles Darwin's work, including his speculations about the evolutionary origins of social instincts in humans. Modern evolutionary psychology, however, is possible only because of advances in evolutionary theory in the 20th century.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists say that natural selection has provided humans with many psychological adaptations, in much the same way that it generated humans' anatomical and physiological adaptations. As with adaptations in general, psychological adaptations are said to be specialized for the environment in which an organism evolved, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. Sexual selection provides organisms with adaptations related to mating. For male mammals, which have a relatively high maximal potential reproduction rate, sexual selection leads to adaptations that help them compete for females. For female mammals, with a relatively low maximal potential reproduction rate, sexual selection leads to choosiness, which helps females select higher quality mates. Charles Darwin described both natural selection and sexual selection, and he relied on group selection to explain the evolution of altruistic (self-sacrificing) behavior. But group selection was considered a weak explanation, because in any group the less altruistic individuals will be more likely to survive, and the group will become less self-sacrificing as a whole.\n\nIn 1964, William D. Hamilton proposed inclusive fitness theory, emphasizing a gene-centered view of evolution. Hamilton noted that genes can increase the replication of copies of themselves into the next generation by influencing the organism's social traits in such a way that (statistically) results in helping the survival and reproduction of other copies of the same genes (most simply, identical copies in the organism's close relatives). According to Hamilton's rule, self-sacrificing behaviors (and the genes influencing them) can evolve if they typically help the organism's close relatives so much that it more than compensates for the individual animal's sacrifice. Inclusive fitness theory resolved the issue of how altruism can evolve. Other theories also help explain the evolution of altruistic behavior, including evolutionary game theory, tit-for-tat reciprocity, and generalized reciprocity. These theories help to explain the development of altruistic behavior, and account for hostility toward cheaters (individuals that take advantage of others' altruism).\n\nSeveral mid-level evolutionary theories inform evolutionary psychology. The r/K selection theory proposes that some species prosper by having many offspring, while others follow the strategy of having fewer offspring but investing much more in each one. Humans follow the second strategy. Parental investment theory explains how parents invest more or less in individual offspring based on how successful those offspring are likely to be, and thus how much they might improve the parents' inclusive fitness. According to the Trivers–Willard hypothesis, parents in good conditions tend to invest more in sons (who are best able to take advantage of good conditions), while parents in poor conditions tend to invest more in daughters (who are best able to have successful offspring even in poor conditions). According to life history theory, animals evolve life histories to match their environments, determining details such as age at first reproduction and number of offspring. Dual inheritance theory posits that genes and human culture have interacted, with genes affecting the development of culture, and culture, in turn, affecting human evolution on a genetic level (see also the Baldwin effect).\n\nEvolutionary psychology is based on the hypothesis that, just like hearts, lungs, livers, kidneys, and immune systems, cognition has functional structure that has a genetic basis, and therefore has evolved by natural selection. Like other organs and tissues, this functional structure should be universally shared amongst a species, and should solve important problems of survival and reproduction.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists seek to understand psychological mechanisms by understanding the survival and reproductive functions they might have served over the course of evolutionary history. These might include abilities to infer others' emotions, discern kin from non-kin, identify and prefer healthier mates, cooperate with others and follow leaders. Consistent with the theory of natural selection, evolutionary psychology sees humans as often in conflict with others, including mates and relatives. For instance, a mother may wish to wean her offspring from breastfeeding earlier than does her infant, which frees up the mother to invest in additional offspring. Evolutionary psychology also recognizes the role of kin selection and reciprocity in evolving prosocial traits such as altruism. Like chimpanzees and bonobos, humans have subtle and flexible social instincts, allowing them to form extended families, lifelong friendships, and political alliances. In studies testing theoretical predictions, evolutionary psychologists have made modest findings on topics such as infanticide, intelligence, marriage patterns, promiscuity, perception of beauty, bride price and parental investment.\n\nProponents of evolutionary psychology in the 1990s made some explorations in historical events, but the response from historical experts was highly negative and there has been little effort to continue that line of research. Historian Lynn Hunt says that the historians complained that the researchers:\n\nHunt states that, \"the few attempts to build up a subfield of psychohistory collapsed under the weight of its presuppositions.\" She concludes that as of 2014 the \"'iron curtain' between historians and psychology...remains standing.\"\n\nNot all traits of organisms are evolutionary adaptations. As noted in the table below, traits may also be exaptations, byproducts of adaptations (sometimes called \"spandrels\"), or random variation between individuals.\n\nPsychological adaptations are hypothesized to be innate or relatively easy to learn, and to manifest in cultures worldwide. For example, the ability of toddlers to learn a language with virtually no training is likely to be a psychological adaptation. On the other hand, ancestral humans did not read or write, thus today, learning to read and write require extensive training, and presumably represent byproducts of cognitive processing that use psychological adaptations designed for other functions. However, variations in manifest behavior can result from universal mechanisms interacting with different local environments. For example, Caucasians who move from a northern climate to the equator will have darker skin. The mechanisms regulating their pigmentation do not change; rather the input to those mechanisms change, resulting in different output.\n\n! !! Adaptation !! Exaptation !! Byproduct !! Random variation\n\nOne of the tasks of evolutionary psychology is to identify which psychological traits are likely to be adaptations, byproducts or random variation. George C. Williams suggested that an \"adaptation is a special and onerous concept that should only be used where it is really necessary.\" As noted by Williams and others, adaptations can be identified by their improbable complexity, species universality, and adaptive functionality.\n\nA question that may be asked about an adaptation is whether it is generally obligate (relatively robust in the face of typical environmental variation) or facultative (sensitive to typical environmental variation). The sweet taste of sugar and the pain of hitting one's knee against concrete are the result of fairly obligate psychological adaptations; typical environmental variability during development does not much affect their operation. By contrast, facultative adaptations are somewhat like \"if-then\" statements. For example, adult attachment style seems particularly sensitive to early childhood experiences. As adults, the propensity to develop close, trusting bonds with others is dependent on whether early childhood caregivers could be trusted to provide reliable assistance and attention. The adaptation for skin to tan is conditional to exposure to sunlight; this is an example of another facultative adaptation. When a psychological adaptation is facultative, evolutionary psychologists concern themselves with how developmental and environmental inputs influence the expression of the adaptation.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists hold that behaviors or traits that occur universally in all cultures are good candidates for evolutionary adaptations. Cultural universals include behaviors related to language, cognition, social roles, gender roles, and technology. Evolved psychological adaptations (such as the ability to learn a language) interact with cultural inputs to produce specific behaviors (e.g., the specific language learned). \n\nBasic gender differences, such as greater eagerness for sex among men and greater coyness among women, are explained as sexually dimorphic psychological adaptations that reflect the different reproductive strategies of males and females. Research has also shown participants were able to recognize the facial expression of fear significantly better on a male face than on a female face. Females also recognized fear generally better than males. \n\nEvolutionary psychologists contrast their approach to what they term the \"standard social science model,\" according to which the mind is a general-purpose cognition device shaped almost entirely by culture.\n\nEvolutionary psychology argues that to properly understand the functions of the brain, one must understand the properties of the environment in which the brain evolved. That environment is often referred to as the \"environment of evolutionary adaptedness\".\n\nThe idea of an \"environment of evolutionary adaptedness\" was first explored as a part of attachment theory by John Bowlby. This is the environment to which a particular evolved mechanism is adapted. More specifically, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness is defined as the set of historically recurring selection pressures that formed a given adaptation, as well as those aspects of the environment that were necessary for the proper development and functioning of the adaptation.\n\nHumans, comprising the genus \"Homo\", appeared between 1.5 and 2.5 million years ago, a time that roughly coincides with the start of the Pleistocene 2.6 million years ago. Because the Pleistocene ended a mere 12,000 years ago, most human adaptations either newly evolved during the Pleistocene, or were maintained by stabilizing selection during the Pleistocene. Evolutionary psychology therefore proposes that the majority of human psychological mechanisms are adapted to reproductive problems frequently encountered in Pleistocene environments. In broad terms, these problems include those of growth, development, differentiation, maintenance, mating, parenting, and social relationships.\n\nThe environment of evolutionary adaptedness is significantly different from modern society. The ancestors of modern humans lived in smaller groups, had more cohesive cultures, and had more stable and rich contexts for identity and meaning. Researchers look to existing hunter-gatherer societies for clues as to how hunter-gatherers lived in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. Unfortunately, the few surviving hunter-gatherer societies are different from each other, and they have been pushed out of the best land and into harsh environments, so it is not clear how closely they reflect ancestral culture. However, all around the world small-band hunter-gatherers offer a similar developmental system for the young (\"hunter-gatherer childhood model,\" Konner, 2005; \nevolved developmental niche\" or \"evolved nest;\" Narvaez et al., 2013). The characteristics of the niche are largely the same as for social mammals, who evolved over 30 million years ago: soothing perinatal experience, several years of on-request breastfeeding, nearly constant affection or physical proximity, responsiveness to need (mitigating offspring distress), self-directed play, and for humans, multiple responsive caregivers. Initial studies show the importance of these components in early life for positive child outcomes.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists sometimes look to chimpanzees, bonobos, and other great apes for insight into human ancestral behavior. Christopher Ryan and Cacilda Jethá argue that evolutionary psychologists have overemphasized the similarity of humans and chimps, which are more violent, while underestimating the similarity of humans and bonobos, which are more peaceful.\n\nSince an organism's adaptations were suited to its ancestral environment, a new and different environment can create a mismatch. Because humans are mostly adapted to Pleistocene environments, psychological mechanisms sometimes exhibit \"mismatches\" to the modern environment. One example is the fact that although about 10,000 people are killed with guns in the US annually, whereas spiders and snakes kill only a handful, people nonetheless learn to fear spiders and snakes about as easily as they do a pointed gun, and more easily than an unpointed gun, rabbits or flowers. A potential explanation is that spiders and snakes were a threat to human ancestors throughout the Pleistocene, whereas guns (and rabbits and flowers) were not. There is thus a mismatch between humans' evolved fear-learning psychology and the modern environment.\n\nThis mismatch also shows up in the phenomena of the supernormal stimulus, a stimulus that elicits a response more strongly than the stimulus for which the response evolved. The term was coined by Niko Tinbergen to refer to non-human animal behavior, but psychologist Deirdre Barrett said that supernormal stimulation governs the behavior of humans as powerfully as that of other animals. She explained junk food as an exaggerated stimulus to cravings for salt, sugar, and fats, and she says that television is an exaggeration of social cues of laughter, smiling faces and attention-grabbing action. Magazine centerfolds and double cheeseburgers pull instincts intended for an environment of evolutionary adaptedness where breast development was a sign of health, youth and fertility in a prospective mate, and fat was a rare and vital nutrient. The psychologist Mark van Vugt recently argued that modern organizational leadership is a mismatch. His argument is that humans are not adapted to work in large, anonymous bureaucratic structures with formal hierarchies. The human mind still responds to personalized, charismatic leadership primarily in the context of informal, egalitarian settings. Hence the dissatisfaction and alienation that many employees experience. Salaries, bonuses and other privileges exploit instincts for relative status, which attract particularly males to senior executive positions.\n\nEvolutionary theory is heuristic in that it may generate hypotheses that might not be developed from other theoretical approaches. One of the major goals of adaptationist research is to identify which organismic traits are likely to be adaptations, and which are byproducts or random variations. As noted earlier, adaptations are expected to show evidence of complexity, functionality, and species universality, while byproducts or random variation will not. In addition, adaptations are expected to manifest as proximate mechanisms that interact with the environment in either a generally obligate or facultative fashion (see above). Evolutionary psychologists are also interested in identifying these proximate mechanisms (sometimes termed \"mental mechanisms\" or \"psychological adaptations\") and what type of information they take as input, how they process that information, and their outputs. Evolutionary developmental psychology, or \"evo-devo,\" focuses on how adaptations may be activated at certain developmental times (e.g., losing baby teeth, adolescence, etc.) or how events during the development of an individual may alter life history trajectories.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists use several strategies to develop and test hypotheses about whether a psychological trait is likely to be an evolved adaptation. Buss (2011) notes that these methods include:\n\nEvolutionary psychologists also use various sources of data for testing, including experiments, archaeological records, data from hunter-gatherer societies, observational studies, neuroscience data, self-reports and surveys, public records, and human products.\nRecently, additional methods and tools have been introduced based on fictional scenarios, mathematical models, and multi-agent computer simulations.\n\nFoundational areas of research in evolutionary psychology can be divided into broad categories of adaptive problems that arise from the theory of evolution itself: survival, mating, parenting, family and kinship, interactions with non-kin, and cultural evolution.\n\nProblems of survival are clear targets for the evolution of physical and psychological adaptations. Major problems the ancestors of present-day humans faced included food selection and acquisition; territory selection and physical shelter; and avoiding predators and other environmental threats.\n\nConsciousness meets George Williams' criteria of species universality, complexity, and functionality, and it is a trait that apparently increases fitness.\n\nIn his paper \"Evolution of consciousness,\" John Eccles argues that special anatomical and physical adaptations of the mammalian cerebral cortex gave rise to consciousness. In contrast, others have argued that the recursive circuitry underwriting consciousness is much more primitive, having evolved initially in pre-mammalian species because it improves the capacity for interaction with both social \"and\" natural environments by providing an energy-saving \"neutral\" gear in an otherwise energy-expensive motor output machine. Once in place, this recursive circuitry may well have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms, as outlined by Bernard J. Baars. Richard Dawkins suggested that humans evolved consciousness in order to make themselves the subjects of thought. Daniel Povinelli suggests that large, tree-climbing apes evolved consciousness to take into account one's own mass when moving safely among tree branches. Consistent with this hypothesis, Gordon Gallup found that chimps and orangutans, but not little monkeys or terrestrial gorillas, demonstrated self-awareness in mirror tests.\n\nThe concept of consciousness can refer to voluntary action, awareness, or wakefulness. However, even voluntary behavior involves unconscious mechanisms. Many cognitive processes take place in the cognitive unconscious, unavailable to conscious awareness. Some behaviors are conscious when learned but then become unconscious, seemingly automatic. Learning, especially implicitly learning a skill, can take place outside of consciousness. For example, plenty of people know how to turn right when they ride a bike, but very few can accurately explain how they actually do so. Evolutionary psychology approaches self-deception as an adaptation that can improve one's results in social exchanges.\n\nSleep may have evolved to conserve energy when activity would be less fruitful or more dangerous, such as at night, and especially during the winter season.\n\nMany experts, such as Jerry Fodor, write that the purpose of perception is knowledge, but evolutionary psychologists hold that its primary purpose is to guide action. For example, they say, depth perception seems to have evolved not to help us know the distances to other objects but rather to help us move around in space. Evolutionary psychologists say that animals from fiddler crabs to humans use eyesight for collision avoidance, suggesting that vision is basically for directing action, not providing knowledge.\n\nBuilding and maintaining sense organs is metabolically expensive, so these organs evolve only when they improve an organism's fitness. More than half the brain is devoted to processing sensory information, and the brain itself consumes roughly one-fourth of one's metabolic resources, so the senses must provide exceptional benefits to fitness. Perception accurately mirrors the world; animals get useful, accurate information through their senses.\n\nScientists who study perception and sensation have long understood the human senses as adaptations to their surrounding worlds. Depth perception consists of processing over half a dozen visual cues, each of which is based on a regularity of the physical world. Vision evolved to respond to the narrow range of electromagnetic energy that is plentiful and that does not pass through objects. Sound waves go around corners and interact with obstacles, creating a complex pattern that includes useful information about the sources of and distances to objects. Larger animals naturally make lower-pitched sounds as a consequence of their size. The range over which an animal hears, on the other hand, is determined by adaptation. Homing pigeons, for example, can hear very low-pitched sound (infrasound) that carries great distances, even though most smaller animals detect higher-pitched sounds. Taste and smell respond to chemicals in the environment that are thought to have been significant for fitness in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. For example, salt and sugar were apparently both valuable to the human or pre-human inhabitants of the environment of evolutionary adaptedness, so present day humans have an intrinsic hunger for salty and sweet tastes. The sense of touch is actually many senses, including pressure, heat, cold, tickle, and pain. Pain, while unpleasant, is adaptive. An important adaptation for senses is range shifting, by which the organism becomes temporarily more or less sensitive to sensation. For example, one's eyes automatically adjust to dim or bright ambient light. Sensory abilities of different organisms often coevolve, as is the case with the hearing of echolocating bats and that of the moths that have evolved to respond to the sounds that the bats make.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists contend that perception demonstrates the principle of modularity, with specialized mechanisms handling particular perception tasks. For example, people with damage to a particular part of the brain suffer from the specific defect of not being able to recognize faces (prosopagnosia). Evolutionary psychology suggests that this indicates a so-called face-reading module.\n\nIn evolutionary psychology, learning is said to be accomplished through evolved capacities, specifically facultative adaptations. Facultative adaptations express themselves differently depending on input from the environment. Sometimes the input comes during development and helps shape that development. For example, migrating birds learn to orient themselves by the stars during a critical period in their maturation. Evolutionary psychologists believe that humans also learn language along an evolved program, also with critical periods. The input can also come during daily tasks, helping the organism cope with changing environmental conditions. For example, animals evolved Pavlovian conditioning in order to solve problems about causal relationships. Animals accomplish learning tasks most easily when those tasks resemble problems that they faced in their evolutionary past, such as a rat learning where to find food or water. Learning capacities sometimes demonstrate differences between the sexes. In many animal species, for example, males can solve spatial problem faster and more accurately than females, due to the effects of male hormones during development. The same might be true of humans.\n\nMotivations direct and energize behavior, while emotions provide the affective component to motivation, positive or negative. In the early 1970s, Paul Ekman and colleagues began a line of research which suggests that many emotions are universal. He found evidence that humans share at least five basic emotions: fear, sadness, happiness, anger, and disgust. Social emotions evidently evolved to motivate social behaviors that were adaptive in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. For example, spite seems to work against the individual but it can establish an individual's reputation as someone to be feared. Shame and pride can motivate behaviors that help one maintain one's standing in a community, and self-esteem is one's estimate of one's status.\nMotivation has a neurobiological basis in the reward system of the brain. Recently, it has been suggested that reward systems may evolve in such a way that there may be an inherent or unavoidable trade-off in the motivational system for activities of short versus long duration.\n\nCognition refers to internal representations of the world and internal information processing. From an evolutionary psychology perspective, cognition is not \"general purpose,\" but uses heuristics, or strategies, that generally increase the likelihood of solving problems that the ancestors of present-day humans routinely faced. For example, present day humans are far more likely to solve logic problems that involve detecting cheating (a common problem given humans' social nature) than the same logic problem put in purely abstract terms. Since the ancestors of present-day humans did not encounter truly random events, present day humans may be cognitively predisposed to incorrectly identify patterns in random sequences. \"Gamblers' Fallacy\" is one example of this. Gamblers may falsely believe that they have hit a \"lucky streak\" even when each outcome is actually random and independent of previous trials. Most people believe that if a fair coin has been flipped 9 times and Heads appears each time, that on the tenth flip, there is a greater than 50% chance of getting Tails. Humans find it far easier to make diagnoses or predictions using frequency data than when the same information is presented as probabilities or percentages, presumably because the ancestors of present-day humans lived in relatively small tribes (usually with fewer than 150 people) where frequency information was more readily available.\n\nEvolutionary psychology is primarily interested in finding commonalities between people, or basic human psychological nature. From an evolutionary perspective, the fact that people have fundamental differences in personality traits initially presents something of a puzzle. (Note: The field of behavioral genetics is concerned with statistically partitioning differences between people into genetic and environmental sources of variance. However, understanding the concept of heritability can be tricky – heritability refers only to the differences between people, never the degree to which the traits of an individual are due to environmental or genetic factors, since traits are always a complex interweaving of both.)\n\nPersonality traits are conceptualized by evolutionary psychologists as due to normal variation around an optimum, due to frequency-dependent selection (behavioral polymorphisms), or as facultative adaptations. Like variability in height, some personality traits may simply reflect inter-individual variability around a general optimum. Or, personality traits may represent different genetically predisposed \"behavioral morphs\" – alternate behavioral strategies that depend on the frequency of competing behavioral strategies in the population. For example, if most of the population is generally trusting and gullible, the behavioral morph of being a \"cheater\" (or, in the extreme case, a sociopath) may be advantageous. Finally, like many other psychological adaptations, personality traits may be facultative – sensitive to typical variations in the social environment, especially during early development. For example, later born children are more likely than first borns to be rebellious, less conscientious and more open to new experiences, which may be advantageous to them given their particular niche in family structure. It is important to note that shared environmental influences do play a role in personality and are not always of less importance than genetic factors. However, shared environmental influences often decrease to near zero after adolescence but do not completely disappear.\n\nAccording to Steven Pinker, who builds on the work by Noam Chomsky, the universal human ability to learn to talk between the ages of 1 – 4, basically without training, suggests that language acquisition is a distinctly human psychological adaptation (see, in particular, Pinker's \"The Language Instinct\"). Pinker and Bloom (1990) argue that language as a mental faculty shares many likenesses with the complex organs of the body which suggests that, like these organs, language has evolved as an adaptation, since this is the only known mechanism by which such complex organs can develop.\n\nPinker follows Chomsky in arguing that the fact that children can learn any human language with no explicit instruction suggests that language, including most of grammar, is basically innate and that it only needs to be activated by interaction. Chomsky himself does not believe language to have evolved as an adaptation, but suggests that it likely evolved as a byproduct of some other adaptation, a so-called spandrel. But Pinker and Bloom argue that the organic nature of language strongly suggests that it has an adaptational origin.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists hold that the FOXP2 gene may well be associated with the evolution of human language. In the 1980s, psycholinguist Myrna Gopnik identified a dominant gene that causes language impairment in the KE family of Britain. This gene turned out to be a mutation of the FOXP2 gene. Humans have a unique allele of this gene, which has otherwise been closely conserved through most of mammalian evolutionary history. This unique allele seems to have first appeared between 100 and 200 thousand years ago, and it is now all but universal in humans. However, the once-popular idea that FOXP2 is a 'grammar gene' or that it triggered the emergence of language in \"Homo sapiens\" is now widely discredited.\n\nCurrently several competing theories about the evolutionary origin of language coexist, none of them having achieved a general consensus. Researchers of language acquisition in primates and humans such as Michael Tomasello and Talmy Givón, argue that the innatist framework has understated the role of imitation in learning and that it is not at all necessary to posit the existence of an innate grammar module to explain human language acquisition. Tomasello argues that studies of how children and primates actually acquire communicative skills suggests that humans learn complex behavior through experience, so that instead of a module specifically dedicated to language acquisition, language is acquired by the same cognitive mechanisms that are used to acquire all other kinds of socially transmitted behavior.\n\nOn the issue of whether language is best seen as having evolved as an adaptation or as a spandrel, evolutionary biologist W. Tecumseh Fitch, following Stephen J. Gould, argues that it is unwarranted to assume that every aspect of language is an adaptation, or that language as a whole is an adaptation. He criticizes some strands of evolutionary psychology for suggesting a pan-adaptionist view of evolution, and dismisses Pinker and Bloom's question of whether \"Language has evolved as an adaptation\" as being misleading. He argues instead that from a biological viewpoint the evolutionary origins of language is best conceptualized as being the probable result of a convergence of many separate adaptations into a complex system. A similar argument is made by Terrence Deacon who in \"The Symbolic Species\" argues that the different features of language have co-evolved with the evolution of the mind and that the ability to use symbolic communication is integrated in all other cognitive processes.\n\nIf the theory that language could have evolved as a single adaptation is accepted, the question becomes which of its many functions has been the basis of adaptation. Several evolutionary hypotheses have been posited: that language evolved for the purpose of social grooming, that it evolved as a way to show mating potential or that it evolved to form social contracts. Evolutionary psychologists recognize that these theories are all speculative and that much more evidence is required to understand how language might have been selectively adapted.\n\nGiven that sexual reproduction is the means by which genes are propagated into future generations, sexual selection plays a large role in human evolution. Human mating, then, is of interest to evolutionary psychologists who aim to investigate evolved mechanisms to attract and secure mates. Several lines of research have stemmed from this interest, such as studies of mate selection mate poaching, mate retention, mating preferences and conflict between the sexes.\n\nIn 1972 Robert Trivers published an influential paper on sex differences that is now referred to as parental investment theory. The size differences of gametes (anisogamy) is the fundamental, defining difference between males (small gametes – sperm) and females (large gametes – ova). Trivers noted that anisogamy typically results in different levels of parental investment between the sexes, with females initially investing more. Trivers proposed that this difference in parental investment leads to the sexual selection of different reproductive strategies between the sexes and to sexual conflict. For example, he suggested that the sex that invests less in offspring will generally compete for access to the higher-investing sex to increase their inclusive fitness (also see Bateman's principle<ref name=\"doi10.1038/hdy.1948.21\"></ref>). Trivers posited that differential parental investment led to the evolution of sexual dimorphisms in mate choice, intra- and inter- sexual reproductive competition, and courtship displays. In mammals, including humans, females make a much larger parental investment than males (i.e. gestation followed by childbirth and lactation). Parental investment theory is a branch of life history theory.\n\nBuss and Schmitt's (1993) \"Sexual Strategies Theory\" proposed that, due to differential parental investment, humans have evolved sexually dimorphic adaptations related to \"sexual accessibility, fertility assessment, commitment seeking and avoidance, immediate and enduring resource procurement, paternity certainty, assessment of mate value, and parental investment.\" Their \"Strategic Interference Theory\" suggested that conflict between the sexes occurs when the preferred reproductive strategies of one sex interfere with those of the other sex, resulting in the activation of emotional responses such as anger or jealousy.\n\nWomen are generally more selective when choosing mates, especially under long term mating conditions. However, under some circumstances, short term mating can provide benefits to women as well, such as fertility insurance, trading up to better genes, reducing risk of inbreeding, and insurance protection of her offspring.\n\nDue to male paternity insecurity, sex differences have been found in the domains of sexual jealousy. Females generally react more adversely to emotional infidelity and males will react more to sexual infidelity. This particular pattern is predicted because the costs involved in mating for each sex are distinct. Women, on average, should prefer a mate who can offer resources (e.g., financial, commitment), thus, a woman risks losing such resources with a mate who commits emotional infidelity. Men, on the other hand, are never certain of the genetic paternity of their children because they do not bear the offspring themselves (\"paternity insecurity\"). This suggests that for men sexual infidelity would generally be more aversive than emotional infidelity because investing resources in another man's offspring does not lead to propagation of their own genes.\n\nAnother interesting line of research is that which examines women's mate preferences across the ovulatory cycle. The theoretical underpinning of this research is that ancestral women would have evolved mechanisms to select mates with certain traits depending on their hormonal status. Known as the ovulatory shift hypothesis, the theory posits that, during the ovulatory phase of a woman's cycle (approximately days 10–15 of a woman's cycle), a woman who mated with a male with high genetic quality would have been more likely, on average, to produce and bear a healthy offspring than a woman who mated with a male with low genetic quality. These putative preferences are predicted to be especially apparent for short-term mating domains because a potential male mate would only be offering genes to a potential offspring. This hypothesis allows researchers to examine whether women select mates who have characteristics that indicate high genetic quality during the high fertility phase of their ovulatory cycles. Indeed, studies have shown that women's preferences vary across the ovulatory cycle. In particular, Haselton and Miller (2006) showed that highly fertile women prefer creative but poor men as short-term mates. Creativity may be a proxy for good genes. Research by Gangestad et al. (2004) indicates that highly fertile women prefer men who display social presence and intrasexual competition; these traits may act as cues that would help women predict which men may have, or would be able to acquire, resources.\n\nReproduction is always costly for women, and can also be for men. Individuals are limited in the degree to which they can devote time and resources to producing and raising their young, and such expenditure may also be detrimental to their future condition, survival and further reproductive output.\nParental investment is any parental expenditure (time, energy etc.) that benefits one offspring at a cost to parents' ability to invest in other components of fitness (Clutton-Brock 1991: 9; Trivers 1972). Components of fitness (Beatty 1992) include the well-being of existing offspring, parents' future reproduction, and inclusive fitness through aid to kin (Hamilton, 1964). Parental investment theory is a branch of life history theory.\n\nRobert Trivers' theory of parental investment predicts that the sex making the largest investment in lactation, nurturing and protecting offspring will be more discriminating in mating and that the sex that invests less in offspring will compete for access to the higher investing sex (see Bateman's principle). Sex differences in parental effort are important in determining the strength of sexual selection.\n\nThe benefits of parental investment to the offspring are large and are associated with the effects on condition, growth, survival and ultimately, on reproductive success of the offspring. However, these benefits can come at the cost of parent's ability to reproduce in the future e.g. through the increased risk of injury when defending offspring against predators, the loss of mating opportunities whilst rearing offspring and an increase in the time to the next reproduction. Overall, parents are selected to maximize the difference between the benefits and the costs, and parental care will likely evolve when the benefits exceed the costs.\n\nThe Cinderella effect is an alleged high incidence of stepchildren being physically, emotionally or sexually abused, neglected, murdered, or otherwise mistreated at the hands of their stepparents at significantly higher rates than their genetic counterparts. It takes its name from the fairy tale character Cinderella, who in the story was cruelly mistreated by her stepmother and stepsisters. Daly and Wilson (1996) noted: \"Evolutionary thinking led to the discovery of the most important risk factor for child homicide – the presence of a stepparent. Parental efforts and investments are valuable resources, and selection favors those parental psyches that allocate effort effectively to promote fitness. The adaptive problems that challenge parental decision making include both the accurate identification of one's offspring and the allocation of one's resources among them with sensitivity to their needs and abilities to convert parental investment into fitness increments…. Stepchildren were seldom or never so valuable to one's expected fitness as one's own offspring would be, and those parental psyches that were easily parasitized by just any appealing youngster must always have incurred a selective disadvantage\"(Daly & Wilson, 1996, pp. 64–65). However, they note that not all stepparents will \"want\" to abuse their partner's children, or that genetic parenthood is any insurance against abuse. They see step parental care as primarily \"mating effort\" towards the genetic parent.\n\nInclusive fitness is the sum of an organism's classical fitness (how many of its own offspring it produces and supports) and the number of equivalents of its own offspring it can add to the population by supporting others. The first component is called classical fitness by Hamilton (1964).\n\nFrom the gene's point of view, evolutionary success ultimately depends on leaving behind the maximum number of copies of itself in the population. Until 1964, it was generally believed that genes only achieved this by causing the individual to leave the maximum number of viable offspring. However, in 1964 W. D. Hamilton proved mathematically that, because close relatives of an organism share some identical genes, a gene can also increase its evolutionary success by promoting the reproduction and survival of these related or otherwise similar individuals. Hamilton concluded that this leads natural selection to favor organisms that would behave in ways that maximize their inclusive fitness. It is also true that natural selection favors behavior that maximizes personal fitness.\n\nHamilton's rule describes mathematically whether or not a gene for altruistic behavior will spread in a population:\nwhere\nBULLET::::- formula_2 is the reproductive cost to the altruist,\nBULLET::::- formula_3 is the reproductive benefit to the recipient of the altruistic behavior, and\nBULLET::::- formula_4 is the probability, above the population average, of the individuals sharing an altruistic gene – commonly viewed as \"degree of relatedness\".\n\nThe concept serves to explain how natural selection can perpetuate altruism. If there is an \"altruism gene\" (or complex of genes) that influences an organism's behavior to be helpful and protective of relatives and their offspring, this behavior also increases the proportion of the altruism gene in the population, because relatives are likely to share genes with the altruist due to common descent. Altruists may also have some way to recognize altruistic behavior in unrelated individuals and be inclined to support them. As Dawkins points out in \"The Selfish Gene\" (Chapter 6) and \"The Extended Phenotype\", this must be distinguished from the green-beard effect.\n\nAlthough it is generally true that humans tend to be more altruistic toward their kin than toward non-kin, the relevant proximate mechanisms that mediate this cooperation have been debated (see kin recognition), with some arguing that kin status is determined primarily via social and cultural factors (such as co-residence, maternal association of sibs, etc.), while others have argued that kin recognition can also be mediated by biological factors such as facial resemblance and immunogenetic similarity of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). For a discussion of the interaction of these social and biological kin recognition factors see Lieberman, Tooby, and Cosmides (2007) (PDF).\n\nWhatever the proximate mechanisms of kin recognition there is substantial evidence that humans act generally more altruistically to close genetic kin compared to genetic non-kin.\n\nAlthough interactions with non-kin are generally less altruistic compared to those with kin, cooperation can be maintained with non-kin via mutually beneficial reciprocity as was proposed by Robert Trivers. If there are repeated encounters between the same two players in an evolutionary game in which each of them can choose either to \"cooperate\" or \"defect,\" then a strategy of mutual cooperation may be favored even if it pays each player, in the short term, to defect when the other cooperates. Direct reciprocity can lead to the evolution of cooperation only if the probability, w, of another encounter between the same two individuals exceeds the cost-to-benefit ratio of the altruistic act:\n\nReciprocity can also be indirect if information about previous interactions is shared. Reputation allows evolution of cooperation by indirect reciprocity. Natural selection favors strategies that base the decision to help on the reputation of the recipient: studies show that people who are more helpful are more likely to receive help. The calculations of indirect reciprocity are complicated and only a tiny fraction of this universe has been uncovered, but again a simple rule has emerged. Indirect reciprocity can only promote cooperation if the probability, q, of knowing someone's reputation exceeds the cost-to-benefit ratio of the altruistic act:\n\nOne important problem with this explanation is that individuals may be able to evolve the capacity to obscure their reputation, reducing the probability, q, that it will be known.\n\nTrivers argues that friendship and various social emotions evolved in order to manage reciprocity. Liking and disliking, he says, evolved to help present day humans' ancestors form coalitions with others who reciprocated and to exclude those who did not reciprocate. Moral indignation may have evolved to prevent one's altruism from being exploited by cheaters, and gratitude may have motivated present day humans' ancestors to reciprocate appropriately after benefiting from others' altruism. Likewise, present day humans feel guilty when they fail to reciprocate. These social motivations match what evolutionary psychologists expect to see in adaptations that evolved to maximize the benefits and minimize the drawbacks of reciprocity.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists say that humans have psychological adaptations that evolved specifically to help us identify nonreciprocators, commonly referred to as \"cheaters.\" In 1993, Robert Frank and his associates found that participants in a prisoner's dilemma scenario were often able to predict whether their partners would \"cheat,\" based on a half-hour of unstructured social interaction. In a 1996 experiment, for example, Linda Mealey and her colleagues found that people were better at remembering the faces of people when those faces were associated with stories about those individuals cheating (such as embezzling money from a church).\n\nHumans may have an evolved set of psychological adaptations that predispose them to be more cooperative than otherwise would be expected with members of their tribal in-group, and, more nasty to members of tribal out groups. These adaptations may have been a consequence of tribal warfare. Humans may also have predispositions for \"altruistic punishment\" – to punish in-group members who violate in-group rules, even when this altruistic behavior cannot be justified in terms of helping those you are related to (kin selection), cooperating with those who you will interact with again (direct reciprocity), or cooperating to better your reputation with others (indirect reciprocity).\n\nThough evolutionary psychology has traditionally focused on individual-level behaviors, determined by species-typical psychological adaptations, considerable work has been done on how these adaptations shape and, ultimately govern, culture (Tooby and Cosmides, 1989). Tooby and Cosmides (1989) argued that the mind consists of many domain-specific psychological adaptations, some of which may constrain what cultural material is learned or taught. As opposed to a domain-general cultural acquisition program, where an individual passively receives culturally-transmitted material from the group, Tooby and Cosmides (1989), among others, argue that: \"the psyche evolved to generate adaptive rather than repetitive behavior, and hence critically analyzes the behavior of those surrounding it in highly structured and patterned ways, to be used as a rich (but by no means the only) source of information out of which to construct a 'private culture' or individually tailored adaptive system; in consequence, this system may or may not mirror the behavior of others in any given respect.\" (Tooby and Cosmides 1989).\n\nAccording to Paul Baltes, the benefits granted by evolutionary selection decrease with age. Natural selection has not eliminated many harmful conditions and nonadaptive characteristics that appear among older adults, such as Alzheimer disease. If it were a disease that killed 20-year-olds instead of 70-year-olds this may have been a disease that natural selection could have eliminated ages ago. Thus, unaided by evolutionary pressures against nonadaptive conditions, modern humans suffer the aches, pains, and infirmities of aging and as the benefits of evolutionary selection decrease with age, the need for modern technological mediums against non-adaptive conditions increases.\n\nAs humans are a highly social species, there are many adaptive problems associated with navigating the social world (e.g., maintaining allies, managing status hierarchies, interacting with outgroup members, coordinating social activities, collective decision-making). Researchers in the emerging field of evolutionary social psychology have made many discoveries pertaining to topics traditionally studied by social psychologists, including person perception, social cognition, attitudes, altruism, emotions, group dynamics, leadership, motivation, prejudice, intergroup relations, and cross-cultural differences.\n\nWhen endeavouring to solve a problem humans at an early age show determination while chimpanzees have no comparable facial expression. Researchers suspect the human determined expression evolved because when a human is determinedly working on a problem other people will frequently help.\n\nAdaptationist hypotheses regarding the etiology of psychological disorders are often based on analogies between physiological and psychological dysfunctions, as noted in the table below. Prominent theorists and evolutionary psychiatrists include Michael T. McGuire, Anthony Stevens, and Randolph M. Nesse. They, and others, suggest that mental disorders are due to the interactive effects of both nature and nurture, and often have multiple contributing causes.\n\n+ Possible Causes of Psychological 'Abnormalities' from an Adaptationist Perspective \nSummary based on information in these textbooks (all titled \"Evolutionary Psychology\"): Buss (2011), Gaulin & McBurney (2004), Workman & Reader (2008) as well as Cosmides & Tooby (1999) \"Toward an evolutionary taxonomy of treatable conditions\"\n! Causal mechanism of failure or malfunction of adaptation !! Physiological Example !! Hypothesized Psychological Example\nBy-product of an adaptation(s)\n\nEvolutionary psychologists have suggested that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder may reflect a side-effect of genes with fitness benefits, such as increased creativity. (Some individuals with bipolar disorder are especially creative during their manic phases and the close relatives of people with schizophrenia have been found to be more likely to have creative professions.) A 1994 report by the American Psychiatry Association found that people suffered from schizophrenia at roughly the same rate in Western and non-Western cultures, and in industrialized and pastoral societies, suggesting that schizophrenia is not a disease of civilization nor an arbitrary social invention. Sociopathy may represent an evolutionarily stable strategy, by which a small number of people who cheat on social contracts benefit in a society consisting mostly of non-sociopaths. Mild depression may be an adaptive response to withdraw from, and re-evaluate, situations that have led to disadvantageous outcomes (the \"analytical rumination hypothesis\") (see Evolutionary approaches to depression).\n\nSome of these speculations have yet to be developed into fully testable hypotheses, and a great deal of research is required to confirm their validity.\n\nEvolutionary psychology has been applied to explain criminal or otherwise immoral behavior as being adaptive or related to adaptive behaviors. Males are generally more aggressive than females, who are more selective of their partners because of the far greater effort they have to contribute to pregnancy and child-rearing. Males being more aggressive is hypothesized to stem from the more intense reproductive competition faced by them. Males of low status may be especially vulnerable to being childless. It may have been evolutionary advantageous to engage in highly risky and violently aggressive behavior to increase their status and therefore reproductive success. This may explain why males are generally involved in more crimes, and why low status and being unmarried is associated with criminality. Furthermore, competition over females is argued to have been particularly intensive in late adolescence and young adulthood, which is theorized to explain why crime rates are particularly high during this period.\n\nMany conflicts that result in harm and death involve status, reputation, and seemingly trivial insults. Steven Pinker in his book \"The Blank Slate\" argues that in non-state societies without a police it was very important to have a credible deterrence against aggression. Therefore, it was important to be perceived as having a credible reputation for retaliation, resulting in humans to develop instincts for revenge as well as for protecting reputation (\"honor\"). Pinker argues that the development of the state and the police have dramatically reduced the level of violence compared to the ancestral environment. Whenever the state breaks down, which can be very locally such as in poor areas of a city, humans again organize in groups for protection and aggression and concepts such as violent revenge and protecting honor again become extremely important.\n\nRape is theorized to be a reproductive strategy that facilitates the propagation of the rapist's progeny. Such a strategy may be adopted by men who otherwise are unlikely to be appealing to women and therefore cannot form legitimate relationships, or by high status men on socially vulnerable women who are unlikely to retaliate to increase their reproductive success even further. The sociobiological theories of rape are highly controversial, as traditional theories typically do not consider rape to be a behavioral adaptation, and objections to this theory are made on ethical, religious, political, as well as scientific grounds.\n\nAdaptationist perspectives on religious belief suggest that, like all behavior, religious behaviors are a product of the human brain. As with all other organ functions, cognition's functional structure has been argued to have a genetic foundation, and is therefore subject to the effects of natural selection and sexual selection. Like other organs and tissues, this functional structure should be universally shared amongst humans and should have solved important problems of survival and reproduction in ancestral environments. However, evolutionary psychologists remain divided on whether religious belief is more likely a consequence of evolved psychological adaptations, or a byproduct of other cognitive adaptations.\n\nCoalitional psychology is an approach to explain political behaviors between different coalitions and the conditionality of these behaviors in evolutionary psychological perspective. This approach assumes that since human beings appeared on the earth, they have evolved to live in groups instead of living as individuals to achieve benefits such as more mating opportunities and increased status. Human beings thus naturally think and act in a way that manages and negotiates group dynamics.\n\nCoalitional psychology offers falsifiable ex ante prediction by positing five hypotheses on how these psychological adaptations operate:\nBULLET::::- Humans represent groups as a special category of individual, unstable and with a short shadow of the future\nBULLET::::- Political entrepreneurs strategically manipulate the coalitional environment, often appealing to emotional devices such as \"outrage\" to inspire collective action.\nBULLET::::- Relative gains dominate relations with enemies, whereas absolute gains characterize relations with allies.\nBULLET::::- Coalitional size and male physical strength will positively predict individual support for aggressive foreign policies.\nBULLET::::- Individuals with children, particularly women, will vary in adopting aggressive foreign policies than those without progeny.\n\nCritics of evolutionary psychology accuse it of promoting genetic determinism, panadaptionism (the idea that all behaviors and anatomical features are adaptations), unfalsifiable hypotheses, distal or ultimate explanations of behavior when proximate explanations are superior, and malevolent political or moral ideas.\n\nCritics have argued that evolutionary psychology might be used to justify existing social hierarchies and reactionary policies. It has also been suggested by critics that evolutionary psychologists' theories and interpretations of empirical data rely heavily on ideological assumptions about race and gender.\n\nIn response to such criticism, evolutionary psychologists often caution against committing the naturalistic fallacy – the assumption that \"what is natural\" is necessarily a moral good. However, their caution against committing the naturalistic fallacy has been criticized as means to stifle legitimate ethical discussions.\n\nSome criticisms of evolutionary psychology point at contradictions between different aspects of adaptive scenarios posited by evolutionary psychology. One example is the evolutionary psychology model of extended social groups selecting for modern human brains, a contradiction being that the synaptic function of modern human brains require high amounts of many specific essential nutrients so that such a transition to higher requirements of the same essential nutrients being shared by all individuals in a population would decrease the possibility of forming large groups due to bottleneck foods with rare essential nutrients capping group sizes. It is mentioned that some insects have societies with different ranks for each individual and that monkeys remain socially functioning after removal of most of the brain as additional arguments against big brains promoting social networking. The model of males as both providers and protectors is criticized for the impossibility of being in two places at once, the male cannot both protect his family at home and be out hunting at the same time. In the case of the claim that a provider male could buy protection service for his family from other males by bartering food that he had hunted, critics point at the fact that the most valuable food (the food that contained the rarest essential nutrients) would be different in different ecologies and as such vegetable in some geographical areas and animal in others, making it impossible for hunting styles relying on physical strength or risk taking to be universally of similar value in bartered food and instead making it inevitable that in some parts of Africa, food gathered with no need for major physical strength would be the most valuable to barter for protection. A contradiction between evolutionary psychology's claim of men needing to be more sexually visual than women for fast speed of assessing women's fertility than women needed to be able to assess the male's genes and its claim of male sexual jealousy guarding against infidelity is also pointed at, as it would be pointless for a male to be fast to assess female fertility if he needed to assess the risk of there being a jealous male mate and in that case his chances of defeating him before mating anyway (pointlessness of assessing one necessary condition faster than another necessary condition can possibly be assessed).\n\nEvolutionary psychology has been entangled in the larger philosophical and social science controversies related to the debate on nature versus nurture. Evolutionary psychologists typically contrast evolutionary psychology with what they call the standard social science model (SSSM). They characterize the SSSM as the \"blank slate\", \"relativist\", \"social constructionist\", and \"cultural determinist\" perspective that they say dominated the social sciences throughout the 20th century and assumed that the mind was shaped almost entirely by culture.\n\nCritics have argued that evolutionary psychologists created a false dichotomy between their own view and the caricature of the SSSM. Other critics regard the SSSM as a rhetorical device or a straw man and suggest that the scientists whom evolutionary psychologists associate with the SSSM did not believe that the mind was a blank state devoid of any natural predispositions.\n\nSome critics view evolutionary psychology as a form of genetic reductionism and genetic determinism, a common critique being that evolutionary psychology does not address the complexity of individual development and experience and fails to explain the influence of genes on behavior in individual cases. Evolutionary psychologists respond that they are working within a nature-nurture interactionist framework that acknowledges that many psychological adaptations are facultative (sensitive to environmental variations during individual development). The discipline is generally not focused on proximate analyses of behavior, but rather its focus is on the study of distal/ultimate causality (the evolution of psychological adaptations). The field of behavioral genetics is focused on the study of the proximate influence of genes on behavior.\n\nA frequent critique of the discipline is that the hypotheses of evolutionary psychology are frequently arbitrary and difficult or impossible to adequately test, thus questioning its status as an actual scientific discipline, for example because many current traits probably evolved to serve different functions than they do now. While evolutionary psychology hypotheses are difficult to test, evolutionary psychologists assert that it is not impossible. Part of the critique of the scientific base of evolutionary psychology includes a critique of the concept of the Environment of Evolutionary Adaptation (EEA). Some critics have argued that researchers know so little about the environment in which \"Homo sapiens\" evolved that explaining specific traits as an adaption to that environment becomes highly speculative. Evolutionary psychologists respond that they do know many things about this environment, including the facts that present day humans' ancestors were hunter-gatherers, that they generally lived in small tribes, etc. Edward Hagen argues that the human past environments were not radically different in the same sense as the Carboniferous or Jurassic periods and that the animal and plant taxa of the era were similar to those of the modern world, as was the geology and ecology. Hagen argues that few would deny that other organs evolved in the EEA (for example, lungs evolving in an oxygen rich atmopshere) yet critics question whether or not the brain's EEA is truly knowable, which he argues constitutes selective scepticism. Hagen also argues that most evolutionary psychology research is based on the fact that females can get pregnant and males cannot, which Hagen observes was also true in the EEA. John Alcock describes this as the \"No Time Machine Argument\", as critics are arguing that since it is not possible to travel back in time to the EEA, then it cannot be determined what was going on there and thus what was adaptive. Alcock argues that present day evidence allows researchers to be reasonably confident about the conditions of the EEA and that the fact that so many human behaviours are adaptive in the \"current\" environment is evidence that the ancestral environment of humans had much in common with the present one, as these behaviours would have evolved in the ancestral environment. Thus Alcock concludes that researchers can make predictions on the adaptive value of traits.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists generally presume that, like the body, the mind is made up of many evolved modular adaptations, although there is some disagreement within the discipline regarding the degree of general plasticity, or \"generality,\" of some modules. It has been suggested that modularity evolves because, compared to non-modular networks, it would have conferred an advantage in terms of fitness and because connection costs are lower.\n\nIn contrast, some academics argue that it is unnecessary to posit the existence of highly domain specific modules, and, suggest that the neural anatomy of the brain supports a model based on more domain general faculties and processes. Moreover, empirical support for the domain-specific theory stems almost entirely from performance on variations of the Wason selection task which is extremely limited in scope as it only tests one subtype of deductive reasoning.\n\nCecilia Heyes has argued that the picture presented by some evolutionary psychology of the human mind as a collection of cognitive instinctsorgans of thought shaped by genetic evolution over very long time periodsdoes not fit research results. She posits instead that humans have cognitive gadgets\"special-purpose organs of thought\" built in the course of development through social interaction.\n\nEvolutionary psychologists have addressed many of their critics (see, for example, books by Segerstråle (2000), \"Defenders of the Truth: The Battle for Science in the Sociobiology Debate and Beyond,\" Barkow (2005), \"Missing the Revolution: Darwinism for Social Scientists,\" and Alcock (2001), \"The Triumph of Sociobiology\"). Among their rebuttals are that some criticisms are straw men, are based on an incorrect nature versus nurture dichotomy, are based on misunderstandings of the discipline, etc. Robert Kurzban suggested that \"...critics of the field, when they err, are not slightly missing the mark. Their confusion is deep and profound. It’s not like they are marksmen who can’t quite hit the center of the target; they’re holding the gun backwards.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Barkow, J., Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. 1992. The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Buss, D. M. (1994). \"The evolution of desire: Strategies of human mating\". New York: Basic Books.\nBULLET::::- Confer, Easton, Fleischman, Goetz, Lewis, Perilloux & Buss Evolutionary Psychology, \"American Psychologist\", 2010.\nBULLET::::- Durrant, R., & Ellis, B.J. (2003). Evolutionary Psychology. In M. Gallagher & R.J. Nelson (Eds.), \"Comprehensive Handbook of Psychology, Volume Three: Biological Psychology\" (pp. 1–33). New York: Wiley & Sons.\nBULLET::::- Fruehwald, Edwin Scott, Law and Human Behavior: A Study in Behavioral Biology, Neuroscience, and The Law (Vandeplas 2011).\nBULLET::::- Gaulin, Steven J. C. and Donald H. McBurney. \"Evolutionary psychology\". Prentice Hall. 2003.\nBULLET::::- </ref>\nBULLET::::- Nesse, R.M. (2000). Tingergen's Four Questions Organized.\nBULLET::::- Schacter, Daniel L, Daniel Wegner and Daniel Gilbert. 2007. \"Psychology\". Worth Publishers. .\nBULLET::::- Tooby, J. & Cosmides, L. (2005). Conceptual foundations of evolutionary psychology. In D. M. Buss (Ed.), \"The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology\" (pp. 5–67). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Full text\nBULLET::::- Heylighen F. (2012). \"Evolutionary Psychology\", in: A. Michalos (ed.): Encyclopedia of Quality of Life Research (Springer, Berlin).\nBULLET::::- Gerhard Medicus (2015). Being Human – Bridging the Gap between the Sciences of Body and Mind. Berlin: VWB\nBULLET::::- Oikkonen, Venla: \"Gender, Sexuality and Reproduction in Evolutionary Narratives.\" London: Routledge, 2013.\n\nBULLET::::- PsychTable.org Collaborative effort to catalog human psychological adaptations\nBULLET::::- What Is Evolutionary Psychology? by Clinical Evolutionary Psychologist Dale Glaebach.\nBULLET::::- Evolutionary Psychology – Approaches in Psychology\n\nBULLET::::- Human Behavior and Evolution Society; international society dedicated to using evolutionary theory to study human nature\nBULLET::::- The International Society for Human Ethology; promotes ethological perspectives on the study of humans worldwide\nBULLET::::- European Human Behaviour and Evolution Association an interdisciplinary society that supports the activities of European researchers with an interest in evolutionary accounts of human cognition, behavior and society\nBULLET::::- The Association for Politics and the Life Sciences; an international and interdisciplinary association of scholars, scientists, and policymakers concerned with evolutionary, genetic, and ecological knowledge and its bearing on political behavior, public policy and ethics.\nBULLET::::- Society for Evolutionary Analysis in Law a scholarly association dedicated to fostering interdisciplinary exploration of issues at the intersection of law, biology, and evolutionary theory\nBULLET::::- The New England Institute for Cognitive Science and Evolutionary Psychology aims to foster research and education into the interdisciplinary nexus of cognitive science and evolutionary studies\nBULLET::::- The NorthEastern Evolutionary Psychology Society; regional society dedicated to encouraging scholarship and dialogue on the topic of evolutionary psychology\nBULLET::::- Feminist Evolutionary Psychology Society researchers that investigate the active role that females have had in human evolution\n\nBULLET::::- Evolutionary Psychology – free access online scientific journal\nBULLET::::- Evolution and Human Behavior – journal of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society\nBULLET::::- Evolutionary Psychological Science - An international, interdisciplinary forum for original research papers that address evolved psychology. Spans social and life sciences, anthropology, philosophy, criminology, law and the humanities.\nBULLET::::- Politics and the Life Sciences – an interdisciplinary peer-reviewed journal published by the Association for Politics and the Life Sciences\nBULLET::::- Human Nature: An Interdisciplinary Biosocial Perspective – advances the interdisciplinary investigation of the biological, social, and environmental factors that underlie human behavior. It focuses primarily on the functional unity in which these factors are continuously and mutually interactive. These include the evolutionary, biological, and sociological processes as they interact with human social behavior.\nBULLET::::- Biological Theory: Integrating Development, Evolution and Cognition – devoted to theoretical advances in the fields of biology and cognition, with an emphasis on the conceptual integration afforded by evolutionary and developmental approaches.\nBULLET::::- Evolutionary Anthropology\nBULLET::::- Behavioral and Brain Sciences – interdisciplinary articles in psychology, neuroscience, behavioral biology, cognitive science, artificial intelligence, linguistics and philosophy. About 30% of the articles have focused on evolutionary analyses of behavior.\nBULLET::::- Evolution and Development – research relevant to interface of evolutionary and developmental biology\nBULLET::::- The Evolutionary Review – Art, Science, and Culture\n\nBULLET::::- Brief video clip from the \"Evolution\" PBS Series\nBULLET::::- TED talk by Steven Pinker about his book The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature\nBULLET::::- RSA talk by evolutionary psychologist Robert Kurzban on modularity of mind, based on his book \"Why Everyone (Else) is a Hypocrite\"\nBULLET::::- Richard Dawkins' lecture on natural selection and evolutionary psychology\nBULLET::::- Evolutionary Psychology – Steven Pinker & Frans de Waal Audio recording\nBULLET::::- Stone Age Minds: A conversation with evolutionary psychologists Leda Cosmides and John Tooby\nBULLET::::- Margaret Mead and Samoa. Review of the nature versus nurture debate triggered by Mead's book \"Coming of Age in Samoa.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Evolutionary Psychology\", \"In Our Time\", BBC Radio 4 discussion with Janet Radcliffe Richards, Nicholas Humphrey and Steven Rose (Nov. 2, 2000)\n"}
{"id": "9705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9705", "title": "Languages of Europe", "text": "Languages of Europe\n\nMost languages of Europe belong to the Indo-European language family. \nOut of a total population of 744 million (as of 2018), some 94% are native speakers of an Indo-European language;\nwithin Indo-European, the three largest phyla are Romance, Germanic and Slavic with more than 200 million speakers each, between them accounting for close to 90% of Europeans. Smaller phyla of Indo-European found in Europe include Hellenic (Greek, c. 10 million), Baltic (c. 7 million), Albanian (c. 5 million), Indo-Aryan (Romani, c. 1.5 million) and Celtic (including Welsh, c. 1 million).\n\nOf the approximately 45 million Europeans speaking non-Indo-European languages, most speak languages within either the Uralic and Turkic families. Still smaller groups (such as Basque and various languages of the Caucasus) account for less than 1% of the European population between them. Immigration has added sizeable communities of speakers of African and Asian languages, amounting to about 4% of the population, with Arabic being the most widely spoken of them.\n\nFive languages have more than 50 million native speakers in Europe: French, Italian, German, English and Russian. While Russian has the largest number of native speakers (more than 100 million in Europe), English has the largest number of speakers in total, including some 200 million speakers of English as a second language. (\"See English language in Europe\".)\n\nThe Indo-European language family is descended from Proto-Indo-European, which is believed to have been spoken thousands of years ago. Early speakers of Indo-European daughter languages most likely expanded into Europe with the incipient Bronze Age, around 4,000 years ago (Bell-Beaker culture).\n\nRoughly 215 million Europeans (primarily in Southern and Western Europe) are native speakers of Romance languages, the largest groups including\nFrench (c. 72 million),\nItalian (c. 65 million),\nSpanish (Castilian) (c. 40 million), \nRomanian (c. 23 million),\nPortuguese (c. 10 million),\nCatalan (c. 9 million),\nSicilian (c. 5 million, also subsumed under Italian), \nVenetian language (c. 4 million),\nGalician (c. 2 million),\nSardinian (c. 1 million),\nOccitan (c. 500,000),\nbesides numerous smaller communities.\n\nThe Romance languages are descended from varieties of Vulgar Latin spoken in the various parts of the Roman Empire in Late Antiquity. Latin was itself part of the (otherwise extinct) Italic branch of Indo-European.\nRomance is divided phylogenetically into Italo-Western, Eastern Romance (including Romanian) and Sardinian. The Romance-speaking area in Europe is often referred to as Latin Europe.\n\nWe can further break down Italo-Western into the \"Italo-Dalmatian languages\" (sometimes grouped with Eastern Romance), including the Tuscan-derived Italian and numerous local Romance lects in Italy as well as Dalmatian, and the \"Western Romance languages\". The Western Romance languages in turn separate into the Gallo-Romance languages, including French and its varieties (Langues d'oïl), the Rhaeto-Romance languages and the Gallo-Italic languages; the Occitano-Romance languages, grouped with either Gallo-Romance or East Iberian, including Occitan, Catalan and Aragonese; and finally the West Iberian languages (Spanish-Portuguese), including the Astur-Leonese languages, Galician-Portuguese and Castilian.\n\nThe Germanic languages make up the predominant language family in northwestern Europe.\nAn estimated 210 million Europeans are native speakers of Germanic languages, the largest groups being German (c. 95 million), English (c. 70 million) and Dutch (c. 24 million), Swedish (c. 10 million), Danish (c. 6 million) and Norwegian (c. 5 million).\n\nThere are two extant major sub-divisions: West Germanic and North Germanic. A third group, East Germanic, is now extinct; the only known surviving East Germanic texts are written in the Gothic language.\nWest Germanic is divided into Anglo-Frisian (including English), Low German and Low Franconian (including Dutch) and High German (including Standard German).\n\nBULLET::::- German and Low Franconian\n\nGerman is spoken throughout Germany, Austria, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the East Cantons of Belgium, much of Switzerland (including the northeast areas bordering on Germany and Austria) and northern Italy (South Tyrol).\n\nThere are several groups of German dialects:\nBULLET::::- High German include several dialect families:\nBULLET::::- Standard German\nBULLET::::- Central German dialects, spoken in central Germany and include Luxembourgish\nBULLET::::- High Franconian, a family of transitional dialects between Central and Upper High German\nBULLET::::- Upper German, including Austro-Bavarian and Swiss German\nBULLET::::- Yiddish is a Jewish language developed in Germany and shares many features of High German dialects and Hebrew.\n\nLow German (including Low Saxon) is spoken in various regions throughout Northern Germany and the North and East of the Netherlands. It is an official language in Germany. \nIt may be separated into Low Saxon (West Low German) and East Low German.\n\nDutch is spoken throughout the Netherlands, the northern half of Belgium, as well as the Nord-Pas de Calais region of France, and around Düsseldorf in Germany. In Belgian and French contexts, Dutch is sometimes referred to as Flemish. Dutch dialects are varied and cut across national borders.\n\nBULLET::::- Anglo-Frisian\n\nThe Anglo-Frisian language family is now mostly represented by English (Anglic), descended from the Old English language spoken by the Anglo-Saxons:\nBULLET::::- English, the main language of the United Kingdom, also used in English-speaking Europe\nBULLET::::- Scots, spoken in Scotland and Ulster.\nThe Frisian languages are spoken by about 500,000 Frisians, who live on the southern coast of the North Sea in the Netherlands and Germany. These languages include West Frisian, Saterlandic, and North Frisian.\n\nBULLET::::- North Germanic (Scandinavian)\nThe North Germanic languages are spoken in Scandinavian countries and include Danish (Denmark), Norwegian (Norway), Swedish (Sweden and parts of Finland), or Elfdalian (in a small part of central Sweden), Faroese (Faroe Islands), and Icelandic (Iceland).\n\nEnglish has a long history of contact with Scandinavian languages, given the immigration of Scandinavians early in the history of Britain, and has similar structure with Scandinavian languages.\n\nSlavic languages are spoken in large areas of Central Europe, Southern Europe and Eastern Europe. An estimated 250 million Europeans are native speakers of Slavic languages, the largest groups being \nRussian (c. 110 million in European Russia and adjacent parts of Eastern Europe, Russian forming the largest linguistic community in Europe), \nPolish (c. 55 million),\nUkrainian (c. 40 million), \nSerbo-Croatian (c. 21 million),\nCzech (c. 11 million),\nBulgarian (c. 9 million), \nSlovak (c. 5 million)\nBelarusian and Slovene (c. 3 million each)\nand Macedonian (c. 2 million).\n\nPhylogenetically, Slavic is divided into three subgroups:\nBULLET::::- West Slavic includes Polish, Czech, Slovak, Lower Sorbian, Upper Sorbian and Kashubian.\nBULLET::::- East Slavic includes Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Rusyn.\nBULLET::::- South Slavic is divided into Southeast Slavic and Southwest Slavic groups: \"Southwest Slavic languages\" include Serbo-Croatian and Slovene, each with numerous distinctive dialects. Serbo-Croatian boasts four distinct national standards, Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian, all based on the Eastern Herzegovinian dialect; \"Southeast Slavic languages\" include Bulgarian, Macedonian and Old Church Slavonic (a liturgical language).\n\nBULLET::::- Greek (ca. 13 million) is the official language of Greece and Cyprus, and there are Greek-speaking enclaves in Albania, Bulgaria, Italy, North Macedonia, Romania, Georgia, Ukraine, Lebanon, Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Turkey, and in Greek communities around the world. Dialects of modern Greek that originate from Attic Greek (through Koine and then Medieval Greek) are Cappadocian, Pontic, Cretan, Cypriot, Katharevousa, and Yevanic\nBULLET::::- Italiot Greek is, debatably, a Doric dialect of Greek. It is spoken in southern Italy only, in the southern Calabria region (as Grecanic) and in the Salento region (as Griko). It has been studied by the German linguist Gerhard Rohlfs during the 1930s and 1950s.\nBULLET::::- Tsakonian is a Doric dialect of the Greek language spoken in the lower Arcadia region of the Peloponnese around the village of Leonidio\n\nBULLET::::- The Baltic languages are spoken in Lithuania (Lithuanian (ca. 3 million), Samogitian) and Latvia (Latvian (ca. 2 million), Latgalian). Samogitian and Latgalian are usually considered to be dialects of Lithuanian and Latvian respectively.\nBULLET::::- There are also several extinct Baltic languages, including: Galindian, Curonian, Old Prussian, Selonian, Semigallian and Sudovian.\nBULLET::::- Albanian (ca. 5 million) has two major dialects, Tosk Albanian and Gheg Albanian. It is spoken in Albania and Kosovo, neighboring North Macedonia, Serbia, Greece, Italy and Montenegro. It is also widely spoken in the Albanian diaspora.\nBULLET::::- There are six living Celtic languages, spoken in areas of northwestern Europe dubbed the \"Celtic nations\". All six are members of the Insular Celtic family, which in turn is divided into:\nBULLET::::- Brythonic family: Welsh (Wales, ca. 700 000), Cornish (Cornwall, ca. 500) and Breton (Brittany, ca. 200 000)\nBULLET::::- Goidelic family: Irish (Ireland, ca. 140 000), Scottish Gaelic (Scotland, ca. 50 000), and Manx (Isle of Man, ca. 1 800)\nBULLET::::- Continental Celtic languages had previously been spoken across Europe from Iberia and Gaul to Asia Minor, but became extinct in the first millennium AD.\nBULLET::::- The Indo-Aryan languages have one major representation, it being Romani (c. 1.5 million speakers), introduced to Europe in the late medieval period.\nBULLET::::- The Iranian languages in Europe are natively represented in the North Caucasus, notably with Ossetian (ca. 600 000).\nBULLET::::- Armenian speakers (ca. 7 million) came to Russia in significant numbers after the First World War due to Armenian genocide and dissolution of the Ottoman Empire (see below).\n\nUralic is native to northern Eurasia. Finno-Ugric groups the Uralic languages other than Samoyedic. \nFinnic languages include Finnish (ca. 5 million) and Estonian (ca. 1 million). The Sami languages (ca. 30 000) are closely related to Finnic.\n\nThe Ugric languages are represented in Europe with the Hungarian language (ca. 13 million), historically introduced with the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin of the 9th century.\n\nThe Samoyedic Nenets language is spoken in Nenets Autonomous Okrug in the far northeastern corner of Europe (as delimited by the Ural Mountains).\n\nBULLET::::- Oghuz languages in Europe include Turkish, spoken in European Turkey and by immigrant communities; Azerbaijani is spoken in Azerbaijan and parts of Southern Russia and Gagauz is spoken in Gagauzia.\nBULLET::::- Kypchak languages in Europe include Crimean Tatar, which is spoken in Crimea; Tatar, which is spoken in Tatarstan; Bashkir, which is spoken in Bashkortostan; and Kazakh, which is spoken in Kazakhstan.\nBULLET::::- Oghur languages were historically indigenous to much of Eastern Europe; however, most of them are extinct today, with the exception of Chuvash, which is spoken in Chuvashia.\n\nBULLET::::- The Basque language (or \"Euskara\", ca. 750 000) is a language isolate and the ancestral language of the Basque people who inhabit the Basque Country, a region in the western Pyrenees mountains mostly in northeastern Spain and partly in southwestern France of about 3 million inhabitants, where it is spoken fluently by about 750,000 and understood by more than 1.5 million people. Basque is directly related to ancient Aquitanian, and it is likely that an early form of the Basque language was present in Western Europe before the arrival of the Indo-European languages in the area in the Bronze Age.\nBULLET::::- North Caucasian languages is a geographical blanket term for two unrelated language families spoken chiefly in the north Caucasus and Turkey—the Northwest Caucasian family (including Abkhaz and Circassian) and the Northeast Caucasian family, spoken mainly in the border area of the southern Russian Federation (including Dagestan, Chechnya, and Ingushetia).\nBULLET::::- Kalmyk is a Mongolic language, spoken in the Republic of Kalmykia, part of the Russian Federation. Its speakers entered the Volga region in the early 17th century.\nBULLET::::- Maltese (ca. 500 000) is a Semitic language with Romance and Germanic influences, spoken in Malta. It is based on Sicilian Arabic, with influences from Sicilian, Italian, French and, more recently, English. It is unique in that it is the only Semitic language whose standard form is written in Latin script. It is also the smallest official language of the EU in terms of speakers, and the only official Semitic language within the EU.\nBULLET::::- Cypriot Maronite Arabic (also known as Cypriot Arabic) is a variety of Arabic spoken by Maronites in Cyprus. Most speakers live in Nicosia, but others are in the communities of Kormakiti and Lemesos. Brought to the island by Maronites fleeing Lebanon over 700 years ago, this variety of Arabic has been influenced by Greek in both phonology and vocabulary, while retaining certain unusually archaic features in other respects.\n\nIn the Middle Ages the two most important defining elements of Europe were \"Christianitas\" and \"Latinitas\". Thus language—at least the supranational language—played an elementary role.\nThe earliest dictionaries were glossaries, i.e., more or less structured lists of lexical pairs (in alphabetical order or according to conceptual fields). The Latin-German (Latin-Bavarian) \"Abrogans\" was among the first. A new wave of lexicography can be seen from the late 15th century onwards (after the introduction of the printing press, with the growing interest in standardizing languages).\n\nThe concept of the nation state begins to emerge in the early modern period. Nations adopted particular dialects as their national language. This, together with improved communications, led to official efforts to standardise the national language, and a number of language academies were established (e.g., 1582 \"Accademia della Crusca\" in Florence, 1617 \"Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft\" in Weimar, 1635 \"Académie française\" in Paris, 1713 \"Real Academia Española\" in Madrid). Language became increasingly linked to nation as opposed to culture, and was also used to promote religious and ethnic identity (e.g., different Bible translations in the same language for Catholics and Protestants).\n\nThe first languages for which standardisation was promoted included Italian (\"questione della lingua\": Modern Tuscan/Florentine vs. Old Tuscan/Florentine vs. Venetian → Modern Florentine + archaic Tuscan + Upper Italian), French (the standard is based on Parisian), English (the standard is based on the London dialect) and (High) German (based on the dialects of the chancellery of Meissen in Saxony, Middle German, and the chancellery of Prague in Bohemia (\"Common German\")). But several other nations also began to develop a standard variety in the 16th century.\n\nEurope has had a number of languages that were considered linguae francae over some ranges for some periods according to some historians. Typically in the rise of a national language the new language becomes a lingua franca to peoples in the range of the future nation until the consolidation and unification phases. If the nation becomes internationally influential, its language may become a lingua franca among nations that speak their own national languages. Europe has had no lingua franca ranging over its entire territory spoken by all or most of its populations during any historical period. Some linguae francae of past and present over some of its regions for some of its populations are:\n\nBULLET::::- Classical Greek and then Koine Greek in the Mediterranean Basin from the Athenian empire to the eastern Roman Empire, being replaced by Modern Greek.\nBULLET::::- Koine Greek and Modern Greek, in the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire and other parts of the Balkans south of the Jireček Line.\nBULLET::::- Vulgar Latin and Late Latin among the uneducated and educated populations respectively of the Roman empire and the states that followed it in the same range no later than 900 AD; medieval Latin and Renaissance Latin among the educated populations of western, northern, central and part of eastern Europe until the rise of the national languages in that range, beginning with the first language academy in Italy in 1582/83; new Latin written only in scholarly and scientific contexts by a small minority of the educated population at scattered locations over all of Europe; ecclesiastical Latin, in spoken and written contexts of liturgy and church administration only, over the range of the Roman Catholic Church.\nBULLET::::- Lingua Franca or Sabir, the original of the name, an Italian-based pidgin language of mixed origins used by maritime commercial interests around the Mediterranean in the Middle Ages and early Modern Age.\nBULLET::::- Old French in continental western European countries and in the Crusader states.\nBULLET::::- Czech, mainly during the reign of Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV (14th century) but also during other periods of Bohemian control over the Holy Roman Empire.\nBULLET::::- Middle Low German (14th–16th century, during the heyday of the Hanseatic League).\nBULLET::::- Spanish as Castilian in Spain and New Spain from the times of the Catholic Monarchs and Columbus, c. 1492; that is, after the Reconquista, until established as a national language in the times of Louis XIV, c. 1648; subsequently multinational in all nations in or formerly in the Spanish Empire.\nBULLET::::- Polish, due to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (16th–18th centuries).\nBULLET::::- Italian due to the Renaissance, the opera, the Italian empire, the fashion industry and the influence of the Roman Catholic church.\nBULLET::::- French from the golden age under Cardinal Richelieu and Louis XIV c. 1648; i.e., after the Thirty Years' War, in France and the French colonial empire, until established as the national language during the French Revolution of 1789 and subsequently multinational in all nations in or formerly in the various French Empires.\nBULLET::::- German in Northern, Central, and Eastern Europe.\nBULLET::::- English in Great Britain until its consolidation as a national language in the Renaissance and the rise of Modern English; subsequently internationally under the various states in or formerly in the British Empire; globally since the victories of the predominantly English speaking countries (United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and others) and their allies in the two world wars ending in 1918 (World War I) and 1945 (World War II) and the subsequent rise of the United States as a superpower and major cultural influence.\nBULLET::::- Russian in the former Soviet Union and Russian Empire including Northern and Central Asia.\n\nHistorical attitudes towards linguistic diversity are illustrated by two French laws: the Ordonnance de Villers-Cotterêts (1539), which said that every document in France should be written in French (neither in Latin nor in Occitan) and the Loi Toubon (1994), which aimed to eliminate anglicisms from official documents. States and populations within a state have often resorted to war to settle their differences. There have been attempts to prevent such hostilities: two such initiatives were promoted by the Council of Europe, founded in 1949, which affirms the right of minority language speakers to use their language fully and freely. The Council of Europe is committed to protecting linguistic diversity. Currently all European countries except France, Andorra and Turkey have signed the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, while Greece, Iceland and Luxembourg have signed it, but have not ratified it; this framework entered into force in 1998. Another European treaty, the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, was adopted in 1992 under the auspices of the Council of Europe: it entered into force in 1998, and while it is legally binding for 24 countries, France, Iceland, Italy, North Macedonia, Moldova and Russia have chosen to sign without ratifying the convention.\n\n \nThe main scripts used in Europe today are the Latin and Cyrillic.\n\nThe Greek alphabet was derived from the Phoenician alphabet, and Latin was derived from the Greek via the Old Italic alphabet. In the Early Middle Ages, Ogham was used in Ireland and runes (derived the Old Italic script) in Scandinavia. Both were replaced in general use by the Latin alphabet by the Late Middle Ages. The Cyrillic script was derived from the Greek with the first texts appearing around 940 AD.\nAround 1900 there were mainly two typeface variants of the Latin alphabet used in Europe: Antiqua and Fraktur. Fraktur was used most for German, Estonian, Latvian, Norwegian and Danish whereas Antiqua was used for Italian, Spanish, French, Polish, Portuguese, English, Romanian, Swedish and Finnish. The Fraktur variant was banned by Hitler in 1941, having been described as \"Schwabacher Jewish letters\". Other scripts have historically been in use in Europe, including Phoenician, from which modern Latin letters descend, Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs on Egyptian artefacts traded during Antiquity various runic systems used in Northern Europe preceding Christianisation, and Arabic during the era of the Ottoman Empire.\n\nHungarian rovás was used by the Hungarian people in the early Middle Ages, but it was gradually replaced with the Latin-based Hungarian alphabet when Hungary became a kingdom, though it was revived in the 20th century and has certain marginal, but growing area of usage since then.\n\nThe European Union (as of 2016) had 28 member states accounting for a population of 510 million, or about 69% of the population of Europe.\n\nThe European Union has designated by agreement with the member states 24 languages as \"official and working:\" Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Irish, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish. This designation provides member states with two \"entitlements\": the member state may communicate with the EU in any of the designated and view \"EU regulations and other legislative documents\" in that language.\n\nThe European Union and the Council of Europe have been collaborating in education of member populations in languages for \"the promotion of plurilingualism\" among EU member states, The joint document, \"Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (CEFR)\", is an educational standard defining \"the competencies necessary for communication\" and related knowledge for the benefit of educators in setting up educational programs. \nIn a 2005 independent survey requested by the EU's Directorate-General for Education and Culture regarding the extent to which major European languages were spoken in member states. The results were published in a 2006 document, \"Europeans and Their Languages\", or \"Eurobarometer 243\". In this study, statistically relevant samples of the population in each country were asked to fill out a survey form concerning the languages that they spoke with sufficient competency \"to be able to have a conversation\".\n\nThe following is a table of European languages. The number of speakers as a first or second language (L1 and L2 speakers) listed are speakers in Europe only; see list of languages by number of native speakers and list of languages by total number of speakers for global estimates on numbers of speakers.\n\nThe list includes any language variety with an ISO 639 code. Because the ISO-639-2 and ISO-639-3 codes have different definitions, this means that some communities of speakers may be listed more than once. For instance, speakers of Austro-Bavarian are listed both under \"Bavarian\" (ISO-639-3 code \"bar\") as well as under \"German\" (ISO-639-2 code \"de\").\n\n! Name\n! ISO-639\n! Classification\n!Official status (national)\n!Official status (regional)\n\nKarachay-Balkar  krc  Turkic, Kipchak  300,000   & (Russia)\nKomi  kv  Uralic, Finno-Ugric, Permic  220,000    (Russia)\nMontenegrin\ncnr\nIndo-European, Slavic, South, Western, Serbo-Croatian\n240,700\n\nNenets  yrk  Uralic, Samoyedic  4,000    (Russia)\n\nRecent (post-1945) immigration to Europe introduced substantial communities of speakers of non-European languages.\n\nThe largest such communities include Arabic speakers (see Arabs in Europe)\nand Turkish speakers (beyond European Turkey and the historical sphere of influence of the Ottoman Empire, see Turks in Europe).\nArmenians, Berbers and Kurds have diaspora communities of c. 1–2 million each. The various languages of Africa and languages of India form numerous smaller diaspora communities.\n\nBULLET::::- List of the largest immigrant languages\n{class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n!Name\n!ISO 639\n!Classification\n!L1\n!Ethnic diaspora\nArabic ar Afro-Asiatic, Semitic  > 4 million c. 12 million\nTurkish tr  Turkic, Oghuz  c. 3 million  c. 7 million\nArmenian  hy  Indo-European  c. 1 million  c. 2-3 million\nKurdish  ku  Indo-European, Iranian, Western  c. 0.6 million  c. 1 million\nBengali–Assamese  bn as syl  Indo-European, Indo-Aryan c. 0.6 million  c. 1 million\nAzerbaijani  az  Turkic, Oghuz  c. 0.5 million  c. 0.7 million\nKabyle  kab  Afro-Asiatic, Berber  c. 0.5 million  c. 1 million\nChinesezh Sino-Tibetan, Sinitic  c. 0.3 million  c. 2 million \nUrduurIndo-European, Indo-Aryan c. 0.3 million c. 1.8 million\n\nUzbek  uz Turkic, Karluk c. 0.3 million c. 1–2 million\nPersian  fa  Indo-European, Iranian, Western  c. 0.3 million  c. 0.4 million\nPunjabi  pa  Indo-European, Indo-Aryan c. 0.3 million c. 0.7 million\nGujarati  gu Indo-European, Indo-Aryan c. 0.2 million c. 0.6 million\nTamil  ta  Dravidian  c. 0.2 million  c. 0.5 million\nSomali  so  Afro-Asiatic, Cushitic  c. 0.2 million  c. 0.4 million\n\nBULLET::::- Ethnic groups in Europe\nBULLET::::- Eurolinguistics\nBULLET::::- European Day of Languages\nBULLET::::- Multilingual countries and regions of Europe\nBULLET::::- Travellingua\nBULLET::::- Standard Average European\n\nBULLET::::- Map of Minorities & Regional and Minority Languages of Europe, Language Diversity (2017)\n"}
{"id": "9706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9706", "title": "Eindhoven University of Technology", "text": "Eindhoven University of Technology\n\nThe Eindhoven University of Technology (), abbr. , is a technical university in the Netherlands, operating in English. \n\nThe University has been placed in the top 500 universities in the world by five major ranking tables. The 2019 QS World University Rankings place Eindhoven 99th in the world, 34th in Europe, and 3rd in the Netherlands - TU/e has moved up 59 places in this world ranking since 2012 (in two other main world rankings it is 167th and 51-75th).\n\nTU/e is the Dutch member of the EuroTech Universities Alliance, a strategic partnership of universities of science & technology in Europe: Technical University of Denmark (DTU), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), École Polytechnique (L’X), The Technion, Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e), and Technical University of Munich (TUM).\n\nThe Eindhoven University of Technology was founded as the \"Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven\" (THE) on 23 June 1956 by the Dutch government. It was the second institute of its kind in the Netherlands, preceded only by the Delft University of Technology. \n\nUndergraduate education was given in four- or five-year programs until 2002, styled along the lines of the German system of education; graduates of these programs were granted an engineering title and allowed to prefix their name with the title \"ir.\" (an abbreviation of ingenieur; not to be confused with graduates of technical \"hogescholen\", who were engineers abbreviated \"ing.\"). Starting in 2002, following the entry into force of the Bologna Accords, the university switched to the bachelor/master structure (students graduating in 2002 were given both an old-style engineering title and a new master's title). The undergraduate programs are now split into two parts, a three-year bachelor program and a two-year master program. \n\nOn 3 January 2011, the university's strategic vision document for the period up to 2020, the \"Strategic Plan 2020\", was presented. Despite the economic crisis and the budget cutbacks announced by the Dutch government for the period up to 2014, the university set itself an ambitious strategic vision for the period up to 2020. This vision included establishing a University College to foster both depth, breadth, and societal relevance in engineering education; establishing a combined Graduate School to manage the graduate programs; an increase of the student body by 50 percent; a 50 percent increase in the number of annual PhDs awarded; an increase of knowledge \"valorisation\" (exploitation by industry and society) to a campus-wide score of 4.2; increasing the international position of the university to within the top-100 universities; and increasing the embedding of the university within the city and the Brainport region by transforming the campus into a high-grade science park with laboratories, housing facilities for 700 students and researchers and supporting facilities. The science park was one of the more costly elements of the plan.\n\nThe Eindhoven University of Technology is a public university of the Netherlands. As such its general structure and management is determined by the \"Wet op het Hoger Onderwijs en Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek\" (English: \"Law on Higher Education and Scientific Research\"). Between that law and the statutes of the university itself, the management of the university is organized according to the following chart:\n\nThe day-to-day running of the university is in the hands of the Executive College (Dutch: \"College van Bestuur\"). The College provides oversight for the departments, the service organizations and the Innovation Lab, plus the local activities of the Stan Ackermans Institute. The College consists of three people, plus a secretary:\n\nBULLET::::- The president: The president is the chair of the College and the main face of the university to the outside world. Over the last few years the post has been held by people from outside the university, chosen from high levels of industry, in order to strengthen the ties between the university and industrial partners. The current president is Robert-Jan Smits, the former Director-General of Research and Innovation at the European Commission.\nBULLET::::- The rector magnificus: The rector magnificus is the one member of the College whose membership is mandated by law. The law allows the university to appoint a rector in any way, but the university statutes determine that the rector magnificus must be an active professor at the university (and must have been that before being appointed rector); in practice the rector is always a former department dean. The rector is the voice of the academic staff in the College and guards the academic interests of the university in the College. The current rector magnificus is Frank Baaijens.\nBULLET::::- The vice president: The third member is a \"tie-breaker\" member of the College. The post is open to anybody (but generally not filled by an academic staff member). The current vice president is Nicole Ummelen.\nBULLET::::- The secretary: The secretary is not a member of the College but a university functionary who does secretarial work for the College, keeping the minutes and the records and taking care of communication between the College and the university. The College secretary is usually the secretary for the entire university. The current secretary is Susanne van Weelden.\n\nThere are two bodies that provide oversight over the Executive College:\n\nBULLET::::- The Oversight Board is an external board of five people appointed by the Minister of Education (one member is appointed at the suggestion of the University Council). The Board provides external oversight of the running of the university, including changing of the statutes, the budget and other management decisions.\nBULLET::::- The University Council is a council of 18 people, half of whom are elected from the university staff (academic and otherwise) and half from the student body. The University Council is informed of the running of the university by the College at least twice a year and may advise the College as it sees fit. It guards against discrimination within the university. And the council must agree to changes in the management structure. The Council membership is open to all students and personnel, except those persons who are in the Oversight Board, the Executive College or who are the University Secretary.\n\nMost of the work at the university is done in the departments and the service organizations.\n\nBULLET::::- The departments take care of most of the research and education at the university; each one is run by its professors, headed by the dean. The deans are all members of the executive deliberation meeting, which is a regular meeting of the deans and the rector.\nBULLET::::- The service organizations provide services to the inhabitants of the university campus. Examples of these organizations include the housing organization, the ICT organization and the Communication Expertise Center (which does external communications, including to the press). Each service organization is headed by an organization head.\n\nBoth for the departments and the service organizations, the staff (and students) are involved with the running of the body. For that reason both types of bodies have advisory councils which have advisory and co-decision authorities.\n\nOver the past two decades, the TU/e has increasingly developed commercial interests and off-campus ties. These include commercial agreements and contracts directly between the university and external companies, but also interests in spinoff companies. In order to manage these kinds of contractual obligations the university started the TU/e Holding B.V. in 1997. The Holding is a limited company, dedicated to the commercial exploitation of scientific knowledge.\n\nThe scientific departments (or faculties; Dutch: \"faculteiten\") are the primary vehicles for teaching and research in the university. They employ the majority of the academic staff, are responsible for teaching and sponsor the research schools and institutions.\n\nThe departments also offer Ph.D programs (Dutch: \"promotiefase\") whereby a qualified master may earn a Ph.D. Unlike in anglo-saxon countries these are not educational programs, however; rather, a person working towards obtaining the Ph.D is a research employee of the university.\n\nThe TU/e has nine departments:\nBULLET::::- Biomedical Engineering\nBULLET::::- Built Environment\nBULLET::::- Electrical Engineering\nBULLET::::- Industrial Design\nBULLET::::- Chemical Engineering and Chemistry\nBULLET::::- Industrial Engineering & Innovation Sciences (formerly Technology Management)\nBULLET::::- Applied Physics\nBULLET::::- Mechanical Engineering\nBULLET::::- Mathematics and Computer Science\n\nThe university offers honors programs aimed at both bachelor and master students. At the bachelor level it consists of intensive study within eight possible areas or tracks. At the master level it consists of personal leadership and professional development components, over and above the normal masters study.\n\nIn 1986, the university started a number of programs for a postgraduate doctorate of engineering (PDEng) together with two other Dutch technological universities (TU Delft and University of Twente). These programs are managed by the Stan Ackermans Institute on behalf of the 4TU Federation. Each program is two years in length. Ten programs are available at the TU/e.\nBULLET::::- TU/e PDEng programs:\nBULLET::::- Automotive Systems Design\nBULLET::::- Clinical Informatics\nBULLET::::- Data Science\nBULLET::::- Healthcare Systems Design\nBULLET::::- Information and Communication Technology\nBULLET::::- Process and Product Design\nBULLET::::- Qualified Medical Engineer\nBULLET::::- Smart Buildings and Cities\nBULLET::::- Software Technology\nBULLET::::- User-System Interaction\n\nNationally, more than 3,500 students have earned the postgraduate PDEng degree through this program.\n\nThe university hosts a number of other educational programs that are in some way related to the main educational programs. These include the teacher's program and an MBA program.\n\nBULLET::::- Eindhoven School of Education: Teacher's education for masters, to get their higher education teaching certificate. Also does research into educational sciences and innovation in education.\nBULLET::::- TIAS School for Business and Society: A shared MBA program with the University of Tilburg, for university graduates.\nBULLET::::- HBO minor program: Bachelor programs for students of HBO universities (four-year bachelor programs), to allow them access to university master programs.\n\nThe TU/e participates in a large number of research institutes which balance in different ways between pure science and applied science research. Some of these institutes are bound strictly to the university, others combine research across different universities. \n\nThe TU/e is among the world’s ten best-performing research universities in terms of research cooperation with industry in 2011 (Number 1 in 2009). Ten to 20 percent of the scientific publications of these ten universities in the period 2006–2008 were the result of partnerships with researchers in industry. As well as TU/e and Delft University of Technology, the top 10 also includes two universities in Japan (Tokyo Institute of Technology and Keio University in Tokyo), two in Sweden (CTH Chalmers University of Technology and KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm), and one each in Denmark (DTU Technical University of Denmark in Lyngby), Finland (University of Helsinki), Norway (Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Trondheim) and the USA (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York).\n\nThe TU/e plays a central role in the academic, economic and social life of Eindhoven and the surrounding region. In addition the university maintains relations with institutions far beyond that region as well and participates in national and international events (sometimes through the student body).\n\nThe TU/e is enormously important to the economy of the Eindhoven region, as well as the wider areas of BrabantStad and the Samenwerkingsverband Regio Eindhoven. It provides highly skilled labor for the local knowledge economy and is a knowledge and research partner for technology companies in the area.\n\nThe historic basis for the university's role as an economy and research motor was the interaction with Philips. The university was founded primarily to address the need of Philips for local personnel with academic levels of education in electronics, physics, chemistry and later computer science. Later that interest spread to DAF and Royal Dutch Shell (which became the primary employer for graduates of the chemistry department). There was also a synergy with these companies in that senior personnel were hired from them to form the academic staff of the university (which led to the Eindhoven joke that the university trains the engineers and Philips trains the professors).\n\nChanging economic times and business strategies changed the relationship during the 1980s and 1990s. As Philips started moving away from the region, its importance to the region and the university decreased. A struggle for economic survival forced the university to seek closer ties with the city and region of Eindhoven in the 1989–1995 period, resulting in the creation of the Brainport initiative to draw high tech business and industry to the region. The university started expending more effort in knowledge valorisation, in incubating technology startups, in providing direct knowledge support for local technology companies. Also the academic interests of the research shifted with the times, with more effort going into energy efficiency research, green technologies, and other areas of interest driven by social relevance (the call for better technology in the medical field, for example, led to cooperation with the Catharina Hospital and the University of Maastricht medical department and finally the creation of the Biomedical Technology department).\n\nThe TU/e is host (and in some cases also commissioner) of a number of highly successful research schools, including the ESI and the DPI. These research institutes are a source of high-tech knowledge for high-tech companies in the area, such as ASML, NXP and FEI. The university also plays a large role as knowledge and personnel supplier to other companies in the High Tech Campus Eindhoven and helps incubate startups through the Eindhoven Twinning Center. It is also a knowledge supporter of the automotive industry in the Helmond region.\n\nIn the extended region, the TU/e is part of the backbone of the Eindhoven-Leuven-Aachen triangle. This economic cooperation agreement between three cities in three countries has created one of the most innovative regions in the European Union (measured in terms of money invested in technology and knowledge economy); the agreement is based on the cooperative triangle that connects the three technical universities in those cities.\n\nAs of the summer of 2010, the TU/e is host to the Eindhoven Energy Institute (EEI). The EEI is a virtual research institute (meaning that it doesn't have any actual offices or facilities), which manages and coordinates the activities of a large number of groups and subinstitutes in the general area of sustainable and alternative energy technologies.\n\nThe scientific director of the institute is prof.dr.ir. David Smeulders. He is pro forma head of the research department, which is split into four key areas: \"Built Environment\" (energy usage and patterns in building, headed by prof.dr.ir. Jan Hensen from the Department of the Built Environment), \"Future Fuels\" (headed by prof.dr. Philip de Goey of Mechanical Engineering), \"Energy Conversion\" (headed by prof.dr.ir. René Janssen from Chemical Engineering) and \"Fusion and Plasma\" (headed by prof.dr. Niek Lopes Cardozo from Physics). The EEI also incorporates the Graduate School on Sustainable Energy, which the TU/e had already established together with the TU Munich and DTU Lyngby. Secretarial services will be provided by the Center Technology for Sustainable Development (TDO) which also already existed at the TU/e (since 1994).\n\nEnergy research at the TU/e is among the best in academic Europe (a February 2010 study by Reed Elsevier puts it second only to Imperial College London). This fact, as well as the unique attention to energy in the built-up environment, drew the attention of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology. The EEI is now a full co-location of EIT's KIC on Sustainable Energy (InnoEnergy).\n\nThe TU/e maintains active academic cooperation with sister institutions in many different countries, for example:\n\nBULLET::::- National University of Singapore, Singapore\nBULLET::::- Zhejiang University, China\nBULLET::::- Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China\nBULLET::::- Fudan University, China\nBULLET::::- Northeastern University (China), China\nBULLET::::- International Institute of Information Technology, Bangalore, India\nBULLET::::- International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India\nBULLET::::- Manipal Academy of Higher Education, India\nBULLET::::- Georgia Institute of Technology, US\nBULLET::::- Northwestern University, US\nBULLET::::- Carnegie Mellon University, US\nBULLET::::- RMIT University, Australia\nBULLET::::- Middle East Technical University, Turkey\nBULLET::::- Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium\n\nThe TU/e also provides education to an increasing number of foreign students and graduates. According to the 2009 annual report in the academic year 2008–2009 there were 490 exchange students, 103 foreign nationals registered in a bachelor program, 430 in a master program, 158 in a professional doctorate program (79% of the total). In 2009 the university employed 37 foreign professors (15.9% of the total) and 16 foreign associate professors (12.8%). Overall, 29.5% of the university staff was non-Dutch.\n\nIn 2011/2012, the TU/e has Erasmus bilateral agreements with many universities in 30 countries across Europe in a diverse range of subjects for student exchange.\n\nIn addition to the \"regular\" types of sports practiced among the student body and by the staff, the TU/e collaborates with the student body in a number of \"technology sporting efforts\". These usually take the form of cross-department projects, which makes them multidisciplinary efforts. Some examples include:\n\nBULLET::::- Robot football: In 2010 TechUnited, the university's robot football team, won the European Championship, came second for the third time in a row at the world championship in Singapore and finally won the world championship in 2012. The team is part of the Mid-Size league of RoboCup.\nBULLET::::- Auto racing:The TU/e hosts and sponsors a student race team, University Racing Eindhoven (URE). This team competes annually in the Formula Student and other races with self-built racers. Starting in 2010 the team switched from a petrol engine to an electric car; this car came third at Silverstone, second at Hockenheim and won the Formula Student in its first year.\n\nThere university is more than just the departments, research bodies and the students. There are several ancillary activities necessary to the running of the university, activities that cross the boundaries and interests of the different departments. These activities are carried out by the universities' service organizations.\n\nThe university has the following service organizations:\n\n!Organization!!Full name!!Purpose\nDAZ\nvalign=\"top\"Organizational and secretarial functions for varied activities, the alumni organization and the Student Sport Center\nCEC\nvalign=\"top\"Communications Expertise Center \nvalign=\"top\"Responsible for all university communications and announcements, including interacting with the press and communications regarding external billing and payments. CEC also handles the printing and distribution of university brochures and guards the uniform application of the university's house style.\nDPO\nvalign=\"top\"Human Resources Management \nvalign=\"top\"All HR-related activities, from vacancies and pension plans to regulations about health and workplace safety, to the bicycle plan (a tax break for personnel to buy a bicycle).\nDFEZ\nvalign=\"top\"Financial and Economic Services \nvalign=\"top\"University finances.\nDH\nvalign=\"top\"Housing service \nvalign=\"top\"Management of all real estate belonging university\nICT\nvalign=\"top\"ICT Service \nvalign=\"top\"Management of university computers and student laptops, networks, network security, shared storage facilities, university Sharepoint sites, plus codes of conduct relating to those systems\nIEC\nvalign=\"top\"Information Expertise Center \nvalign=\"top\"The university library (both physical and digital).\nDIZ\nvalign=\"top\"Internal Affairs Service \nvalign=\"top\"Internal services, such as the BedrijfsHulpVerlening (Emergency Assistance for catastrophes like fires, heart attacks and so on), Logistics, Purchasing and Contract Management.\nSTU\nvalign=\"top\"Student Service Center \nvalign=\"top\"Student services (admission and registries, information for highschool students and other, future students, laptop service, et cetera).\nGTD\nvalign=\"top\"Common Technical Service \nvalign=\"top\"Provides technical services to departments (e.g. building of experiments, bespoke machinery, prototypes, specialized software).\n\nBULLET::::- Wil van der Aalst, Dutch Computer scientist\nBULLET::::- Jo Coenen, Dutch architect and former Chief Architect of the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Martijn van Dam, member of the House of Representatives (2006–10, 2010–12)\nBULLET::::- Marijn Dekkers, Chairman of Unilever\nBULLET::::- Jan Dietz, Dutch computer scientist\nBULLET::::- Teun van Dijck, member of the House of Representatives (2006–10, 2010–12)\nBULLET::::- Camiel Eurlings, Dutch Minister of Transport, Public Works and Water Management (2006–2010)\nBULLET::::- Gerard Kleisterlee, Chairman of Vodafone and a former President and Chief Executive Officer of Royal Philips Electronics\nBULLET::::- Arno Kuijlaars, mathematician, professor at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven\nBULLET::::- G.M. Nijssen, Dutch computer scientist\nBULLET::::- Itay Noy, Israeli watchmaker\nBULLET::::- Kees Schouhamer Immink, president Turing Machines Inc, digital pioneer, winner Emmy Award, recipient IEEE Medal of Honor\nBULLET::::- Sjoerd Soeters, architect\nBULLET::::- René van Zuuk, Dutch architect\n\nBULLET::::- Jacques Benders, mathematician\nBULLET::::- Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn, mathematician\nBULLET::::- Henk Buck, professor of chemistry\nBULLET::::- Jo Coenen, Dutch architect and former Chief Architect of the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Henk Dorgelo, physicist and first rector magnificus\nBULLET::::- Edsger W. Dijkstra, mathematician and computer scientist\nBULLET::::- Hugo Christiaan Hamaker, physicist\nBULLET::::- Hubert-Jan Henket, architect\nBULLET::::- Alexandre Horowitz, mechanical engineer; inventor of the Philishave\nBULLET::::- Arie Andries Kruithof, physicist, discovered the Kruithofeffect and Kruithofcurve\nBULLET::::- Piet Lemstra, inventor of the Dyneema fibre\nBULLET::::- Jack van Lint, mathematician\nBULLET::::- Harry Lintsen, historian in technology history, former chairman Foundation for the History of Technology\nBULLET::::- Archer Martin, Fellow of the Royal Society, 1952 Nobel laureate in chemistry (professor TU/e 1964–1974)\nBULLET::::- Bert Meijer, chemical engineer, pioneer in polymer research\nBULLET::::- Sjoerd Romme, professor of Entrepreneurship & Innovation\nBULLET::::- Johan Schot, historian, professor of technology history\nBULLET::::- Piet Steenkamp, lawyer, co-founder of the CDA\nBULLET::::- Martinus Tels, chemical engineer, rector magnificus, pioneer of waste management processes in the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- Ton van Trier, rector magnificus, Minister of Education in the cabinet Van Agt-I\nBULLET::::- Wietse Venema, programmer and physicist\n\nBULLET::::- prof. dr. ir.René de Borst: Spinozapremie (1999)\nBULLET::::- prof. dr. Bert Meijer: KNCV Gold Medal (1993), Arthur K. Doolittle Award (1995), Spinozapremie (2001), Wheland Medal 2010/2011\nBULLET::::- prof.dr.ir. René Janssen: KIvI/NIRIA Speurwerkprijs 2010, Spinozapremie (2015)\nBULLET::::- prof. dr.ir. Jaap Schouten: Simon Stevin Master 2006\n\nEindhoven is currently (2018) ranked between 51 and 141 in the world (the university itself provides a survey), and a top ten technical university in Europe.\n!Year !! THE Ranking (Change) !! QS Ranking (Change)\n200570 – \n200667 ( 3) – \n2007130 ( 63) – \n2008128 ( 2) – \n2009120 ( 8) – \n2010114 ( 6)126\n2010-11115 ( 1)146 ( 20)\n2012-13114 ( 1) 158 ( 12) \n2013-14106 ( 8) 157 ( 1)\n2014-15144 ( 38) overall, Engineering and Technology 64 147 ( 10)\n2015-16176 ( 32) overall, Engineering and Technology 62 ( 2), Physical sciences 86 117 ( 30)\n2016-17177 ( 1) overall, Engineering and Technology 64 ( 2), Computer Science 75 121 ( 4)\n2017-18141 ( 36) overall, Engineering and Technology 51 ( 13), Computer Science 64 104 ( 17)\n2018-19\n167 ( 26) overall, Engineering and Technology 69 ( 18), Computer Science 74\n99 ( 5)\n\nIn a 2003 European Commission report, TU/e was ranked as third among European research universities (after Cambridge and Oxford, at equality with TU Munich and thus making it the highest ranked Technical University in Europe), based on the impact of its scientific research.\nIn 2011 Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) rankings, TU/e was placed at the 52-75 bucket internationally in Engineering/Technology and Computer Science ( ENG ) category and at 34th place internationally in the Computer Science subject field.\n\nBULLET::::- DevLab (research alliance)\nBULLET::::- \"Technologist\" – magazine published by Eurotech Universities\n\nBULLET::::- Official website in Dutch\nBULLET::::- Official website in English\n"}
{"id": "9707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9707", "title": "Electronegativity", "text": "Electronegativity\n\nElectronegativity, symbol \"χ\", is a chemical property that describes the tendency of an atom to attract a shared pair of electrons (or electron density) towards itself. An atom's electronegativity is affected by both its atomic number and the distance at which its valence electrons reside from the charged nucleus. The higher the associated electronegativity number, the more an atom or a substituent group attracts electrons towards itself.\n\nOn the most basic level, electronegativity is determined by factors like the nuclear charge (the more protons an atom has, the more \"pull\" it will have on electrons) and the number/location of other electrons present in the atomic shells (the more electrons an atom has, the farther from the nucleus the valence electrons will be, and as a result the less positive charge they will experience—both because of their increased distance from the nucleus, and because the other electrons in the lower energy core orbitals will act to shield the valence electrons from the positively charged nucleus).\n\nThe opposite of electronegativity is electropositivity: a measure of an element's ability to donate electrons.\n\nThe term \"electronegativity\" was introduced by Jöns Jacob Berzelius in 1811,\nthough the concept was known even before that and was studied by many chemists including Avogadro.\nIn spite of its long history, an accurate scale of electronegativity was not developed until 1932, when Linus Pauling proposed an electronegativity scale, which depends on bond energies, as a development of valence bond theory. It has been shown to correlate with a number of other chemical properties. Electronegativity cannot be directly measured and must be calculated from other atomic or molecular properties. Several methods of calculation have been proposed, and although there may be small differences in the numerical values of the electronegativity, all methods show the same periodic trends between elements.\n\nThe most commonly used method of calculation is that originally proposed by Linus Pauling. This gives a dimensionless quantity, commonly referred to as the Pauling scale (\"χ\"), on a relative scale running from 0.79 to 3.98 (hydrogen = 2.20). When other methods of calculation are used, it is conventional (although not obligatory) to quote the results on a scale that covers the same range of numerical values: this is known as an electronegativity in \"Pauling units\".\n\nAs it is usually calculated, electronegativity is not a property of an atom alone, but rather a property of an atom in a molecule. Properties of a free atom include ionization energy and electron affinity. It is to be expected that the electronegativity of an element will vary with its chemical environment, but it is usually considered to be a transferable property, that is to say that similar values will be valid in a variety of situations.\n\nCaesium is the least electronegative element in the periodic table (=0.79), while fluorine is most electronegative (=3.98). Francium and caesium were originally both assigned 0.7; caesium's value was later refined to 0.79, but no experimental data allows a similar refinement for francium. However, francium's ionization energy is known to be slightly higher than caesium's, in accordance with the relativistic stabilization of the 7s orbital, and this in turn implies that francium is in fact more electronegative than caesium.\n\nPauling first proposed the concept of electronegativity in 1932 as an explanation of the fact that the covalent bond between two different atoms (A–B) is stronger than would be expected by taking the average of the strengths of the A–A and B–B bonds. According to valence bond theory, of which Pauling was a notable proponent, this \"additional stabilization\" of the heteronuclear bond is due to the contribution of ionic canonical forms to the bonding.\n\nThe difference in electronegativity between atoms A and B is given by:\nwhere the dissociation energies, \"E\", of the A–B, A–A and B–B bonds are expressed in electronvolts, the factor (eV) being included to ensure a dimensionless result. Hence, the difference in Pauling electronegativity between hydrogen and bromine is 0.73 (dissociation energies: H–Br, 3.79 eV; H–H, 4.52 eV; Br–Br 2.00 eV)\n\nAs only differences in electronegativity are defined, it is necessary to choose an arbitrary reference point in order to construct a scale. Hydrogen was chosen as the reference, as it forms covalent bonds with a large variety of elements: its electronegativity was fixed first at 2.1, later revised to 2.20. It is also necessary to decide which of the two elements is the more electronegative (equivalent to choosing one of the two possible signs for the square root). This is usually done using \"chemical intuition\": in the above example, hydrogen bromide dissolves in water to form H and Br ions, so it may be assumed that bromine is more electronegative than hydrogen. However, in principle, since the same electronegativities should be obtained for any two bonding compounds, the data are in fact overdetermined, and the signs are unique once a reference point is fixed (usually, for H or F).\n\nTo calculate Pauling electronegativity for an element, it is necessary to have data on the dissociation energies of at least two types of covalent bond formed by that element. A. L. Allred updated Pauling's original values in 1961 to take account of the greater availability of thermodynamic data, and it is these \"revised Pauling\" values of the electronegativity that are most often used.\n\nThe essential point of Pauling electronegativity is that there is an underlying, quite accurate, semi-empirical formula for dissociation energies, namely:\n\nor sometimes, a more accurate fit\n\nThis is an approximate equation, but holds with good accuracy. Pauling obtained it by noting that a bond can be approximately represented as a quantum mechanical superposition of a covalent bond and two ionic bond-states. The covalent energy of a bond is approximately, by quantum mechanical calculations, the geometric mean of the two energies of covalent bonds of the same molecules, and there is an additional energy that comes from ionic factors, i.e. polar character of the bond.\n\nThe geometric mean is approximately equal to the arithmetic mean - which is applied in the first formula above - when the energies are of the similar value, e.g., except for the highly electropositive elements, where there is a larger difference of two dissociation energies; the geometric mean is more accurate and almost always gives a positive excess energy, due to ionic bonding. The square root of this excess energy, Pauling notes, is approximately additive, and hence one can introduce the electronegativity. Thus, it is this semi-empirical formula for bond energy that underlies Pauling electronegativity concept.\n\nThe formulas are approximate, but this rough approximation is in fact relatively good and gives the right intuition, with the notion of polarity of the bond and some theoretical grounding in quantum mechanics. The electronegativities are then determined to best fit the data.\n\nIn more complex compounds, there is additional error since electronegativity depends on the molecular environment of an atom. Also, the energy estimate can be only used for single, not for multiple bonds. The energy of formation of a molecule containing only single bonds then can be approximated from an electronegativity table, and depends on the constituents and sum of squares of differences of electronegativities of all pairs of bonded atoms. Such a formula for estimating energy typically has relative error of order of 10%, but can be used to get a rough qualitative idea and understanding of a molecule.\n\nRobert S. Mulliken proposed that the arithmetic mean of the first ionization energy (E) and the electron affinity (E) should be a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract electrons. As this definition is not dependent on an arbitrary relative scale, it has also been termed absolute electronegativity, with the units of kilojoules per mole or electronvolts.\n\nHowever, it is more usual to use a linear transformation to transform these absolute values into values that resemble the more familiar Pauling values. For ionization energies and electron affinities in electronvolts,\nand for energies in kilojoules per mole,\n\nThe Mulliken electronegativity can only be calculated for an element for which the electron affinity is known, fifty-seven elements as of 2006.\nThe Mulliken electronegativity of an atom is sometimes said to be the negative of the chemical potential. By inserting the energetic definitions of the ionization potential and electron affinity into the Mulliken electronegativity, it is possible to show that the Mulliken chemical potential is a finite difference approximation of the electronic energy with respect to the number of electrons., i.e.,\n\nA. Louis Allred and Eugene G. Rochow considered that electronegativity should be related to the charge experienced by an electron on the \"surface\" of an atom: The higher the charge per unit area of atomic surface the greater the tendency of that atom to attract electrons. The effective nuclear charge, \"Z\", experienced by valence electrons can be estimated using Slater's rules, while the surface area of an atom in a molecule can be taken to be proportional to the square of the covalent radius, \"r\". When \"r\" is expressed in picometres,\n\nR.T. Sanderson has also noted the relationship between Mulliken electronegativity and atomic size, and has proposed a method of calculation based on the reciprocal of the atomic volume. With a knowledge of bond lengths, Sanderson's model allows the estimation of bond energies in a wide range of compounds. Sanderson's model has also been used to calculate molecular geometry, \"s\"-electrons energy, NMR spin-spin constants and other parameters for organic compounds. This work underlies the concept of electronegativity equalization, which suggests that electrons distribute themselves around a molecule to minimize or to equalize the Mulliken electronegativity. This behavior is analogous to the equalization of chemical potential in macroscopic thermodynamics.\n\nPerhaps the simplest definition of electronegativity is that of Leland C. Allen, who has proposed that it is related to the average energy of the valence electrons in a free atom,\n\nwhere \"ε\" are the one-electron energies of s- and p-electrons in the free atom and \"n\" are the number of s- and p-electrons in the valence shell. It is usual to apply a scaling factor, 1.75×10 for energies expressed in kilojoules per mole or 0.169 for energies measured in electronvolts, to give values that are numerically similar to Pauling electronegativities.\n\nThe one-electron energies can be determined directly from spectroscopic data, and so electronegativities calculated by this method are sometimes referred to as spectroscopic electronegativities. The necessary data are available for almost all elements, and this method allows the estimation of electronegativities for elements that cannot be treated by the other methods, e.g. francium, which has an Allen electronegativity of 0.67. However, it is not clear what should be considered to be valence electrons for the d- and f-block elements, which leads to an ambiguity for their electronegativities calculated by the Allen method.\n\nIn this scale neon has the highest electronegativity of all elements, followed by fluorine, helium, and oxygen.\n\nThe wide variety of methods of calculation of electronegativities, which all give results that correlate well with one another, is one indication of the number of chemical properties which might be affected by electronegativity. The most obvious application of electronegativities is in the discussion of bond polarity, for which the concept was introduced by Pauling. In general, the greater the difference in electronegativity between two atoms the more polar the bond that will be formed between them, with the atom having the higher electronegativity being at the negative end of the dipole. Pauling proposed an equation to relate \"ionic character\" of a bond to the difference in electronegativity of the two atoms, although this has fallen somewhat into disuse.\n\nSeveral correlations have been shown between infrared stretching frequencies of certain bonds and the electronegativities of the atoms involved: however, this is not surprising as such stretching frequencies depend in part on bond strength, which enters into the calculation of Pauling electronegativities. More convincing are the correlations between electronegativity and chemical shifts in NMR spectroscopy or isomer shifts in Mössbauer spectroscopy (see figure). Both these measurements depend on the s-electron density at the nucleus, and so are a good indication that the different measures of electronegativity really are describing \"the ability of an atom in a molecule to attract electrons to itself\".\n\nIn general, electronegativity increases on passing from left to right along a period, and decreases on descending a group. Hence, fluorine is the most electronegative of the elements (not counting noble gases), whereas caesium is the least electronegative, at least of those elements for which substantial data is available. This would lead one to believe that caesium fluoride is the compound whose bonding features the most ionic character.\n\nThere are some exceptions to this general rule. Gallium and germanium have higher electronegativities than aluminium and silicon, respectively, because of the d-block contraction. Elements of the fourth period immediately after the first row of the transition metals have unusually small atomic radii because the 3d-electrons are not effective at shielding the increased nuclear charge, and smaller atomic size correlates with higher electronegativity (see Allred-Rochow electronegativity, Sanderson electronegativity above). The anomalously high electronegativity of lead, in particular when compared to thallium and bismuth, is an artifact of electronegativity varying with oxidation state: its electronegativity conforms better to trends if it is quoted for the +2 state instead of the +4 state.\n\nIn inorganic chemistry it is common to consider a single value of the electronegativity to be valid for most \"normal\" situations. While this approach has the advantage of simplicity, it is clear that the electronegativity of an element is \"not\" an invariable atomic property and, in particular, increases with the oxidation state of the element.\n\nAllred used the Pauling method to calculate separate electronegativities for different oxidation states of the handful of elements (including tin and lead) for which sufficient data was available. However, for most elements, there are not enough different covalent compounds for which bond dissociation energies are known to make this approach feasible. This is particularly true of the transition elements, where quoted electronegativity values are usually, of necessity, averages over several different oxidation states and where trends in electronegativity are harder to see as a result.\n\n! Acid\n! Formula\n! Chlorineoxidationstate\n! p\"K\"\n\nThe chemical effects of this increase in electronegativity can be seen both in the structures of oxides and halides and in the acidity of oxides and oxoacids. Hence CrO and MnO are acidic oxides with low melting points, while CrO is amphoteric and MnO is a completely basic oxide.\n\nThe effect can also be clearly seen in the dissociation constants of the oxoacids of chlorine. The effect is much larger than could be explained by the negative charge being shared among a larger number of oxygen atoms, which would lead to a difference in p\"K\" of log() = –0.6 between hypochlorous acid and perchloric acid. As the oxidation state of the central chlorine atom increases, more electron density is drawn from the oxygen atoms onto the chlorine, reducing the partial negative charge on the oxygen atoms and increasing the acidity.\n\nThe electronegativity of an atom changes depending on the hybridization of the orbital employed in bonding. Electrons in s orbitals are held more tightly than electrons in p orbitals. Hence, a bond to an atom that employs an sp\"\" hybrid orbital for bonding will be more heavily polarized to that atom when the hybrid orbital has more s character. That is, when electronegativities are compared for different hybridization schemes of a given element, the order χ(sp) < χ(sp) < χ(sp) holds (the trend should apply to non-integer hybridization indices as well). While this holds true in principle for any main-group element, values for the hybridization-specific electronegativity are most frequently cited for carbon. In organic chemistry, these electronegativities are frequently invoked to predict or rationalize bond polarities in organic compounds containing double and triple bonds to carbon.\n! Hybridization\n! χ (Pauling)\n'generic' C\n\nIn organic chemistry, electronegativity is associated more with different functional groups than with individual atoms. The terms group electronegativity and substituent electronegativity are used synonymously. However, it is common to distinguish between the inductive effect and the resonance effect, which might be described as σ- and π-electronegativities, respectively. There are a number of linear free-energy relationships that have been used to quantify these effects, of which the Hammett equation is the best known. Kabachnik parameters are group electronegativities for use in organophosphorus chemistry.\n\nElectropositivity is a measure of an element's ability to donate electrons, and therefore form positive ions; thus, it is opposed to electronegativity.\n\nMainly, this is an attribute of metals, meaning that, in general, the greater the metallic character of an element the greater the electropositivity. Therefore, the alkali metals are most electropositive of all. This is because they have a single electron in their outer shell and, as this is relatively far from the nucleus of the atom, it is easily lost; in other words, these metals have low ionization energies.\n\nWhile electronegativity increases along periods in the periodic table, and decreases down groups, electropositivity \"decreases\" along periods (from left to right) and \"increases\" down groups.\n\nBULLET::::- Electronegativities of the elements (data page)\nBULLET::::- Chemical polarity\n\n\nBULLET::::- WebElements, lists values of electronegativities by a number of different methods of calculation\nBULLET::::- Video explaining electronegativity\nBULLET::::- Electronegativity Chart, a summary listing of each elements electronegativity along with an interactive periodic table\n"}
{"id": "9708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9708", "title": "European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages", "text": "European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages\n\nThe European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML) is a European treaty (CETS 148) adopted in 1992 under the auspices of the Council of Europe to protect and promote historical regional and minority languages in Europe. The preparation for the charter was undertaken by the predecessor to the current Congress of Local and Regional Authorities, the Standing Conference of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe because involvement of local and regional government was essential. The actual charter was written in the Parliamentary Assembly based on the Congress' Recommendations. It only applies to languages traditionally used by the nationals of the State Parties (thus excluding languages used by recent immigrants from other states, see immigrant languages), which significantly differ from the majority or official language (thus excluding what the state party wishes to consider as mere local dialects of the official or majority language) and that either have a territorial basis (and are therefore traditionally spoken by populations of regions or areas within the State) or are used by linguistic minorities within the State as a whole (thereby including such languages as Yiddish, Romani and Lemko, which are used over a wide geographic area).\n\nSome states, such as Ukraine and Sweden, have tied the status of minority language to the recognized national minorities, which are defined by ethnic, cultural and/or religious criteria, thereby circumventing the Charter's notion of linguistic minority. \n\nLanguages that are official within regions, provinces or federal units within a State (for example Catalan in Spain) are not classified as official languages of the State and may therefore benefit from the Charter. On the other hand, Ireland has not been able to sign the Charter on behalf of the Irish language (although a minority language) as it is defined as the first official language of the state. The United Kingdom has ratified the Charter in respect to (among other languages) Welsh in Wales, Scots in Scotland, and Irish in Northern Ireland. France, although a signatory, has been constitutionally blocked from ratifying the Charter in respect to the languages of France.\n\nThe charter provides a large number of different actions state parties can take to protect and promote historical regional and minority languages. There are two levels of protection—all signatories must apply the lower level of protection to qualifying languages. Signatories may further declare that a qualifying language or languages will benefit from the higher level of protection, which lists a range of actions from which states must agree to undertake at least 35.\n\nCountries can ratify the charter in respect of its minority languages based on Part II or Part III of the charter, which contain varying principles. Countries can treat languages differently under the charter, for example, in the United Kingdom, the Welsh language is ratified under the general Part II principles as well as the more specific Part III commitments, while the Cornish language is ratified only under Part II.\n\nPart II of the Charter details eight main principles and objectives upon which States must base their policies and legislation. They are seen as a framework for the preservation of the languages concerned.\nBULLET::::- Recognition of regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth.\nBULLET::::- Respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority language.\nBULLET::::- The need for resolute action to promote such languages.\nBULLET::::- The facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of such languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life.\nBULLET::::- The provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of such languages at all appropriate stages.\nBULLET::::- The promotion of relevant transnational exchanges.\nBULLET::::- The prohibition of all forms of unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and intended to discourage or endanger its maintenance or development.\nBULLET::::- The promotion by states of mutual understanding between all the country’s linguistic groups.\n\nPart III details comprehensive rules, across a number of sectors, by which states agree to abide. Each language to which Part III of the Charter is applied must be named specifically by the government. States must select at least thirty-five of the undertakings in respect to each language. Many provisions contain several options, of varying degrees of stringency, one of which has to be chosen “according to the situation of each language”. The areas from which these specific undertakings must be chosen are as follows:\nBULLET::::- Education\nBULLET::::- Judicial authorities\nBULLET::::- Administrative authorities and public services\nBULLET::::- Media\nBULLET::::- Cultural activities and facilities\nBULLET::::- Economic and social life\nBULLET::::- Transfrontier exchanges\n\nCountries that have ratified the Charter, and languages for which the ratification was made:\n\nratification: 25 January 2002\n\nBULLET::::- Assyrian\nBULLET::::- Greek\nBULLET::::- Russian\nBULLET::::- Kurdish (under two names: Kurmanji and Ezdiki)\nratification: 28 June 2001\n\nBULLET::::- Croatian of Burgenland\nBULLET::::- Slovene (in Carinthia and Styria)\nBULLET::::- Hungarian (in Burgenland and Vienna)\nBULLET::::- Czech (in Vienna)\nBULLET::::- Slovak (in Vienna)\nBULLET::::- Romani (in Burgenland)\nratification: 21 September 2010\nBULLET::::- Albanian\nBULLET::::- Montenegrin\nBULLET::::- Czech\nBULLET::::- Italian\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Macedonian\nBULLET::::- German\nBULLET::::- Polish\nBULLET::::- Romanian\nBULLET::::- Rusyn\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nBULLET::::- Slovene\nBULLET::::- Turkish\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nBULLET::::- Jewish languages (Yiddish and Ladino)\nratification: 5 November 1997\n\nBULLET::::- Czech\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Italian\nBULLET::::- Rusyn\nBULLET::::- Serbian\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nratification: 26 August 2002\n\nBULLET::::- Armenian\nBULLET::::- Cypriot Maronite Arabic\nratification: 15 November 2006\n\nBULLET::::- Slovak (parts II and III, across the whole territory)\nBULLET::::- Polish (part II; and part III in Moravia-Silesia, in districts Frydek-Místek and Karviná)\nBULLET::::- German (part II only)\nBULLET::::- Romani (part II only)\nratification: 8 September 2000\n\nBULLET::::- German (in Southern Jutland)\nratification: 9 November 1994\n\nBULLET::::- Karelian\nBULLET::::- Sami\nBULLET::::- Swedish (co-official language)\nratification: 16 September 1998\n\nBULLET::::- Danish (in Schleswig-Holstein)\nBULLET::::- Upper Sorbian (in the Free State of Saxony)\nBULLET::::- Lower Sorbian (in Brandenburg)\nBULLET::::- North Frisian (in Schleswig-Holstein)\nBULLET::::- Saterland Frisian (in Lower Saxony)\nBULLET::::- Romani (across Germany)\nBULLET::::- Low German (part III in Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein); (part II in Brandenburg, Northrhine-Westphalia and Saxony-Anhalt)\nBULLET::::- Low Rhenish (in Northrhine-Westphalia)\nratification: 26 April 1995\n\nBULLET::::- Armenian\nBULLET::::- Boyash\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian\nBULLET::::- Croatian\nBULLET::::- German\nBULLET::::- Greek\nBULLET::::- Polish\nBULLET::::- Romani\nBULLET::::- Romanian\nBULLET::::- Rusyn\nBULLET::::- Serbian\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nBULLET::::- Slovene\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nratification: 18 November 1997\n\nBULLET::::- No regional or minority languages\nratification: 22 June 2005\n\nBULLET::::- No regional or minority languages\nratification: 15 February 2006\n\nBULLET::::- Albanian\nBULLET::::- Romani\nratification: 2 May 1996\n\nBULLET::::- West Frisian (in Friesland, under part III)\nBULLET::::- Limburgish (in Limburg, under part II)\nBULLET::::- Low Saxon (across the Netherlands, under part II)\nBULLET::::- Romani (across the Netherlands, under part II)\nBULLET::::- Yiddish (across the Netherlands, under part II)\nratification: 10 November 1993\n\nBULLET::::- Sami (parts II and III)\nBULLET::::- Kven (part II only)\nBULLET::::- Romani (part II only)\nBULLET::::- Scandoromani (part II only)\nratification: 12 February 2009\n\nBULLET::::- Armenian\nBULLET::::- Belarusian\nBULLET::::- Czech\nBULLET::::- German\nBULLET::::- Hebrew\nBULLET::::- Karaim\nBULLET::::- Kashub\nBULLET::::- Lithuanian\nBULLET::::- Romani\nBULLET::::- Russian\nBULLET::::- Lemko\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nBULLET::::- Tatar\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nBULLET::::- Yiddish\n style=\"vertical-align: top; padding-left: 1em; width: 50%;\" \nratification 24 October 2007\n\nPart II applied to:\nBULLET::::- Albanian\nBULLET::::- Armenian\nBULLET::::- Greek\nBULLET::::- Italian\nBULLET::::- Macedonian\nBULLET::::- Polish\nBULLET::::- Romani\nBULLET::::- Rusyn\nBULLET::::- Tatar\nBULLET::::- Yiddish\n\nPart III applied to:\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian\nBULLET::::- Croatian\nBULLET::::- Czech\nBULLET::::- German\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Russian\nBULLET::::- Serbian\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nBULLET::::- Turkish\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nratification: 15 February 2006\n\nBULLET::::- Albanian\nBULLET::::- Bosnian\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian\nBULLET::::- Croatian\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Romani\nBULLET::::- Romanian\nBULLET::::- Rusyn\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nratification: 5 September 2001\n\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian\nBULLET::::- Croatian\nBULLET::::- Czech\nBULLET::::- German\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Polish\nBULLET::::- Romani\nBULLET::::- Rusyn\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian\nratification: 4 October 2000\n\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Italian\nBULLET::::- Romani\nratification: 9 April 2001\n\nBULLET::::- Aragonese, \"luenga propia\" in Aragon\nBULLET::::- Astur-Leonese, present in Asturias; and in part of Leon, Zamora, Cantabria and Extremadura (recognized in Asturias, Castile and León)\nBULLET::::- Basque (official in the Basque Country and part of Navarre)\nBULLET::::- Catalan, official in the Balearic Islands and Catalonia; \"llengua pròpia\" in Aragon.\nBULLET::::- Valencian (A dialect of Catalan, official in Valencia)\nBULLET::::- Galician, present in Galicia; and in part of Asturias, Leon and Zamora provinces (official in Galicia)\nratification: 9 February 2000\n\nBULLET::::- Finnish\nBULLET::::- Meänkieli\nBULLET::::- Sami\nBULLET::::- Romani\nBULLET::::- Yiddish\nratification: 23 December 1997\n\nBULLET::::- Italian\nBULLET::::- Romansh (Co-official)\nratification: 19 September 2005\n\nUkraine does not specify languages by name, but rather ratifies on behalf of \"the languages of the following ethnic minorities of Ukraine\": Not counted are Rusyns (Ruthenians), because Ukraine (unlike neighboring countries) denies them separate ethnic and linguistic status.\nBULLET::::- Armenian\nBULLET::::- Belarusian\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian\nBULLET::::- Crimean Tatar\nBULLET::::- Gagauz\nBULLET::::- Greek\nBULLET::::- German\nBULLET::::- Hungarian\nBULLET::::- Jewish/Yiddish\nBULLET::::- Moldavian\nBULLET::::- Polish\nBULLET::::- Romanian\nBULLET::::- Russian\nBULLET::::- Slovak\nratification : 1 July 2001 (effective; ratified 27 March 2001)\nThe Government of the United Kingdom declares [on 23 April 2003] that the Charter should extend to the \"Isle of Man\", being a territory for whose international relations the Government of the United Kingdom is responsible.\n\nBULLET::::- Cornish (Article 2, Part II only (Article 7))\nBULLET::::- Irish<br>(Articles 2 and 3, Part II (Article 7) and Part III (Articles 8-14, with reservations))\nBULLET::::- Scots (Articles 2 and 3, Part II only (Article 7))\nBULLET::::- Scots as Ulster-Scots (Articles 2 and 3, Part II only (Article 7))\nBULLET::::- Scottish Gaelic<br>(Articles 2 and 3, Part II (Article 7) and Part III (Articles 8-14, with reservations))<br>(British Nationality Act 1981, Schedule 1, Article 1(1)(c), and the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005 )\nBULLET::::- Welsh<br>(Articles 2 and 3, Part II (Article 7) and Part III (Articles 8-14, with reservations))<br>(Welsh Language Act 1967 (repealed 21.12.1993) and the Welsh Language Act 1993 )\nBULLET::::- Manx (Manx Gaelic) (Article 2, Part II only (Article 7))\n\nBULLET::::- European languages\nBULLET::::- Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities\nBULLET::::- Languages of the European Union\nBULLET::::- Language policy in France\nBULLET::::- Linguistic rights\nBULLET::::- List of Linguistic Rights in Constitutions (Europe)\nBULLET::::- Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights\nBULLET::::- Vergonha\n\nBULLET::::- European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages text\nBULLET::::- More information on the treaty\nBULLET::::- Charter website\nBULLET::::- Eurolang (News agency about minority languages in Europe)\nBULLET::::- Explanatory Report on the Charter\nBULLET::::- lexpress.fr\nBULLET::::- Application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages,Doc. 12881\n"}
{"id": "9709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9709", "title": "English Civil War", "text": "English Civil War\n\nThe English Civil War (1642–1651) was a series of civil wars and political machinations between Parliamentarians (\"Roundheads\") and Royalists (\"Cavaliers\") principally over the manner of England's governance. The first (1642–1646) and second (1648–1649) wars pitted the supporters of King Charles I against the supporters of the Long Parliament, while the third (1649–1651) saw fighting between supporters of King Charles II and supporters of the Rump Parliament. The war ended with Parliamentarian victory at the Battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651.\n\nThe outcome of the war was threefold: the trial and execution of Charles I (1649); the exile of his son, Charles II (1651); and the replacement of English monarchy with, at first, the Commonwealth of England (1649–1653) and then the Protectorate under the personal rule of Oliver Cromwell (1653–1658) and briefly his son Richard (1658–1659). In England, the monopoly of the Church of England on Christian worship was ended, while in Ireland the victors consolidated the established Protestant Ascendancy. Constitutionally, the wars established the precedent that an English monarch cannot govern without Parliament's consent, although the idea of Parliamentary sovereignty was only legally established as part of the Glorious Revolution in 1688.\n\nThe term \"English Civil War\" appears most often in the singular, although historians often divide the conflict into two or three separate wars. These were not restricted to England, as Wales was part of the Kingdom of England and affected accordingly. The conflicts also involved wars with Scotland and Ireland, and civil wars within them.\n\nThe wars spanning all three countries are known as the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. In the early 19th century, Sir Walter Scott referred to it as \"the Great Civil War\".\n\nUnlike other civil wars in England, which focused on who should rule, these conflicts were more concerned with the manner in which the three kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland were governed. The 1911 \"Encyclopædia Britannica\" called the series of conflicts the \"Great Rebellion\", while some historians – notably Marxists such as Christopher Hill (1912–2003) – long favoured the term \"English Revolution\".\n\nEach side had a geographical stronghold, such that minority elements were silenced or fled. The royalty's included the countryside, the shires, the cathedral city of Oxford, and the less economically developed areas of northern and western England. Parliament's spanned the industrial centres, ports, and economically advanced regions of southern and eastern England, including the remaining cathedral cities (except York, Chester, Worcester). Lacey Baldwin Smith says, \"the words \"populous, rich, and rebellious\" seemed to go hand in hand\".\n\nMany officers and veteran soldiers had fought in European wars, notably the Eighty Years' War between the Spanish and the Dutch, which began in 1568.\n\nThe main battle tactic came to be known as pike and shot infantry. The two sides would line up opposite one another, with infantry brigades of musketeers in the centre. These carried matchlock muskets, an inaccurate weapon which nevertheless could be lethal at a range of up to 300 yards. Musketeers would assemble three rows deep, the first kneeling, second crouching, and third standing, allowing all to fire a volley simultaneously. At times, troops divided into two groups, allowing one to reload while the other fired. Among the musketeers were pike men, carrying pikes of to long, whose main purpose was to protect the musketeers from cavalry charges. Positioned on each side of the infantry were cavalry, with a right-wing led by the lieutenant-general and left by the commissary general. Its main aim was to rout the opponents' cavalry, then turn and overpower their infantry.\n\nThe Royalist cavaliers' skill and speed on horseback led to many early victories. Prince Rupert, commanding the king's cavalry, used a tactic learned while fighting in the Dutch army, where cavalry would charge at full speed into the opponent's infantry, firing their pistols just before impact.\n\nHowever, with Oliver Cromwell and the introduction of the more disciplined New Model Army, a group of disciplined pike men would stand its ground, which could have a devastating effect.\n\nThe Royalist cavalry had a tendency to chase down individual targets after the initial charge, leaving their forces scattered and tired, whereas Cromwell's cavalry was slower but better disciplined. Trained to operate as a single unit, it went on to win many decisive victories.\n\nThe English Civil War broke out in 1642, less than 40 years after the death of Queen Elizabeth I. Elizabeth had been succeeded by her first cousin twice-removed, King James VI of Scotland, as James I of England, creating the first personal union of the Scottish and English kingdoms. As King of Scots, James had become accustomed to Scotland's weak parliamentary tradition since assuming control of the Scottish government in 1583, so that upon assuming power south of the border, the new King of England was affronted by the constraints the English Parliament attempted to place on him in exchange for money. In spite of this, James's personal extravagance meant he was perennially short of money and had to resort to extra-parliamentary sources of income.\n\nThis extravagance was tempered by James's peaceful disposition, so that by the succession of his son Charles I in 1625 the two kingdoms had both experienced relative peace, internally and in their relations with each other, for as long as anyone could remember. Charles followed his father's dream in hoping to unite the kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland into a single kingdom. Many English Parliamentarians were suspicious of such a move, fearing that such a new kingdom might destroy old English traditions that had bound the English monarchy. As Charles shared his father's position on the power of the crown (James had described kings as \"little gods on Earth\", chosen by God to rule in accordance with the doctrine of the \"Divine Right of Kings\"), the suspicions of the Parliamentarians had some justification.\n\nAt the time, the Parliament of England did not have a large permanent role in the English system of government. Instead, it functioned as a temporary advisory committee and was summoned only if and when the monarch saw fit. Once summoned, a Parliament's continued existence was at the king's pleasure since it was subject to dissolution by him at any time.\n\nYet in spite of this limited role, Parliament had acquired over the centuries \"de facto\" powers of enough significance that monarchs could not simply ignore them indefinitely. For a monarch, Parliament's most indispensable power was its ability to raise tax revenues far in excess of all other sources of revenue at the Crown's disposal. By the 17th century, Parliament's tax-raising powers had come to be derived from the fact that the gentry was the only stratum of society with the ability and authority to collect and remit the most meaningful forms of taxation then available at the local level. So if the king wanted to ensure smooth revenue collection, he needed gentry cooperation. For all of the Crown's legal authority, its resources were limited by any modern standard to an extent that if the gentry refused to collect the king's taxes on a national scale, the Crown lacked a practical means of compelling them.\n\nFrom the thirteenth century, monarchs ordered the election of representatives to sit in the House of Commons, with most voters being the owners of property, although in some potwalloper boroughs every male householder could vote. When assembled along with the House of Lords, these elected representatives formed a Parliament. So the concept of Parliaments allowed representatives of the property-owning class to meet, primarily, at least from the point of view of the monarch, to sanction whatever taxes the monarch wished to collect. In the process, the representatives could debate and enact statutes, or acts. However, Parliament lacked the power to force its will upon the monarch; its only leverage was the threat of withholding the financial means required to implement his plans.\n\nMany concerns were raised over Charles's marriage in 1625 to a Roman Catholic French princess: Henrietta Maria. Parliament refused to assign him the traditional right to collect customs duties for his entire reign, deciding instead to grant it only on a provisional basis and negotiate with him.\n\nCharles, meanwhile, decided to send an expeditionary force to relieve the French Huguenots, whom French royal troops held besieged in La Rochelle. Such military support for Protestants on the Continent potentially alleviated concerns about the King's marriage to a Catholic. However, Charles's insistence on giving command of the English force to his unpopular royal favorite George Villiers, the Duke of Buckingham, undermined that support. Unfortunately for Charles and Buckingham, the relief expedition proved a fiasco (1627), and Parliament, already hostile to Buckingham for his monopoly on royal patronage, opened impeachment proceedings against him. Charles responded by dissolving Parliament. This saved Buckingham but confirmed the impression that Charles wanted to avoid Parliamentary scrutiny of his ministers.\n\nHaving dissolved Parliament and unable to raise money without it, the king assembled a new one in 1628. (The elected members included Oliver Cromwell, John Hampden, and Edward Coke.) The new Parliament drew up a Petition of Right, which Charles accepted as a concession to obtain his subsidy. The Petition made reference to Magna Carta, but did not grant him the right of tonnage and poundage, which Charles had been collecting without Parliamentary authorization since 1625. Several more active members of the opposition were imprisoned, which caused outrage; one, John Eliot, subsequently died in prison and came to be seen as a martyr for the rights of Parliament.\n\nCharles I avoided calling a Parliament for the next decade, a period known as the \"personal rule of Charles I\", or the \"Eleven Years' Tyranny\". During this period, Charles's policies were determined by his lack of money. First and foremost, to avoid Parliament, the King needed to avoid war. Charles made peace with France and Spain, effectively ending England's involvement in the Thirty Years' War. However, that in itself was far from enough to balance the Crown's finances.\n\nUnable to raise revenue without Parliament and unwilling to convene it, Charles resorted to other means. One was to revive conventions, often outdated. For example, a failure to attend and receive knighthood at Charles's coronation became a finable offence with the fine paid to the Crown. The King also tried to raise revenue through ship money, demanding in 1634–1636 that the inland English counties pay a tax for the Royal Navy to counter the threat of privateers and pirates in the English Channel. Established law supported the policy of coastal counties and inland ports such as London paying ship money in times of need, but it had not been applied to inland counties before. Authorities had ignored it for centuries, and many saw it as yet another extra-Parliamentary, illegal tax, which prompted some prominent men to refuse to pay it. Charles issued a writ against John Hampden for his failure to pay, and although five judges including Sir George Croke supported Hampden, seven judges found in favor of the King in 1638. The fines imposed on people who refused to pay ship money and standing out against its illegality aroused widespread indignation.\n\nDuring his \"Personal Rule\", Charles aroused most antagonism through his religious measures. He believed in High Anglicanism, a sacramental version of the Church of England, theologically based upon Arminianism, a creed shared with his main political adviser, Archbishop William Laud. In 1633, Charles appointed Laud Archbishop of Canterbury and started making the Church more ceremonial, replacing the wooden communion tables with stone altars. Puritans accused Laud of reintroducing Catholicism; when they complained, he had them arrested. In 1637, John Bastwick, Henry Burton, and William Prynne had their ears cut off for writing pamphlets attacking Laud's views — a rare penalty for gentlemen, and one that aroused anger. Moreover, the Church authorities revived statutes from the time of Elizabeth I about church attendance and fined Puritans for not attending Anglican services.\n\nThe end of Charles's independent governance came when he attempted to apply the same religious policies in Scotland. The Church of Scotland, reluctantly episcopal in structure, had independent traditions. Charles wanted one uniform Church throughout Britain and introduced a new, High Anglican version of the English Book of Common Prayer to Scotland in the middle of 1637. This was violently resisted. A riot broke out in Edinburgh, which may have been started in St Giles' Cathedral, according to legend, by Jenny Geddes. In February 1638, the Scots formulated their objections to royal policy in the National Covenant. This document took the form of a \"loyal protest\", rejecting all innovations not first tested by free Parliaments and General Assemblies of the Church.\n\nIn the spring of 1639, King Charles I accompanied his forces to the Scottish border to end the rebellion known as the Bishops' War, but after an inconclusive campaign, he accepted the offered Scottish truce: the Pacification of Berwick. This truce proved temporary, and a second war followed in mid-1640. A Scots army defeated Charles's forces in the north, then captured Newcastle. Charles eventually agreed not to interfere in Scotland's religion and paid the Scots' war expenses.\n\nCharles needed to suppress the rebellion in Scotland, but had insufficient funds to do so. He needed to seek money from a newly elected English Parliament in 1640. Its majority faction, led by John Pym, used this appeal for money as a chance to discuss grievances against the Crown and oppose the idea of an English invasion of Scotland. Charles took exception to this \"lèse-majesté\" (offense against the ruler) and dissolved the Parliament after only a few weeks; hence its name, \"the Short Parliament\".\n\nWithout Parliament's support, Charles attacked Scotland again, breaking the truce at Berwick, and suffered comprehensive defeat. The Scots went on to invade England, occupying Northumberland and Durham. Meanwhile, another of Charles's chief advisers, Thomas Wentworth, 1st Viscount Wentworth, had risen to the role of Lord Deputy of Ireland in 1632, and brought in much-needed revenue for Charles by persuading the Irish Catholic gentry to pay new taxes in return for promised religious concessions.\n\nIn 1639, Charles had recalled Wentworth to England and in 1640 made him Earl of Strafford, attempting to have him achieve similar results in Scotland. This time he proved less successful and the English forces fled the field at their second encounter with the Scots in 1640. Almost the whole of Northern England was occupied and Charles forced to pay £850 per day to keep the Scots from advancing. Had he not done so they would have pillaged and burnt the cities and towns of Northern England.\n\nAll this put Charles in a desperate financial state. As King of Scots, he had to find money to pay the Scottish army in England; as King of England, he had to find money to pay and equip an English army to defend England. His means of raising English revenue without an English Parliament fell critically short of achieving this. Against this backdrop, and according to advice from the Magnum Concilium (the House of Lords, but without the Commons, so not a Parliament), Charles finally bowed to pressure and summoned another English Parliament in November 1640.\n\nThe new Parliament proved even more hostile to Charles than its predecessor. It immediately began to discuss grievances against him and his government, with Pym and Hampden (of ship money fame) in the lead. They took the opportunity presented by the King's troubles to force various reforming measures — including many with strong \"anti-Papist\" themes — upon him. The members passed a law stating that a new Parliament would convene at least once every three years — without the King's summons if need be. Other laws passed making it illegal for the king to impose taxes without Parliamentary consent and later gave Parliament control over the king's ministers. Finally, the Parliament passed a law forbidding the King to dissolve it without its consent, even if the three years were up. Ever since this Parliament has been known as the Long Parliament. However, Parliament did attempt to avert conflict by requiring all adults to sign The Protestation, an oath of allegiance to Charles.\n\nEarly in the Long Parliament, the house overwhelmingly accused Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford of high treason and other crimes and misdemeanors.\n\nHenry Vane the Younger supplied evidence of Strafford's claimed improper use of the army in Ireland, alleging that he had encouraged the King to use his Ireland-raised forces to threaten England into compliance. This evidence was obtained from Vane's father, Henry Vane the Elder, a member of the King's Privy council, who refused to confirm it in Parliament out of loyalty to Charles. On 10 April 1641, Pym's case collapsed, but Pym made a direct appeal to Henry Vane the Younger to produce a copy of the notes from the King's Privy council, discovered by the younger Vane and secretly turned over to Pym, to the great anguish of the Elder Vane. These notes contained evidence that Strafford had told the King, \"Sir, you have done your duty, and your subjects have failed in theirs; and therefore you are absolved from the rules of government, and may supply yourself by extraordinary ways; you have an army in Ireland, with which you may reduce the kingdom.\"\n\nPym immediately launched a Bill of Attainder stating Strafford's guilt and demanding that he be put to death. Unlike a guilty verdict in a court case, attainder did not require a legal burden of proof, but it did require the king's approval. Charles, however, guaranteed Strafford that he would not sign the attainder, without which the bill could not be passed. Furthermore, the Lords opposed the severity of a death sentence on Strafford. Yet increased tensions and a plot in the army to support Strafford began to sway the issue. On 21 April, the Commons passed the Bill (204 in favour, 59 opposed, and 250 abstained), and the Lords acquiesced. Charles, still incensed over the Commons' handling of Buckingham, refused his assent. Strafford himself, hoping to head off the war he saw looming, wrote to the king and asked him to reconsider. Charles, fearing for the safety of his family, signed on 10 May. Strafford was beheaded two days later. In the meantime both Parliament and the King agreed to an independent investigation into the king's involvement in Strafford's plot.\n\nThe Long Parliament then passed the Triennial Act, also known as the Dissolution Act in May 1641, to which the Royal Assent was readily granted. The Triennial Act required Parliament to be summoned at least once in three years. When the King failed to issue a proper summons, the members could assemble on their own. This act also forbade ship money without Parliament's consent, fines in distraint of knighthood, and forced loans. Monopolies were cut back sharply, the Courts of the Star Chamber and High Commission abolished by the Habeas Corpus Act 1640, and the Triennial Act respectively. All remaining forms of taxation were legalised and regulated by the Tonnage and Poundage Act. On 3 May, Parliament decreed The Protestation, attacking the 'wicked counsels' of Charles's government, whereby those who signed the petition undertook to defend 'the true reformed religion', Parliament, and the king's person, honour and estate. Throughout May, the House of Commons launched several bills attacking bishops and Episcopalianism in general, each time defeated in the Lords.\n\nCharles and his Parliament hoped that the execution of Strafford and the Protestation would end the drift towards war, but in fact, they encouraged it. Charles and his supporters continued to resent Parliament's demands, and Parliamentarians continued to suspect Charles of wanting to impose episcopalianism and unfettered royal rule by military force. Within months, the Irish Catholics, fearing a resurgence of Protestant power, struck first, and all Ireland soon descended into chaos. Rumors circulated that the King supported the Irish, and Puritan members of the Commons soon started murmuring that this exemplified the fate that Charles had in store for them all.\n\nIn early January 1642, Charles, accompanied by 400 soldiers, attempted to arrest five members of the House of Commons on a charge of treason. This attempt failed. When the troops marched into Parliament, Charles enquired of William Lenthall, the Speaker, as to the whereabouts of the five. Lenthall replied, \"May it please your Majesty, I have neither eyes to see nor tongue to speak in this place but as the House is pleased to direct me, whose servant I am here.\" So the Speaker proclaimed himself a servant of Parliament, rather than the King.\n\nIn the summer of 1642, these national troubles helped to polarise opinion, ending indecision about which side to support or what action to take. Opposition to Charles also arose from many local grievances. For example, imposed drainage schemes in The Fens disrupted the livelihood of thousands after the King awarded a number of drainage contracts. Many saw the King as indifferent to public welfare, and this played a role in bringing much of eastern England into the Parliamentarian camp. This sentiment brought with it such people as the Earl of Manchester and Oliver Cromwell, each a notable wartime adversary of the King. Conversely, one of the leading drainage contractors, the Earl of Lindsey, was to die fighting for the King at the Battle of Edgehill.\n\nIn early January 1642, a few days after failing to capture five members of the House of Commons, Charles feared for the safety of his family and retinue and left the London area for the north country. Further frequent negotiations by letter between the King and the Long Parliament, through to early summer, proved fruitless. As the summer progressed, cities and towns declared their sympathies for one faction or the other: for example, the garrison of Portsmouth commanded by Sir George Goring declared for the King, but when Charles tried to acquire arms from Kingston upon Hull, the weaponry depository used in the previous Scottish campaigns, Sir John Hotham, the military governor appointed by Parliament in January, refused to let Charles enter the town, and when Charles returned with more men later, Hotham drove them off. Charles issued a warrant for Hotham's arrest as a traitor but was powerless to enforce it. Throughout the summer, tensions rose and there was brawling in several places, the first death from the conflict taking place in Manchester.\n\nAt the outset of the conflict, much of the country remained neutral, though the Royal Navy and most English cities favored Parliament, while the King found marked support in rural communities. Historians estimate that both sides had only about 15,000 men between them, but the war quickly spread and eventually involved every level of society. Many areas attempted to remain neutral. Some formed bands of Clubmen to protect their localities from the worst excesses of the armies of both sides, but most found it impossible to withstand both King and Parliament. On one side, the King and his supporters fought for traditional government in church and state, while on the other, most Parliamentarians initially took up arms to defend what they saw as a traditional balance of government in church and state, which the bad advice the King received from his advisers had undermined before and during the \"Eleven Years' Tyranny\". The views of the members of Parliament ranged from unquestioning support of the King — at one point during the First Civil War, more members of the Commons and Lords gathered in the King's Oxford Parliament than at Westminster — through to radicals who sought major reforms in religious independence and redistribution of power at a national level. However, even the most radical Parliamentarian supporters still favored keeping Charles on the throne.\n\nAfter the debacle at Hull, Charles moved on to Nottingham, raising the royal standard there on 22 August 1642. At the time, Charles had with him about 2,000 cavalries and a small number of Yorkshire infantrymen, and using the archaic system of a Commission of Array, his supporters started to build a larger army around the standard. Charles moved in a westerly direction, first to Stafford, then on to Shrewsbury, as support for his cause seemed particularly strong in the Severn valley area and in North Wales. While passing through Wellington, he declared in what became known as the \"Wellington Declaration\" that he would uphold the \"Protestant religion, the laws of England, and the liberty of Parliament\".\n\nThe Parliamentarians who opposed the King did not remain passive in this pre-war period. As in Hull, they took measures to secure strategic towns and cities by appointing to office men sympathetic to their cause. On 9 June they voted to raise an army of 10,000 volunteers and appointed Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of Essex its commander three days later. He received orders \"to rescue His Majesty's person, and the persons of the Prince [of Wales] and the Duke of York [James II] out of the hands of those desperate persons who were about them.\" The Lords Lieutenant whom Parliament appointed used the Militia Ordinance to order the militia to join Essex's army.\n\nTwo weeks after the King had raised his standard at Nottingham, Essex led his army north towards Northampton, picking up support along the way (including a detachment of Huntingdonshire cavalry raised and commanded by Oliver Cromwell). By mid-September Essex's forces had grown to 21,000 infantry and 4,200 cavalries and dragoons. On 14 September he moved his army to Coventry and then to the north of the Cotswolds, a strategy that placed it between the Royalists and London. With the size of both armies now in the tens of thousands and only Worcestershire between them, it was inevitable that cavalry reconnaissance units would meet sooner or later. This happened in the first major skirmish of the Civil War, when a troop of about 1,000 Royalist cavalry under Prince Rupert, a German nephew of the King and one of the outstanding cavalry commanders of the war, defeated a Parliamentary cavalry detachment under Colonel John Brown at the Battle of Powick Bridge, which crossed the River Teme close to Worcester.\nRupert withdrew to Shrewsbury, where a council-of-war discussed two courses of action: whether to advance towards Essex's new position near Worcester, or march down the now open road towards London. The Council decided on the London route, but not to avoid a battle, for the Royalist generals wanted to fight Essex before he grew too strong, and the temper of both sides made it impossible to postpone the decision. In the Earl of Clarendon's words, \"it was considered more counsel able to march towards London, it being morally sure that the earl of Essex would put himself in their way.\" So the army left Shrewsbury on 12 October, gaining two days' start on the enemy, and moved south-east. This had the desired effect of forcing Essex to move to intercept them.\n\nThe first pitched battle of the war, at Edgehill on 23 October 1642, proved inconclusive, both Royalists and Parliamentarians claiming victory. The second field action, the stand-off at Turnham Green, saw Charles forced to withdraw to Oxford, which would serve as his base for the rest of the war.\n\nIn 1643, Royalist forces won at Adwalton Moor, gaining control of most of Yorkshire. In the Midlands, a Parliamentary force under Sir John Gell besieged and captured the cathedral city of Lichfield, after the death of the original commander, Lord Brooke. This group then joined forces with Sir John Brereton at the inconclusive Battle of Hopton Heath (19 March 1643), where the Royalist commander, the Earl of Northampton, was killed. John Hampden died after being wounded in the Battle of Chalgrove Field (18 June 1643). Subsequent battles in the west of England at Lansdowne and Roundway Down also went to the Royalists. Prince Rupert could then take Bristol. In the same year, however, Cromwell formed his troop of \"Ironsides\", a disciplined unit that demonstrated his military leadership ability. With their assistance he won a victory at the Battle of Gainsborough in July.\n\nAt this stage, from 7 to 9 August 1643, there were some popular demonstrations in London — both for and against war. They were protesting at Westminster. A peace demonstration by London women, which turned violent, was suppressed by William Waller's regiment of horse. Some women were beaten and even killed, and many arrested.\n\nAfter these August events, the representative of Venice in England reported to the doge that the London government took considerable measures to stifle dissent.\n\nIn general, the early part of the war went well for the Royalists. The turning point came in the late summer and early autumn of 1643, when the Earl of Essex's army forced the king to raise the Siege of Gloucester and then brushed the Royalists aside at the First Battle of Newbury (20 September 1643), to return triumphantly to London. Parliamentarian forces led by the Earl of Manchester besieged the port of King's Lynn, Norfolk, which under Sir Hamon L'Estrange held out until September. Other forces won the Battle of Winceby, giving them control of Lincoln. Political manœuvring to gain an advantage in numbers led Charles to negotiate a ceasefire in Ireland, freeing up English troops to fight on the Royalist side in England, while Parliament offered concessions to the Scots in return for aid and assistance.\nHelped by the Scots, Parliament won at Marston Moor (2 July 1644), gaining York and the north of England. Cromwell's conduct in the battle proved decisive, and showed his potential as a political and as an important military leader. The defeat at the Battle of Lostwithiel in Cornwall, however, marked a serious reverse for Parliament in the south-west of England. Subsequent fighting around Newbury (27 October 1644), though tactically indecisive, strategically gave another check to Parliament.\n\nIn 1645, Parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish. It passed the Self-denying Ordinance, by which all members of either House of Parliament laid down their commands and re-organized its main forces into the New Model Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, with Cromwell as his second-in-command and Lieutenant-General of Horse. In two decisive engagements — the Battle of Naseby on 14 June and the Battle of Langport on 10 July — the Parliamentarians effectively destroyed Charles's armies.\n\nIn the remains of his English realm, Charles tried to recover a stable base of support by consolidating the Midlands. He began to form an axis between Oxford and Newark-on-Trent in Nottinghamshire. These towns had become fortresses and showed more reliable loyalty to him than others. He took Leicester, which lies between them, but found his resources exhausted. Having little opportunity to replenish them, in May 1646 he sought shelter with a Presbyterian Scottish army at Southwell in Nottinghamshire. Charles was eventually handed over to the English Parliament by the Scots and imprisoned. This marked the end of the First English Civil War.\nCharles I took advantage of the deflection of attention away from himself to negotiate on 28 December 1647 a secret treaty with the Scots, again promising church reform. Under the agreement, called the \"Engagement\", the Scots undertook to invade England on Charles's behalf and restore him to the throne on condition of the establishment of Presbyterianism within three years.\n\nA series of Royalist uprisings throughout England and a Scottish invasion occurred in the summer of 1648. Forces loyal to Parliament put down most of those in England after little more than a skirmish, but uprisings in Kent, Essex and Cumberland, the rebellion in Wales, and the Scottish invasion involved pitched battles and prolonged sieges.\n\nIn the spring of 1648, unpaid Parliamentarian troops in Wales changed sides. Colonel Thomas Horton defeated the Royalist rebels at the Battle of St Fagans (8 May) and the rebel leaders surrendered to Cromwell on 11 July after a protracted two-month siege of Pembroke. Sir Thomas Fairfax defeated a Royalist uprising in Kent at the Battle of Maidstone on 1 June. Fairfax, after his success at Maidstone and the pacification of Kent, turned north to reduce Essex, where, under an ardent, experienced and popular leader, Sir Charles Lucas, the Royalists had taken up arms in great numbers. Fairfax soon drove the enemy into Colchester, but his first attack on the town met with a repulse and he had to settle down to a long siege.\n\nIn the North of England, Major-General John Lambert fought a successful campaign against several Royalist uprisings, the largest being that of Sir Marmaduke Langdale in Cumberland. Thanks to Lambert's successes, the Scottish commander, the Duke of Hamilton, had to take a western route through Carlisle in his pro-Royalist Scottish invasion of England. The Parliamentarians under Cromwell engaged the Scots at the Battle of Preston (17–19 August). The battle took place largely at Walton-le-Dale near Preston, Lancashire, and resulted in a victory for Cromwell's troops over the Royalists and Scots commanded by Hamilton. This victory marked the end of the Second English Civil War.\n\nNearly all the Royalists who had fought in the First Civil War had given their word not to bear arms against Parliament, and many, like Lord Astley, were therefore bound by oath not to take any part in the second conflict. So the victors in the Second Civil War showed little mercy to those who had brought war into the land again. On the evening of the surrender of Colchester, Parliamentarians had Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot. Parliamentary authorities sentenced the leaders of the Welsh rebels, Major-General Rowland Laugharne, Colonel John Poyer and Colonel Rice Powel to death, but executed only Poyer (25 April 1649), having selected him by lot. Of five prominent Royalist peers who had fallen into Parliamentary hands, three – the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and Lord Capel, one of the Colchester prisoners and a man of high character – were beheaded at Westminster on 9 March.\n\nCharles's secret pacts and encouragement of supporters to break their parole caused Parliament to debate whether to return the King to power at all. Those who still supported Charles's place on the throne, such as the army leader and moderate Fairfax, tried again to negotiate with him. The Army, furious that Parliament continued to countenance Charles as a ruler, then marched on Parliament and conducted \"Pride's Purge\" (named after the commanding officer of the operation, Thomas Pride) in December 1648. Troops arrested 45 members and kept 146 out of the chamber. They allowed only 75 members in, and then only at the Army's bidding. This Rump Parliament received orders to set up, in the name of the people of England, a High Court of Justice for the trial of Charles I for treason. Fairfax, a constitutional monarchist and moderate, declined to have anything to do with the trial. He resigned as head of the army, so clearing Cromwell's road to power.\n\nAt the end of the trial the 59 Commissioners (judges) found Charles I guilty of high treason as a \"tyrant, traitor, murderer and public enemy\". His beheading took place on a scaffold in front of the Banqueting House of the Palace of Whitehall on 30 January 1649. After the Restoration in 1660, nine of the surviving regicides not living in exile were executed and most others sentenced to life imprisonment.\n\nAfter the regicide, Charles as the eldest son has publicly proclaimed King Charles II in the Royal Square of St. Helier, Jersey, on 17 February 1649 (after a first such proclamation in Edinburgh on 5 February 1649).\n\nIreland had undergone continual war since the rebellion of 1641, with most of the island controlled by the Irish Confederates. Increasingly threatened by the armies of the English Parliament after Charles I's arrest in 1648, the Confederates signed a treaty of alliance with the English Royalists. The joint Royalist and Confederate forces under the Duke of Ormonde tried to eliminate the Parliamentary army holding Dublin by laying siege, but their opponents routed them at the Battle of Rathmines (2 August 1649). As the former Member of Parliament Admiral Robert Blake blockaded Prince Rupert's fleet in Kinsale, Cromwell could land at Dublin on 15 August 1649 with an army to quell the Royalist alliance.\n\nCromwell's suppression of the Royalists in Ireland in 1649 still has strong resonance for many Irish. After the Siege of Drogheda, the massacre of nearly 3,500 people — around 2,700 Royalist soldiers and 700 others, including civilians, prisoners and Catholic priests (Cromwell claimed all had carried arms) — became one of the historical memories that has driven Irish-English and Catholic-Protestant strife during the last three centuries. The Parliamentarian conquest of Ireland ground on for another four years until 1653, when the last Irish Confederate and Royalist troops surrendered. In the wake of the conquest, the victors confiscated almost all Irish Catholic-owned land and distributed it to Parliament's creditors, to Parliamentary soldiers who served in Ireland, and to English who had settled there before the war.\n\nThe execution of Charles I altered the dynamics of the Civil War in Scotland, which had raged between Royalists and Covenanters since 1644. By 1649, the struggle had left the Royalists there in disarray and their erstwhile leader, the Marquess of Montrose, had gone into exile. At first, Charles II encouraged Montrose to raise a Highland army to fight on the Royalist side. However, when the Scottish Covenanters (who did not agree with the execution of Charles I and who feared for the future of Presbyterianism under the new Commonwealth) offered him the crown of Scotland, Charles abandoned Montrose to his enemies. However, Montrose, who had raised a mercenary force in Norway, had already landed and could not abandon the fight. He did not succeed in raising many Highland clans and the Covenanters defeated his army at the Battle of Carbisdale in Ross-shire on 27 April 1650. The victors captured Montrose shortly afterwards and took him to Edinburgh. On 20 May the Scottish Parliament sentenced him to death and had him hanged the next day.\nCharles II landed in Scotland at Garmouth in Morayshire on 23 June 1650 and signed the 1638 National Covenant and the 1643 Solemn League and Covenant shortly after coming ashore. With his original Scottish Royalist followers and his new Covenanter allies, Charles II became the greatest threat facing the new English republic. In response to the threat, Cromwell left some of his lieutenants in Ireland to continue the suppression of the Irish Royalists and returned to England.\n\nHe arrived in Scotland on 22 July 1650 and proceeded to lay siege to Edinburgh. By the end of August, disease and a shortage of supplies had reduced his army, and he had to order a retreat towards his base at Dunbar. A Scottish army under the command of David Leslie, tried to block the retreat, but Cromwell defeated them at the Battle of Dunbar on 3 September. Cromwell's army then took Edinburgh, and by the end of the year his army had occupied much of southern Scotland.\n\nIn July 1651, Cromwell's forces crossed the Firth of Forth into Fife and defeated the Scots at the Battle of Inverkeithing (20 July 1651). The New Model Army advanced towards Perth, which allowed Charles, at the head of the Scottish army, to move south into England. Cromwell followed Charles into England, leaving George Monck to finish the campaign in Scotland. Monck took Stirling on 14 August and Dundee on 1 September. The next year, 1652, saw a mopping up of the remnants of Royalist resistance, and under the terms of the \"Tender of Union\", the Scots received 30 seats in a united Parliament in London, with General Monck as the military governor of Scotland.\n\nAlthough Cromwell's New Model Army had defeated a Scottish army at Dunbar, Cromwell could not prevent Charles II from marching from Scotland deep into England at the head of another Royalist army. They marched to the west of England where English Royalist sympathies were strongest, but although some English Royalists joined the army, they were far fewer in number than Charles and his Scottish supporters had hoped. Cromwell finally engaged and defeated the new king at Worcester on 3 September 1651.\n\nAfter the Royalist defeat at Worcester, Charles II escaped via safe houses and a famous oak tree to France, and Parliament was left in \"de facto\" control of England. Resistance continued for a time in the Channel Islands, Ireland and Scotland, but with the pacification of England, resistance elsewhere did not threaten the military supremacy of the New Model Army and its Parliamentary paymasters.\n\nDuring the Wars, the Parliamentarians established a number of successive committees to oversee the war effort. The first, the Committee of Safety set up in July 1642, comprised 15 members of Parliament. After the Anglo-Scottish alliance against the Royalists, the Committee of Both Kingdoms replaced the Committee of Safety between 1644 and 1648. Parliament dissolved the Committee of Both Kingdoms when the alliance ended, but its English members continued to meet as the Derby House Committee. A second Committee of Safety then replaced it.\n\nDuring the English Civil War, the role of bishops as wielders of political power and upholders of the established church became a matter of heated political controversy. John Calvin formulated a doctrine of Presbyterianism, which held that the offices of \"presbyter\" and \"episkopos\" in the New Testament were identical; he rejected the doctrine of apostolic succession. Calvin's follower John Knox brought Presbyterianism to Scotland when the Scottish church was reformed in 1560. In practice, Presbyterianism meant that committees of lay elders had a substantial voice in church government, as opposed to merely being subjects to a ruling hierarchy.\n\nThis vision of at least partial democracy in ecclesiology paralleled the struggles between Parliament and the King. A body within the Puritan movement in the Church of England sought to abolish the office of bishop and remake the Church of England along Presbyterian lines. The Martin Marprelate tracts (1588–1589), applying the pejorative name of \"prelacy\" to the church hierarchy, attacked the office of bishop with satire that deeply offended Elizabeth I and her Archbishop of Canterbury John Whitgift. The vestments controversy also related to this movement, seeking further reductions in church ceremony, and labeling the use of elaborate vestments as \"unedifying\" and even idolatrous.\n\nKing James I, reacting against the perceived contumacy of his Presbyterian Scottish subjects, adopted \"No Bishop, no King\" as a slogan; he tied the hierarchical authority of the bishop to the absolute authority he sought as King, and viewed attacks on the authority of the bishops as attacks on his authority. Matters came to a head when Charles I appointed William Laud as Archbishop of Canterbury; Laud aggressively attacked the Presbyterian movement and sought to impose the full Book of Common Prayer. The controversy eventually led to Laud's impeachment for treason by a bill of attainder in 1645 and subsequent execution. Charles also attempted to impose episcopacy on Scotland; the Scots' violent rejection of bishops and liturgical worship sparked the Bishops' Wars in 1639–1640.\n\nDuring the height of Puritan power under the Commonwealth and the Protectorate, episcopacy was formally abolished in the Church of England on 9 October 1646. The Church of England remained Presbyterian until the Restoration of the monarchy under Charles II in 1660.\n\nDuring the English Civil War, the English overseas possessions became highly involved. In the Channel Islands, the island of Jersey and Castle Cornet in Guernsey supported the King until a surrender with honour in December 1651.\n\nAlthough the newer, Puritan settlements in North America, notably Massachusetts, were dominated by Parliamentarians, the older colonies sided with the Crown. Friction between Royalists and Puritans in Maryland came to a head in the Battle of the Severn. The Virginia Company's settlements, Bermuda and Virginia, as well as Antigua and Barbados were conspicuous in their loyalty to the Crown. Bermuda's Independent Puritans were expelled, settling the Bahamas under William Sayle as the Eleutheran Adventurers. Parliament passed An Act for prohibiting Trade with the Barbados, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego in October, 1650, which stated that\nThe Act also authorised Parliamentary privateers to act against English vessels trading with the rebellious colonies:\nThe Parliament began assembling a fleet to invade the Royalist colonies, but many of the English islands in the Caribbean were captured by the Dutch and French in 1651 during the Second Anglo-Dutch War. Far to the North, Bermuda's regiment of Militia and its coastal batteries prepared to resist an invasion that never came. The colony made a separate peace that respected its internal status quo. The Parliament of Bermuda avoided the Parliament of England's fate during The Protectorate, becoming one of the oldest continuous legislatures in the world.\n\nVirginia's population swelled with Cavaliers during and after the English Civil War. Even so, Virginia Puritan Richard Bennett was made Governor answering to Cromwell in 1652, followed by two more nominal \"Commonwealth Governors\". The loyalty of Virginia's Cavaliers to the Crown was rewarded after the 1660 Restoration of the Monarchy when Charles II dubbed it the \"Old Dominion\".\n\nFigures for casualties during this period are unreliable, but some attempt has been made to provide rough estimates.\n\nIn England, a conservative estimate is that roughly 100,000 people died from war-related disease during the three civil wars. Historical records count 84,830 dead from the wars themselves. Counting in accidents and the two Bishops' wars, an estimate of 190,000 dead is achieved, out of a total population of about five million.\n\nFigures for Scotland are less reliable and should be treated with caution. Casualties include the deaths of prisoners-of-war in conditions that accelerated their deaths, with estimates of 10,000 prisoners not surviving or not returning home (8,000 captured during and immediately after the Battle of Worcester were deported to New England, Bermuda and the West Indies to work for landowners as indentured labourers). There are no figures to calculate how many died from war-related diseases, but if the same ratio of disease to battle deaths from English figures is applied to the Scottish figures, a not unreasonable estimate of 60,000 people is achieved, from a population of about one million.\n\nFigures for Ireland are described as \"miracles of conjecture\". Certainly the devastation inflicted on Ireland was massive, with the best estimate provided by Sir William Petty, the father of English demography. Petty estimated that 112,000 Protestants and 504,000 Catholics were killed through plague, war and famine, giving an estimated total of 616,000 dead, out of a pre-war population of about one and a half million. Although Petty's figures are the best available, they are still acknowledged as tentative; they do not include an estimated 40,000 driven into exile, some of whom served as soldiers in European continental armies, while others were sold as indentured servants to New England and the West Indies. Many of those sold to landowners in New England eventually prospered, but many sold to landowners in the West Indies were worked to death.\n\nThese estimates indicate that England suffered a 4 percent loss of population, Scotland a loss of 6 percent, while Ireland suffered a loss of 41 percent of its population. Putting these numbers into the context of other catastrophes helps to understand the devastation of Ireland in particular. The Great Hunger of 1845–1852 resulted in a loss of 16 percent of the population, while during the Second World War the population of the Soviet Union fell by 16 percent.\n\nOrdinary people took advantage of the dislocation of civil society in the 1640s to gain personal advantages. The contemporary guild democracy movement won its greatest successes among London's transport workers, notably the Thames watermen. Rural communities seized timber and other resources on the sequestrated estates of Royalists and Catholics, and on the estates of the royal family and church hierarchy. Some communities improved their conditions of tenure on such estates. The old \"status quo\" began a retrenchment after the end of the First Civil War in 1646, and more especially after the Restoration in 1660, but some gains were long-term. The democratic element introduced into the watermen's company in 1642, for example, survived with vicissitudes until 1827.\n\nThe wars left England, Scotland, and Ireland among the few countries in Europe without a monarch. In the wake of victory, many of the ideals (and many idealists) became sidelined. The republican government of the Commonwealth of England ruled England (and later all of Scotland and Ireland) from 1649 to 1653 and from 1659 to 1660. Between the two periods, and due to in-fighting among various factions in Parliament, Oliver Cromwell ruled over the Protectorate as Lord Protector (effectively a military dictator) until his death in 1658.\n\nOn Oliver Cromwell's death, his son Richard became Lord Protector, but the Army had little confidence in him. After seven months the Army removed Richard, and in May 1659 it re-installed the Rump. However, since the Rump Parliament acted as though nothing had changed since 1653 and as though it could treat the Army as it liked, military force shortly afterward dissolved this as well. After the second dissolution of the Rump, in October 1659, the prospect of a total descent into anarchy loomed as the Army's pretense of unity finally dissolved into factions.\nInto this atmosphere General George Monck, Governor of Scotland under the Cromwells, marched south with his army from Scotland. On 4 April 1660, in the Declaration of Breda, Charles II made known the conditions of his acceptance of the Crown of England. Monck organised the Convention Parliament, which met for the first time on 25 April 1660. On 8 May 1660, it declared that Charles II had reigned as the lawful monarch since the execution of Charles I in January 1649. Charles returned from exile on 23 May 1660. On 29 May 1660, the populace in London acclaimed him as king. His coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 23 April 1661. These events became known as the \"Restoration\".\n\nAlthough the monarchy was restored, it was still only with the consent of Parliament. So the civil wars effectively set England and Scotland on course towards a parliamentary monarchy form of government. The outcome of this system was that the future Kingdom of Great Britain, formed in 1707 under the Acts of Union, managed to forestall the kind of often-bloody revolution typical of European republican movements, as seen after the Jacobin revolution in 18th-century France and the later success of Napoleon, which generally resulted in total abolition of monarchy. Thus the United Kingdom was spared the wave of revolutions that occurred in Europe in the 1840s. Specifically, future monarchs became wary of pushing Parliament too hard, and Parliament effectively chose the line of royal succession in 1688 with the Glorious Revolution and in the 1701 Act of Settlement.\n\nIn the early decades of the 20th century, the Whig school was the dominant theoretical view. It explained the Civil War as resulting from centuries of struggle between Parliament (notably the House of Commons) and the Monarchy, with Parliament defending the traditional rights of Englishmen, while the Stuart monarchy continually attempted to expand its right to dictate law arbitrarily. The major Whig historian, S. R. Gardiner, popularised the idea that the English Civil War was a \"Puritan Revolution\", which challenged the repressive Stuart Church and prepared the way for religious toleration. So Puritanism was seen as the natural ally of a people preserving their traditional rights against arbitrary monarchical power.\n\nThe Whig view was challenged and largely superseded by the Marxist school, which became popular in the 1940s, and saw the English Civil War as a bourgeois revolution. According to Marxist historian Christopher Hill:\n\nIn the 1970s, revisionist historians challenged both the Whig and the Marxist theories, notably in the 1973 anthology \"The Origins of the English Civil War\" (Conrad Russell ed.). These historians focused on the minutiae of the years immediately before the civil war, so returning to the contingency-based historiography of Clarendon's famous \"History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England\". This, it was claimed, demonstrated that factional war-allegiance patterns did not fit either Whig or Marxist history. Parliament was not inherently progressive, nor the events of 1640 a precursor for the Glorious Revolution. Furthermore, Puritans did not necessarily ally themselves with Parliamentarians. Many members of the bourgeoisie fought for the King, while many landed aristocrats supported Parliament.\n\nFrom the 1990s, a number of historians discarded and replaced the historical title \"English Civil War\" with the titles the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and the \"British Civil Wars\", positing that the civil war in England cannot be understood in isolation from events in other parts of Britain and Ireland; King Charles I remains crucial, not just as King of England, but through his relationship with the peoples of his other realms. For example, the wars began when King Charles I tried imposing an Anglican Prayer Book upon Scotland, and when this was met with resistance from the Covenanters, he needed an army to impose his will. However, this forced him to call an English Parliament to raise new taxes to pay for the army. The English Parliaments were not willing to grant Charles the revenue he needed to pay for the Scottish expeditionary army unless he addressed their grievances. By the early 1640s, Charles was left in a state of near-permanent crisis management, often unwilling to concede enough ground to any faction to neutralize the threat, and in some cases doing so would only to antagonise another faction. For example, Charles finally agreed-upon terms with the Covenanters in August 1641, but although this might have weakened the position of the English Parliament, the Irish Rebellion of 1641 broke out in October 1641, largely negating the political advantage he had obtained by relieving himself of the cost of the Scottish invasion.\n\nThomas Hobbes gives a much earlier historical account of the English Civil War in his \"Behemoth\", written in 1668 and published in 1681. He reports that the causes of the war were the doctrines of politics and conflicts that arose from science that disputed those political doctrines. \"Behemoth\" offered a uniquely historical and philosophical approach to naming the catalysts for the war. It also served as a statement to explain why Charles I could not hold his place of power and maintain peace in his kingdom. \nSpecifically, Hobbes analyses the following aspects of English thought during the war (listed in order of his discussions in \"Behemoth\"): the opinions of divinity and politics that spurred rebellion; rhetoric and doctrine used by the rebels against the king; and how opinions about \"taxation, the conscription of soldiers, and military strategy\" affected the outcomes of battles and shifts of sovereignty.\n\nHobbes offered a unique contribution to historical interpretation of the civil war through his \"Behemoth\" by connecting the civil war to the motivations of intellectuals who Hobbes reports caused it by trying to spread certain ideas throughout the nation, largely for the sake of displaying their own wisdom and learning. He held the belief that clerical pretensions had contributed significantly to the trouble during the civil war — \"whether those of puritan fundamentalists, papal supremacists or divine right Episcopalians\". Hobbes wanted to revoke all of independent power of the clergy and to change the civil system such that they were controlled by the state.\n\nSome scholars suggest that \"Behemoth\" has not received due respect as an academic work, being comparatively overlooked and underrated in the shadow of \"Leviathan\". One factor that may have distracted attention from it as a historical work is that it takes the form of a dialogue. While philosophical dialogues are common, historical ones are not. Other factors that hindered its success include Charles II's refusing its publication and Hobbes' chiefly interpretive approach to the historical narrative.\n\nMuch can be gleaned about Hobbes as a person from looking at the difficulties he faced while seeking an audience for \"Behemoth\". The essay illuminates a flaw shared by most of Hobbes's political philosophy as well, which is his lack of ability or willingness to empathize with perspectives that largely differed from his own. As his perspective was so much at odds with other views, Hobbes struggled to understand the thinking of most of his potential audience and people in general. For instance, he credits the Presbyterians and Parliamentarians with \"improbably long-planned and wicked ambitions\". What is more \"he hardly understands the orthodox Royalists (he was himself a highly unorthodox Royalist) any better, and he makes only limited concessions of sincerity to the religious feelings of the various parties\".\n\nTwo large historical societies exist, The Sealed Knot and The English Civil War Society, which regularly re-enact events and battles of the Civil War in full period costume.\n\nBULLET::::- Timeline of the English Civil War, showing events leading up to, culminating in, and resulting from the English Civil Wars.\nBULLET::::- First English Civil War, 1642\nBULLET::::- First English Civil War, 1643\nBULLET::::- First English Civil War, 1644\nBULLET::::- First English Civil War, 1645\nBULLET::::- First English Civil War, 1646\nBULLET::::- Cromwell's Soldiers' Pocket Bible, booklet Cromwell issued to his army in 1643.\nBULLET::::- English Dissenters\nBULLET::::- William Hiseland, the last Royalist veteran of the Civil War\nBULLET::::- Thirty Years' War, a defining event in European history during the reign of Charles I\nBULLET::::- The Levellers, a movement for political reform.\nBULLET::::- Diggers\n\nBULLET::::- – excerpts from primary and secondary sources.\nBULLET::::- Volume I, Part 1, Volume I, Part 2, Volume II, Part 1, Volume II, Part 2, Volume III, Part 1, Volume III, Part 2\nBULLET::::- Volume I, Volume II, Volume III\nBULLET::::- – emphasis on historiography.\nBULLET::::- Volume I (1642–1644); Volume II (1644–1647); Volume III (1645–1647); Volume IV (1647–1649), The basic narrative history used by all other scholars.\nBULLET::::- – 20 essays by Morrill.\nBULLET::::- – 14 scholars discuss the argument of John Morrill that the English Civil War was the last war of religion, rather than the first modern revolution. excerpt; historiography pp. 1–25.\n\nBULLET::::- Englishcivilwar.org News, comment and discussion about the English Civil War\nBULLET::::- Official website of the English Civil War Society\nBULLET::::- The Revolution Over the Revolution\nBULLET::::- by Brandon W Duke\nBULLET::::- This page has links to some transcriptions of contemporary documents concerning eastern England\nBULLET::::- A national Civil War chronology\nBULLET::::- Civil War chronology for Lincolnshire and its environs\nBULLET::::- Connected Histories\n"}
{"id": "9710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9710", "title": "Elementary algebra", "text": "Elementary algebra\n\nElementary algebra encompasses some of the basic concepts of algebra, one of the main branches of mathematics. It is typically taught to secondary school students and builds on their understanding of arithmetic. Whereas arithmetic deals with specified numbers, algebra introduces quantities without fixed values, known as variables. This use of variables entails a use of algebraic notation and an understanding of the general rules of the operators introduced in arithmetic. Unlike abstract algebra, elementary algebra is not concerned with algebraic structures outside the realm of real and complex numbers.\n\nThe use of variables to denote quantities allows general relationships between quantities to be formally and concisely expressed, and thus enables solving a broader scope of problems. Many quantitative relationships in science and mathematics are expressed as algebraic equations.\n\nAlgebraic notation describes the rules and conventions for writing mathematical expressions, as well as the terminology used for talking about parts of expressions. For example, the expression formula_1 has the following components:\n\nA \"coefficient\" is a numerical value, or letter representing a numerical constant, that multiplies a variable (the operator is omitted). A \"term\" is an addend or a summand, a group of coefficients, variables, constants and exponents that may be separated from the other terms by the plus and minus operators. Letters represent variables and constants. By convention, letters at the beginning of the alphabet (e.g. formula_2) are typically used to represent constants, and those toward the end of the alphabet (e.g. formula_3 and ) are used to represent variables. They are usually written in italics.\n\nAlgebraic operations work in the same way as arithmetic operations, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation. and are applied to algebraic variables and terms. Multiplication symbols are usually omitted, and implied when there is no space between two variables or terms, or when a coefficient is used. For example, formula_4 is written as formula_5, and formula_6 may be written formula_7.\n\nUsually terms with the highest power (exponent), are written on the left, for example, formula_8 is written to the left of . When a coefficient is one, it is usually omitted (e.g. formula_9 is written formula_8). Likewise when the exponent (power) is one, (e.g. formula_11 is written formula_12). When the exponent is zero, the result is always 1 (e.g. formula_13 is always rewritten to ). However formula_14, being undefined, should not appear in an expression, and care should be taken in simplifying expressions in which variables may appear in exponents.\n\nOther types of notation are used in algebraic expressions when the required formatting is not available, or can not be implied, such as where only letters and symbols are available. As an illustration of this, while exponents are usually formatted using superscripts, e.g., formula_8, in plain text, and in the TeX mark-up language, the caret symbol \"^\" represents exponentiation, so formula_8 is written as \"x^2\". In programming languages such as Ada, Fortran, Perl, Python and Ruby, a double asterisk is used, so formula_8 is written as \"x**2\". Many programming languages and calculators use a single asterisk to represent the multiplication symbol, and it must be explicitly used, for example, formula_12 is written \"3*x\".\n\nElementary algebra builds on and extends arithmetic by introducing letters called variables to represent general (non-specified) numbers. This is useful for several reasons.\n\nBULLET::::1. Variables may represent numbers whose values are not yet known. For example, if the temperature of the current day, C, is 20 degrees higher than the temperature of the previous day, P, then the problem can be described algebraically as formula_19.\nBULLET::::2. Variables allow one to describe \"general\" problems, without specifying the values of the quantities that are involved. For example, it can be stated specifically that 5 minutes is equivalent to formula_20 seconds. A more general (algebraic) description may state that the number of seconds, formula_21, where m is the number of minutes.\nBULLET::::3. Variables allow one to describe mathematical relationships between quantities that may vary. For example, the relationship between the circumference, \"c\", and diameter, \"d\", of a circle is described by formula_22.\nBULLET::::4. Variables allow one to describe some mathematical properties. For example, a basic property of addition is commutativity which states that the order of numbers being added together does not matter. Commutativity is stated algebraically as formula_23.\n\nAlgebraic expressions may be evaluated and simplified, based on the basic properties of arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation). For example,\nBULLET::::- Added terms are simplified using coefficients. For example, formula_24 can be simplified as formula_25 (where 3 is a numerical coefficient).\nBULLET::::- Multiplied terms are simplified using exponents. For example, formula_26 is represented as formula_27\nBULLET::::- Like terms are added together, for example, formula_28 is written as formula_29, because the terms containing formula_30 are added together, and, the terms containing formula_31 are added together.\nBULLET::::- Brackets can be \"multiplied out\", using the distributive property. For example, formula_32 can be written as formula_33 which can be written as formula_34\nBULLET::::- Expressions can be factored. For example, formula_35, by dividing both terms by formula_36 can be written as formula_37\n\nAn equation states that two expressions are equal using the symbol for equality, (the equals sign). One of the best-known equations describes Pythagoras' law relating the length of the sides of a right angle triangle:\n\nThis equation states that formula_39, representing the square of the length of the side that is the hypotenuse, the side opposite the right angle. That is equal to the sum (addition) of the squares of the other two sides whose lengths are represented by and .\n\nAn equation is the claim that two expressions have the same value and are equal. Some equations are true for all values of the involved variables (such as formula_40); such equations are called identities. Conditional equations are true for only some values of the involved variables, e.g. formula_41 is true only for formula_42 and formula_43. The values of the variables which make the equation true are the solutions of the equation and can be found through equation solving.\n\nAnother type of equation is inequality. Inequalities are used to show that one side of the equation is greater, or less, than the other. The symbols used for this are: formula_44 where formula_45 represents 'greater than', and formula_46 where formula_47 represents 'less than'. Just like standard equality equations, numbers can be added, subtracted, multiplied or divided. The only exception is that when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, the inequality symbol must be flipped.\n\nBy definition, equality is an equivalence relation, meaning it has the properties (a) reflexive (i.e. formula_48), (b) symmetric (i.e. if formula_49 then formula_50) (c) transitive (i.e. if formula_49 and formula_52 then formula_53). It also satisfies the important property that if two symbols are used for equal things, then one symbol can be substituted for the other in any true statement about the first and the statement will remain true. This implies the following properties:\n\nBULLET::::- if formula_49 and formula_55 then formula_56 and formula_57;\nBULLET::::- if formula_49 then formula_59 and formula_60;\nBULLET::::- more generally, for any function , if formula_61 then formula_62.\n\nThe relations \"less than\" formula_47 and greater than formula_45 have the property of transitivity:\nBULLET::::- If   formula_65   and   formula_66   then   formula_67;\nBULLET::::- If   formula_65   and   formula_69   then   formula_70;\nBULLET::::- If   formula_65   and   formula_72   then   formula_73;\nBULLET::::- If   formula_65   and   formula_75   then   formula_76.\nBy reversing the inequation, formula_47 and formula_45 can be swapped, for example:\nBULLET::::- formula_65 is equivalent to formula_80\n\nSubstitution is replacing the terms in an expression to create a new expression. Substituting 3 for in the expression makes a new expression with meaning . Substituting the terms of a statement makes a new statement. When the original statement is true independently of the values of the terms, the statement created by substitutions is also true. Hence definitions can be made in symbolic terms and interpreted through substitution: if formula_81 is meant as the definition of formula_82 as the product of with itself, substituting for informs the reader of this statement that formula_83 means . Often it's not known whether the statement is true independently of the values of the terms. And, substitution allows one to derive restrictions on the possible values, or show what conditions the statement holds under. For example, taking the statement , if is substituted with , this implies , which is false, which implies that if then canot be .\n\nIf and are integers, rationals, or real numbers, then implies or . Consider . Then, substituting for and for , we learn or . Then we can substitute again, letting and , to show that if then or . Therefore, if , then or ( or ), so implies or or .\n\nIf the original fact were stated as \" implies or \", then when saying \"consider ,\" we would have a conflict of terms when substituting. Yet the above logic is still valid to show that if then or or if, instead of letting and , one substitutes for and for (and with , substituting for and for ). This shows that substituting for the terms in a statement isn't always the same as letting the terms from the statement equal the substituted terms. In this situation it's clear that if we substitute an expression into the term of the original equation, the substituted does not refer to the in the statement \" implies or .\"\n\nThe following sections lay out examples of some of the types of algebraic equations that may be encountered.\n\nLinear equations are so-called, because when they are plotted, they describe a straight line. The simplest equations to solve are linear equations that have only one variable. They contain only constant numbers and a single variable without an exponent. As an example, consider:\n\nTo solve this kind of equation, the technique is add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of the equation by the same number in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Once the variable is isolated, the other side of the equation is the value of the variable. This problem and its solution are as follows:\n\nIn words: the child is 4 years old.\n\nThe general form of a linear equation with one variable, can be written as: formula_90\n\nFollowing the same procedure (i.e. subtract from both sides, and then divide by ), the general solution is given by formula_91\n\nA linear equation with two variables has many (i.e. an infinite number of) solutions. For example:\n\nThat cannot be worked out by itself. If the son's age was made known, then there would no longer be two unknowns (variables). The problem then becomes a linear equation with just one variable, that can be solved as described above.\n\nTo solve a linear equation with two variables (unknowns), requires two related equations. For example, if it was also revealed that:\nBULLET::::- Problem in words\nBULLET::::- Equivalent equation\n\nNow there are two related linear equations, each with two unknowns, which enables the production of a linear equation with just one variable, by subtracting one from the other (called the elimination method):\n\nIn other words, the son is aged 12, and since the father 22 years older, he must be 34. In 10 years, the son will be 22, and the father will be twice his age, 44. This problem is illustrated on the associated plot of the equations.\n\nFor other ways to solve this kind of equations, see below, System of linear equations.\n\nA quadratic equation is one which includes a term with an exponent of 2, for example, formula_30, and no term with higher exponent. The name derives from the Latin \"quadrus\", meaning square. In general, a quadratic equation can be expressed in the form formula_97, where is not zero (if it were zero, then the equation would not be quadratic but linear). Because of this a quadratic equation must contain the term formula_98, which is known as the quadratic term. Hence formula_99, and so we may divide by and rearrange the equation into the standard form\n\nwhere formula_101 and formula_102. Solving this, by a process known as completing the square, leads to the quadratic formula\n\nwhere the symbol \"±\" indicates that both\n\nare solutions of the quadratic equation.\n\nQuadratic equations can also be solved using factorization (the reverse process of which is expansion, but for two linear terms is sometimes denoted foiling). As an example of factoring:\n\nwhich is the same thing as\n\nIt follows from the zero-product property that either formula_107 or formula_108 are the solutions, since precisely one of the factors must be equal to zero. All quadratic equations will have two solutions in the complex number system, but need not have any in the real number system. For example,\n\nhas no real number solution since no real number squared equals −1.\nSometimes a quadratic equation has a root of multiplicity 2, such as:\n\nFor this equation, −1 is a root of multiplicity 2. This means −1 appears twice, since the equation can be rewritten in factored form as\n\nAll quadratic equations have exactly two solutions in complex numbers (but they may be equal to each other), a category that includes real numbers, imaginary numbers, and sums of real and imaginary numbers. Complex numbers first arise in the teaching of quadratic equations and the quadratic formula. For example, the quadratic equation\n\nhas solutions\n\nSince formula_114 is not any real number, both of these solutions for \"x\" are complex numbers.\n\nAn exponential equation is one which has the form formula_115 for formula_116, which has solution\n\nwhen formula_118. Elementary algebraic techniques are used to rewrite a given equation in the above way before arriving at the solution. For example, if\n\nthen, by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation, and then dividing both sides by 3 we obtain\n\nwhence\n\nor\n\nA logarithmic equation is an equation of the form formula_123 for formula_116, which has solution\n\nFor example, if\n\nthen, by adding 2 to both sides of the equation, followed by dividing both sides by 4, we get\n\nwhence\n\nfrom which we obtain\n\nA radical equation is one that includes a radical sign, which includes square roots, formula_130 cube roots, formula_131, and \"n\"th roots, formula_132. Recall that an \"n\"th root can be rewritten in exponential format, so that formula_132 is equivalent to formula_134. Combined with regular exponents (powers), then formula_135 (the square root of cubed), can be rewritten as formula_136. So a common form of a radical equation is formula_137 (equivalent to formula_138) where and are integers. It has real solution(s):\n! is odd\n! is even<br>and formula_139\n! and are even<br>and formula_140\n! is even, is odd, and formula_140\nformula_142\n\nequivalently\n\nformula_144\n\nequivalently\n\nformula_146\nno real solution\n\nFor example, if:\n\nthen\n\nand thus \n\nThere are different methods to solve a system of linear equations with two variables.\n\nAn example of solving a system of linear equations is by using the elimination method:\n\nMultiplying the terms in the second equation by 2:\n\nAdding the two equations together to get:\n\nwhich simplifies to\n\nSince the fact that formula_107 is known, it is then possible to deduce that formula_156 by either of the original two equations (by using \"2\" instead of ) The full solution to this problem is then\n\nThis is not the only way to solve this specific system; could have been resolved before .\n\nAnother way of solving the same system of linear equations is by substitution.\n\nAn equivalent for can be deduced by using one of the two equations. Using the second equation:\n\nSubtracting formula_160 from each side of the equation:\n\nand multiplying by −1:\n\nUsing this value in the first equation in the original system:\n\nAdding \"2\" on each side of the equation:\n\nwhich simplifies to\n\nUsing this value in one of the equations, the same solution as in the previous method is obtained.\n\nThis is not the only way to solve this specific system; in this case as well, could have been solved before .\n\nIn the above example, a solution exists. However, there are also systems of equations which do not have any solution. Such a system is called inconsistent. An obvious example is\n\nAs 0≠2, the second equation in the system has no solution. Therefore, the system has no solution.\nHowever, not all inconsistent systems are recognized at first sight. As an example, consider the system \n\nMultiplying by 2 both sides of the second equation, and adding it to the first one results in\nwhich clearly has no solution.\n\nThere are also systems which have infinitely many solutions, in contrast to a system with a unique solution (meaning, a unique pair of values for and ) For example:\n\nIsolating in the second equation:\n\nAnd using this value in the first equation in the system:\n\nThe equality is true, but it does not provide a value for . Indeed, one can easily verify (by just filling in some values of ) that for any there is a solution as long as formula_173. There is an infinite number of solutions for this system.\n\nSystems with more variables than the number of linear equations are called underdetermined. Such a system, if it has any solutions, does not have a unique one but rather an infinitude of them. An example of such a system is\n\nWhen trying to solve it, one is led to express some variables as functions of the other ones if any solutions exist, but cannot express \"all\" solutions numerically because there are an infinite number of them if there are any.\n\nA system with a higher number of equations than variables is called overdetermined. If an overdetermined system has any solutions, necessarily some equations are linear combinations of the others.\n\nBULLET::::- History of elementary algebra\nBULLET::::- Binary operation\nBULLET::::- Gaussian elimination\nBULLET::::- Mathematics education\nBULLET::::- Number line\nBULLET::::- Polynomial\nBULLET::::- Cancelling out\nBULLET::::- Tarski's high school algebra problem\n\nBULLET::::- Leonhard Euler, \" Elements of Algebra\", 1770. English translation Tarquin Press, 2007, , also online digitized editions 2006, 1822.\nBULLET::::- Charles Smith, \"A Treatise on Algebra\", in Cornell University Library Historical Math Monographs.\nBULLET::::- Redden, John. \"Elementary Algebra\". Flat World Knowledge, 2011\n"}
{"id": "9712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9712", "title": "ERP", "text": "ERP\n\nERP or Erp may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Effective refractory period, in a cardiac cycle\nBULLET::::- Estrogen receptor positive, a cancer pathology test result\nBULLET::::- Event-related potential, a measured brain response\nBULLET::::- Exposure and response prevention, a treatment method in behavioral therapy\n\nBULLET::::- Erp (Pict), father of Drest I of the Picts\n\nBULLET::::- Erp, Ariège, a village in southern France\nBULLET::::- Erp (Germany), a village in Germany\nBULLET::::- Erp, Netherlands, a town in the Netherlands\n\nBULLET::::- Economic Report of the President, a document published by the President of the United States' Council of Economic Advisers\nBULLET::::- Effective rate of protection, a method of working out the value of import tariffs\nBULLET::::- \"Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo\" (disambiguation), (Spanish for People's Revolutionary Army), in several Latin American countries\nBULLET::::- Equity risk premium, excess return on risky investments\nBULLET::::- Estonian Reform Party\nBULLET::::- European Recovery Program, official name of the Marshall Plan\n\nBULLET::::- Effective radiated power, in electromagnetic transmission systems, a standardised theoretical measurement of radio frequency energy\nBULLET::::- Electronic Road Pricing, an electronic toll collection scheme adopted in Singapore to manage traffic by way of road pricing\nBULLET::::- Energy-related products, devices that affect energy consumption, and are subject to Energy Efficiency requirements\nBULLET::::- Enterprise resource planning, the integrated management of core business processes\n\nBULLET::::- Earp\nBULLET::::- Ethernet Ring Protection Switching, (ERPS) used in Ethernet networks\nBULLET::::- Erotic Role-playing\n"}
{"id": "9713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9713", "title": "Ernest Thayer", "text": "Ernest Thayer\n\nErnest Lawrence Thayer (; August 14, 1863 – August 21, 1940) was an American writer and poet who wrote the poem \"Casey\" (or \"Casey at the Bat\"), which is \"the single most famous baseball poem ever written\" according to the Baseball Almanac, and \"the nation’s best-known piece of comic verse—a ballad that began a native legend as colorful and permanent as that of Johnny Appleseed or Paul Bunyan.\"\n\nThayer was born in Lawrence, Massachusetts, and raised in nearby Worcester. He graduated \"magna cum laude\" in philosophy from Harvard University in 1885, where he had been editor of the \"Harvard Lampoon\" and a member of the theatrical society Hasty Pudding. William Randolph Hearst, a friend from both activities, hired Thayer as humor columnist for \"The San Francisco Examiner\" 1886–88.\n\nThayer's last piece, dated June 3, 1888, was a ballad entitled \"Casey\" (\"Casey at the Bat\") which made him \"a prize specimen of the one-poem poet\" according to \"American Heritage\".\n\nIt was not until several months after the publication of the poem that Thayer became famous for it, since he was hardly the boastful type and had signed the June 24 poem with the nickname \"Phin\" which he had used since his time as a writer for the \"Harvard Lampoon\". Two mysteries remain about the poem: whether Casey and Mudville were based on a real person or place, and, if so, their actual identities. On March 31, 2007, Katie Zezima of \"The New York Times\" wrote an article called \"In 'Casey' Rhubarb, 2 Cities Cry 'Foul!'\" on the competing claims of two towns to such renown: Stockton, California, and Holliston, Massachusetts.\nOn the possible model for Casey, Thayer dismissed the notion that any single living baseball player was an influence. However, late 1880s Boston star Mike \"King\" Kelly is likely as a model for Casey's baseball situations. Besides being a native of a town close to Boston, Thayer, as a \"San Francisco Examiner\" baseball reporter in the off-season of 1887–88, covered exhibition games featuring Kelly. During November 1887, some of his reportage about a Kelly at-bat has the same ring as Casey's famous at-bat in the poem. A 2004 book by Howard W. Rosenberg, \"Cap Anson 2: The Theatrical and Kingly Mike Kelly: U.S. Team Sport's First Media Sensation and Baseball's Original Casey at the Bat,\" reprints a 1905 Thayer letter to a Baltimore scribe who was asking about the poem's roots. In the letter, Thayer named Kelly (d. 1894), as having shown \"impudence\" in claiming to have inspired it. Rosenberg argues that if Thayer still felt offended, Thayer may have later denied Kelly as an influence. Kelly had also performed as a vaudeville actor, and recited the poem dozens of times.\n\nThe first public performance of the poem was on August 14, 1888, by actor De Wolf Hopper, on Thayer's 25th birthday. Thayer's recitation of the poem at a Harvard class reunion in 1895 helps solve the mystery, which lingered into the 20th century, of who had written it.\n\nDuring the mid-1890s, Thayer contributed several other comic poems for Hearst's newspaper \"New York Journal\" and then began overseeing his family's mills in Worcester full-time. Thayer relocated to Santa Barbara in 1912, where he married Rosalind Buel Hammett and retired. He died in 1940, at age 77.\n\n\"The New York Times\"' obituary of Thayer on August 22, 1940, p. 19 quotes comedian DeWolf Hopper, who helped make the poem famous: \n\nBULLET::::- Ernest Lawrence Thayer: Profile and Poem at Poets.org\n"}
{"id": "9714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9714", "title": "List of English-language poets", "text": "List of English-language poets\n\nThis is a list of English-language poets, who have written much of their poetry in English. Main country of residence as a poet (not place of birth): A = Australia, B = Barbados, Bo = Bosnia, C = Canada, Ch = Chile, Cu = Cuba, D = Dominica, De = Denmark, E = England, F = France, G = Germany, Ga = Gambia, Gd = Grenada, Gh = Ghana/Gold Coast, Gr = Greece, Gu = Guyana/British Guiana, HK = Hong Kong, In = India, IoM = Isle of Man, Is = Israel, Ir = Ireland, It = Italy, J = Jamaica, Je = Jersey, Jp = Japan, K = Kenya, L = Lebanon, M = Malta, Me = Mexico, Mo = Montserrat, Ne = Nepal, Nf = Newfoundland (colony), Ni = Nigeria, NI = Northern Ireland, Nt = Netherlands, NZ = New Zealand, P = Pakistan, Pa = Palestine, Ph = Philippines, PI = Pitcairn Islands, RE = Russian Empire, S = Scotland, SA = South Africa, Se = Serbia, SL = Saint Lucia, SLe = Sierra Leone, SLk = Sri Lanka, So = Somalia, Sw = Sweden, T = Trinidad and Tobago, US = United States/preceding colonies, W = Wales, Z = Zimbabwe/Rhodesia\n\nBULLET::::- Jonathan Aaron (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Chris Abani (born 1966, Ni/US)\nBULLET::::- Henry Abbey (1842–1911, US\nBULLET::::- Eleanor Hallowell Abbott (1872–1958, US)\nBULLET::::- J. H. M. Abbott (1874–1953, A)\nBULLET::::- Lascelles Abercrombie (1881–1938, E)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Talmage Abernethy (1872–1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Mark Abley (born 1955, C)\nBULLET::::- James Aboud (born 1956, T)\nBULLET::::- Lionel Abrahams (1928–2004, SA)\nBULLET::::- Sam Abrams (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- Seth Abramson (born 1976, US)\nBULLET::::- Dannie Abse (1923–2014, W)\nBULLET::::- Chinua Achebe (1930–2013, Ni/US)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Obianuju Acholonu (1951–2014, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Kathy Acker (1947–1997, US)\nBULLET::::- Diane Ackerman (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- Duane Ackerson (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- Milton Acorn (1923–1986, C)\nBULLET::::- Harold Acton (1904–1994, E/It)\nBULLET::::- Gilbert Adair (1944–2011, S/F)\nBULLET::::- Virginia Hamilton Adair (1919–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- Helen Adam (1909–1993, S/US)\nBULLET::::- Jean Adam (1704–1765, S)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Henry Adams (1872–1936, NZ/A)\nBULLET::::- Douglas Adams (1952–2001, E)\nBULLET::::- John Adams (1704–1740, US)\nBULLET::::- Léonie Adams (1899–1988, US)\nBULLET::::- Ryan Adams (born 1974, US)\nBULLET::::- Gil Adamson (born 1961, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Adamson (born 1943, A)\nBULLET::::- Fleur Adcock (born 1934, NZ/E)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Addison (1672–1719, E)\nBULLET::::- Kim Addonizio (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Bayo Adebowale] (born 1944, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Toyin Adewale-Gabriel (born 1969, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Opal Palmer Adisa (born 1954, J)\nBULLET::::- Tatamkhulu Afrika (1920–2002, SA)\nBULLET::::- John Agard (born 1949, Gu)\nBULLET::::- Patience Agbabi (born 1965, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Deborah Ager born 1978, US)\nBULLET::::- Kelli Russell Agodon (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Allan Ahlberg (born 1938, E)\nBULLET::::- Ai (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Ama Ata Aidoo (born 1940, Gh)\nBULLET::::- Conrad Aiken (1889–1973, US)\nBULLET::::- Douglas Ainslie (1865–1948, S)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Aird (1802–1876, S)\nBULLET::::- Adam Aitken (born 1960, A)\nBULLET::::- Neil Aitken (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- Funso Aiyejina (born 1949, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Tolu Ajayi (born 1946, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Mark Akenside (1721–1770, E)\nBULLET::::- Salman Akhtar (born 1946, In/US)\nBULLET::::- Tolu Akinyemi (living, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Alasdair MacMhaighstir Alasdair (c. 1695–1770, S)\nBULLET::::- Jordie Albiston (born 1961, A)\nBULLET::::- Ammiel Alcalay (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Amos Bronson Alcott (1799–1888, US)\nBULLET::::- Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888, US)\nBULLET::::- Kaye Aldenhoven (living, A)\nBULLET::::- Richard Aldington (1892–1962, E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Alexander (born 1962, US)\nBULLET::::- Sidney A. Alexander (1866–1948, E)\nBULLET::::- William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling (c. 1567–1640, E)\nBULLET::::- Sherman Alexie (born 1966, US)\nBULLET::::- Felipe Alfau (1902–1999, US)\nBULLET::::- Edna Alford (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- Mike Alfred (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- Agha Shahid Ali (1949–2001, In/US)\nBULLET::::- James Alexander Allan (1889–1956, A)\nBULLET::::- Rob Allan (born 1945, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Sandra Alland (living, C/S)\nBULLET::::- Donna Allard (living, C)\nBULLET::::- William Allegrezza (born 1974, US)\nBULLET::::- Dick Allen (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- Donald Allen (1912–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Allen (living, A)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Akers Allen (1832–1911, US)\nBULLET::::- Leslie Holdsworth Allen (1879–1964, A)\nBULLET::::- Lillian Allen (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- Richard James Allen (born 1960, A)\nBULLET::::- Ron Allen (1947–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- Ellen Palmer Allerton (1835–1893, US)\nBULLET::::- William Allingham (1824/28–1889, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- Washington Allston (1779–1843, US)\nBULLET::::- Anne-Marie Alonzo (1951–2005, C)\nBULLET::::- Alta (Alta Gerrey, born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- Al Alvarez (born 1929, E)\nBULLET::::- Ivy Alvarez (living, A)\nBULLET::::- Julia Alvarez (born 1950, D/US)\nBULLET::::- Moniza Alvi (born 1954, E)\n\nBULLET::::- George Amabile (born 1936, C)\nBULLET::::- Abdulkareem Baba Aminu (born 1977, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Kingsley Amis (1922–1995, E)\nBULLET::::- A. R. Ammons (1926–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- Madhur Anand (born 1971, C)\nBULLET::::- Ingrid Andersen (born 1965, SA)\nBULLET::::- Ethel Anderson (1883–1958, A)\nBULLET::::- Patrick Anderson (1915–1979, E/C)\nBULLET::::- Rod Anderson (born 1935, C)\nBULLET::::- Victor Henry Anderson (1917–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Andre (born 1946, C/US)\nBULLET::::- Bruce Andrews (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Andrews (1924–1989, E/Gr)\nBULLET::::- Ron Androla (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Angel (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- Maya Angelou (1928–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- James Stout Angus (1830–1923, S)\nBULLET::::- Marion Angus (1865–1946, S)\nBULLET::::- J. K. Annand (1908–1993, S)\nBULLET::::- David Antin (born 1932, US)\nBULLET::::- Antler (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- Susanne Antonetta (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Brother Antoninus (1912–1994, US)\nBULLET::::- Philip Appleman (born 1926, US)\nBULLET::::- Richard Appleton (1932–2005, A)\nBULLET::::- Alexander Arbuthnot (1538–1583, S)\nBULLET::::- Walter Conrad Arensberg (1878–1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Rae Armantrout (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Simon Armitage (born 1963, E)\nBULLET::::- Richard Armour (1906–1989, US)\nBULLET::::- Jeannette Armstrong (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- Peter Armstrong (born 1957, E)\nBULLET::::- Tammy Armstrong (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- David Arnason (born 1940, C)\nBULLET::::- Craig Arnold (1967–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- Matthew Arnold (1822–1888, E)\nBULLET::::- Joanne Arnott (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- K. O. Arvidson (1938–2011, NZ)\nBULLET::::- M. K. Asante (born 1982, US)\nBULLET::::- John Ashbery (1927–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- Cliff Ashby (1919–2012, E)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Ashby-Sterry (1836 or 1838–1917, E)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Ashe (1836–1889, E)\nBULLET::::- Renée Ashley (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Anne Askew (1521–1546, E)\nBULLET::::- Timoshenko Aslanides (born 1943, A)\nBULLET::::- Herbert Asquith (1881–1947, E)\nBULLET::::- Thea Astley (1925–2004, A)\nBULLET::::- Tilly Aston (1873–1947, A)\nBULLET::::- Edwin Atherstone (1788–1872, E)\nBULLET::::- Cassandra Atherton (living, A)\nBULLET::::- Rupert Atkinson (1881–1961, A)\nBULLET::::- Tiffany Atkinson (born 1972, W)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Atwood (born 1939, C)\nBULLET::::- Dorothy Auchterlonie (1915–1991, A)\nBULLET::::- John Audelay (died c. 1426, E)\nBULLET::::- W. H. Auden (1907–1973, E/US)\nBULLET::::- William Auld (1924–2006, S)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Auslander (1897–1965, US)\nBULLET::::- Paul Auster (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Alfred Austin (1835–1913, E)\nBULLET::::- Oana Avasilichioaei (living, C)\nBULLET::::- James Avery (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- Tusiata Avia (born 1966, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Avison (1918–2007, C)\nBULLET::::- Ayo Ayoola-Amale (born 1970, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Pam Ayres (born 1947, E)\nBULLET::::- Sir Robert Aytoun (1570–1638, S/E)\nBULLET::::- William Edmondstoune Aytoun (1813–1865, S)\nBULLET::::- Nnorom Azuonye (born 1967, Ni)\nBULLET::::- Jody Azzouni (born 1954, US)\n\nBULLET::::- Ken Babstock (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- Jimmy Santiago Baca (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- Bellamy Bach (group pseudonym, 1980s, US)\nBULLET::::- Joseph M. Bachelor (Joseph Morris, 1889–1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Bachinsky (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- Gabeba Baderoon (born 1969, SA)\nBULLET::::- Grace Shattuck Bail (1898–1996, US)\nBULLET::::- Alfred Bailey (1905–1997, C)\nBULLET::::- Jacob Bailey (1731–1808, US/C)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Bailey (born 1953, E)\nBULLET::::- Philip James Bailey (1816–1902, E)\nBULLET::::- Joanna Baillie (1762–1861, S/E)\nBULLET::::- David Baker (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Marie Annharte Baker (born 1942, C)\nBULLET::::- Peter Bakowski (born 1954, A)\nBULLET::::- John Balaban (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Jesse Ball (born 1978, US)\nBULLET::::- Addie L. Ballou (1838–1916, US)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Bamford (1788–1872, E)\nBULLET::::- John Banim (1798–1842, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- Chris Banks (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- Russell Banks (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- Kaushalya Bannerji (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Anne Bannerman (1765–1829, S)\nBULLET::::- Frances Bannerman (1855–1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Lex Banning (1921–1965, A)\nBULLET::::- Ivy Bannister (born 1951, US/Ir)\nBULLET::::- Shabbir Banoobhai (born 1949, SA)\nBULLET::::- Amiri Baraka (1934–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- Anna Laetitia Barbauld (1743–1825, E)\nBULLET::::- Mary Barber (c. 1685 – c. 1755, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Ros Barber (born 1964, E)\nBULLET::::- Anna Laetitia Barbauld (1743–1825, E)\nBULLET::::- John Barbour (c. 1320–1395, S)\nBULLET::::- Alexander Barclay (1476–1552, S)\nBULLET::::- Leland Bardwell (1922–2016, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Serie Barford (living, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Richard Harris Barham (Thomas Ingoldsby, 1788–1845, E)\nBULLET::::- George Barker (1913–1991, E)\nBULLET::::- Les Barker (born 1947, E)\nBULLET::::- Coleman Barks (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- Joel Barlow (1754–1812, US/F)\nBULLET::::- Lady Anne Barnard (1750–1825, S/SA)\nBULLET::::- Mary Barnard (1909–2002, US)\nBULLET::::- Djuna Barnes (1892–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- Stuart Barnes (born 1977, A)\nBULLET::::- William Barnes (1801–1886, E)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Barnett (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Richard Barnfield (1574–1627, E)\nBULLET::::- Willis Barnstone (born 1927, US)\nBULLET::::- John Barr (1809–1889, S/NZ)\nBULLET::::- Miriam Barr (born 1982, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Laird Barron (born 1970, US)\nBULLET::::- Bernard Barton (1784–1849, E)\nBULLET::::- John Barton (born 1957, C)\nBULLET::::- Bertha Hirsch Baruch (later 19th – early 20th century, US)\nBULLET::::- Gary Barwin (born 1964, C)\nBULLET::::- Todd Bash (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Basinski (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Shaunt Basmajian (1950–1990, C)\nBULLET::::- Ellen Bass (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Arlo Bates (1850–1918, US)\nBULLET::::- David Bates (1809–1870, US)\nBULLET::::- H. E. Bates (1905–1974, E)\nBULLET::::- Katharine Lee Bates (1859–1929, US)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Bathanti (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- Dawn-Michelle Baude (born 1959, US)\nBULLET::::- Bill Bauer (1932–2010, US/C)\nBULLET::::- Edward Baugh (born 1936, J)\nBULLET::::- Eric Baus (born 1975, US)\nBULLET::::- Charles Baxter (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- James K. Baxter (1926–1972, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Bayldon (1865–1958, A)\nBULLET::::- William Baylebridge (1883–1942, A)\n\nBULLET::::- Eric Beach (born 1947, A)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Beach (died 1737, W)\nBULLET::::- John Beaglehole (1901–1971, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Anne Beale (1816–1900, E/W)\nBULLET::::- Doug Beardsley (born 1941, C)\nBULLET::::- James Beattie (1735–1803, S)\nBULLET::::- Jan Beatty (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- Derek Beaulieu (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- Francis Beaumont (1586–1616, E)\nBULLET::::- Bruce Beaver (1928–2004, A)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Beckett (1906–1989, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Joshua Beckman (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Lovell Beddoes (1803–1849, E/G)\nBULLET::::- Ruth Bedford (1882–1963, A)\nBULLET::::- Jack Bedson (born 1950, A)\nBULLET::::- Patricia Beer (1919–1999, E)\nBULLET::::- Ven Begamudré (born 1956, C)\nBULLET::::- Brendan Behan (1923–1964, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Aphra Behn (1640–1689, E)\nBULLET::::- Sinclair Beiles (1930–2000, SA)\nBULLET::::- Gerard Beirne (born 1962, Ir/C)\nBULLET::::- Henry Beissel (born 1929, G/C)\nBULLET::::- Billy-Ray Belcourt (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Ken Belford (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- Erin Belieu (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- J. J. Bell (1871–1934, S)\nBULLET::::- Julian Bell (1908–1937, E)\nBULLET::::- Marvin Bell (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- Lisa Bellear (1961–2006, A)\nBULLET::::- Lesley Belleau (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Hilaire Belloc (1870–1953, E)\nBULLET::::- John Bemrose (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Gwen Benaway (born 1987, C)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Vincent Benét (1898–1943, US)\nBULLET::::- William Rose Benét (1886–1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Benger (1775–1827, E)\nBULLET::::- Gwendolyn B. Bennett (1902–1981, US)\nBULLET::::- Jim Bennett (born 1951, E)\nBULLET::::- Louise Bennett-Coverley (1919–2006, J)\nBULLET::::- Robbie Benoit (died 2007, C)\nBULLET::::- A. C. Benson (1862–1925, E)\nBULLET::::- Richard Berengarten (born 1943, E)\nBULLET::::- Bill Berkson (1939–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- Charles Bernstein (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Robert Berold (born 1948, SA)\nBULLET::::- Anselm Berrigan (born 1972, US)\nBULLET::::- Daniel Berrigan (1921–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- Ted Berrigan (1934–1983, US)\nBULLET::::- James Berry (1924–2017, J/E)\nBULLET::::- Wendell Berry (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- John Berryman (1914–1972, US)\nBULLET::::- Charles Best (1570–1627, E)\nBULLET::::- Mary Matilda Betham (1776–1852, E)\nBULLET::::- Matilda Betham-Edwards (1836–1919, E)\nBULLET::::- Ursula Bethell (1874–1945, NZ)\nBULLET::::- John Betjeman (1906–1984, E)\nBULLET::::- Craven Langstroth Betts (1853–1941, C)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Beverley (fl. 1815–1830, E)\nBULLET::::- Judith Beveridge (born 1956, A)\nBULLET::::- Helen Bevington (1906–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- L. S. Bevington (1845–1895, E)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Bibby (1799–1863, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Ruth Bidgood (born 1922, W)\nBULLET::::- Vonani Bila (born 1972, SA)\nBULLET::::- Robert Billings (1949–1986, C)\nBULLET::::- William Billington (1825–1884, E)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Bingham (1740–1814, E)\nBULLET::::- Laurence Binyon (1869–1943, E)\nBULLET::::- Hera Lindsay Bird (born 1987, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Earle Birney (1904–1995, C)\nBULLET::::- Dora Birtles (1903–1992, A)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Bishop (1911–1979, US)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Bishop (1731–1795, E)\nBULLET::::- Bill Bissett (born 1939, C)\nBULLET::::- Sherwin Bitsui (born 1974, US)\nBULLET::::- David MacLeod Black (born 1941, S)\nBULLET::::- Sophie Cabot Black (born 1958, US)\nBULLET::::- Paul Blackburn (1926–1971, US)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Blacklock (1721–1791, S)\nBULLET::::- Leigh Blackmore (born 1959, A)\nBULLET::::- R. P. Blackmur (1904–1965, US)\nBULLET::::- Peter Bladen (1922–2001, A)\nBULLET::::- Isa Blagden (1816 or 1817–1873, It)\nBULLET::::- Mark Blagrave (born 1956, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Blair (1699–1746, S)\nBULLET::::- Lewis Blake (born 1946, E)\nBULLET::::- William Blake (1757–1827, E)\nBULLET::::- Susanna Blamire (1747–1794, E)\nBULLET::::- Paddy Blanchfield (1911–1980, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Richard Blanco (born 1968, US)\nBULLET::::- Don Blanding (1894–1957, US)\nBULLET::::- Robin Blaser (1925–2009, C)\nBULLET::::- Ann Eliza Bleecker (1752–1783, US)\nBULLET::::- Adrian Blevins (born 1964, US)\nBULLET::::- John Blight (1913–1995, A)\nBULLET::::- Mathilde Blind (1841–1896, E)\nBULLET::::- Laurie Block (1949–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- E. D. Blodgett (1935–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Paul Blood (1832–1919, US)\nBULLET::::- Valerie Bloom (born 1956, J/E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Bloomfield (1766–1823, E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Blower (c. 1757/63 – post-1816, E)\nBULLET::::- Edmund Blunden (1896–1974, E)\nBULLET::::- Roy Blumenthal (born 1968, SA)\nBULLET::::- Wilfrid Scawen Blunt (1840–1922, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Bly (born 1926, US)\nBULLET::::- Ali Blythe (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Barcroft Boake (1866–1892, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Boates (born 1954, C)\nBULLET::::- Merlinda Bobis (born 1959, A)\nBULLET::::- Louise Bogan (1897–1970, US)\nBULLET::::- Michelle Boisseau (1955–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- Christian Bök (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- George Henry Boker (1823–1890, US)\nBULLET::::- Eavan Boland (born 1944, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Alan Bold (1943–1998, S)\nBULLET::::- Dermot Bolger (born 1959, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Stephanie Bolster (born 1969, C)\nBULLET::::- Edmund Bolton (c. 1575 – c. 1633)\nBULLET::::- Ken Bolton (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- Roger Bonair-Agard (living, J/US)\nBULLET::::- Horatius Bonar (1808–1889, S)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Bonhôte (1744–1818, E)\nBULLET::::- Sean Bonney (living, E)\nBULLET::::- Arna Wendell Bontemps (1902–1973, US)\nBULLET::::- Shane Book (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Luke Booker (1762–1835, E)\nBULLET::::- Kurt Boone (born 1959, US)\nBULLET::::- Henry Ernest Boote (1865–1949, A)\nBULLET::::- Ivan Bootham (1939–2016, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Pat Boran (born 1963, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Jenny Bornholdt (born 1960, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Roo Borson (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- Keith Bosley (1937–2018, E)\nBULLET::::- Anne Lynch Botta (1815–1891, US)\nBULLET::::- Gordon Bottomley (1874–1948, E)\nBULLET::::- David Bottoms (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- Jenny Boult (MML Bliss, 1951–2005, A)\nBULLET::::- Francis William Bourdillon (1852–1921, E)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Bourinot (1893–1969, C)\nBULLET::::- John Philip Bourke (1860–1914, A)\nBULLET::::- Jane Bowdler (1743–1784, E)\nBULLET::::- George Bowering (born 1936, C)\nBULLET::::- Marilyn Bowering (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- Cathy Smith Bowers (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- Edgar Bowers (1924–2000, US)\nBULLET::::- Tim Bowling (born 1964, C)\nBULLET::::- Alex Boyd (born 1969, C)\nBULLET::::- Louise Esther Vickroy Boyd (1827–1909, US)\nBULLET::::- Mark Alexander Boyd (1563–1601, S)\nBULLET::::- Kay Boyle (1902–1992, US)\nBULLET::::- Peter Boyle (born 1951, A)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Boyse (1702/1703–1749, Ir/E)\n\nBULLET::::- Francis Brabazon (1907–1984, A)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Bracken (1843–1898, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Alison Brackenbury (born 1953, E)\nBULLET::::- James Bradley (born 1967, A)\nBULLET::::- Anne Bradstreet (c. 1612–1672, US)\nBULLET::::- E. J. Brady (1869–1952, A)\nBULLET::::- Kate Braid (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- Lawrence Ytzhak Braithwaite (1963–2008, C)\nBULLET::::- Shannon Bramer (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- Bertha Southey Brammall (1878–1957, A)\nBULLET::::- James Bramston (c. 1694–1743, E)\nBULLET::::- Dionne Brand (born 1953, C)\nBULLET::::- Di Brandt (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- Charles Brasch (1909–1973, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Giannina Braschi (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- Kamau Brathwaite (born 1930, B)\nBULLET::::- Richard Brautigan (1935–1984, US)\nBULLET::::- John Jefferson Bray (1912–1995, A)\nBULLET::::- Diana Brebner (1956–2001, C)\nBULLET::::- Jean \"Binta\" Breeze (born 1957, J)\nBULLET::::- Christopher Brennan (1870–1932, A)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Payne Brennan (1918–1990, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Brennan (born 1973, A)\nBULLET::::- Jane Brereton (1685–1740, W)\nBULLET::::- John Le Gay Brereton (1871–1933, A)\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Breton (1542–1626, E)\nBULLET::::- Brian Brett (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- Lily Brett (born 1946, A)\nBULLET::::- Ken Brewer (1941–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Brewster (1922–2012, C)\nBULLET::::- Martha Wadsworth Brewster (1710 – c. 1757, US)\nBULLET::::- Breyten Breytenbach (born 1939, SA)\nBULLET::::- Diana Bridge (born 1942, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Robert Bridges (1844–1930, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Bringhurst (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- Geoffrey Brock (born 1964, US)\nBULLET::::- Alexander Brome (1620–1666, E)\nBULLET::::- David Bromige (1933–2009, C/US)\nBULLET::::- William Bronk (1918–1999, US)\nBULLET::::- Anne Brontë (1820–1849, E)\nBULLET::::- Branwell Brontë (1817–1848, E)\nBULLET::::- Charlotte Brontë (1816–1855, E)\nBULLET::::- Emily Brontë (1818–1848, E)\nBULLET::::- Rupert Brooke (1887–1915, E)\nBULLET::::- David Brooks (born 1953, A)\nBULLET::::- Gwendolyn Brooks (1917–2000, US)\nBULLET::::- Audrey Alexandra Brown (1904–1998, C)\nBULLET::::- George Mackay Brown (1921–1996, S)\nBULLET::::- James Brown (J. B. Selkirk, 1832–1904, S)\nBULLET::::- Jericho Brown (born 1976, US)\nBULLET::::- Pam Brown (born 1948, A)\nBULLET::::- Sterling Allen Brown (1901–1989, US)\nBULLET::::- Stewart Brown (born 1951, E)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Edward Brown (1830–1897, IoM)\nBULLET::::- Wayne Brown (1944–2009, T)\nBULLET::::- Frances Browne (1816–1879, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Isaac Hawkins Browne (1705–1760, E)\nBULLET::::- Moses Browne (1704–1787, E)\nBULLET::::- Sir Thomas Browne (1605–1682, E)\nBULLET::::- William Browne (1588–1643, E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806–1861, E/It)\nBULLET::::- Robert Browning (1812–1889, E/It)\nBULLET::::- Charles Tory Bruce (1906–1971, C)\nBULLET::::- Mary Grant Bruce (1878–1958, A)\nBULLET::::- Julie Bruck (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Dennis Brutus (1924–2009, SA)\nBULLET::::- William Cullen Bryant (1794–1878, US)\nBULLET::::- Colette Bryce (born 1970, NI/E)\nBULLET::::- Bryher (Annie Winifred Ellerman, 1894–1983, E)\nBULLET::::- Dugald Buchanan (1716–1768, S)\nBULLET::::- George Buchanan (1506–1582, S)\nBULLET::::- Robert Williams Buchanan (1841–1901, S)\nBULLET::::- Vincent Buckley (1925–1988, A)\nBULLET::::- Charles Buckmaster (1950–1972, A)\nBULLET::::- David Budbill (1940–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- Robert Budde (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- Andrea Hollander Budy (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Suzanne Buffam (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Charles Bukowski (1920–1994, US)\nBULLET::::- April Bulmer (born 1963, C)\nBULLET::::- Rhoda Bulter (1929–1994, S)\nBULLET::::- Basil Bunting (1900–1985, E)\nBULLET::::- Anthony Burgess (1917–1993, E)\nBULLET::::- Haldane Burgess (1862–1927, S)\nBULLET::::- Andrew Burke (born 1944, A)\nBULLET::::- Murdoch Burnett (1953–2015, C)\nBULLET::::- Joanne Burns (born 1945, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Burns (1759–1796, S)\nBULLET::::- Stanley Burnshaw (1906–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- John Burnside (born 1955, S)\nBULLET::::- Sophia Burrell (1753–1802, E)\nBULLET::::- William S. Burroughs (1914–1997, US)\nBULLET::::- Mick Burrs (born 1940, C)\nBULLET::::- Duncan Bush (1946–2017, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Olivia Ward Bush-Banks (1869–1944, US)\nBULLET::::- Aaron Bushkowsky (born 1957, C)\nBULLET::::- Guy Butler (1918–2001, SA)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Butler (1612–1680, E)\nBULLET::::- Ray Buttigieg (born 1955, M)\nBULLET::::- Anthony Butts (born 1969, US)\nBULLET::::- A. S. Byatt (born 1936, E)\nBULLET::::- Kathryn Stripling Byer (1944–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- Witter Bynner (Emanuel Morgan, 1881–1968, US)\nBULLET::::- Lord Byron (1788–1824, E/It)\n\nBULLET::::- Richard Caddel (1949–2003, E)\nBULLET::::- Caroline Caddy (born 1944, A)\nBULLET::::- Charmaine Cadeau (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Adrian Caesar (born 1955, A)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Cain (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- Scott Cairns (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Alison Calder (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Angus Calder (1942–2008, S)\nBULLET::::- Alex Caldiero (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- Frank Oliver Call (1878–1956, C)\nBULLET::::- Barry Callaghan (born 1937, C)\nBULLET::::- Michael Feeney Callan (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Charles Stuart Calverley (1831–1884, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Calvert (1945–1988, E)\nBULLET::::- Anne Cameron (Cam Hubert, born 1938, C)\nBULLET::::- Norman Cameron (1905–1953, S)\nBULLET::::- Jason Camlot (born 1967, C)\nBULLET::::- A. Y. Campbell (1885–1958, S)\nBULLET::::- Alistair Campbell (1925–2009, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Angus Peter Campbell (living, S)\nBULLET::::- David Campbell (1915–1979, A)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Campbell (born 1980, A)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Campbell (1879–1944, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Meg Campbell (1937–2007, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Paul-Henri Campbell (born 1982, US)\nBULLET::::- Roy Campbell (1901–1957, SA)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Campbell (1774–1844, S/E)\nBULLET::::- William Wilfred Campbell (1860–1918, C)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Campion (1567–1620, E)\nBULLET::::- Melville Henry Cane (1879–1980, US)\nBULLET::::- Mary Wedderburn Cannan (1893–1973, E)\nBULLET::::- Moya Cannon (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Edward Capern (1819–1894, E)\nBULLET::::- Vahni Capildeo (born 1973, T/S)\nBULLET::::- Natalee Caple (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Carew (1595–1639, E)\nBULLET::::- Henry Carey (1693–1743, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Carliell (died c. 1622, E)\nBULLET::::- Bliss Carman (1861–1929, C/US)\nBULLET::::- Clyde Carr (1886–1962, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Fern G. Z. Carr (born 1956, C)\nBULLET::::- Jim Carroll (1949–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- Lewis Carroll (1832–1898, E)\nBULLET::::- Hayden Carruth (1921–2008, US)\nBULLET::::- A.J. Carruthers (living, A)\nBULLET::::- Ann Elizabeth Carson (born 1929, C)\nBULLET::::- Anne Carson (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- Ciaran Carson (1948–2019, NI)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Carter (1717–1806, E)\nBULLET::::- Jared Carter (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- William Cartwright (1611–1643, E)\nBULLET::::- Raymond Carver (1938–1988, US)\nBULLET::::- Alice Cary (1820–1871, US)\nBULLET::::- Phoebe Cary (1824–1871, US)\nBULLET::::- James Casey (1824–1909, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Juanita Casey (1925–2012, E)\nBULLET::::- Neal Cassady (1926–1968, US)\nBULLET::::- Cyrus Cassells (born 1957, US)\nBULLET::::- Ana Castillo (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- Lee Cataldi (born 1942, A)\nBULLET::::- Nancy Cato (1917–2000, A)\nBULLET::::- Charles Causley (1917–2003, E)\nBULLET::::- Nick Cave (born 1957, A)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne (1623–1673, E)\nBULLET::::- Kate Cayley (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Susanna Centlivre (c. 1667/1670 – 1723, E)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Centolella (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Ceravolo (1934–1988, US)\nBULLET::::- John Chalkhill (fl. 1600, E)\nBULLET::::- Gordon Challis (1932–2018, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Weyman Chan (born 1963, C)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Chandler (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Margaret Chandler (1807–1834, US)\nBULLET::::- Diana Chang (1924–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- William Ellery Channing (1818–1901, US)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Chapman (1873–1935, US)\nBULLET::::- George Chapman (1560–1634, E)\nBULLET::::- Patrick Chapman (born 1968, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Fred Chappell (born 1936, US)\nBULLET::::- Craig Charles (born 1964, E)\nBULLET::::- James Charlton (born 1947, A)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Chatterton (1752–1770, E)\nBULLET::::- Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1343–1400, E)\nBULLET::::- Angelico Chavez (1910–1996, US)\nBULLET::::- Syl Cheney-Coker (born 1945, SLe)\nBULLET::::- Maxine Chernoff (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- Kelly Cherry (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- G. K. Chesterton (1874–1936, E)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Chestre (late 14th c., E)\nBULLET::::- James Wm. Chichetto (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Lydia Maria Child (1802–1880, US)\nBULLET::::- Billy Childish (born 1959, E)\nBULLET::::- Marilyn Chin (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- Staceyann Chin (born 1972, J)\nBULLET::::- Eileen Chong (born 1980, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Choquette (1905–1991, C)\nBULLET::::- Lesley Choyce (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Christakos (born 1962, C)\nBULLET::::- Evie Christie (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Chubb (1892–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- Mary Chudleigh (1656–1710, E)\nBULLET::::- Hubert Newman Wigmore Church (1857–1932, A)\nBULLET::::- Richard Church (1893–1972, E)\nBULLET::::- Charles Churchill (1731–1764, E)\nBULLET::::- John Ciardi (1916–1986, US)\nBULLET::::- Colley Cibber (1671–1757, E)\nBULLET::::- Charl Cilliers (born 1941, SA)\nBULLET::::- Sandra Cisneros (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Carson Cistulli (born 1979, US)\n\nBULLET::::- Amy Clampitt (1920–1994, US\nBULLET::::- Kate Clanchy (born 1965, S)\nBULLET::::- John Clanvowe (c. 1341–1391, W/E)\nBULLET::::- John Clare (1793–1864, E)\nBULLET::::- Dave Clark (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Douglas Clark (1942–2010, E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Clark (1918–1978, S)\nBULLET::::- Emily Clark (fl. 1798–1833, E)\nBULLET::::- Ross Clark (born 1953, A)\nBULLET::::- Tom Clark (1941–2018, US)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Clark (born 1980, S)\nBULLET::::- Amy Key Clarke (1892–1980, E)\nBULLET::::- Austin Clarke (1886–1974, Ir)\nBULLET::::- George Elliott Clarke (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- Gillian Clarke (born 1937, W)\nBULLET::::- Jack Clarke (1933–1992, US)\nBULLET::::- Marcus Clarke (1846–1881, A)\nBULLET::::- Brian P. Cleary (born 1959, US)\nBULLET::::- Brendan Cleary (born 1958, NI)\nBULLET::::- William Cleland (1661–1689, S)\nBULLET::::- Justin Clemens (born 1969, A)\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Clementine (born 1988, E/F)\nBULLET::::- Jack Clemo (1916–1994, E)\nBULLET::::- John Cleveland (1613–1658, E)\nBULLET::::- Michelle Cliff (1946–2016, J/US)\nBULLET::::- Wayne Clifford (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Lucille Clifton (1936–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- Caroline Clive (1801–1873, E)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Hugh Clough (1819–1861, E)\n\nBULLET::::- Grace Stone Coates (1881–1976, US)\nBULLET::::- Florence Earle Coates (1850–1927, US)\nBULLET::::- Bob Cobbing (1920–2002, E)\nBULLET::::- Robbie Coburn (born 1994, A)\nBULLET::::- Alison Cockburn (awa Alison Rutherford, 1712–1794, S)\nBULLET::::- Alice Rollit Coe (1858–1940, US)\nBULLET::::- Judith Ortiz Cofer (1952–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- Brian Coffey (1905–1995, Ir/F)\nBULLET::::- Fred Cogswell (1917–2004, C)\nBULLET::::- Leonard Cohen (1934–2016, C)\nBULLET::::- Matt Cohen (1942–1999, C)\nBULLET::::- Allison Hedge Coke (born 1958, US)\nBULLET::::- Norma Cole (born 1945, C/US)\nBULLET::::- Hal Gibson Pateshall Colebatch (1945–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- Aidan Coleman (born 1976, A)\nBULLET::::- Victor Coleman (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Wanda Coleman (1946–2013, US)\nBULLET::::- Hartley Coleridge (1796–1849, E)\nBULLET::::- Mary Elizabeth Coleridge (1861–1907, E)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834, E)\nBULLET::::- Don Coles (1927–2017, C)\nBULLET::::- Katharine Coles (born 1959, US)\nBULLET::::- Edward Coletti (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Mary Collier (c. 1688–1762, E)\nBULLET::::- Billy Collins (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- John Collins (1742–1808, E)\nBULLET::::- William Collins (1721–1759, E)\nBULLET::::- Laurence Collinson (1925–1986, A)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Collis (living, C)\nBULLET::::- John Robert Colombo (born 1936, C)\nBULLET::::- Glenn Colquhoun (born 1964, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Padraic Colum (1881–1972, Ir/US)\nBULLET::::- Anna Olcott Commelin (1841–1924, US)\nBULLET::::- Anne Compton (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- Wayde Compton (born 1972, C)\nBULLET::::- Helen Gray Cone (1859–1934, US)\nBULLET::::- William Congreve (1670–1729, E)\nBULLET::::- Jan Conn (born 1952, C/US)\nBULLET::::- Stewart Conn (born 1936, S)\nBULLET::::- Paul Conneally (born 1959, E)\nBULLET::::- Karen Connelly (born 1969, C)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Connolly (born 1962, C)\nBULLET::::- Susan Connolly (born 1956, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Robert Conquest (1917–2015, E)\nBULLET::::- Tony Conran (1931–2013, W)\nBULLET::::- Henry Constable (1562–1613, E/F)\nBULLET::::- David Constantine (born 1944, E)\nBULLET::::- Eliza Cook (1818–1889, E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Cook-Lynn (born 1930, US)\nBULLET::::- Sophie Cooke (born 1976, S)\nBULLET::::- Ina Coolbrith (1841–1928, US)\nBULLET::::- Dennis Cooley (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Clark Coolidge (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- Afua Cooper (born 1957, J/C)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Cooper (1805–1892, E)\nBULLET::::- Jack Cope (1913–1991, SA)\nBULLET::::- Wendy Cope (born 1945, E)\nBULLET::::- Judith Copithorne (born 1939, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Copland (fl. 1508–1547, E)\nBULLET::::- A. E. Coppard (1878–1957, E)\nBULLET::::- Julia Copus (born 1969, E)\nBULLET::::- Richard Corbet (1582–1635, E)\nBULLET::::- Cid Corman (1924–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- Alfred Corn (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Frances Cornford (1886–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- Francis M. Cornford (1874–1943, E)\nBULLET::::- Joe Corrie (1894–1968, S)\nBULLET::::- Gregory Corso (1930–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- Jayne Cortez (1936–2012, US)\nBULLET::::- William Johnson Cory (1823–1892, E)\nBULLET::::- Louisa Stuart Costello (1799–1877, Ir/F)\nBULLET::::- Charles Cotton (1630–1687, E)\nBULLET::::- Anna Couani (born 1948, A)\nBULLET::::- Anne Ross Cousin (1824–1906, E/S)\nBULLET::::- Dani Couture (born 1978, C)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Cowherd (1817–1907, C)\nBULLET::::- Abraham Cowley (1618–1667, E)\nBULLET::::- Hannah Cowley (1743–1809, E)\nBULLET::::- Malcolm Cowley (1898–1989, US)\nBULLET::::- Dorothy Cowlin (1911–2010, E)\nBULLET::::- William Cowper (1731–1800, E)\nBULLET::::- George Crabbe (1754–1832, E)\nBULLET::::- Christine Craig (born 1943, J)\nBULLET::::- Helen Craik (c. 1751–1825, S/E)\nBULLET::::- Hart Crane (1899–1932, US)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Crane (1871–1900, US)\nBULLET::::- Richard Crashaw (1613–1649, E)\nBULLET::::- Isabella Valancy Crawford (1846–1887, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Crawford (1868–1930, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Crawford (born 1959, S)\nBULLET::::- Richard Crawley (1840–1893, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Morri Creech (born 1970, US)\nBULLET::::- Robert Creeley (1926–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- Caroline de Crespigny (1797–1861, E/G)\nBULLET::::- Walter D'Arcy Cresswell (1896–1960, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Louise Crisp (born 1957, A)\nBULLET::::- Ann Batten Cristall (1769–1848, E)\nBULLET::::- Andy Croft (born 1956, E)\nBULLET::::- Julian Croft (born 1941, A)\nBULLET::::- Alison Croggon (born 1962, A)\nBULLET::::- Jeremy Cronin (born 1949, SA)\nBULLET::::- M. T. C. Cronin (born 1963, A)\nBULLET::::- Lynn Crosbie (born 1963, C)\nBULLET::::- Camilla Dufour Crosland (1812–1895, E)\nBULLET::::- Zora Cross (1890–1964, A)\nBULLET::::- Aleister Crowley (1875–1947, E)\nBULLET::::- Andrew Crozier (1943–2008, E)\nBULLET::::- Lorna Crozier (Lorna Uher, born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- Helen Cruickshank (1886–1975, S)\nBULLET::::- Michael Crummey (born 1965, C)\nBULLET::::- Julie Crysler (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Ann Cullen (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Countee Cullen (1903–1946, US)\nBULLET::::- Nancy Jo Cullen (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Patrick Cullinan (1932–2011, SA)\nBULLET::::- E. E. Cummings (1894–1962, US)\nBULLET::::- Gary Cummiskey (born 1963, SA)\nBULLET::::- Allan Cunningham (1784–1842, S/E)\nBULLET::::- J. V. Cunningham (1911–1985, US)\nBULLET::::- John Cunningham (1729–1773, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- Allen Curnow (1911–2001, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Margaret Curran (1887–1962, A)\nBULLET::::- Jen Currin (living, US/C)\nBULLET::::- Tony Curtis (born 1946, W)\nBULLET::::- Tony Curtis (born 1955, Ir)\nBULLET::::- James Cuthbertson (1851–1910, A)\nBULLET::::- Ivor Cutler (1923–2006, S)\nBULLET::::- Lidija Cvetkovic (born 1967, A)\nBULLET::::- Kayla Czaga (living, C)\n\nBULLET::::- H.D. (Hilda Doolittle, 1886–1961, US)\nBULLET::::- Cyril Dabydeen (living, Gu/C)\nBULLET::::- David Dabydeen (born 1955, Gu)\nBULLET::::- Kalli Dakos (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Victor Daley (1858–1805, A)\nBULLET::::- Mary Dalton (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- Pádraig J. Daly (born 1943, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Joseph A. Dandurand (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Achmat Dangor (born 1948, SA)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Daniel (1562–1619, E)\nBULLET::::- David Daniels (1933–2008, US)\nBULLET::::- Jeffrey Daniels (living, US)\nBULLET::::- George Darley (1795–1846, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Tina Darragh (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Keki N. Daruwalla (born 1937, In)\nBULLET::::- Erasmus Darwin (1731–1802, E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth Daryush (1887–1977, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert von Dassanowsky (Robert Dassanowsky) (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- Beverley Daurio (born 1953, C)\nBULLET::::- William Davenant (1606–1668, E)\nBULLET::::- Guy Davenport (1927–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- Frank Davey (born 1940, C)\nBULLET::::- Donald Davidson (1893–1968, US)\nBULLET::::- John Davidson (1857–1909, S/E)\nBULLET::::- Lucretia Maria Davidson (1808–1825, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Davidson (born 1944, US)\nBULLET::::- Donald Davie (1922–1995, E)\nBULLET::::- Alan Davies (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- Deborah Kay Davies (living, W)\nBULLET::::- Hugh Sykes Davies (1909–1984, E)\nBULLET::::- Idris Davies (1905–1953, W)\nBULLET::::- John Davies (1569–1626, E)\nBULLET::::- W. H. Davies (1871–1940, W)\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Flood Davin (1840–1901, C)\nBULLET::::- Beatrice Deloitte Davis (1909–1992, A)\nBULLET::::- Jon Davis (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Norma Davis (1905–1945, A)\nBULLET::::- Tanya Davis (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Osborne Davis (1814–1845, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Edward Davison (1898–1970, S/US)\nBULLET::::- Peter Davison (1928–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- Bruce Dawe (born 1930, A)\nBULLET::::- Tom Dawe (born 1940, C)\nBULLET::::- Jeffery Day (1896–1918, E)\nBULLET::::- Sarah Day (born 1958, A)\nBULLET::::- Cecil Day-Lewis (1904–1972, E)\nBULLET::::- Adriana de Barros (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- Somerset de Chair (1911–1995, E)\nBULLET::::- Jean Louis De Esque (1879–1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Madeline DeFrees (1919–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- Celia de Fréine (born 1948, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Ingrid de Kok (born 1951, SA)\nBULLET::::- Walter de la Mare (1873–1956, E)\nBULLET::::- Christine De Luca (born 1947, S)\nBULLET::::- Sadiqa de Meijer (born 1977, C)\nBULLET::::- Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford (1550–1604, E)\nBULLET::::- Phillippa Yaa de Villiers (born 1966, SA)\nBULLET::::- James Deahl (born 1945, C)\nBULLET::::- Dulcie Deamer (1890–1972, A)\nBULLET::::- John F. Deane (born 1943, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Joel Deane (born 1969, A)\nBULLET::::- Patrick Deeley (born 1953, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Madeline DeFrees (1919–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Dekker (1575–1641, E)\nBULLET::::- Greg Delanty (born 1958, Ir/US)\nBULLET::::- Kris Demeanor (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Barry Dempster (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- Joe Denham (living, C)\nBULLET::::- John Denham (1615–1669, E)\nBULLET::::- C. J. Dennis (1876–1938, A)\nBULLET::::- John Dennison (born 1978, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Tory Dent (1958–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- Enid Derham (1882–1941, A)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Dermody (1775–1802, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Toi Derricotte (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Heather Derr-Smith (born 1971, US)\nBULLET::::- Michelle Desbarats (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Babette Deutsch (1895–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- James Devaney (1890–1976, A)\nBULLET::::- Mary Deverell (1731–1805, E)\nBULLET::::- Denis Devlin (1908–1959, Ir)\nBULLET::::- George E. Dewar (1895–1969, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Christopher Dewdney (born 1951, C]\nBULLET::::- Imtiaz Dharker (born 1954, P/W)\nBULLET::::- Pier Giorgio Di Cicco (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- Mary di Michele (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- Diane di Prima (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- Ann Diamond (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Anne Dick (died 1741, S)\nBULLET::::- Jennifer K Dick (born 1970, US)\nBULLET::::- James Dickey (1923–1997, US)\nBULLET::::- Adam Dickinson (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Emily Dickinson (1830–1886, US)\nBULLET::::- Matthew Dickman (born 1975, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Dickman (born 1975, US)\nBULLET::::- Robert Dickson (1944–2007, C)\nBULLET::::- Peter Didsbury (born 1946, E)\nBULLET::::- Modikwe Dikobe (1913 – unknown year, SA)\nBULLET::::- Des Dillon (living, S)\nBULLET::::- John Dillon (1851–1927, Ir)\nBULLET::::- B. R. Dionysius (born 1969, A)\nBULLET::::- Ray DiPalma (1943–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- Thomas M. Disch (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni (born 1956, In/US)\nBULLET::::- Isobel Dixon (born 1969, SA/E)\nBULLET::::- Sarah Dixon (1671–1765, E)\nBULLET::::- William Hepworth Dixon (1821–1879, E)\nBULLET::::- Angifi Dladla (born 1950, SA)\nBULLET::::- Tim Dlugos (1950–1990, US)\nBULLET::::- Kildare Dobbs (1923–2013, C)\nBULLET::::- Henry Austin Dobson (1840–1921, E)\nBULLET::::- Rosemary Dobson (1920–2012, A)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Dobyns (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Jeramy Dodds (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Dodsley (1703–1764, E)\nBULLET::::- Pete Doherty (born 1979, E)\nBULLET::::- Digby Mackworth Dolben (1848–1867, E)\nBULLET::::- Joe Dolce (born 1947, US/A)\nBULLET::::- Don Domanski (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- Magie Dominic (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Jeffery Donaldson (living, C)\nBULLET::::- John Donaldson (Jon Inglis, 1921–1989, E)\nBULLET::::- John Donne (1572–1631, E)\nBULLET::::- David Donnell (born 1939, C)\nBULLET::::- Gerard Donovan (born 1959, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- Theo Dorgan (born 1953, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Ed Dorn (1929–1999, US)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Ann Dorset (1752–1834, E)\nBULLET::::- Candas Jane Dorsey (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- Mark Doty (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- Clive Doucet (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- Sarah Doudney (1841–1926, E)\nBULLET::::- Lucy Dougan (born 1966, A)\nBULLET::::- Charles Montagu Doughty (1843–1926, E)\nBULLET::::- Lord Alfred Douglas (1870–1945, E)\nBULLET::::- Alice May Douglas (1865–1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Gavin Douglas (c. 1474–1522, S)\nBULLET::::- George Brisbane Scott Douglas (1856–1935, S)\nBULLET::::- Keith Douglas (1920–1944, E)\nBULLET::::- Orville Lloyd Douglas (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- Rita Dove (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- Basil Dowling (1910–2000, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Finuala Dowling (born 1962, SA)\nBULLET::::- Gordon Downie (1964–2017, C)\nBULLET::::- Ellen Mary Patrick Downing (1828–1869, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Ernest Dowson (1867–1900, E)\nBULLET::::- Francis Hastings Doyle (1810–1888, E)\nBULLET::::- Kirby Doyle (1932–2003, US)\n\nBULLET::::- Michael Dransfield (1948–1973, A)\nBULLET::::- Jane Draycott (born 1954, E)\nBULLET::::- Michael Drayton (1563–1631, E)\nBULLET::::- John Swanwick Drennan (1809–1893, Ir)\nBULLET::::- William Drennan (1754–1820, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Adam Drinan (also Joseph Macleod, 1903–1984, E)\nBULLET::::- John Drinkwater (1882–1937, E)\nBULLET::::- William Drummond of Hawthornden (1585–1649, S)\nBULLET::::- William Henry Drummond (1854–1907, C)\nBULLET::::- John Dryden (1631–1700, E)\nBULLET::::- W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963, US)\nBULLET::::- I. D. du Plessis (1900–1981, SA)\nBULLET::::- Klara du Plessis (living, SA/C)\nBULLET::::- Norman Dubie (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Duck (c. 1705–1756, E)\nBULLET::::- Louis Dudek (1918–2001, S)\nBULLET::::- Carol Ann Duffy (born 1955, S)\nBULLET::::- Charles Gavan Duffy (1816–1903, Ir/A)\nBULLET::::- Maureen Duffy (born 1933, E)\nBULLET::::- Alan Dugan (1923–2003, J/US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Dugan (1947–2006, A)\nBULLET::::- Eileen Duggan (1894–1972, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Laurie Duggan (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- Jas H. Duke (1939–1992, A)\nBULLET::::- Richard Duke (1658–1711, E)\nBULLET::::- Tug Dumbly (Geoff Forrester, living, A)\nBULLET::::- Marilyn Dumont (born 1955, C)\nBULLET::::- Paul Laurence Dunbar (1872–1906, US)\nBULLET::::- William Dunbar (1459 or 1460 – c. 1530, S)\nBULLET::::- Andrew Duncan (born 1956, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Duncan (1919–1988, US)\nBULLET::::- Camille Dungy (born 1972, US)\nBULLET::::- Helen Dunmore (1952–2017, E)\nBULLET::::- Douglas Dunn (born 1942, S)\nBULLET::::- Max Dunn (died 1963, A)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Dunn (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- Joe Dunthorne (born 1982, W)\nBULLET::::- Paul Durcan (born 1944, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Lawrence Durrell (1912–1990, E)\nBULLET::::- Anne Dutton (1692–1765, E)\nBULLET::::- Geoffrey Dutton (1922–1998, A)\nBULLET::::- Stuart Dybek (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- Edward Dyer (1543–1607, E)\nBULLET::::- John Dyer (1699–1758, W)\nBULLET::::- Bob Dylan (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Edward Dyson (1865–1931, A)\n\nBULLET::::- Joan Adeney Easdale (1913–1998, E)\nBULLET::::- Evelyn Eaton (1902–1983, C)\nBULLET::::- Richard Eberhart (1904–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- Emily Eden (1797–1869, E)\nBULLET::::- Helen Parry Eden (1885–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Edgar (born 1951, A)\nBULLET::::- Lauris Edmond (1924–2000, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Russell Edson (1928–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- Richard Edwardes (c. 1523–1566, E)\nBULLET::::- Dic Edwards (born 1953, W)\nBULLET::::- Jonathan Edwards (born 1979, W)\nBULLET::::- Rhian Edwards (living, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Terry Ehret (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- Vic Elias (1948–2006, US/C)\nBULLET::::- Anne Elder (1918–1976, A)\nBULLET::::- George Eliot (Mary Anne Evans, 1819–1880, E)\nBULLET::::- T. S. Eliot (1888–1965, US/E)\nBULLET::::- Elizabeth F. Ellet (1818–1877, US)\nBULLET::::- Charlotte Elliot (1839–1880, S)\nBULLET::::- David Elliott (1923–1999, C)\nBULLET::::- Jean Elliot (1727–1805, S)\nBULLET::::- Ebenezer Elliott (1781–1849, E)\nBULLET::::- George Ellis (1753–1815, E)\nBULLET::::- Royston Ellis (born 1941, E)\nBULLET::::- Chris Else (born 1942, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Rebecca Elson (1960–1999, C)\nBULLET::::- Crispin Elsted (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Claudia Emerson (1957–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882, US)\nBULLET::::- Chris Emery (born 1963, E)\nBULLET::::- William Empson (1906–1984, E)\nBULLET::::- Paul Engle (1908–1991, US)\nBULLET::::- John Ennis (born 1944, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Karen Enns (living, C)\nBULLET::::- D. J. Enright (1920–2002, E)\nBULLET::::- Riemke Ensing (born 1939, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Theodore Enslin (1925–2011, US)\nBULLET::::- Louise Erdrich (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Erskine (1685–1752, S)\nBULLET::::- Clayton Eshleman (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- Martín Espada (born 1957, US)\nBULLET::::- Ramabai Espinet (born 1948, T)\nBULLET::::- Jill Alexander Essbaum (born 1971, US)\nBULLET::::- Maggie Estep (1963–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- George Etherege (1635–1691, E)\nBULLET::::- Michael Estok (1939–1989, C)\nBULLET::::- Jerry Estrin (1947–1993, US)\nBULLET::::- Anne Evans (1820–1870, E)\nBULLET::::- Christine Evans (born 1943, E/W)\nBULLET::::- George Essex Evans (1863–1909, A)\nBULLET::::- Margiad Evans (Peggy Whistler, 1909–1958, E)\nBULLET::::- Mari Evans (1919–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- Sebastian Evans (1830–1909, E)\nBULLET::::- William Everson (Brother Antoninus, 1912–1994, US\nBULLET::::- Gavin Ewart (1916–1995, E)\nBULLET::::- John K. Ewers (1904–1978, A)\nBULLET::::- Elisabeth Eybers (1915–2007, SA/Nt)\n\nBULLET::::- Frederick William Faber (1814–1863, E)\nBULLET::::- Diane Fahey (born 1945, A)\nBULLET::::- Ruth Fainlight (born 1931, US/E)\nBULLET::::- Kingsley Fairbridge (1885–1924, SA)\nBULLET::::- A. R. D. Fairburn (1904–1957, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Maria and Harriet Falconar (born c. 1771–1774, E or S)\nBULLET::::- William Falconer (1732–1769, S)\nBULLET::::- Padraic Fallon (1905–1974, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Maria Fanshawe (1765–1834, E)\nBULLET::::- U. A. Fanthorpe (1929–1909, E)\nBULLET::::- Patricia Fargnoli (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- Eleanor Farjeon (1881–1965, E)\nBULLET::::- Fiona Farrell (born 1947, NZ)\nBULLET::::- John Farrell (1851–1904, A)\nBULLET::::- John Farrell (1968–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Farrell (born 1965, A)\nBULLET::::- Margaretta Faugères (1771–1801, US)\nBULLET::::- Jessie Redmon Fauset (1882–1961, US)\nBULLET::::- Brian Fawcett (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Elaine Feeney (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Elaine Feinstein (1930–2019, E)\nBULLET::::- Alison Fell (born 1944, S)\nBULLET::::- Charles Fenerty (c. 1821–1892, C)\nBULLET::::- Elijah Fenton (1683–1730, E)\nBULLET::::- James Fenton (born 1931, NI)\nBULLET::::- James Fenton (born 1949, E)\nBULLET::::- Richard Fenton (1747–1821, W)\nBULLET::::- Gus Ferguson (born 1940, SA)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Ferguson (1810–1886, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Robert Fergusson (1750–1774, S)\nBULLET::::- Lawrence Ferlinghetti (born 1919, US)\nBULLET::::- Ferron (Deborah Foisy, born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- George Fetherling (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- Michael Field (Katherine Bradley, 1846–1914, and Edith Cooper, 1862–1913, E)\nBULLET::::- Henry Fielding (1707–1754, E)\nBULLET::::- Connie Fife (1961–2017, C)\nBULLET::::- Anne Finch, Countess of Winchilsea (1661–1720, E)\nBULLET::::- Annie Finch (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Peter Finch (living, W)\nBULLET::::- Robert Finch (1900–1995, C)\nBULLET::::- Ian Hamilton Finlay (1925–2006, S)\nBULLET::::- Joan Finnigan (1925–2007, C)\nBULLET::::- Jon Paul Fiorentino (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Fisher (born 1957, W)\nBULLET::::- Roy Fisher (1930–2017, E)\nBULLET::::- Edward FitzGerald (1809–1883, E)\nBULLET::::- Judith Fitzgerald (1952–2015, C)\nBULLET::::- R. D. Fitzgerald (1902–1987, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Fitzgerald (1910–1985, US)\nBULLET::::- Richard FitzPatrick (1748–1813, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- Roderick Flanagan (1828–1862, A)\nBULLET::::- James Elroy Flecker (1884–1915, E)\nBULLET::::- Marjorie Fleming (1803–1811, S)\nBULLET::::- Giles Fletcher (c. 1586–1623, E)\nBULLET::::- Giles Fletcher, the Elder (c. 1548–1611, E)\nBULLET::::- John Fletcher (1579–1625, E)\nBULLET::::- John Gould Fletcher (1886–1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Phineas Fletcher (1582–1650, E)\nBULLET::::- F. S. Flint (1885–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- Alice Flowerdew (1759–1830, E)\nBULLET::::- Lionel Fogarty (born 1958, A)\nBULLET::::- Jack Foley (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- Mary Hannay Foott (1846–1918, A)\nBULLET::::- John Forbes (1950–1998, A)\nBULLET::::- Carolyn Forché (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Ford Madox Ford (1873–1939, E)\nBULLET::::- John Ford (1586–1639, E)\nBULLET::::- John M. Ford (1957–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- Robert Ford (1915–1998, C)\nBULLET::::- Mabel Forrest (1872–1935, A)\nBULLET::::- Veronica Forrest-Thomson (1947–1975, S)\nBULLET::::- Gary Jeshel Forrester (born 1946, NZ)\nBULLET::::- William Forster (1818–1882, A)\nBULLET::::- John Foulcher (born 1952, A)\nBULLET::::- Ellen Thorneycroft Fowler (1860–1920, E)\nBULLET::::- William Fowler (c. 1560–1612, S)\nBULLET::::- Kate Fox (born 1975, E)\nBULLET::::- Len Fox (1905–2004, A)\nBULLET::::- Janet Frame (1924–2004, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Ruth France (1913–1968, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Matthew Francis (born 1956, E/W)\nBULLET::::- Robert Francis (1901–1987, US)\nBULLET::::- George Sutherland Fraser (1915–1980, S)\nBULLET::::- Gregory Fraser (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Raymond Fraser (1941–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- Benjamin Frater (1979–2007, A)\nBULLET::::- Brentley Frazer (born 1972, A)\nBULLET::::- Grace Beacham Freeman (1916–2002, US)\nBULLET::::- John Freeman (1880–1929, E)\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Freeston (1907–1978, E)\nBULLET::::- Patrick Friesen (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Frost (1874–1963, US)\nBULLET::::- Gwen Frostic (1906–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- Gene Frumkin (1928–2007, US)\nBULLET::::- Mark Frutkin (born 1948, US/C)\nBULLET::::- Sheila Meiring Fugard (born 1932, SA)\nBULLET::::- Ethel Romig Fuller (1883–1965, US)\nBULLET::::- John Fuller (born 1937, E)\nBULLET::::- Roy Fuller (1912–1991, E)\nBULLET::::- Mary Eliza Fullerton (1868–1946, A)\nBULLET::::- Alice Fulton (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- Graham Fulton (born 1959, S)\nBULLET::::- Robin Fulton (born 1937, S)\nBULLET::::- Ulpian Fulwell (1545/1546 – before 1586, E)\nBULLET::::- Richard Furness (1791–1857, E)\n\nBULLET::::- Frances Dana Barker Gage (1808–1884, US)\nBULLET::::- Dunstan Gale (fl. 1596, E)\nBULLET::::- Kate Gale (living, US)\nBULLET::::- James Galvin (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- Patrick Galvin (1927–2011, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Forrest Gander (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Robert Garioch (1909–1981, S)\nBULLET::::- Hamlin Garland (1860–1940, US)\nBULLET::::- Raymond Garlick (1926–2011, W)\nBULLET::::- Richard Garnett (1835–1906, E)\nBULLET::::- Jean Garrigue (1912–1972, US)\nBULLET::::- Samuel Garth (1661–1719, E)\nBULLET::::- George Gascoigne (1525–1577, E)\nBULLET::::- David Gascoyne (1916–2001, E/F)\nBULLET::::- Bill Gaston (born 1953, C)\nBULLET::::- John Gay (1685–1732, E)\nBULLET::::- Ross Gay (born 1974, US)\nBULLET::::- William Gay (1865–1897, S/A)\nBULLET::::- Alexander Geddes (1737–1802, S)\nBULLET::::- Leon Gellert (1892–1977, A)\nBULLET::::- W. R. P. George (1912–2006, W)\nBULLET::::- Dan Gerber (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- Amy Gerstler (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- Marty Gervais (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Charles Ghigna (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- Monk Gibbon (1896–1987, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Reginald Gibbons (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- Stella Gibbons (1902–1989, E)\nBULLET::::- Ivy Gibbs (c. 1886–1966, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Kahlil Gibran (1883–1931, L/US)\nBULLET::::- G. H. Gibson (Ironbark, 1846–1921, A)\nBULLET::::- Wilfrid Wilson Gibson (1878–1962, E)\nBULLET::::- Elsa Gidlow (1898–1986, C)\nBULLET::::- Angus Morrison Gidney (1803–1882, C)\nBULLET::::- Gerry Gilbert (1936–2009, C)\nBULLET::::- Jack Gilbert (1925–2012, US)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Gilbert (1933–1993, A)\nBULLET::::- W. S. Gilbert (1836–1911, E)\nBULLET::::- Ellen Gilchrist (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- George Gilfillan (1813–1878, S)\nBULLET::::- Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935, US)\nBULLET::::- Mary Gilmore (1865–1962, A)\nBULLET::::- Allen Ginsberg (1926–1997, US)\nBULLET::::- Dana Gioia (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Nikki Giovanni (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Jesse Glass (born 1954, US/Jp)\nBULLET::::- John Glassco (1909–1981, C)\nBULLET::::- Madeline Gleason (1903–1979, US)\nBULLET::::- Duncan Glen (1933–2008, S)\nBULLET::::- William Glen (1789–1826, S)\nBULLET::::- Lorri Neilsen Glenn (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Denis Glover (1912–1980, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Louise Glück (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Rumer Godden (1907–1998, In/E)\nBULLET::::- Patricia Goedicke (1931–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- Oliver St. John Gogarty (1878–1957, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Albert Goldbarth (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Goldsmith (born 1961, US)\nBULLET::::- Oliver Goldsmith (1728–1774, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- Oliver Goldsmith (1794–1861, C)\nBULLET::::- Peter Goldsworthy (born 1951, A)\nBULLET::::- Leona Gom (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- W. T. Goodge (1862–1909, A)\nBULLET::::- Lorna Goodison (born 1947, J)\nBULLET::::- Paul Goodman (1911–1972, US)\nBULLET::::- Barnabe Googe (1540–1594, E)\nBULLET::::- Adam Lindsay Gordon (1833–1870, A)\nBULLET::::- Katherine L. Gordon (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Gordon of Straloch (1580–1661, S)\nBULLET::::- Hedwig Gorski (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- Edmund Gosse (1849–1928, E)\nBULLET::::- Phyllis Gotlieb (1926–2009, C)\nBULLET::::- Keith Gottschalk (born 1946, SA)\nBULLET::::- Alan Gould (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- Nora Gould (living, C)\nBULLET::::- John Gower (c. 1330–1408, E)\nBULLET::::- Susan Goyette (born 1964, C)\n\nBULLET::::- James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose (1612–1650, S)\nBULLET::::- Jorie Graham (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- Neile Graham (born 1958, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Cunninghame Graham of Gartmore (1735–1797, S)\nBULLET::::- W. S. Graham (1918–1986, S)\nBULLET::::- James Grahame (1765–1811, S)\nBULLET::::- Mark Granier (born 1957, E/Ir)\nBULLET::::- Paul Grano (1894–1975, A)\nBULLET::::- Alex Grant (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Richard Graves (1715–1804, E)\nBULLET::::- Richard Harry Graves (1897–1971, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Graves (1895–1985, E)\nBULLET::::- Alexander Gray (1882–1968, S)\nBULLET::::- Catherine Gray, Lady Manners (1766–1852, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Kathryn Gray (born 1973, W)\nBULLET::::- Maxwell Gray (Mary Gleed Tuttiett, 1846–1923, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Gray (born 1945, A)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Gray (born 1941, SA)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Gray (1716–1771, E)\nBULLET::::- Dorothy Auchterlonie Green (1915–1991, A)\nBULLET::::- H. M. Green (1881–1962, A)\nBULLET::::- Paula Green (born 1955, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Richard Greene (born 1961, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Greene (1558–1592, E)\nBULLET::::- Lavinia Greenlaw (born 1962, E)\nBULLET::::- Gavin Greenlees (1930–1983, A)\nBULLET::::- Leslie Greentree (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Dora Greenwell (1821–1882, E)\nBULLET::::- Linda Gregg (1942–2019, US)\nBULLET::::- Horace Gregory (1898–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- Andrew Greig (born 1951, S)\nBULLET::::- Eamon Grennan (born 1941, Ir)\nBULLET::::- H. W. Gretton (1914–1983, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Fulke Greville, 1st Baron Brooke (1554–1628, E)\nBULLET::::- Gerald Griffin (1803–1840, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Sarah Maria Griffin (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Susan Griffin (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Bill Griffiths (1948–2007, E)\nBULLET::::- Bryn Griffiths (living, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Jane Griffiths (born 1970, E)\nBULLET::::- Geoffrey Grigson (1905–1985, E)\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Grimald (1519–1562, E)\nBULLET::::- Angelina Weld Grimké (1880–1958, US)\nBULLET::::- Charlotte Forten Grimké (1837–1914, US)\nBULLET::::- Eliza Griswold (born 1973, US)\nBULLET::::- Rufus Wilmot Griswold (1815–1857, US)\nBULLET::::- Philip Gross (born 1952, E)\nBULLET::::- Paul Groves (born 1947, E/W)\nBULLET::::- Bertha Jane Grundy (Mrs. Leith Adams, 1837–1912, E)\nBULLET::::- Jeff Guess (born 1948, A)\nBULLET::::- Barbara Guest (1920–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- Edgar Guest (1881–1959, US)\nBULLET::::- Paul Guest (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Malcolm Guite (born 1957, E)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Guiterman (1871–1943, US)\nBULLET::::- Genni Gunn (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- Thom Gunn (1929–2004, E/US)\nBULLET::::- Kristjana Gunnars (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- Lee Gurga (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- Ivor Gurney (1890–1937, E)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Gustafson (1909–1995, C)\nBULLET::::- Mafika Gwala (1946–2014, SA)\nBULLET::::- Cyril Gwynn (1897–1988, W/A)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Gwynn (1864–1950, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Beth Gylys (born 1964, US)\nBULLET::::- Brion Gysin (1916–1986, C/E)\n\nBULLET::::- William Habington (1605–1654, E)\nBULLET::::- Marilyn Hacker (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- John Haines (1924–2011, US)\nBULLET::::- Paul Haines (1933–2003, US/C)\nBULLET::::- Helen Hajnoczky (born 1985, C)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Gordon Hake (1809–1895, E)\nBULLET::::- Sarah Josepha Hale (1788–1879, US)\nBULLET::::- Bernadette Hall (born 1945, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Donald Hall (1928–2018, US)\nBULLET::::- Megan Hall (born 1972, SA)\nBULLET::::- Phil Hall (born 1953, C)\nBULLET::::- Radclyffe Hall (1880–1943, E)\nBULLET::::- Rodney Hall (born 1935, A)\nBULLET::::- Arthur Hallam (1811–1833, E)\nBULLET::::- Alan Halsey (born 1949, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Michael Hamburger (1924–2007, E)\nBULLET::::- Ian Hamilton (1938–2001, E)\nBULLET::::- Jane Eaton Hamilton (born 1954, C)\nBULLET::::- Janet Hamilton (1795–1873, S)\nBULLET::::- Philip Hammial (born 1937, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Gavin Hampson (born 1948, E)\nBULLET::::- Susan Hampton (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- Sophie Hannah (born 1971, E)\nBULLET::::- Kerry Hardie (born 1951, NI)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Hardy (1840–1928, E)\nBULLET::::- Lesbia Harford (1891–1927, A)\nBULLET::::- Joy Harjo (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- William Harmon (born 1938, US)\nBULLET::::- Frances Harper (1825–1911, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael S. Harper (1938–2016 US)\nBULLET::::- Charles Harpur (1813–1868, A)\nBULLET::::- Alice Harriman (1861–1925, US)\nBULLET::::- Edward Harrington (1895–1966, A)\nBULLET::::- Claire Harris (born 1937, C)\nBULLET::::- Joseph Harris (1773–1825, W)\nBULLET::::- Max Harris (1921–1995, A)\nBULLET::::- Michael Harris (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- Robert Harris (1951–1993, A)\nBULLET::::- Wilson Harris (1921–2018, Gu/E)\nBULLET::::- Jennifer Harrison (born 1955, A)\nBULLET::::- Jim Harrison (1937–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- Martin Harrison (1949–2014, A)\nBULLET::::- Richard Harrison (poet) (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Tony Harrison (born 1937, E)\nBULLET::::- Les Harrop (born 1948, E/A)\nBULLET::::- Molly Harrower (1906–1999, S)\nBULLET::::- J. S. Harry (1939–2015, A)\nBULLET::::- Carla Harryman (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- David Harsent (born 1942, E)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Hart (born 1954, A)\nBULLET::::- Paul Hartal (born 1936, Is/C)\nBULLET::::- Anne Le Marquand Hartigan (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Jill Hartman (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- Sadakichi Hartmann (1867–1944, US)\nBULLET::::- Michael Hartnett (1941–1999, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Diana Hartog (born 1942, C)\nBULLET::::- William Hart-Smith (1911–1990, NZ)\nBULLET::::- F. W. Harvey (1888–1957, E)\nBULLET::::- Elisabeth Harvor (living, C)\nBULLET::::- Gwen Harwood (1920–1995, A)\nBULLET::::- Lee Harwood (1939–2015, E)\nBULLET::::- Alamgir Hashmi (born 1951, E)\nBULLET::::- J. H. Haslam (1874–1969, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Hasluck (born 1942, A)\nBULLET::::- Robert Hass (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Katherine Hastings (living, US)\nBULLET::::- Ann Hatton (1764–1838, W)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Hawes (died 1523, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Stephen Hawker (1803–1875, E)\nBULLET::::- Kathleen Hawkins (1883–1981, NZ)\nBULLET::::- George Campbell Hay (1915–1984, S)\nBULLET::::- Gilbert Hay] (born c. 1403, S)\nBULLET::::- Myfanwy Haycock (1913–1963, W/E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Hayden (1913–1980, US)\nBULLET::::- William Hayley (1745–1820, E)\nBULLET::::- Robert Hayman (1575–1629, Nf)\nBULLET::::- Tony Haynes (born 1960, US)\nBULLET::::- Joel Hayward (born 1964, NZ)\nBULLET::::- Eliza Haywood (c. 1693–1756, E)\nBULLET::::- H.D. (Hilda Doolittle, 1886–1961, E)\nBULLET::::- Randolph Healy (born 1956, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Seamus Heaney (1939–2013, Ir)\nBULLET::::- Josephine D. Heard (1861 – c. 1921, US)\nBULLET::::- John Heath-Stubbs (1918–2006, E)\nBULLET::::- Charles Heavysege (1816–1876, C)\nBULLET::::- James Hebblethwaite (1857–1921, A)\nBULLET::::- Anthony Hecht (1923–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- Jennifer Michael Hecht (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- John Hegley (born 1953, E)\nBULLET::::- Wilfrid Heighington (1897–1945, C)\nBULLET::::- Steven Heighton (born 1961, C)\nBULLET::::- Anita Heiss (born 1968, A)\nBULLET::::- Lyn Hejinian (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- Jill Hellyer (1925–2012, A)\nBULLET::::- David Helwig (1938–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- Maggie Helwig (born 1961, C)\nBULLET::::- Felicia Hemans (1793–1835, E)\nBULLET::::- Kris Hemensley (born 1946, A)\nBULLET::::- Essex Hemphill (1957–1995, US)\nBULLET::::- Brian Henderson (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- Hamish Henderson (1919–2002, S)\nBULLET::::- Philip Henderson (1906–1977, E)\nBULLET::::- Thomas William Heney (1862–1928, A)\nBULLET::::- John Henley (1692–1756, E)\nBULLET::::- William Ernest Henley (1849–1903, E)\nBULLET::::- Adrian Henri (1932–2000, E)\nBULLET::::- Paul Henry (born 1959, W)\nBULLET::::- Robert Henryson (fl. 1460–1500, S)\nBULLET::::- Thomas Nicoll Hepburn (wrote as Gabriel Setoun, 1861–1930, S)\nBULLET::::- Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury (1582–1648, E/W)\nBULLET::::- George Herbert (1593–1632, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary SidneyMary Herbert, Countess of Pembroke (Mary Sidney, 1561–1621, E)\nBULLET::::- [[W. N. Herbert]] (born 1961, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Herrick (poet)Robert Herrick]] (1591–1674, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Steven Herrick]] (born 1958, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Benjamin Hertwig]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Kibble Hervey]] (1799–1959, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Phoebe Hesketh]] (1909–2005, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Paul Hetherington]] (born 1958, A)\nBULLET::::- [[William Maxwell Hetherington]] (1803–1865, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Hewett]] (1923–2002, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Hewitt (poet)John Hewitt]] (1907–1987, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Maurice Hewlett]] (1861–1923, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Heyen]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Heywood]] (c. 1570s – 1650, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Dick Higgins]] (1938–1998, US)\nBULLET::::- [[F. R. Higgins]] (1896–1941, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Kevin Higgins (poet)Kevin Higgins]] (born 1967, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Rita Ann Higgins]] (born 1955, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Colleen Higgs]] (born 1962, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Higham (biographer)Charles Higham]] (1931–2012, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Scott Hightower]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Conrad Hilberry]] (1928–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Fiona Hile]] (living, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Barry Hill (Australian writer)Barry Hill]] (born 1943, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Hill (painter)Edward Hill]] (1843–1923, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Geoffrey Hill]] (1932–2016, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Hilles]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Hillman (poet)Richard Hillman]] (born 1964, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ellen Hinsey]] (born 1960, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Hirshfield]] (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Hitchcock (poet)George Hitchcock]] (1914–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[H. L. Hix]] (born 1960, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Hoccleve]] (c. 1368–1426, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Hodgins]] (1959–1995, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ralph Hodgson]] (1871–1962, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[W. N. Hodgson]] (1893–1916, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Barbara Hofland]] (1770–1844, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Hofmann]] (born 1957, G/US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Hogg]] (1770–1835, S)\nBULLET::::- [[David Holbrook]] (1923–2011, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Susan Holbrook]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Holcroft]] (1745–1809, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Clive Holden]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Margaret Holford]] (1778–1852, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Barbara Holland]] (1933–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Hugh Holland]] (1569–1633, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Holland]] (born 1966, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Holland-Batt]] (born 1982, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Hollander]] (1929–2013, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Hollis]] (born 1971, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anselm Hollo]] (1934–2013, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nancy Holmes]] (born 1959, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.]] (1809–1894, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Hood]] (1798–1845, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Cornelia Hoogland]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ellen Sturgis Hooper]] (1812–1848, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Harry Hooton]] (1908–1961, A)\nBULLET::::- [[A. D. Hope]] (1907–2000, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Hope]] (born 1944, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Gerard Manley Hopkins]] (1844–1889, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Leah Horlick]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sean Horlor]] (born 1981, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Frances Horovitz]] (1938–1983, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Horovitz]] (born 1935, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Horn (poet)Peter Horn]] (1934–2019, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[George Moses Horton]] (1797–1884, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Allan Kolski Horwitz]] (born 1952, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Karen Houle]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Joan Houlihan]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alfred Edward HousmanA. E. Housman]] (1859–1936, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey]] (1517–1547, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Liz Howard (writer)Liz Howard]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Howard]] (born 1929, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Guy Howarth]] (1906–1974, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Fanny Howe]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Howe (printer)George Howe]] (1769–1821, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Julia Ward Howe]] (1819–1910, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Susan Howe]] (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ada Verdun Howell]] (1902–1981, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Anthony Howell (performance artist)Anthony Howell]] (born 1945, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Harry Howith]] (1934–2014, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Howitt]] (1799–1888, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Howitt (poet)Richard Howitt]] (1799–1869, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Howitt]] (1792–1879, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Hubert]] (died 1629, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Hudson (poet)Thomas Hudson]] (d. c. 1605, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Frieda Hughes]] (born 1960, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Langston Hughes]] (1902–1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Hughes (British writer)Richard Hughes]] (1900–1976, E/W)\nBULLET::::- [[Ted Hughes]] (1930–1998, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Hugo]] (1923–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Coral Hull]] (born 1965, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Lynda Hull]] (1954–1994, US)\nBULLET::::- [[T. E. Hulme]] (1883–1917, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexander Hume]] (c. 1560–1609, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Anna Hume]] (fl. 1644, S)\nBULLET::::- [[David Hume of Godscroft]] (1558–1629, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Barry Humphries]] (born 1934, A/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Emyr Humphreys]] (born 1919, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Helen Humphreys]] (born 1961, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Henry Leigh HuntLeigh Hunt]] (1784–1859, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sam Hunt (poet)Sam Hunt]] (born 1946, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Aislinn Hunter]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Al Hunter (writer)Al Hunter]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Hunter (poet)Bruce Hunter]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Catherine Hunter]] (born 1957, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Rex Hunter]] (1889–1960, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Constance Hunting]] (1925–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Cynthia Huntington]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Chris Hutchinson (poet)Chris Hutchinson]] (born 1972, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Pearse Hutchinson]] (1927–2012, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[William Hutton (historian)William Hutton]] (1723–1815, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Aldous Huxley]] (1894–1963, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Smith Huyghue]] (1816–1891, C/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Hyde]] (1860–1949, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Robin Hyde]] ((pen name of Iris Wilkinson; 1906–1939, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Helen von Kolnitz Hyer]] (1896–1983, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Maureen Hynes]] (living, C)\n\nBULLET::::- [[John Imlah]] (1799–1846, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Rex Ingamells]] (1913–1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Jean Ingelow]] (1820–1897, E)\nBULLET::::- [[P. Inman]] (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Susan Ioannou]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Valentin Iremonger]] (1918–1991, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Eric Irvin]] (1908–1993, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Frances Itani]] (born 1942, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Helen Ivory]] (born 1969, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Jackson (poet)Alan Jackson]] (born 1938, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Violet Jacob]] (1863–1946, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Josephine Jacobsen]] (1908–2003, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Jago]] (1715–1781, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James I of Scotland]] (1394–1437, S)\nBULLET::::- [[James VI and I]] (1566–1625, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan James (poet)Alan James]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Clive James]] (1939–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John James (poet)John James]] (1939–2018, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Maria James (poet)Maria James]] (1793–1868, W/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kathleen Jamie]] (born 1962, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Alan Jamieson]] (born 1958, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Patricia Janus]] (1932–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mark Jarman]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lisa Jarnot]] (born 1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Randall Jarrell]] (1914–1965, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Jefferies]] (born 1957, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robinson Jeffers]] (1887–1962, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rod Jellema]] (1927–1918, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jemeni (singer)Jemeni]] (Joanne Gairy, born 1976, Gd/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Graham Jenkin]] (born 1938, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Jenkins (poet)John Jenkins]] (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Jenkins]] (1818–1898, W/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Mike Jenkins (poet)Mike Jenkins]] (born 1953, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Nigel Jenkins]] (1949–2014, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Jennings]] (1926–2001, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kate Jennings]] (born 1948, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Wopko Jensma]] (1939–1993 or after, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Sydney Jephcott]] (1864–1951, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Paulette Jiles]] (born 1943, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Liesl Jobson]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Rita Joe]] (1932–2007, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Reg Johanson]] (born 1968, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edmund John]] (1883–1917, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Godfrey John]] (living, W)\nBULLET::::- [[E. Pauline Johnson]] (1861–1913, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Fenton Johnson]] (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Georgia Douglas Johnson]] (1880–1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Helene Johnson]] (1906–1995, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Weldon Johnson]] (1871–1938, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Linton Kwesi Johnson]] (born 1952, J)\nBULLET::::- [[Lionel Johnson]] (1867–1902, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Samuel Johnson]] (1709–1784, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Johnson (poet)Sarah Johnson]] (born 1980, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[George Benson Johnston]] (1913–2004, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Martin Johnston]] (1947–1990, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Amanda Jones (inventor)Amanda Jones]] (1835–1914, US)\nBULLET::::- [[D. G. Jones]] (1929–2016, C)\nBULLET::::- [[David Jones (artist-poet)David Jones]] (1895–1974, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ebenezer Jones]] (1820–1860, E)\nBULLET::::- [[El Jones]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Emma Jones (poet)Emma Jones]] (born 1977, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Evan Jones (Australian poet)Evan Jones]] (born 1931, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Glyn Jones (Welsh writer)Glyn Jones]] (1905–1995, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Jack Jones (Welsh musician)Jack Jones]] (born 1992, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Jill Jones (poet)Jill Jones]] (born 1951, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Joseph Jones (writer)John Joseph Jones]] (1930–2000, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick Jones]] (born 1965, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Rae Desmond Jones]] (1941–2017, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Jones (poet)Richard Jones]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Terry Jones]] (born 1942, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Erica Jong]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ben Jonson]] (1573–1637, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Julie Joosten]] (born 1980, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Jordan (poet)John Jordan]] (1930–1988, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[June Jordan]] (1936–2002, J/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anthony Joseph]] (born 1966, T/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Eve Joseph]] (born 1953, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jenny Joseph]] (1932–2018, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Danilo Jovanovitch]] (1919–2015, A)\nBULLET::::- [[James Joyce]] (1882–1941, Ir/I)\nBULLET::::- [[Trevor Joyce]] (born 1947, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Judge]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Donald Justice]] (1925–2004, US)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Jim Kacian]] (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Aryan Kaganof]] (born 1964, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Chester Kallman]] (1921–1975, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Surjeet Kalsey]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Smaro Kamboureli]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ilya Kaminsky]] (born 1977, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Julie Kane]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Adeena Karasick]] (born 1965, C/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Karr]] (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Julia Kasdorf]] (born 1962, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Laura Kasischke]] (born 1961, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Bob Kaufman]] (1925–1986, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Shirley Kaufman]] (1923–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rupi Kaur]] (born 1992, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick Kavanagh]] (1904–1967, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Jackie Kay]] (born 1961, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Jayne Fenton Keane]] (living, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Lionel Kearns]] (born 1937, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Annie Keary]] (1825–1879, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Diane Keating]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Keats]] (1795–1821, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Keble]] (1792–1866, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Janice Kulyk Keefer]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Weldon Kees]] (1914–1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nancy Keesing]] (1923–1993, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Antigone Kefala]] (born 1935, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Kelen]] (born 1958, A)\nBULLET::::- [[S. K. Kelen]] (born 1956, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Kellas]] (born 1951, SA/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Isabella Kelly]] (1759–1857, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[M. T. Kelly]] (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Kelton]] (died c. 1550, E/W)\nBULLET::::- [[Penn Kemp]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Kendall (poet)Henry Kendall]] (1839–1882, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Kenna]] (1865–1932, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Cate Kennedy]] (born 1963, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy]] (\"Woodbine Willy\", 1883–1929, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Leo Kennedy]] (1907–2000, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Miranda Kennedy]] (born 1975, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Walter Kennedy (poet)Walter Kennedy]] (c. 1455 – c. 1508, S)\nBULLET::::- [[X. J. Kennedy]] (born 1929, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jean Kent (poet)Jean Kent]] (born 1951, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Kenyon]] (1947–1995, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Kirkland Kernighan]] (1854–1926, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jack Kerouac]] (1922–1969, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sidney Keyes]] (1922–1943, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Keorapetse Kgositsile]] (1938–2018, SA/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mimi Khalvati]] (born 1944, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Kickham]] (1828–1882, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Killigrew]] (1660–1685, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Joyce Kilmer]] (1886–1918, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Henry King]] (1910–2000, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry King (poet)Henry King]] (1592–1669, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William King (poet)William King]] (1663–1712, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Kingsley]] (1819–1875, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Barbara Kingsolver]] (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Galway Kinnell]] (1927–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Kinsella (poet)John Kinsella]] (born 1963, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Kinsella]] (born 1928, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Rudyard Kipling]] (1865–1936, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Olga Kirsch]] (1924–1997, SA/Is)\nBULLET::::- [[Roy Kiyooka]] (1926–1994, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolyn Kizer]] (1925–1914, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Barbara Klar]] (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Klassen]] (born 1932, C)\nBULLET::::- [[A. M. Klein]] (1909–1972, C)\nBULLET::::- [[August Kleinzahler]] (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Etheridge Knight]] (1931–1991, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Knight (poet)Stephen Knight]] (born 1960, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Raymond Knister]] (1899–1932, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth Koch]] (1925–2002, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Ellen Kocher]] (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Joy Kogawa]] (born 1935, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Komninos Zervoskomninos]] (born 1950, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Yusef Komunyakaa]] (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ted Kooser]] (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Shane Koyczan]] (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Rustum Kozain]] (born 1966, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Rudi Krausmann]] (1933–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Krauss]] (1901–1993, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolyn Kreiter-Foronda]] (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Uys Krige]] (1910–1987, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Kroetsch]] (1927–2011, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Antjie Krog]] (born 1952, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Anton Robert Krueger]] (born 1971, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Marilyn Krysl]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anatoly Kudryavitsky]] (born 1954, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Abhay Kumar]] (born 1980, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Mazisi Kunene]] (1930–2006, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Tuli Kupferberg]] (1923–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Maxine Kumin]] (1925–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Stanley Kunitz]] (1905–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Kuppner]] (born 1951, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Kuusisto]] (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Morris Kyffin]] (c. 1555–1598, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Joanne Kyger]] (1934–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Kynaston]] (1587–1642, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[John La Rose]] (1927–2006, J/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sonnet L'Abbé]] (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward A. Lacey]] (1938–1995, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mike Ladd (poet)Mike Ladd]] (born 1959, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ben Ladouceur]] (born 1987, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nick Laird]] (born 1975, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[David Lake (writer)David Lake]] (1929–2016, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Lamantia]] (1927–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kendrick Lamar]] (born 1987, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Lamb]] (1775–1834, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Archibald Lampman]] (1861–1899, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tim Lander]] (born 1938, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Letitia Elizabeth Landon]] (1802–1838, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Walter Savage Landor]] (1775–1864, E)\nBULLET::::- [[M. Travis Lane]] (born 1934, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick Lane]] (1939–2019, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Lang]] (1844–1912, S)\nBULLET::::- [[D.L. LangD. L. Lang]] (born 1983, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William Langland]] (c. 1332 – c. 1386, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Eve Langley]] (1904–1974, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Emilia Lanier]] (1569–1645, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sidney Lanier]] (1842–1881, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lucy Larcom]] (1824–1893, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rebecca Hammond Lard]] (1772–1855, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Larkin]] (born 1957, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Larkin]] (1922–1985, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Evelyn Lau]] (born 1971, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Laughlin]] (1914–1997, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ann Lauterbach]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorianne Laux]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Emily Lawless]] (1845–1913, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Anthony Lawrence (poet)Anthony Lawrence]] (born 1957, A)\nBULLET::::- [[D. H. Lawrence]] (1885–1930, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Lawson]] (1867–1922, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Louisa Lawson]] (1848–1920, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Lax]] (1915–2000, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Layamon]] (late 12th – early 13th c., E)\nBULLET::::- [[Irving Layton]] (1912–2006, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Emma Lazarus]] (1849–1887, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Augustus Asplet Le Gros]] (1840–1877, Je)\nBULLET::::- [[Bronwyn Lea]] (living, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Leapor]] (1722–1746, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Lear]] (1812–1888, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lesley Lebkowicz]] (born 1946, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Ledwidge]] (1887–1917, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[David Lee (poet)David Lee]] (born 1944, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dennis Lee (author)Dennis Lee]] (born 1939, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John B. Lee]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Muna Lee (writer)Muna Lee]] (1895–1965, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lily Alice Lefevre]] (1854–1938, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Joy Leftow]] (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sylvia Legris]] (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ursula K. Le Guin]] (1929–2018, US)\nBULLET::::- [[David Lehman]] (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Geoffrey Lehmann]] (born 1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Brad Leithauser]] (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sue Lenier]] (born 1957, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charlotte Lennox]] (c. 1730–1804, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Lent]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Leonard (poet)John Leonard]] (born 1965, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Leonard (poet)Tom Leonard]] (1944–2018, S)\nBULLET::::- [[William Ellery Leonard]] (1876–1944, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas LePan]] (1914–1998, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ben Lerner]] (born 1979, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alex Leslie]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Rika Lesser]] (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Denise Levertov]] (1923–1997, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dana Levin (poet)Dana Levin]] (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Levine (poet)Philip Levine]] (1928–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Larry Levis]] (1946–1996, US)\nBULLET::::- [[D. A. Levy]] (1942–1968, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William Levy (author)William Levy]] (1939–2019, US/Nt)\nBULLET::::- [[Emma Lew]] (born 1962, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Oswald LeWinter]] (1931–2013, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alun Lewis (poet)Alun Lewis]] (1915–1944, W)\nBULLET::::- [[C. S. Lewis]] (1898–1963, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Gwyneth Lewis]] (born 1959, W)\nBULLET::::- [[J. Patrick Lewis]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Wyndham Lewis]] (1882–1957, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Ley]] (c. 1599–1641, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Tim Liardet]] (born 1959, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Liddy]] (1934–2008, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Tim Lilburn]] (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Lillard]] (1944–1997, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kate Lilley]] (born 1960, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Tao Lin]] (born 1983, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jack Lindeman]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Eddie Linden]] (born 1935, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Morrow Lindbergh]] (1906–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jack Lindsay (writer)Jack Lindsay]] (1900–1990, A/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Maurice Lindsay]] (1918–2009, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Lindsay]] (born 1958, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Vachel Lindsay]] (1879–1931, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jessie Litchfield]] (1883–1956, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Livesay]] (1909–1996, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Billie Livingston]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Livingstone (poet)Douglas Livingstone]] (1932–1996, SA)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Lochhead]] (1922–2011, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Liz Lochhead]] (born 1947, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Terry Locke]] (born 1946, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Lodge]] (1556–1625, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Logan (minister)John Logan]] (1748–1788, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Logue]] (1926–2011, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Longenbach]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Wadsworth Longfellow]] (1807–1882, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Longley]] (born 1939, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[John Longmuir (poet)John Longmuir]] (1803–1883, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Audre Lorde]] (1934–1992, US)\nBULLET::::- [[LindaAnn Loschiavo]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer LoveGrove]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Lovelace]] (1618–1658, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Lovelich]] (fl. mid-15th c., E)\nBULLET::::- [[Samuel Lover]] (1797–1868, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Amy Lowell]] (1874–1925, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Russell Lowell]] (1819–1891, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Maria White Lowell]] (1821–1853, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Lowell]] (1917–1977, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Pat Lowther]] (1935–1975, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mina Loy]] (1882–1966, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Lucie-Smith]] (born 1933, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Fitz Hugh Ludlow]] (1836–1870, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Tatjana Lukić]] (1959–2008, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Suzanne Lummis]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Laura Lush]] (born 1959, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Lush (writer)Richard Lush]] (born 1934, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Lux]] (1946–2017, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Lydgate]] (1370–1450, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Lyly]] (1553–1606, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Lynch (professor)Michael Lynch]] (1944–1991, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[David Lyndsay]] (c. 1490 – c. 1555, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Francis Lyte]] (1793–1847, S)\nBULLET::::- [[George Lyttelton, 1st Baron LytteltonGeorge Lyttelton]] Lord Lyttelton (1709–1773, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Rozena Maart]] (born 1962, SA/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Lindiwe Mabuza]] (born 1938, US/SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Frederick Macartney]] (1887–1980, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Babington Macaulay]] (1800–1859, E)\nBULLET::::- [[George MacBeth]] (1932–1992, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Norman MacCaig]] (1910–1996, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Denis Florence MacCarthy]] (1817–1882, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Karen Mac Cormack]] (born 1956, C/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Hugh MacDiarmid]] (1892–1978, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Donagh MacDonagh]] (1912–1968, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas MacDonagh]] (1878–1916, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Allan MacDonald (poet)Allan MacDonald]] (1859–1905, S)\nBULLET::::- [[George Macdonald]] (1824–1905, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Hugh MacDonald (poet)Hugh MacDonald]] (born 1945, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Wilson MacDonald]] (1880–1967, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick MacDonogh]] (1902–1961, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Gwendolyn MacEwen]] (1941–1987, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Seán Mac Falls]] (born 1957, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Walter Scott MacFarlane]] (1896–1979, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick MacGill]] (1889–1963, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Alasdair Alpin MacGregor]] (1899–1970, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Ronald Campbell Macfie]] (1867–1931, S)\nBULLET::::- [[James Pittendrigh Macgillivray]] (1856–1938, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas MacGreevy]] (1893–1967, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Machen]] (1863–1947, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom MacInnes]] (1867–1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Louise Mack]] (1870–1935, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John William Mackail]] (1859–1945, S)\nBULLET::::- [[John Macken]] (c. 1784–1823, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Lachlan Mackinnon]] (born 1956, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Compton Mackenzie]] (1883–1972, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth Mackenzie (author)Kenneth Mackenzie]] (Seaforth Mackenzie, 1913–1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Archibald MacLeish]] (1892–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothea Mackellar]] (1885–1968, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Don Maclennan]] (1929–2009, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Macleod]] (1903–1984, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nathaniel Mackey]] (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Don Maclennan]] (1929–2009, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Jackson Mac Low]] (1922–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Louis MacNeice]] (1907–1963, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kevin MacNeil]] (living, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Hector Macneill]] (1746–1818, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Lachlan Mackinnon]] (born 1956, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Alasdair Maclean]] (1926–1994, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Archibald MacLeish]] (1892–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrea MacPherson]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Macpherson]] (1736–1796, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Jay Macpherson]] (1931–2012, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Barry MacSweeney]] (1948–2000, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Haki R. Madhubuti]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Gillespie Magee, Jr.]] (1922–1941, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Wes Magee]] (born 1939, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Jayanta Mahapatra]] (born 1928, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Sitakant Mahapatra]] (born 1937, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Mzi Mahola]] (born 1949, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Derek Mahon]] (born 1941, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer Maiden]] (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Keith Maillard]] (born 1942, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Mair]] (1838–1827, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Major]] (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Clarence Major]] (born 1936, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Majzels]] (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Taylor Mali]] (born 1965, US)\nBULLET::::- [[David Mallet (writer)David Mallet]] (c. 1705–1765, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Malory]] (c. 1415–1471, E)\nBULLET::::- [[David Malouf]] (born 1934, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Kim Maltman]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Eli Mandel]] (1922–1992, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Mandel (poet)Tom Mandel]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ahdri Zhina Mandiela]] (born 1953, J/C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Clarence Mangan]] (1803–1849, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Bill Manhire]] (born 1946, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[David Manicom]] (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Manifold]] (1915–1985, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Leonard Mann]] (1895–1981, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Emily Manning]] (1845–1890, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Frederic Manning]] (1882–1935, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Maurice Manning (poet)Maurice Manning]] (born 1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Manning-Sanders]] (1886–1988, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Mannyng]] (1269–1340, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Chris Mansell]] (born 1953, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Manson]] (born 1969, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Lee Maracle]] (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Blaine Marchand]] (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Morton Marcus (poet)Morton Marcus]] (1936–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Paul Mariani]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[E. A. Markham]] (1939–2008, Mo/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edwin Markham]] (1852–1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nicole Markotic]] (born 1962, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Daphne Marlatt]] (born 1942, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Marlowe]] (1564–1593, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Don Marquis]] (1878–1937, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Garrard Marsh]] (1783–1862, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Marshall (poet)Tom Marshall]] (1938–1993, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Marston (poet)John Marston]] (1576–1634, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Garth Martens]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Camille Martin]] (born 1956, C)\nBULLET::::- [[David Martin (poet)David Martin]] (1915–1997, E/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Martin (poet)Philip Martin]] (1931–2005, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Theodore Martin]] (1816–1909, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Sid Marty]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Marvell]] (1621–1678, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Masefield]] (1878–1967, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lebogang Mashile]] (born 1979, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[R. A. K. Mason]] (1905–1971, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Edgar Lee Masters]] (1868–1950, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Mateer]] (born 1971, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ray Mathew]] (1929–2002, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robin Mathews (poet)Robin Mathews]] (born 1931, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Roland Mathias]] (1915–2007, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Cleopatra Mathis]] (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Don Mattera]] (born 1935, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[James Matthews (writer)James Matthews]] (born 1929, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Glyn Maxwell]] (born 1962, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Bernadette Mayer]] (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Micheline Maylor]] (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Seymour Mayne]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Chandra Mayor]] (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ben Mazer]] (born 1964, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mzwakhe Mbuli]] (born 1959, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[James McAuley]] (1917–1976, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert McBride (poet)Robert McBride]] (c. 1811/1812–1895, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Neil McBride (poet)Neil McBride]] (1861–1942, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Ian McBryde]] (born 1953, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Brian McCabe (author)Brian McCabe]] (born 1951, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Steven McCabe]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Steve McCaffery]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Julia McCarthy]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Susan McCaslin]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[J. D. McClatchy]] (1945–2018, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kim McClenaghan]] (born 1974, SA/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael McClure]] (born 1932, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kathleen McConnell]] (Kathy Mac, living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[David McCooey]] (born 1967, A)\nBULLET::::- [[George Gordon McCrae]] (1833–1927, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John McCrae]] (1872–1918, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Shane McCrae]] (born 1975, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kathleen McCracken]] (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John McCrae]] (1872–1918, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ronald McCuaig]] (1908–1993, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew McDiarmid]] (1914–1996, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Nan McDonald]] (1921–1974, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Roger McDonald]] (born 1941, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Roy McDonald (poet)Roy McDonald]] (1937–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Walt McDonald]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[David McFadden (poet)David McFadden]] (1940–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Hugh McFadden (poet)Hugh McFadden]] (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[David McGimpsey]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Phyllis McGinley]] (1905–1978, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Elvis McGonagall]] (living, S)\nBULLET::::- [[William McGonagall]] (1825–1902, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Roger McGough]] (born 1937, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michelle McGrane]] (born 1974, Z/SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Campbell McGrath]] (born 1962, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas McGrath (poet)Thomas McGrath]] (1916–1990, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Wendy McGrath]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Medbh McGuckian]] (born 1950, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Heather McHugh]] (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William McIlvanney]] (born 1936, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Nadine McInnis]] (born 1957, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James McIntyre (poet)James McIntyre]] (1828–1906, S/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Claude McKay]] (1889–1948, J/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Don McKay]] (born 1942, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Barry McKinnon]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Rod McKuen]] (1933–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Greg McLaren]] (born 1967, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Isaac McLellan]] (1806–1899, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John McLellan (songwriter)John McLellan]] (early 19th century, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Brendan McLeod]] (born 1979, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nigel McLoughlin]] (born 1968, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Rhyll McMaster]] (born 1947, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Susan McMaster]] (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James L. McMichael]] (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ian McMillan (poet)Ian McMillan]] (born 1956, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Eugene McNamara]] (1930–2016, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Anthony McNeill]] (1941–1996, J)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew McNeillie]] (born 1946, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Hollie McNish]] (born 1984, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Bernard McNulty]] (1842–1892, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Steve McOrmond]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Dionyse McTair]] (born 1950, T)\nBULLET::::- [[Máighréad Medbh]] (born 1959, Ir]\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Medwin]] (1788–1869, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Paula Meehan]] (born 1955, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Meinke]] (born 1932, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Melfi]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Melville]] (c. 1578 – c. 1640, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Herman Melville]] (1819–1891, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Meredith]] (born 1955, W)\nBULLET::::- [[George Meredith]] (1828–1909, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Louisa Anne Meredith]] (1812–1895, E/A)\nBULLET::::- [[James Merrill]] (1926–1995, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Stuart Merrill]] (1863–1915, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Iman Mersal]] (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Merton]] (1915–1968, US)\nBULLET::::- [[W. S. Merwin]] (1927–2019, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Messer]] (born 1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Joan Metelerkamp]] (born 1956, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Charlotte Mew]] (1869–1928, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Meyer]] (born 1957, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Meynell]] (1847–1922, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Viola Meynell]] (1885–1956, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Lionel Michael]] (1824–1868, E/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Michaels]] (born 1958, C)\nBULLET::::- [[William Julius Mickle]] (1734–1788, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Marianne Micros]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Middleton (d. 1628)Christopher Middleton]] (c. 1560–1628, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Middleton (poet)Christopher Middleton]] (born 1926, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Barham Middleton]] (1882–1911, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Roy Miki]] (born 1942, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Abdul Milazi]] (born 1966, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Miles]] (1931–1993, W/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Josephine Miles]] (1911–1985, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer Militello]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edna St. Vincent Millay]] (1892–1950, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Duer Miller]] (1874–1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Miller]] (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Joaquin Miller]] (1837–1913, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Leslie Adrienne Miller]] (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Miller (poet)Ruth Miller]] (1919–1969, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Miller (poet)Thomas Miller]] (1807–1874, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Vassar Miller]] (1924–1998, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Millett (poet)John Millett]] (1921–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Millhouse]] (1788–1839, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Milligan]] (1865–1953, Ir/NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Spike Milligan]] (1918–2002, E/Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth G. Mills]] (1923–2004, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Roswell George Mills]] (1896–1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Milton]] (1608–1674, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Minhinnick]] (born 1952, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Minicucci]] (born 1981, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Gary Miranda]] (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sudesh Mishra]] (living, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Adrian Mitchell]] (1932–2008, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Paul Mitchell (writer)Paul Mitchell]] (born 1968, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Silas Weir Mitchell (physician)Silas Weir Mitchell]] (1829–1914, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Mitchell (translator)Stephen Mitchell]] (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Waddie Mitchell]] (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Naomi Mitchison]] (1897–1999, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Amitabh Mitra]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Ange Mlinko]] (born 1960, US)\n\nBULLET::::- [[David Macbeth Moir]] (1798–1851, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Anis Mojgani]] (born 1977, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Mole (poet)John Mole]] (born 1941, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Natalia Molebatsi]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Molloy]] (1942–2004, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Geraldine Monk]] (born 1952, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Harold Monro]] (1879–1932, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Harriet Monroe]] (1860–1936, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax]] (1661–1715, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Montague (poet)John Montague]] (1929–2016, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Lady Mary Wortley Montagu]] (1689–1762, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lenore Montanaro]] (born 1990, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexander Montgomerie]] (c. 1550–1598, S)\nBULLET::::- [[James Montgomery (poet)James Montgomery]] (1771–1854, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lucy Maud Montgomery]] (L. M. Montgomery, 1874–1942, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Marion E. Moodie]] (1867–1958, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Susanna Moodie]] (1803–1885, E/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kobus Moolman]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Jacob McArthur Mooney]] (born 1983, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Moore (poet)Alan Moore]] (born 1960, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Marianne Moore]] (1887–1972, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Merrill Moore]] (1903–1957, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Moore]] (1903–1989, US)\nBULLET::::- [[T. Inglis Moore]] (1901–1978, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Moore]] (1779–1852, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Sturge Moore]] (1870–1944, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Dom Moraes]] (1938–2004, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Barbara Moraff]] (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Cherríe Moraga]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edythe Morahan de Lauzon]] (fl. early 20th c., C)\nBULLET::::- [[Pamela Mordecai]] (born 1942, J/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Hannah More]] (1745–1833, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Dwayne Morgan]] (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edwin Morgan (poet)Edwin Morgan]] (1920–2010, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Jeffrey Morgan (writer)Jeffrey Morgan]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mal Morgan]] (1936–1999, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robin Morgan]] (born 1941, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lorin Morgan-Richards]] (born 1975, US)\nBULLET::::- [[A. F. Moritz]] (born 1947, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mervyn Morris]] (born 1937, J)\nBULLET::::- [[Sharon Morris]] (living, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Morris]] (1834–1896, E)\nBULLET::::- [[David R. Morrison]] (1941–2012, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Jim Morrison]] (1943–1971, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Morrissey]] (born 1959, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kim Morrissey]] (Janice Dales, living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Garry Thomas Morse]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Viggo Mortensen]] (born 1958, US/De)\nBULLET::::- [[Colin Morton]] (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Morton (journalist)Frank Morton]] (1869–1923, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Twm Morys]] (born 1961, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Daniel David Moses]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Howard Moss]] (1922–1987, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thylias Moss]] (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Isabella Motadinyane]] (1963–2003, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[William Motherwell]] (1797–1835, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Motion]] (born 1952, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Seitlhamo Motsapi]] (born 1966, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Casey Motsisi]] (1932–1977, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Eric Mottram]] (1924–1995, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Erin Mouré]] (born 1955, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali]] (born 1940, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Ian Mudie]] (1911–1976, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Mudrooroo]] (Colin Thomas Johnson, 1938–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Lisel Mueller]] (born 1924, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Micere Githae Mugo]] (born 1942, K/Z)\nBULLET::::- [[Edwin Muir]] (1887–1959, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Paul Muldoon]] (born 1951, Ir/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Wendy Mulford]] (born 1941, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Harryette Mullen]] (born 1953, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Laura Mullen]] (born 1958, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anthony Munday]] (c. 1560–1633, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Munro]] (born 1943, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sachiko Murakami]] (born 1980, C)\nBULLET::::- [[William Murdoch (poet)William Murdoch]] (1823–1887, S/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edwin Greenslade Murphy]] (Dryblower, 1866–1939, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Hayden Murphy]] (born 1945, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Murphy (poet)Richard Murphy]] (1927–2018, Ir/SLk)\nBULLET::::- [[Sheila Murphy]] (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Murray (poet)Charles Murray]] (1864–1941, S)\nBULLET::::- [[George Murray (poet)George Murray]] (born 1971, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Joan Murray]] (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Les Murray (poet)Les Murray]] (1938–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- [[David Musgrave]] (born 1965, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Susan Musgrave]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Togara Muzanenhamo]] (born 1975, Z)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Vladimir Nabokov]] (1899–1977, RE/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Constance Naden]] (1858–1889, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarojini Naidu]] (1879–1949, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolina Nairne]] (1766–1845, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Sydney Elliott Napier]] (1870–1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Akhtar Naraghi]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ogden Nash]] (1902–1971, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Roger Nash]] (born 1942, E/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Nashe]] (1567–1601, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Neaves]] (1800–1876, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Neele]] (1798–1828, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lyle Neff]] (born 1969, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Neihardt]] (1881–1973, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William Neill (poet)William Neill]] (1922–2010, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Neilsen]] (living, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Shaw Neilson]] (1872–1942, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Dunbar Nelson]] (1875–1935, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Holly Nelson]] (living, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Marilyn Nelson]] (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Howard Nemerov]] (1920–1991, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenn Nesbitt]] (born 1962, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Newbolt]] (1862–1938, E)\nBULLET::::- [[W. H. New]] (born 1938, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Newlove]] (1938–2003, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Henry Newman]] (1801–1890, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kate Newmann]] (born 1965, NI/Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Aimee Nezhukumatathil]] (born 1974, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nuala Ní Chonchúir]] (born 1970, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Eiléan Ní Chuilleanáin]] (born 1942, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill]] (born 1952, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Ailbhe Ní Ghearbhuigh]] (born 1984, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Doireann Ní Ghríofa]] (born 1981, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[The Owl and the NightingaleNicholas of Guildford]] (12th or 13th c., E)\nBULLET::::- [[Barrie Phillip Nichol]] (bpNichol, 1944–1988, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Grace Nichols]] (born 1950, Gu/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Nichols (poet)Robert Nichols]] (1893–1944, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Cecily Nicholson]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Norman Nicholson]] (1914–1987, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lorine Niedecker]] (1903–1970, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Emilia Nielsen]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Hume Nisbet]] (1849–1923, A/S)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Nolan (author)Christopher Nolan]] (1965–2009, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Oodgeroo Noonuccal]] (1920–1993, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Leslie Norris]] (1921–2006, W/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Harry Northup]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Nortje]] (1942–1970, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Caroline Norton]] (1808–1877, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Notley]] (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alden Nowlan]] (1933–1983, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alfred Noyes]] (1880–1958, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jeff Nuttall]] (1933–2004, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Naomi Shihab Nye]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Nye]] (1939–2016, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Joyce Carol Oates]] (born 1938, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John O'Brien (poet)John O'Brien]] (Patrick Joseph Hartigan, 1878–1952, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Sean O'Brien (writer)Sean O'Brien]] (born 1952, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick O'Connell (poet)Patrick O'Connell]] (1944–2005, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mark O'Connor (poet)Mark O'Connor]] (born 1945, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip O'Connor]] (1916–1998, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary O'Donnell]] (born 1954, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Bernard O'Donoghue]] (born 1945, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Gregory O'Donoghue]] (1951–2005, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Bernard O'Dowd]] (1866–1953, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Dennis O'Driscoll]] (born 1954, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Ernest O'Ferrall]] (1881–1925, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ron Offen]] (1930–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William Henry Ogilvie]] (1869–1963, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank O'Hara]] (1926–1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Bernard O'Hara]] (1862–1927, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Theodore O'Hara]] (1820–1867, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Pixie O'Harris]] (1903–1991, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Sharon Olds]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexandra Oliver]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Oliver]] (1935–2019, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Redell Olsen]] (born 1971, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Olson]] (1910–1970, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sheree-Lee Olson]] (born 1954, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nessa O'Mahony]] (living, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Ondaatje]] (born 1943, SLk/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Heather O'Neill]] (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Henrietta O'Neill]] (1758–1793, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Devenport O'Neill]] (1879–1976, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[George Oppen]] (1908–1984, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Oppen]] (1908–1990, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Antoine Ó Raifteiri]] (1784–1835, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Otho Cresap Ord, II]] (1858–1923, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dowell O'Reilly]] (1865–1923, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Orlovsky]] (1933–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Ormond]] (1923–1990, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Ormsby]] (born 1947, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Gregory Orr (poet)Gregory Orr]] (born 1947, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur O'Shaughnessy]] (1844–1881, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Micheal O'Siadhail]] (born 1947, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Alicia Ostriker]] (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Maggie O'Sullivan]] (born 1951, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Seumas O'Sullivan]] (1879–1958, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Niyi Osundare]] (born 1947, Ni/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Oswald]] (born 1966, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Oswald (activist)John Oswald]] (died 1793, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Eoghan Ó Tuairisc]] (1919–1982, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Outram]] (1930–2005, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ouyang Yu]] (歐陽昱; born 1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Catherine Owen (writer)Catherine Owen]] living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jan Owen]] (born 1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Wilfred Owen]] (1893–1918, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Susan Paddon]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Padel]] (born 1947, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ron Padgett]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Isabel Pagan]] (c. 1740–1821, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Geoff Page]] (born 1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[P. K. Page]] (1916–2010, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Janet Paisley]] (1948–2018, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Grace Paley]] (1922–2007, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Turner Palgrave]] (1824–1897, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Palmer (poet)Michael Palmer]] (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nettie Palmer]] (1885–1964, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Vance Palmer]] (1885–1959, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Sylvia Pankhurst]] (1882–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Aristides Paradissis]] (1923–2006, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Arleen Paré]] (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Parker]] (1893–1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Parnell]] (1670–1718, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Parry (poet)Robert Parry]] (1540–1612, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Lisa Pasold]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Pass]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth Patchen]] (1911–1972, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Banjo Paterson]] (1864–1941, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Don Paterson]] (born 1963, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Coventry Patmore]] (1823–1896, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Brian Patten]] (born 1946, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Kevin Paul]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Paulin]] (born 1949, NI/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ricardo Pau-Llosa]] (born 1954, Cu)\nBULLET::::- [[James Payn]] (1830–1898, E/S)\nBULLET::::- [[Molly Peacock]] (born 1947, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Love Peacock]] (1785–1866, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick Pearse]] (1879–1916, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Soraya Peerbaye]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Pearl Poet]] (14th c., E)\nBULLET::::- [[Patrick Pearse]] (1879–1916, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[James Larkin Pearson]] (1879–1981, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Neil Peart]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kathleen Peirce]] (born 1956, US)\nBULLET::::- [[J. D. C. Pellow]] (1890–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nathan Penlington]] (living, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Penny]] (1729–1784, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Hilary Douglas Clark Pepler]] (1878–1951, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sam Pereira]] (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lucia Perillo]] (1958–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Grace Perry]] (1927–1987, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Lenrie Peters]] (1932–2009, Ga)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Peters]] (1924–2014, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Pascale Petit (poet)Pascale Petit]] (born 1953, W)\nBULLET::::- [[W. T. Pfefferle]] (born 1962, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mario Petrucci]] (born 1958, E)\nBULLET::::- [[M. NourbeSe Philip]] (born 1947, T/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ambrose Philips]] (1674–1749, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Katherine Philips]] (1631/1632–1664, E/W)\nBULLET::::- [[Ben Phillips (poet)Ben Phillips]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Eden Phillpotts]] (1862–1960, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alison Pick]] (born 1975, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Pickard]] (born 1946, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Leah Lakshmi Piepzna-Samarasinha]] (born 1975, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Marge Piercy]] (born 1936, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Laetitia Pilkington]] (c. 1709–1750, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Pilkington]] (1761–1839, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Pinder]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Pinsky]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Pirie]] (1799–1870, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Pitt]] (1699–1748, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Marie Pitt]] (1869–1948, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Pitter]] (1897–1992, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Al Pittman]] (1940–2001, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Marjorie Pizer]] (1920–2016, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Sylvia Plath]] (1932–1963, US/E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Plomer]] (1903–1973, SA/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany]] (1878–1957, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Plunkett]] (1887–1916, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Edgar Allan Poe]] (1809–1849, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Emily Pohl-Weary]] (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Craig Poile]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Suman Pokhrel]] (born 1967, Ne)\nBULLET::::- [[Marcella Polain]] (born 1958, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Margaret Steuart Pollard]] (1904–1996, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Pollock]] (1823–1858, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Pollok]] (c. 1798–1827, S)\nBULLET::::- [[John Pomfret]] (1667–1702, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Marie Ponsot]] (1921–2019, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Pook]] (born 1942, W/F)\nBULLET::::- [[Sandy Pool]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Marie Ponsot]] (1921–2019, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexander Pope]] (1688–1744, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Judith Pordon]] (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anna Maria Porter]] (1780–1832, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Porter]] (1954–2008, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Hal Porter]] (1911–1984, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Porter (poet)Peter Porter]] (1929–2010, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Rochelle Potkar]] (born 1979, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Potter (translator)Robert Potter]] (1721–1804, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Potts]] (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ezra Pound]] (1885–1972, US)\nBULLET::::- [[B. W. Powe]] (born 1955, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Craig Powell (poet)Craig Powell]] (born 1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Winthrop Mackworth Praed]] (1802–1839, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Claire Pratt]] (1921–1995, C)\nBULLET::::- [[E. J. Pratt]] (1882–1964, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jack Prelutsky]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Karen Press]] (born 1956, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Preston (writer)Thomas Preston]] (1537–1598, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ron Pretty]] (born 1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Prewett]] (1893–1962, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nancy Price]] (1880–1970, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Price (poet)Richard Price]] (born 1966, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Priest]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[F. T. Prince]] (1912–2003, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Pringle]] (1789–1834, S/SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Prior]] (1664–1721, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Pauline Prior-Pitt]] (living, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Adelaide Anne Procter]] (1825–1864, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Bryan Procter]] (1787–1874, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kevin Prufer]] (born 1969, US)\nBULLET::::- [[J. H. Prynne]] (born 1936, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sheenagh Pugh]] (born 1950, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Al Purdy]] (1918–2000, C)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Andy Quan]] (born 1969, C/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Quarles]] (1592–1644, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Quennell]] (1905–1993, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sina Queyras]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Roderic Quinn]] (1867–1949, A)\n\nBULLET::::- [[William Radice]] (born 1951, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth Radu]] (born 1945, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sam Ragan]] (1915–1996, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer Rahim]] (born 1963, T)\nBULLET::::- [[Craig Raine]] (born 1944, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kathleen Raine]] (1908–2003, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Carl Rakosi]] (1903–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Walter Raleigh]] (1552 or 1554–1618, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Ralph]] (1705–1762, US/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Raymond Ramcharitar]] (living, T)\nBULLET::::- [[Lesego Rampolokeng]] (born 1965, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Allan Ramsay (poet)Allan Ramsay]] (1686–1758, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Theodore Harding Rand]] (1835–1900, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Dudley Randall]] (1914–2000, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Julia Randall]] (1924–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Randolph (poet)Thomas Randolph]] (1605–1635, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer Rankin]] (1941–1979, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Claudia Rankine]] (born 1963, J)\nBULLET::::- [[John Crowe Ransom]] (1888–1974, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lennox Raphael]] (born 1939, J)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Ratcliffe]] (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Angela Rawlings]] (born 1978, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Raworth]] (born 1938, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Herbert Read]] (1893–1968, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Angela Readman]] (born 1973, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Reaney]] (1926–2008, C)\nBULLET::::- [[George Reavey]] (1907–1976, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Redgrove]] (1932–2003, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Redhill]] (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Reed (poet)Henry Reed]] (1914–1986, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ishmael Reed]] (born 1938, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kerry Reed-Gilbert]] (1956–2019, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ennis Rees]] (1925–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Deryn Rees-Jones]] (living, E/W)\nBULLET::::- [[James Reeves (writer)James Reeves]] (1909–1978, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nell Regan]] (born 1969, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Alastair Reid]] (born 1926, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Reid]] (born 1949, E)\nBULLET::::- [[D. C. Reid]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jamie Reid (Canadian poet)Jamie Reid]] (1941–2015, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Azila Talit Reisenberger]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[James Reiss]] (1941–2016, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Relph]] (1712–1743, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Rendall]] (1898–1967, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth Rexroth]] (1905–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Oliver Reynolds]] (born 1957, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Reznikoff]] (1894–1976, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Shane Rhodes]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ernest Rhys]] (1859–1946, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Rice (writer)Henry Rice]] (1585 or 1586–1651, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Stan Rice]] (1942–2002, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Adrienne Rich]] (1929–2012, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Richardson]] (1873–1957, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Richardson (poet)John Richardson]] (1817–1886, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Richardson (poet)Robert Richardson]] (1850–1901, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Edgell Rickword]] (1898–1982, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Riddell]] (1910–1998, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Lola Ridge]] (1873–1941, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Laura Riding]] (1901–1991, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Ridler]] (1912–2001, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Denise Riley]] (born 1948, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Whitcomb Riley]] (1849–1916, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Riley (poet)John Riley]] (1937–1978, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Riley]] (born 1940, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Roberts Rinehart]] (1876–1958, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Maurice Riordan]] (born 1953, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Alberto Ríos]] (born 1952, US)\n\nBULLET::::- [[E. M. Roach]] (Merton Maloney, 1915–1974, T)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles G. D. Roberts]] (1860–1943, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Emma Roberts (author)Emma Roberts]] (1794–1840, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Roberts (writer)Michael Roberts]] (1902–1948, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edith Anne Robertson]] (1883–1973, S)\nBULLET::::- [[James Robertson (novelist)James Robertson]] (born 1958, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Lisa Robertson]] (born 1961, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Robin Robertson]] (born 1955, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Edwin Arlington Robinson]] (1869–1935, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lennox Robinson]] (1886–1958, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Robinson (poet)Mary Robinson]] (1758–1800, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Matt Robinson (poet)Matt Robinson]] (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Roland Robinson (poet)Roland Robinson]] (1912–1992, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ajmer Rode]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Gordon Rodgers]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[W. R. Rodgers]] (1909–1969, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Carmen Rodríguez]] (born 1948 Ch/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Judith Rodriguez]] (1936–2018, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Theodore Roethke]] (1908–1963, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Janet Rogers]] (born 1963, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Linda Rogers]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Samuel Rogers]] (1763–1855, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Isabella Whiteford Rogerson]] (Isabella Whiteford, 1835–1905, Ir/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Rohrer]] (born 1972, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ethel Rolt Wheeler]] (1869–1958, E)\nBULLET::::- [[David Romtvedt]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dilys Rose]] (born 1954, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Rose (poet)Peter Rose]] (born 1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Raymond Roseliep]] (1917–1983, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Franklin Rosemont]] (1943–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Penelope Rosemont]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Isaac Rosenberg]] (1890–1918, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Joe Rosenblatt]] (1933–2019, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Gabriel Rosenstock]] (born 1949, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Laisha Rosnau]] (born 1972, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Ross]] (1922–2001, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Ross]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Stuart Ross]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[W. W. E. Ross]] (1894–1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christina Rossetti]] (1830–1894, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Dante Gabriel Rossetti]] (1828–1882, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jerome Rothenberg]] (born 1931, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nancy-Gay Rotstein]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Rouse (born 1954, US/E)\nBULLET::::- [[David Rowbotham]] (1924–2010, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Singer Rowe]] (1674–1737, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nicholas Rowe (writer)Nicholas Rowe]] (1674–1718, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Noel Rowe]] (1951–2007, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Rowe (poet)Stephen Rowe]] (born 1980, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Graham Rowlands]] (born 1947, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Rowlands]] (1565–1630, E/Nt)\nBULLET::::- [[Samuel Rowlands]] (c. 1573–1630, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Rosemarie Rowley]] (born 1942, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Susanna Rowson]] (1762–1824, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Susanna Roxman]] (1946–2015, Sw)\nBULLET::::- [[Adam Rudden]] (born 1983, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Muriel Rukeyser]] (1913–1980, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Runcie#Personal lifeCharlotte Runcie]] (born 1989, S)\nBULLET::::- [[George William Russell]] (1867–1935, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nipsey Russell]] (1918–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Brendan Ryan (poet)Brendan Ryan]] (born 1963, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Gig Ryan]] (born 1956, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Kay Ryan]] (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Tracy Ryan]] (born 1964, A)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of DorsetCharles Sackville]] (1643–1706, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of DorsetThomas Sackville]] (1536–1608, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Vita Sackville-West]] (1892–1962, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Benjamin Alire Sáenz]] (born 1954, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Maria Grace Saffery]] (1773–1858, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lake Sagaris]] (born 1956, C/Ch)\nBULLET::::- [[Nandini Sahu]] (born 1973, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Arja Salafranca]] (born 1971, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Trish Salah]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nina Salaman]] (1877–1925, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Blanaid Salkeld]] (1880–1959, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Salom]] (born 1950, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Salusbury (poet)John Salusbury]] (1567–1612, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sir Thomas Salusbury, 2nd BaronetThomas Salusbury]] (1612–1643, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Fiona Sampson]] (born 1963, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sonia Sanchez]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Carl Sandburg]] (1878–1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Sanger]] (born 1943, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Sangster]] (1822–1893, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ann Sansom]] (living, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Clive Sansom]] (1910–1981, E/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Sant]] (born 1950, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Robyn Sarah]] (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Dipti Saravanamuttu]] (born 1960, A)\nBULLET::::- [[May Sarton]] (1912–1995, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Siegfried Sassoon]] (1886–1967, E)\nBULLET::::- [[K. Satchidanandan]] (born 1948, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Esther Saunders]] (1793–1862, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jen Saunders]] (born 1962, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Savage (poet)Richard Savage]] (c. 1697–1743, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jaya Savige]] (born 1978, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Leslie Scalapino]] (1944–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Herman George Scheffauer]] (1876–1927, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jacob Scheier]] (born 1980, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Libby Scheier]] (1946–2000, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Bel Schenk]] (born 1975, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Dennis Schmitz]] (1937–2019, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Pat Schneider]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Johnston Schoolcraft]] (1800–1842, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Andreas Schroeder]] (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Schultz]] (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Schuyler]] (1923–1991, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Delmore Schwartz]] (1913–1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Scobie]] (born 1943, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Gregory Scofield]] (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexander Scott (16th-century poet)Alexander Scott]] (c. 1520 – c. 1583, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexander Scott (20th-century poet)Alexander Scott]] (1920–1989, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Dennis Scott (writer)Dennis Scott]] (1939–1991, J)\nBULLET::::- [[Duncan Campbell Scott]] (1862–1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[F. R. Scott]] (1899–1985, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Frederick George Scott]] (1861–1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Geoffrey Scott (architectural historian)Geoffrey Scott]] (1884–1929, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John A. Scott]] (born 1948, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Margaret Scott (author)Margaret Scott]] (1934–2005, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Dale Scott]] (born 1929, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Scott (poet)Tom Scott]] (1918–1995, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Walter ScottSir Walter Scott]] (1771–1832, S)\nBULLET::::- [[William Bell Scott]] (1811–1890, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Gil Scott-Heron]] (1949–2011, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ann Scott-Moncrieff]] (1914–1943, S)\nBULLET::::- [[E. J. Scovell]] (1907–1999, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Maurice Scully]] (born 1952, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[George Bazeley Scurfield]] (1920–1991, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Seaton]] (1942–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sir Charles Sedley, 5th BaronetCharles Sedley]] (1639–1701, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Frederick Seidel]] (born 1936, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Hugh Seidman]] (born 1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rebecca Seiferle]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lasana M. Sekou]] (born 1959, SM)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Sempill]] (c. 1616–1682, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Sempill the youngerRobert Sempill]] (c. 1595 – c. 1663, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Olive Senior]] (born 1941, J/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sipho Sepamla]] (1932–2007, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Mongane Wally Serote]] (born 1944, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Nina Serrano]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert W. Service]] (1874–1958, S/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Vikram Seth]] (born 1952, SM)\nBULLET::::- [[Elkanah Settle]] (1648–1724, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anna Seward]] (1742–1809, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Sexton]] (1928–1974, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John W. Sexton]] (born 1958, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Shadwell]] (1642–1692, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Kathy Shaidle]] (born 1964, C)\nBULLET::::- [[William Shakespeare]] (1564–1616, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Tupac Shakur]] (1971–1996, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Otep Shamaya]] (born 1979, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Eileen Shanahan]] (1901–1979, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Ntozake Shange]] (1948–2018, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Shanks]] (1892–1953, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jo Shapcott]] (born 1953, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Shapcott]] (born 1935, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Karl Shapiro]] (1913–2000, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Sharkey]] (born 1946, A)\nBULLET::::- [[William Sharp (writer)William Sharp]] (awa Fiona MacLeod, 1855–1905, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Brenda Shaughnessy]] (born 1970, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Luci Shaw]] (born 1928, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Owen Sheers]] (born 1974, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Percy Bysshe Shelley]] (1792–1822, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Shenstone]] (1714–1763, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nan Shepherd]] (1893–1981, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Joseph Sherman]] (1871–1926, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Sherman]] (1945–2006, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Carol Shields]] (1935–2003, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Trish Shields]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[ScarringtonThomas Shipman]] (1632–1680, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Shirley]] (1596–1666, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Fredegond Shove]] (1889–1949, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sandy Shreve]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Penelope Shuttle]] (born 1947, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Beau Sia]] (born 1976, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Sidney]] (1561–1621, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Sidney]] (1554–1586, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Melanie Siebert]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Eli Siegel]] (1902–1978, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Siegel (author)Robert Siegel]] (1939–2012, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jon Silkin]] (1930–1997, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ron Silliman]] (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Shel Silverstein]] (1930–1999, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Simic]] (born 1938, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Goran Simić (poet)Goran Simić]] (born 1952, Bo/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Bren Simmers]] (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Simmons (poet)James Simmons]] (1933–2001, NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Simpson]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Louis Simpson]] (1923–2012, J/US)\nBULLET::::- [[R. A. Simpson]] (1929–2002, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Bennie Lee Sinclair]] (1939–2000, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Iain Sinclair]] (born 1943, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[May Sinclair]] (1863–1946, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sue Sinclair]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Tim Sinclair]] (born 1972, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Burns Singer]] (1928–1964, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Marilyn Singer]] (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kalpna Singh-Chitnis]] (born 1966, In)\nBULLET::::- [[George Sipos]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Sirr]] (born 1960, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Lemn Sissay]] (born 1967, E)\nBULLET::::- [[C. H. Sisson]] (1914–2003, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ari Sitas]] (born 1952, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Edith Sitwell]] (1887–1964, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Osbert Sitwell]] (1892–1969, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sacheverell Sitwell]] (1897–1988, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Sonja Skarstedt]] (1960–2009, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Skelton]] (1460–1529, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robin Skelton]] (1925–1997, E/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Reid Skinner]] (born 1949, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Myra Sklarew]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ed Skoog]] (born 1971, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Zoë Skoulding]] (born 1967, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Skrzynecki]] (born 1945, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth Slessor]] (1901–1971, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Daniel Sloate]] (1931–2009, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Slow]] (1841–1925, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Adam Small (writer)Adam Small]] (1936–2016, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolyn Smart]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Smart]] (1722–1771, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Smart (Canadian author)Elizabeth Smart]] (1913–1986, C)\nBULLET::::- [[A. J. M. Smith]] (1902–1980, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alexander Smith (poet)Alexander Smith]] (1830–1867, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Smith (poet)Bruce Smith]] (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charlotte Turner Smith]] (1749–1806, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Clara Kathleen Smith]] (1911–2004, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Clark Ashton Smith]] (1893–1961, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Burnet Smith]] (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Iain Crichton Smith]] (1928–1998, S)\nBULLET::::- [[John Smith (Canadian poet)John Smith]] (born 1927, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Malachi Smith]] (living, J)\nBULLET::::- [[Marc Smith (American poet)Marc Smith]] (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Margaret Smith (poet)Margaret Smith]] (born 1958, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Smith (poet)Michael Smith]] (1942–2014, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael V. Smith]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Patti Smith]] (born 1946, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rod Smith (poet)Rod Smith]] (born 1962, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ron Smith (Canadian author)Ron Smith]] (born 1943, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Steven Ross Smith]] (born 1945, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Stevie Smith]] (1902–1971, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sydney Goodsir Smith]] (1915–1975, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Tracy K. Smith]] (born 1972, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Vivian Smith (poet)Vivian Smith]] (born 1933, A)\nBULLET::::- [[William Jay Smith]] (1918–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Tobias Smollett]] (1721–1771, S)\nBULLET::::- [[W. D. Snodgrass]] (1925–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Gary Snyder]] (born 1930, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Karen Solie]] (born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[David Solway]] (born 1941, C)\nBULLET::::- [[William Somervile]] (1675–1742, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Cathy Song]] (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Madeline Sonik]] (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Sorenson]] (1869–1939, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Sorley]] (1895–1915, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Gary Soto]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolyn Marie Souaid]] (born 1959, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Raymond Souster]] (1921–2012, C)\nBULLET::::- [[William Soutar]] (1898–1946, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Caroline Anne Southey]] (1786–1854, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Southey]] (1774–1843, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Southwell (Jesuit)Robert Southwell]] (1561–1595, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Wole Soyinka]] (born 1934, Ni)\nBULLET::::- [[Esta Spalding]] (living, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Heather Spears]] (born 1934, C/De)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Spence]] (living, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Lewis Spence]] (1874–1955, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Spencer]] (1882–1975, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Bernard Spencer]] (1909–1963, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Edward Spencer]] (1845–1911, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Spender]] (1909–1995, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edmund Spenser]] (1552–1599, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Leonora Speyer]] (1872–1956, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Harriet Elizabeth Prescott Spofford]] (1835–1921, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Eintou Pearl Springer]] (born 1944, T)\nBULLET::::- [[Birk Sproxton]] (1943–2007, C)\nBULLET::::- [[J. C. Squire]] (1884–1958, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Geoffrey Squires]] (born 1942, NI)\n\nBULLET::::- [[William Stafford (poet)William Stafford]] (1914–1993, US)\nBULLET::::- [[A. E. Stallings]] (born 1968, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jon Stallworthy]] (1935–2014, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Harold Standish]] (1919–1972, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ann Stanford]] (1916–1987, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Stanford]] (1948–1978, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Stanley (poet)George Stanley]] (born 1937, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[George Starbuck]] (1931–1996, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Carmine Starnino]] (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nicolette Stasko]] (born 1950, A)\nBULLET::::- [[C. K. Stead]] (born 1932, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Steele (poet)Peter Steele]] (1939–2012, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Steere (author)Richard Steere]] (1643–1721, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Steffler]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Gertrude Stein]] (1874–1946, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mattie Stepanek]] (1990–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ian Stephens (poet)Ian Stephens]] (1955–1996, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Stephens (author)James Stephens]] (1880–1950, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[James Brunton Stephens]] (1835–1902, S)\nBULLET::::- [[George Stepney]] (1663–1707, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Sterling (author)John Sterling]] (1806–1844, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Gerald Stern]] (born 1925, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ricardo Sternberg]] (born 1948, C/US)\nBULLET::::- [[C. J. Stevens]] (born 1927, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Wallace Stevens]] (1880–1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Stevenson (poet)Richard Stevenson]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Louis Stevenson]] (1850–1894, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Margo Taft Stever]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Amanda Stewart]] (born 1959, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Stewart (poet)Douglas Stewart]] (1913–1985, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Harold Stewart]] (1916–1995, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Shannon Stewart (poet)Shannon Stewart]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[W. Gregory Stewart]] (living, C/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Trumbull Stickney]] (1874–1904, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Stiles]] (living, C/E)\nBULLET::::- [[James Still]] (1906–2001, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Stone]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Donna J. Stone]] (1933–1994, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Stone]] (1915–2011, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet]] (born 1968, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Storer]] (1880–1944, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Randolph Stow]] (1935–2010, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Mark Strand]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer Strauss]] (born 1933, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Sean Street]] (born 1946, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Agnes Strickland]] (1796–1874, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Adelle Stripe]] (born 1976, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Trumbull Stickney]] (1874–1904, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Donna J. Stone]] (1933–1994, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Billy Marshall Stoneking]] (1947–2016, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet]] (born 1968, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Storer]] (1880–1944, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Eithne Strong]] (1923–1999, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Stroud]] (born 1943, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Betsy Struthers]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Struthers (poet)John Struthers]] (1776–1853, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Jesse Stuart]] (1906–1984, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Abhi Subedi]] (born 1945)\nBULLET::::- [[John Suckling (poet)Sir John Suckling]] (1609–1642, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Julie Suk]] (born 1924, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Suknaski]] (1942–2012, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Sullivan]] (1868–1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Aloysius Michael Sullivan]] (1896–1980, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rosemary Sullivan]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Maud Sulter]] (1960–2008, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Moez Surani]] (born 1979, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kamala Surayya]] (1934–2009, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Efua Sutherland]] (1924–1996, Gh)\nBULLET::::- [[John Sutherland (Canadian writer)John Sutherland]] (1919–1956, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Swanson (inventor)Robert Swanson]] (1905–1994, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Sward]] (born 1933, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[George Swede]] (born 1940, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Sweeney]] (1951–2018, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Cole Swensen]] (born 1955, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Karen Swenson]] (born 1936, US)\nBULLET::::- [[May Swenson]] (1913–1989, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jonathan Swift]] (1667–1745, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Todd Swift]] (born 1966, C/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Algernon Charles Swinburne]] (1837–1909, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Randall Swingler]] (1909–1967, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ieuan ap Hywel Swrdwal]] (c. 1430 – c. 1480, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Bobbi Sykes]] (1943–2010, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Joshua Sylvester]] (1563–1618, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Symons]] (1865–1945, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Millington Synge]] (1871–1909, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Sze]] (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Szirtes]] (born 1948, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Szumigalski]] (1922–1999, E/C)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Eileen Tabios]] (born 1960, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Proma Tagore]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Rabindranath Tagore]] (1861–1941, In)\nBULLET::::- [[Maria Takolander]] (born 1973, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis W. Tancred]] (1874–1925, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Tannahill]] (1774–1810, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothea Tanning]] (1910–2012, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Allen Tate]] (1899–1979, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Tate (writer)James Tate]] (1943–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Emma Tatham]] (1829–1855, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Taylor (poet)Andrew Taylor]] (born 1940, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ann Taylor (poet)Ann Taylor]] (1782–1866, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Taylor (poet)Bruce Taylor]] (born 1960, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Taylor]] (1645–1729, E/US)\nBULLET::::- [[Emily Taylor]] (1795–1872, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Heather Taylor]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Taylor (dramatist)Henry Taylor]] (1800–1886, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry S. Taylor]] (born 1942, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Taylor (poet)Jane Taylor]] (1783–1824, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Rachel Annand Taylor]] (1876–1960, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruth Taylor (poet)Ruth Taylor]] (1961–2006, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sara Teasdale]] (1883–1933, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Barry Tebb]] (born 1942, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Fiona Templeton]] (born 1951, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Tennant]] (1784–1848, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Alfred, Lord Tennyson]] (1809–1892, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Frederick Tennyson]] (1807–1898, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Terpstra]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Elaine Terranova]] (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- [[A. S. J. Tessimond]] (1902–1962, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lucy Terry]] (c. 1730–1821, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Souvankham Thammavongsa]] (born 1978, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Celia Thaxter]] (1824–1894, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Ernest Thayer]] (1863–1940, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Thelwall]] (1764–1834, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sharon Thesen]] (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Colin Thiele]] (1920–2006, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Kai Cheng Thom]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[William Thom (poet)William Thom]] (1799–1848, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas the Rhymer]] (Thomas Learmonth, c. 1220 – c. 1298, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas of Hales]] (13th c., E)\nBULLET::::- [[Dylan Thomas]] (1914–1953, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Thomas (poet)Edward Thomas]] (1878–1917, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Thomas (poet)Elizabeth Thomas]] (1675–1731, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lorenzo Thomas (poet)Lorenzo Thomas]] (1944–2005, US)\nBULLET::::- [[R. S. Thomas]] (1913–2000, W)\nBULLET::::- [[William Thomas (Islwyn)William Thomas]] (1832–1878, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Thompson]] (1859–1907, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Thompson (poet)John Thompson]] (1938–1976, E/C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Reuben Thompson]] (1823–1873, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward William Thomson (writer)Edward William Thomson]] (1849–1924, C)\nBULLET::::- [[James Thomson (poet, born 1700)James Thomson]] (1700–1748, S)\nBULLET::::- [[James Thomson (poet, born 1834)James Thomson]] (awa Bysshe Vanolis, 1834–1882, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry David Thoreau]] (1817–1862, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Tim Thorne]] (born 1944, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Russell Thornton (writer)Russell Thornton]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Anthony Thwaite]] (born 1930, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Thwaites]] (1915–2005, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Chidiock Tichborne]] (1558–1586, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Tickell]] (1685–1740, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Tierney]] (born 1970, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Tighe]] (1772–1810, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Tipping]] (born 1949, A)\nBULLET::::- [[José Tlatelpas]] (born 1953, Me/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Nick Toczek]] (born 1950, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Barbara Euphan Todd]] (1890–1976, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ruthven Todd]] (1914–1978, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Mohamud Siad Togane]] (born 1947, So/C)\nBULLET::::- [[J. R. R. Tolkien]] (1892–1973, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Tolson]] (died 1745, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Melvin B. Tolson]] (1898–1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Tomlinson]] (1927–2015, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jean Toomer]] (1894–1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Tompson]] (1807–1883, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Angela Topping]] (born 1954, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Lola Lemire Tostevin]] (born 1937, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Cyril Tourneur]] (died 1626, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ann Townsend]] (born 1962, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Traherne]] (1636/1637–1674, E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Tranter]] (born 1943, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Treadwell]] (born 1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mark Tredinnick]] (born 1962, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Rhea Tregebov]] (born 1953, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Raymond D. Tremblay]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Roland Michel Tremblay]] (born 1972, C/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Natasha Trethewey]] (born 1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Calvin Trillin]] (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Tripp (poet)John Tripp]] (1927–1986, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Quincy Troupe]] (born 1939, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Trower]] (1930–2017, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Mark Truscott]] (born 1970, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Dimitris Tsaloumas]] (1921–2016, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Charlotte Maria Tucker]] (A.L.O.E, 1821–1893, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Eliza Dorothea Cobbe, Lady Tuite]] (c. 1764–1850, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[George Turberville]] (c. 1540 – before 1597, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Marggraf Turley]] (born 1970, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Gael Turnbull]] (1928–2004, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Tennyson Turner]] (1808–1879, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Julian Turner]] (born 1955, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Walter J. Turner]] (1889–1946, A/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Tusser]] (1524–1580, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Hone Tuwhare]] (1922–2008, NZ)\nBULLET::::- [[Violet Tweedale]] (1862–1936, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Chase Twichell]] (born 1950, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Katharine Tynan]] (1859–1932, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[John Tyndall (poet)John Tyndall]] (born 1951, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Daniel Scott Tysdal]] (born 1978, C)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Laura Ulewicz]] (1930–2007, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jeff Unaegbu]] (born 1979, Ni)\nBULLET::::- [[Unorthodox Australian Poet]] (Garry W. Gosney, born 1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Jean Starr Untermeyer]] (1886–1970, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Louis Untermeyer]] (1885–1977, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Updike]] (1932–2009, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Priscila Uppal]] (1974–2018, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Allen Upward]] (1863–1926, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Joan Ure]] (Elizabeth Thoms Clark, 1918–1978, S)\nBULLET::::- [[David UU]] (David W. Harris, 1948–1994, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Amy Uyematsu]] (born 1947, US)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Jean Valentine]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Valentine Vallis]] (1916–2009, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Cor van den Heuvel]] (born 1931, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Mona Van Duyn]] (1921–2004, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lin Van Hek]] (born 1944, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter van Toorn]] (born 1944, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher van Wyk]] (1957–2014, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Vaughan]] (1621–1695, W)\nBULLET::::- [[R. M. Vaughan]] (born 1965, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Vaux, 2nd Baron Vaux of Harrowden]] (1509–1556, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Reetika Vazirani]] (1962–2003, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Janine Pommy Vega]] (1942–2010, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of OxfordEdward Vere, Earl of Oxford]] (1550–1604, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Helen Vendler]] (born 1933, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jumoke Verissimo]] (born 1976, Ni)\nBULLET::::- [[Paul Vermeersch]] (born 1973, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Katherena Vermette]] (born 1977, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jones Very]] (1813–1880, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Vicki Viidikas]] (1948–1998, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Viereck]] (1916–2006, US)\nBULLET::::- [[José García Villa]] (1908–1997, Ph)\nBULLET::::- [[Pamelia Sarah Vining]] (1826–1897, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Vivian Virtue]] (1911–1998, J/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Garth Von Buchholz]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Brian Vrepont]] (1882–1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Prvoslav Vujcic]] (Prvoslav Vujčić, born 1960, Se/C)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Miriam Waddington]] (1917–2004, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Michael Wade (Canadian actor)Michael Wade]] (1944–2004, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sidney Wade]] (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Fred Wah]] (born 1939, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Wain]] (1925–1994, E)\nBULLET::::- [[A. E. Waite]] (1857–1942, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Nayyirah Waheed]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Diane Wakoski]] (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Derek Walcott]] (born 1930, SL)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Waldman]] (born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Waldron]] ((1690 – c. 1730, E/IoM)\nBULLET::::- [[Keith Waldrop]] (born 1932, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rosmarie Waldrop]] (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Waley]] (1889–1966, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alice Walker]] (born 1944, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Margaret Walker]] (1915–1998, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rob Walker (poet)Rob Walker]] (born 1953, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Bronwen Wallace]] (1945–1989, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Chris Wallace-Crabbe]] (born 1934, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Edmund Waller]] (1606–1687, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Walmsley]] (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Agnes Walsh]] (born 1950, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Catherine Walsh (poet)Catherine Walsh]] (born 1964, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[David Waltner-Toews]] (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Ania Walwicz]] (born 1951, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Connie Wanek]] (born 1952, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Powell Ward]] (born 1937, E/W)\nBULLET::::- [[Ned Ward]] (1667–1731, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Sarah Wardle]] (born 1969, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anna Laetitia Waring]] (1823–1910, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Emily Warn]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sylvia Townsend Warner]] (1893–1978, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Crystal Warren]] (living, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[John Warren, 3rd Baron de Tabley]] (1835–1895, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Meralda Warren]] (born 1959, PI)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Penn Warren]] (1905–1989, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Warton]] (1728–1790, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Terry Watada]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Vernon Watkins]] (1906–1967, W)\nBULLET::::- [[George Watsky]] (born 1986, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Rosamund Marriott Watson]] (Graham R. Tomson, 1860–1911, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Samuel Wagan Watson]] (born 1972, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Stephen Watson (poet)Stephen Watson]] (1954–2011, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Watson (poet)Thomas Watson]] (1555–1592, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alison Watt (writer)Alison Watt]] (born 1957, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Barrett Watten]] (born 1948, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Isaac Watts]] (1674–1748, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Rebecca Watts]] (living, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Theodore Watts-Dunton]] (1832–1914, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Tom Wayman]] (born 1945, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan Wearne]] (born 1948, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Francis Webb (poet)Francis Webb]] (1925–1973, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Harri Webb]] (1920–1994, W)\nBULLET::::- [[Phyllis Webb]] (born 1927, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Webster]] (c. 1580 – c. 1634, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Morison Webster]] (1894–1980, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[James Wedderburn (poet)James Wedderburn]] (c. 1495–1553, S)\nBULLET::::- [[John Wedderburn]] (c. 1505–1553, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Wedderburn (poet)Robert Wedderburn]] (c. 1510 – c. 1555, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Rebecca Wee]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[George Weideman]] (1947–2008, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[John Weier]] (born 1949, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Hannah Weiner]] (1928–1997, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Stanley Weir]] (1856–1926, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Marjorie Welish]] (born 1944, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Zachariah Wells]] (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Viola S. Wendt]] (1907–1986, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Marjory Heath Wentworth]] (born 1958, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William Wentworth]] (1790–1872, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Darren Wershler]] (Darren Wershler-Henry, born 1966, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Wesley]] (1707–1788, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Gilbert West]] (1703–1756, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane West]] (1758–1852, E)\nBULLET::::- [[David Wevill]] (born 1935, C/US)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Whalen]] (1923–2002, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dawud Wharnsby]] (born 1972, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Wharton]] (1659–1685, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Gordon Wharton]] (born 1929, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Herb Wharton]] (born 1936, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Mary Whateley]] (1738–1835, E)\nBULLET::::- [[David Wheatley (poet)David Wheatley]] (born 1970, Ir/S)\nBULLET::::- [[Phillis Wheatley]] (1753–1784, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Billy Edd Wheeler]] (born 1932, US)\nBULLET::::- [[E. B. White]] (1899–1985, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Henry Kirke White]] (1785–1806, E)\nBULLET::::- [[James L. White (poet)James L. White]] (1936–1981, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Kenneth White]] (born 1936, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Joshua Whitehead]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Bruce Whiteman]] (born 1952, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Walt Whitman]] (1819–1892, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Isabella Whitney]] (c. 1546–1548 – after 1624, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Zoe Whittall]] (born 1976, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Reed Whittemore]] (1919–2012, US)\nBULLET::::- [[John Greenleaf Whittier]] (1807–1892, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Brian Whittingham]] (born 1950, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Christopher Whyte (writer)Christopher Whyte]] (born 1952, S)\nBULLET::::- [[George Whyte-Melville]] (1821–1878, S/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anna Wickham]] (1883–1947, E/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Les Wicks]] (born 1955, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Wieners]] (1934–2002, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Nissanka Wijeyeratne]] (1924–2007, SLa)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard Wilbur]] (born 1921, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Dora Wilcox]] (1873–1953, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ella Wheeler Wilcox]] (1850–1919, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Wilde]] (1821–1896, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Oscar Wilde]] (1854–1900, Ir/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Amos Wilder]] (1895–1993, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charlotte Wilder]] (1898–1980, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Anne Wilkinson (poet)Anne Wilkinson]] (1910–1961, C)\nBULLET::::- [[John Wilkinson (poet)John Wilkinson]] (born 1953, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William of Nassyngton]] (died 1354, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William of Shoreham]] (fl. 14th century, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Aeneas Francon Williams]] (1886–1971, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Alfred Williams (poet)Alfred Williams]] (1877–1930, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Anna Williams (poet)Anna Williams]] (1706–1783, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Athol Williams]] (born 1970, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[David Gwyn Williams]] (1904–1990, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Donna Williams]] (1963–2017, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Emmett Williams]] (1925–2007, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Heathcote Williams]] (1941–2017, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Helen Maria Williams]] (1759/1762–1827, E/F)\nBULLET::::- [[Hugo Williams]] (born 1942, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Isaac Williams]] (1802–1865, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Williams (Ysgafell)Jane Williams]] (1806–1885, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Jonathan Williams (poet)Jonathan Williams]] (1929–2008, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Miller Williams]] (1930–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Oscar Williams]] (1900–1964, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Richard D'Alton Williams]] (1822–1862, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Rowan Williams]] (born 1950, W/E)\nBULLET::::- [[Saul Williams]] (born 1972, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sherley Anne Williams]] (1944–1999, US)\nBULLET::::- [[William Carlos Williams]] (1883–1963, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank S. Williamson]] (1865–1936, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Elizabeth Willis]] (born 1961, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Wills]] (1790–1868, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Clive Wilmer]] (born 1945, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Frank Wilmot]] (Furnley Maurice, 1881–1942, A)\nBULLET::::- [[John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester]] (1647–1680, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Eleanor Wilner]] (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Alan R. Wilson]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Arthur Wilson (writer)Arthur Wilson]] (1595–1652, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Dede Wilson]] (born 1937, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edwin Wilson (poet)Edwin Wilson]] (born 1942, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Florence Mary Wilson (writer)Florence Mary Wilson]] (c. 1870–1946, Ir/NI)\nBULLET::::- [[Peter Lamborn Wilson]] (also Hakim Bey, born 1945, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Sheri-D Wilson]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Christian Wiman]] (born 1966, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Liz Winfield]] (born 1964, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Rob Winger]] (born 1974, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Sheila Wingfield]] (1906–1992, E/Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Yvor Winters]] (1900–1968, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jane Wiseman]] (Mrs. Holt, 1673 – after 1717, E)\nBULLET::::- [[George Wither]] (1588–1667, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Wolfe (poet)Charles Wolfe]] (1791–1823, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Humbert Wolfe]] (1885–1940, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Wolfe]] (1900–1938, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Theresa Wolfwood]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Jennifer Wong]] (living, HK)\nBULLET::::- [[Nellie Wong]] (born 1934, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Gwyneth Barber Wood]] (died 2006, J)\nBULLET::::- [[George Woodcock]] (1912–1995, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Gregory Woods]] (born 1953, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Joseph Woods (poet)Joseph Woods]] (born 1966, Ir/Z)\nBULLET::::- [[Macdara Woods]] (1942–2018, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Lance Woolaver]] (born 1948, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Dorothy Wordsworth]] (1771–1855, E)\nBULLET::::- [[William Wordsworth]] (1770–1850, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Philip Stanhope Worsley]] (1835–1866, E)\nBULLET::::- Sir [[Henry Wotton]] (1568–1639, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolyn D. Wright]] (born 1949, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Charles Wright (poet)Charles Wright]] (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- [[David Wright (poet)David Wright]] (1920–1994, E)\nBULLET::::- [[David McKee Wright]] (1869–1928, NZ/A)\nBULLET::::- [[Franz Wright]] (1953–2015, US)\nBULLET::::- [[James Wright (poet)James Wright]] (1927–1980, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Jay Wright (poet)Jay Wright]] (born 1935, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Judith Wright]] (1915–2000, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Kirby Wright]] (living, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Wrigley]] (born 1951, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Lady Mary Wroth]] (1587–1651 or 1653)\nBULLET::::- [[Thomas Wyatt (poet)Thomas Wyatt]] (1503–1542, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Elinor Wylie]] (1885–1928, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Alexander Wyon]] (1842–1872, E)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Makhosazana Xaba]] (born 1957, SA)\nBULLET::::- [[Mitsuye Yamada]] (born 1923, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Leo Yankevich]] (1961–2018, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Morgan Yasbincek]] (born 1964, A)\nBULLET::::- [[J. Michael Yates]] (born 1938, US/C)\nBULLET::::- [[W. B. Yeats]] (1865–1939, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[Jean Yoon]] (born 1962, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Monica Youn]] (born 1971, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Andrew Young (poet)Andrew Young]] (1885–1971, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Augustus Young]] (born 1943, Ir)\nBULLET::::- [[d'bi Young]] (born 1977, J/C)\nBULLET::::- [[Douglas Young (classicist)Douglas Young]] (1913–1973, S)\nBULLET::::- [[Edward Young]] (1683–1765, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Ellen Young (poet)Ellen Young]] (c. 1810–1872, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Ian Young (writer)Ian Young]] (born 1945, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Kevin Young (poet)Kevin Young]] (born 1970, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Marguerite Young]] (1908–1995, US)\n\nBULLET::::- [[Matthew Zapruder]] (born 1967, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Marya Zaturenska]] (1902–1982, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Robert Zend]] (1929–1985, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Benjamin Zephaniah]] (born 1958, E)\nBULLET::::- [[Komninos Zervos]] (born 1950, A)\nBULLET::::- [[David Zieroth]] (born 1946, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Rachel Zolf]] (born 1968, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Daniel Zomparelli]] (living, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Carolyn Zonailo]] (born 1947, C)\nBULLET::::- [[Louis Zukofsky]] (1904–1978, US)\nBULLET::::- [[Fay Zwicky]] (1933–2017, A)\nBULLET::::- [[Jan Zwicky]] (born 1955, C)\nBULLET::::- [[List of Australian poets]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of Canadian poets]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of Irish poets]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of Indian poets#Indian poets writing in EnglishList of English poets from India]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of Nigerian poets]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of South African poets]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of poets from the United States]]\n\nBULLET::::- [[English poetry]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of poets]]\nBULLET::::- [[List of women poets]]\n\n[[Category:Lists of poets by language]]\n[[Category:English-language poets ]]"}
{"id": "9717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9717", "title": "Excalibur", "text": "Excalibur\n\nExcalibur () is the legendary sword of King Arthur, sometimes also attributed with magical powers or associated with the rightful sovereignty of Britain. Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone (the proof of Arthur's lineage) are sometimes said to be the same weapon, but in most versions they are considered separate. Excalibur was associated with the Arthurian legend very early on. In Welsh, it is called \"Caledfwlch\"; in Cornish, \"Calesvol\"; in Breton, \"Kaledvoulc'h\"; and in Latin, \"Caliburnus\".\n\nThe name \"Excalibur\" ultimately derives from the Welsh \"Caledfwlch\" (and Breton \"Kaledvoulc'h\", Middle Cornish \"Calesvol\"), which is a compound of ' \"hard\" and ' \"breach, cleft\". Caledfwlch appears in several early Welsh works, including the prose tale \"Culhwch and Olwen\". The name was later used in Welsh adaptations of foreign material such as the \"Brut\"s (chronicles), which were based on Geoffrey of Monmouth. It is often considered to be related to the phonetically similar \"Caladbolg\", a sword borne by several figures from Irish mythology, although a borrowing of \"Caledfwlch\" from Irish \"Caladbolg\" has been considered unlikely by Rachel Bromwich and D. Simon Evans. They suggest instead that both names \"may have similarly arisen at a very early date as generic names for a sword\". This sword then became exclusively the property of Arthur in the British tradition.\n\nGeoffrey of Monmouth, in his \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"The History of the Kings of Britain\", c. 1136), Latinised the name of Arthur's sword as \"Caliburnus\" (potentially influenced by the Medieval Latin spelling \"calibs\" of Classical Latin \"chalybs\", from Greek \"chályps\" [\"χάλυψ\"] \"steel\"). Most Celticists consider Geoffrey's \"Caliburnus\" to be derivative of a lost Old Welsh text in which \"bwlch\" (Old Welsh \"bulc[h]\") had not yet been lenited to \"fwlch\" (Middle Welsh \"vwlch\" or \"uwlch\"). In the late 15th/early 16th-century Middle Cornish play \"Beunans Ke\", Arthur's sword is called \"Calesvol\", which is etymologically an exact Middle Cornish cognate of the Welsh \"Caledfwlch\". It is unclear if the name was borrowed from the Welsh (if so, it must have been an early loan, for phonological reasons), or represents an early, pan-Brittonic traditional name for Arthur's sword.\n\nIn Old French sources this then became \"Escalibor\", \"Excalibor\", and finally the familiar \"Excalibur\". Geoffrey Gaimar, in his Old French \"L'Estoire des Engleis\" (1134-1140), mentions Arthur and his sword: \"this Constantine was the nephew of Arthur, who had the sword Caliburc\" (\"\"Cil Costentin, li niès Artur, Ki out l'espée Caliburc\"\"). In Wace's \"Roman de Brut\" (c. 1150-1155), an Old French translation and versification of Geoffrey's \"Historia\", the sword is called \"Calabrum\", \"Callibourc\", \"Chalabrun\", and \"Calabrun\" (with alternate spellings such as \"Chalabrum\", \"Calibore\", \"Callibor\", \"Caliborne\", \"Calliborc\", and \"Escaliborc\", found in various manuscripts of the \"Brut\").\n\nIn Chrétien de Troyes' late 12th-century Old French \"Perceval\", Arthur's knight Gawain carries the sword \"Escalibor\" and it is stated, \"for at his belt hung Escalibor, the finest sword that there was, which sliced through iron as through wood\" (\"\"Qu'il avoit cainte Escalibor, la meillor espee qui fust, qu'ele trenche fer come fust\"\"). This statement was probably picked up by the author of the \"Estoire Merlin\", or Vulgate Merlin, where the author (who was fond of fanciful folk etymologies) asserts that Escalibor \"is a Hebrew name which means in French 'cuts iron, steel, and wood'\" (\"\"c'est non Ebrieu qui dist en franchois trenche fer & achier et fust\"\"; note that the word for \"steel\" here, achier, also means \"blade\" or \"sword\" and comes from medieval Latin \"aciarium\", a derivative of \"acies\" \"sharp\", so there is no direct connection with Latin \"chalybs\" in this etymology). It is from this fanciful etymological musing that Thomas Malory got the notion that Excalibur meant \"cut steel\" (\"\"the name of it,' said the lady, 'is Excalibur, that is as moche to say, as Cut stele\"\").\n\nIn Arthurian romance, a number of explanations are given for Arthur's possession of Excalibur. In Robert de Boron's \"Merlin\", the first tale to mention the \"sword in the stone\" motif, Arthur obtained the British throne by pulling a sword from an anvil sitting atop a stone that appeared in a churchyard on Christmas Eve. In this account, as foretold by Merlin, the act could not be performed except by \"the true king,\" meaning the divinely appointed king or true heir of Uther Pendragon. As Malory writes: \"\"Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is rightwise king born.\"\" The identity of this sword as Excalibur is made explicit in the later Prose \"Merlin\", part of the Lancelot-Grail cycle (the Vulgate Cycle).\n\nHowever, in the most famous English-language version of the Arthurian tales, Malory's 15th-century \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", early in his reign Arthur breaks the Sword from the Stone while in combat against King Pellinore, and is given Excalibur by the Lady of the Lake in exchange for a later boon. Similarly, in the Post-Vulgate Cycle, Excalibur was given to Arthur by the Lady of the Lake sometime after he began to reign. In the Vulgate \"Mort Artu\", Arthur is at the brink of death and so orders Griflet to throw the sword into the enchanted lake; after two failed attempts (as he felt such a great sword should not be thrown away), Griflet finally complies with the wounded king's request and a hand emerges from the lake to catch it. This tale becomes attached to Bedivere instead of Griflet in Malory and the English tradition. Malory records both versions of the legend in his \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", naming both swords as Excalibur.\n\nIn Welsh legends, Arthur's sword is known as \"Caledfwlch\". In \"Culhwch and Olwen\", it is one of Arthur's most valuable possessions and is used by Arthur's warrior Llenlleawg the Irishman to kill the Irish king Diwrnach while stealing his magical cauldron. Irish mythology mentions a weapon \"Caladbolg\", the sword of Fergus mac Róich, which was also known for its incredible power and was carried by some of Ireland's greatest heroes. The name, which can also mean \"hard cleft\" in Irish, appears in the plural, \"caladbuilc\", as a generic term for \"great swords\" in \"Togail Troi\" (\"The Destruction of Troy\"), a 10th-century Irish translation of the classical tale.\n\nThough not named as Caledfwlch, Arthur's sword is described vividly in \"The Dream of Rhonabwy\", one of the tales associated with the \"Mabinogion\" (as translated by Jeffrey Gantz): \"Then they heard Cadwr Earl of Cornwall being summoned, and saw him rise with Arthur's sword in his hand, with a design of two chimeras on the golden hilt; when the sword was unsheathed what was seen from the mouths of the two chimeras was like two flames of fire, so dreadful that it was not easy for anyone to look.\"\n\nGeoffrey's \"Historia\" is the first non-Welsh source to speak of the sword. Geoffrey says the sword was forged in Avalon and Latinises the name \"Caledfwlch\" as \"Caliburnus\". When his influential pseudo-history made it to Continental Europe, writers altered the name further until it finally took on the popular form \"Excalibur\" (various spellings in the medieval Arthurian romance and chronicle tradition include: \"Calabrun\", \"Calabrum\", \"Calibourne\", \"Callibourc\", \"Calliborc\", \"Calibourch\", \"Escaliborc\", and \"Escalibor\"). The legend was expanded upon in the Vulgate Cycle and in the Post-Vulgate Cycle which emerged in its wake. Both included the work known as the \"Prose Merlin\", but the Post-Vulgate authors left out the \"Merlin\" continuation from the earlier cycle, choosing to add an original account of Arthur's early days including a new origin for Excalibur.\n\nIn several early French works, such as Chrétien de Troyes' \"Perceval, the Story of the Grail\" and the Vulgate \"Lancelot Proper\" section, Excalibur is used by Gawain, Arthur's nephew and one of his best knights. This is in contrast to later versions, where Excalibur belongs solely to the king. The challenge of drawing a sword from a stone also appears in the later Arthurian stories of Galahad, whose achievement of the task indicates that he is destined to find the Holy Grail.\n\nIn many versions, Excalibur's blade was engraved with phrases on opposite sides: \"Take me up\" and \"Cast me away\" (or similar). In addition, when Excalibur was first drawn, in the first battle testing Arthur's sovereignty, its blade blinded his enemies. Malory writes: \"\"thenne he drewe his swerd Excalibur, but it was so breyght in his enemyes eyen that it gaf light lyke thirty torchys.\"\"\n\nIn some tellings, Excalibur's scabbard was said to have powers of its own, as the one wearing it would not lose even a drop of blood. Any wounds received while wearing the scabbard would not bleed at all, thus preventing the death of the wearer. For this reason, Merlin chides Arthur for preferring the sword over the scabbard, saying that the latter was the greater treasure. In the later romance tradition, including \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", the scabbard is stolen from Arthur by his half-sister Morgan le Fay in revenge for the death of her beloved Accolon and thrown into a lake, never to be found again. This act later enables the death of Arthur at the Battle of Camlann.\n\nOther weapons have been associated with Arthur. Welsh tradition also knew of a dagger named Carnwennan and a spear named Rhongomyniad that belonged to him. Carnwennan (\"little white-hilt\") first appears in \"Culhwch and Olwen\", where Arthur uses it to slice the witch Orddu in half. Rhongomyniad (\"spear\" + \"striker, slayer\") is also mentioned in \"Culhwch\", although only in passing; it appears as simply \"Ron\" (\"spear\") in Geoffrey's \"Historia\". Geoffrey also names Arthur's shield as \"Pridwen\", but in \"Culhwch\", \"Prydwen\" (\"fair face\") is the name of Arthur's ship while his shield is named \"Wynebgwrthucher\" (\"face of evening\").\n\nThe Alliterative \"Morte Arthure\", a Middle English poem, mentions Clarent, a sword of peace meant for knighting and ceremonies as opposed to battle, which Mordred stole and then used to kill Arthur at Camlann. The Prose \"Lancelot\" of the Vulgate Cycle mentions a sword called Seure, which belonged to the king but was used by Lancelot in one battle.\n\nIn Welsh mythology, the \"Dyrnwyn\" (\"White-Hilt\"), one of the Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain, is said to be a powerful sword belonging to Rhydderch Hael, one of the Three Generous Men of Britain mentioned in the Welsh Triads. When drawn by a worthy or well-born man, the entire blade would blaze with fire. Rhydderch was never reluctant to hand the weapon to anyone, hence his nickname Hael \"the Generous\", but the recipients, as soon as they had learned of its peculiar properties, always rejected the sword.\n\nThere are other similar weapons described in other mythologies. In particular, Claíomh Solais, which is an Irish term meaning \"Sword of Light\", or \"Shining Sword\", appears in a number of orally transmitted Irish folk-tales. \n\n\nBULLET::::- Lacy, N. J (ed). \"The New Arthurian Encyclopedia.\" (London: Garland. 1996). .\n\nBULLET::::- The Camelot Project at the University of Rochester: Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone\n"}
{"id": "9719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9719", "title": "Eight-bar blues", "text": "Eight-bar blues\n\nIn music, an eight-bar blues is a typical blues chord progression, \"the second most common blues form,\" \"common to folk, rock, and jazz forms of the blues,\" taking eight or bars to the verse.\n\nExamples include \"Sitting on Top of the World\" and \"Key to the Highway\", \"Trouble in Mind\" and \"Stagolee\". \"Heartbreak Hotel\", \"How Long Blues\", \"Ain't Nobody's Business\", \"Cherry Red\", It Hurts Me Too, Worried Life Blues, and \"Get a Haircut\" are all eight-bar blues standards.\n\nOne variant using this progression is to couple one eight-bar blues melody with a different eight-bar blues bridge to create a blues variant of the standard 32-bar song. \"Walking By Myself\", \"I Want a Little Girl\" and \"(Romancing) In The Dark\" are examples of this form. See also blues ballad.\n\nEight bar blues progressions have more variations than the more rigidly defined twelve bar format. The move to the IV chord usually happens at bar 3 (as opposed to 5 in twelve bar); however, \"the I chord moving to the V chord right away, in the second measure, is a characteristic of the eight-bar blues.\"\n\nIn the following examples each box represents a 'bar' of music (the specific time signature is not relevant). The chord in the box is played for the full bar. If two chords are in the box they are each played for half a bar, etc. The chords are represented as scale degrees in Roman numeral analysis. Roman numerals are used so the musician may understand the progression of the chords regardless of the key it is played in.\n\n+Eight-bar blues\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%V\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%IV\n\n\"Worried Life Blues\" (probably the most common eight bar blues progression):\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%IV\n\n\"Heartbreak Hotel\" (variation with the I on the first half):\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\n\nJ. B. Lenoir's \"Slow Down\" and \"Key to the Highway\" (variation with the V at bar 2):\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%V\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%IV\nI V I V\n\n\"Get a Haircut\" by George Thorogood (simple progression):\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\n\nJimmy Rogers' \"Walkin' By Myself\" (somewhat unorthodox example of the form):\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nIV V I V\n\nHowlin Wolf's version of \"Sitting on Top of the World\" is actually a 9 bar blues that adds an extra \"V\" chord at the end of the progression. The song uses movement between major and dominant 7th and major and minor fourth:\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%iv\nI V I IV I V\n\nThe first four bar progression used by Wolf is also used in Nina Simone's 1965 version of \"Trouble in Mind\", but with a more uptempo beat than \"Sitting on Top of the World\":\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%iv\nI VIii VI IVI V\n\nThe progression may be created by dropping the first four bars from the twelve-bar blues, as in the solo section of Bonnie Raitt's \"Love Me Like a Man\" and Buddy Guy's \"Mary Had a Little Lamb\":\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%I\nV IV I V\n\nThere are at least a few very successful songs using somewhat unusual chord progressions as well. For example, the song \"Ain't Nobody's Business\" as performed by Freddie King at least, uses a I–III–IV–iv progression in each of the first four bars. The same four bar progression is used by the band Radiohead to make up the bulk of the song \"Creep\".\nwidth=25%I\nwidth=25%III\nwidth=25%IV\nwidth=25%iv\nI vi ii V\n\nThe same chord progression can also be called a sixteen-bar blues, if each symbol above is taken to be a half note in or time. Examples are \"Nine Pound Hammer\" and Ray Charles's original instrumental \"Sweet Sixteen Bars\".\n\nBULLET::::- Sixteen-bar blues\nBULLET::::- Thirty-two-bar form\n"}
{"id": "9720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9720", "title": "Echidna (disambiguation)", "text": "Echidna (disambiguation)\n\nEchidnas are Australian egg-laying mammals also known as spiny anteaters.\n\nEchidna may also refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Echidna (mythology), monster in Greek mythology and namesake of the mammal\nBULLET::::- (42355) Typhon I Echidna, the natural satellite of the asteroid 42355 Typhon\nBULLET::::- ECHIDNA, high-resolution neutron powder diffractometer at Australia's research reactor OPAL\nBULLET::::- Echidna, character in the video game \"The Bouncer\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Echidna\" (fish) , a genus of moray eels\nBULLET::::- \"Echidna\" , a junior homonym referring to the mammals commonly known as echidnas\nBULLET::::- \"Echidna\" , junior homonym for a genus of African snakes now treated as \"Bitis\"\n\nBULLET::::- Knuckles the Echidna from the Sonic the Hedgehog video game series\nBULLET::::- Echidna Parass, fictional character from the \"Black Cat\" series\n"}
{"id": "9723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9723", "title": "Edward Waring", "text": "Edward Waring\n\nEdward Waring (15 August 1798) was a British mathematician. He entered Magdalene College, Cambridge as a sizar and became Senior wrangler in 1757. He was elected a Fellow of Magdalene and in 1760 Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, holding the chair until his death. He made the assertion known as Waring's problem without proof in his writings \"Meditationes Algebraicae\". Waring was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1763 and awarded the Copley Medal in 1784.\n\nWaring was the eldest son of John and Elizabeth Waring, a prosperous farming couple. He received his early education in Shrewsbury School under a Mr Hotchkin and was admitted as a sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 24 March 1753, being also Millington exhibitioner. His extraordinary talent for mathematics was recognised from his early years in Cambridge. In 1757 he graduated BA as senior wrangler and on 24 April 1758 was elected to a fellowship at Magdalene. He belonged to the Hyson Club, whose members included William Paley.\n\nAt the end of 1759 Waring published the first chapter of \"Miscellanea Analytica\". On 28 January the next year he was appointed Lucasian professor of mathematics, one of the highest positions in Cambridge. William Samuel Powell, then tutor in St John's College, Cambridge opposed Waring's election and instead supported the candidacy of William Ludlam. In the polemic with Powell, Waring was backed by John Wilson. In fact Waring was very young and did not hold the MA, necessary for qualifying for the Lucasian chair, but this was granted him in 1760 by royal mandate. In 1762 he published the full \"Miscellanea Analytica\", mainly devoted to the theory of numbers and algebraic equations. In 1763 he was elected to the Royal Society. He was awarded its Copley Medal in 1784 but withdrew from the society in 1795, after he had reached sixty, 'on account of [his] age'. Waring was also a member of the academies of sciences of Göttingen and Bologna. In 1767 he took an MD degree, but his activity in medicine was quite limited. He carried out dissections with Richard Watson, professor of chemistry and later bishop of Llandaff. From about 1770 he was physician at Addenbrooke's Hospital at Cambridge, and he also practised at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, where he lived for some years after 1767. His career as a physician was not very successful since he was seriously short-sighted and a very shy man.\n\nWaring had a younger brother, Humphrey, who obtained a fellowship at Magdalene in 1775. In 1776 Waring married Mary Oswell, sister of a draper in Shrewsbury; they moved to Shrewsbury and then retired to Plealey, 8 miles out of the town, where Waring owned an estate of 215 acres in 1797\n\nWaring wrote a number of papers in the \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\", dealing with the resolution of algebraic equations, number theory, series, approximation of roots, interpolation, the geometry of conic sections, and dynamics. The \"Meditationes Algebraicae\" (1770), where many of the results published in \"Miscellanea Analytica\" were reworked and expanded, was described by Joseph-Louis Lagrange as 'a work full of excellent researches'. In this work Waring published many theorems concerning the solution of algebraic equations which attracted the attention of continental mathematicians, but his best results are in number theory. Included in this work was the so-called Goldbach conjecture (every even integer is the sum of two primes), and also the following conjecture: every odd integer is a prime or the sum of three primes. Lagrange had proved that every positive integer is the sum of not more than four squares; Waring suggested that every positive integer is either a cube or the sum of not more than nine cubes. He also advanced the hypothesis that every positive integer is either a biquadrate (fourth power) or the sum of not more than nineteen biquadrates. These hypotheses form what is known as Waring's problem. He also published a theorem, due to his friend John Wilson, concerning prime numbers; it was later proven rigorously by Lagrange.\n\nIn \"Proprietates Algebraicarum Curvarum\" (1772) Waring reissued in a much revised form the first four chapters of the second part of \"Miscellanea Analytica\". He devoted himself to the classification of higher plane curves, improving results obtained by Isaac Newton, James Stirling, Leonhard Euler, and Gabriel Cramer. In 1794 he published a few copies of a philosophical work entitled \"An Essay on the Principles of Human Knowledge\", which were circulated among his friends.\n\nWaring's mathematical style is highly analytical. In fact he criticised those British mathematicians who adhered too strictly to geometry. It is indicative that he was one of the subscribers of John Landen's \"Residual Analysis\" (1764), one of the works in which the tradition of the Newtonian fluxional calculus was more severely criticised. In the preface of \"Meditationes Analyticae\" Waring showed a good knowledge of continental mathematicians such as Alexis Clairaut, Jean le Rond d'Alembert, and Euler. He lamented the fact that in Great Britain mathematics was cultivated with less interest than on the continent, and clearly desired to be considered as highly as the great names in continental mathematics—there is no doubt that he was reading their work at a level never reached by any other eighteenth-century British mathematician. Most notably, at the end of chapter three of \"Meditationes Analyticae\" Waring presents some partial fluxional equations (partial differential equations in Leibnizian terminology); such equations are a mathematical instrument of great importance in the study of continuous bodies which was almost completely neglected in Britain before Waring's researches. One of the most interesting results in \"Meditationes Analyticae\" is a test for the convergence of series generally attributed to d'Alembert (the 'ratio test'). The theory of convergence of series (the object of which is to establish when the summation of an infinite number of terms can be said to have a finite 'sum') was not much advanced in the eighteenth century.\n\nWaring's work was known both in Britain and on the continent, but it is difficult to evaluate his impact on the development of mathematics. His work on algebraic equations contained in \"Miscellanea Analytica\" was translated into Italian by Vincenzo Riccati in 1770. Waring's style is not systematic and his exposition is often obscure. It seems that he never lectured and did not habitually correspond with other mathematicians. After Jérôme Lalande in 1796 observed, in \"Notice sur la vie de Condorcet\", that in 1764 there was not a single first-rate analyst in England, Waring's reply, published after his death as 'Original letter of Dr Waring' in the \"Monthly Magazine\", stated that he had given 'somewhere between three and four hundred new propositions of one kind or another'.\n\nDuring his last years he sank into a deep religious melancholy, and a violent cold caused his death, in Plealey, on 15 August 1798. He was buried in the churchyard at Fitz, Shropshire.\n\nBULLET::::- Lagrange polynomial\nBULLET::::- Waring's prime number conjecture\n"}
{"id": "9724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9724", "title": "Eden Phillpotts", "text": "Eden Phillpotts\n\nEden Phillpotts (4 November 1862 – 29 December 1960) was an English author, poet and dramatist. He was born in Mount Abu, India, was educated in Plymouth, Devon, and worked as an insurance officer for 10 years before studying for the stage and eventually becoming a writer.\n\nEden Phillpotts was a great-nephew of Henry Phillpotts, Bishop of Exeter. His father Henry Phillpotts was a son of the bishop’s younger brother Thomas Phillpotts. James Surtees Phillpotts the reforming headmaster of Bedford School was his second cousin.\n\nEden Phillpotts was born on 4 November 1862 at Mount Abu in Rajasthan. His father Henry was an officer in the Indian Army, while his mother Adelaide was the daughter of an Indian Civil Service officer posted in Madras, George Jenkins Waters.\n\nHenry Phillpotts died in 1865, leaving Adelaide a widow at the age of 21. With her three small sons, of whom Eden was the eldest, she returned to England and settled in Plymouth.\n\nPhillpotts was educated at Mannamead School in Plymouth. At school he showed no signs of a literary bent. In 1879, aged 17, he left home and went to London to earn his living. He found a job as a clerk with the Sun Fire Office.\n\nPhillpotts’ ambition was to be an actor and he attended evening classes at a drama school for two years. He came to the conclusion that he would never make a name as an actor but might have success as a writer. In his spare time out of office hours he proceeded to create a stream of small works which he was able to sell. In due course he left the insurance company to concentrate on his writing, while also working part-time as assistant editor for the weekly Black and White Magazine.\n\nEden Phillpotts maintained a steady output of three or four books a year for the next half century. He produced poetry, short stories, novels, plays and mystery tales. Many of his novels were about rural Devon life and some of his plays were distinguished by their effective use of regional dialect.\n\nEden Phillpotts died at his home in Broadclyst near Exeter, Devon, on 29 December 1960.\n\nPhillpotts was for many years the President of the Dartmoor Preservation Association and cared passionately about the conservation of Dartmoor. He was an agnostic and a supporter of the Rationalist Press Association.\n\nPhillpotts was a friend of Agatha Christie, who was an admirer of his work and a regular visitor to his home. In her autobiography she expressed gratitude for his early advice on fiction writing and quoted some of it. Jorge Luis Borges was another Phillpotts admirer. Borges mentioned him numerous times, wrote at least two reviews of his novels, and included him in his \"Personal Library\", a collection of works selected to reflect his personal literary preferences.\n\nPhilpotts allegedly sexually abused his daughter Adelaide. In a 1976 interview for a book about her father, Adelaide described an incestuous \"relationship\" with him that she says lasted from the age of five or six until her early thirties, when he remarried. When she herself finally married at the age of 55 her father never forgave her, and never communicated with her again.\n\nPhillpotts wrote a great many books with a Dartmoor setting. One of his novels, \"Widecombe Fair\", inspired by an annual fair at the village of Widecombe-in-the-Moor, provided the scenario for his comic play \"The Farmer's Wife\" (1916). It went on to become a 1928 silent film of the same name, directed by Alfred Hitchcock. It was followed by a 1941 remake, directed by Norman Lee and Leslie Arliss.\n\nHe co-wrote several plays with his daughter Adelaide Phillpotts, \"The Farmer's Wife\" and \"Yellow Sands\" (1926); she later claimed their relationship was incestuous. Eden is best known as the author of many novels, plays and poems about Dartmoor. His Dartmoor cycle of 18 novels and two volumes of short stories still has many avid readers despite the fact that many titles are out of print.\n\nPhilpotts also wrote a series of novels, each set against the background of a different trade or industry. Titles include: \"Brunel's Tower\" (a pottery) and \"Storm in a Teacup\" (hand-papermaking). Among his other works is \"The Grey Room\", the plot of which is centered on a haunted room in an English manor house. He also wrote a number of other mystery novels, both under his own name and the pseudonym Harrington Hext. These include: \"The Thing at Their Heels\", \"The Red Redmaynes\", \"The Monster\", \"The Clue from the Stars\", and \"The Captain's Curio\". \"The Human Boy\" was a collection of schoolboy stories in the same genre as Rudyard Kipling's Stalky & Co., though different in mood and style. Late in his long writing career he wrote a few books of interest to science fiction and fantasy readers, the most noteworthy being \"Saurus\", which involves an alien reptilian observing human life.\n\nEric Partridge praised the immediacy and impact of his dialect writing.\n\nNovels\nBULLET::::- \"The End of a Life\" (1891)\nBULLET::::- \"Folly and Fresh Air\" (1891)\nBULLET::::- \"A Tiger's Club\" (1892)\nBULLET::::- \"A Deal with the Devil\" (1895)\nBULLET::::- \"Some Every-day Folks\" (1895)\nBULLET::::- \"My Laughing Philosopher\" (1896)\nBULLET::::- \"Down Dartmoor Way\" (1896)\nBULLET::::- \"Lying Prophets: A Novel\" (1897)\nBULLET::::- \"Children of the Mist\" (1898)\nBULLET::::- \"Sons of the Morning\" (1900)\nBULLET::::- \"The Good Red Earth\" (1901)\nBULLET::::- \"The River\" (1902)\nBULLET::::- \"Old Delabole\" (1903)\nBULLET::::- \"The Golden Fetich\" (1903)\nBULLET::::- \"The American Prisoner\" (1904)\nBULLET::::- \"The Farm of the Dagger\" (1904)\nBULLET::::- \"The Secret Woman\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"The Poacher's Wife\" (1906) AKA \"Daniel Sweetland\" (1906)\nBULLET::::- \"The Sinews of War: A Romance of London and the Sea\" (1906) with Arnold Bennett\nBULLET::::- \"Doubloons\" (1906) with Arnold Bennett\nBULLET::::- \"The Portreeve\" (1906)\nBULLET::::- \"The Whirlwind\" (1907)\nBULLET::::- \"The Mother\" (1908)\nBULLET::::- \"The Virgin in Judgment\" (1908) AKA \"A Fight to Finish\" (1911)\nBULLET::::- \"The Statue: A Story of International Intrigue and Mystery\" (1908) with Arnold Bennett\nBULLET::::- \"The Three Brothers\" (1909)\nBULLET::::- \"The Fun of the Fair\" (1909)\nBULLET::::- \"The Haven\" (1909)\nBULLET::::- \"The Flint Heart: A Fairy Story\" (1910)\nBULLET::::- \"The Thief of Virtue\" (1910)\nBULLET::::- \"The Beacon\" (1911)\nBULLET::::- \"Demeter's Daughter\" (1911)\nBULLET::::- \"The Three Knaves\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"The Forest on the Hill\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lovers: A Romance\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"Widecombe Fair\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"The Joy of Youth\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"The Old Time Before Them\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"Faith Tresilion (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Master of Merripit\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"Brunel's Tower\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"The Green Alleys: A Comedy\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"The Banks of Colne: (the Nursery)\" (1917)\nBULLET::::- \"The Girl and the Faun\" (1917)\nBULLET::::- \"The Spinners\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"From the Angle of Seventeen\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"Evander\" (1919)\nBULLET::::- \"Storm in a Teacup\" (1919)\nBULLET::::- \"Miser's Money\" (1920)\nBULLET::::- \"Eudocia\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"The Grey Room\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"The Bronze Venus\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"Orphan Dinah\" (1920)\nBULLET::::- \"The Red Redmaynes\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"Pan and the Twins\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"Number 87\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"The Thing at Their Heels\" (1923)\nBULLET::::- \"Cheat-the-boys; a Story of the Devonshire Orchards\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Redcliff\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"The Treasures of Typhon\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"The Lavender Dragon\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Who Killed Diana?\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Circé's Island\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"A Voice from the Dark\" (1925)\nBULLET::::- \"The Monster\" (1925)\nBULLET::::- \"George Westover\" (1926)\nBULLET::::- \"The Marylebone Miser\" (1926) AKA \"Jig-Saw\" (1926)\nBULLET::::- \"Cornish Droll: A Novel\" (1926)\nBULLET::::- \"The Miniature\" (1926)\nBULLET::::- \"The Jury\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"Arachne\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Children of Men\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"The Ring Fence\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Tryphena\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"The Apes\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"The Three Maidens\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"Alcyone (a Fairy Story)\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"\"Found Drowned\"\" (1931)\nBULLET::::- \"A Clue from the Stars\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"The Broom Squires\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Stormbury, A Story of Devon\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"The Captain's Curio\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Bred in the Bone\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Witch's Cauldron\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Nancy Owlett\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Minions of the Moon\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"Ned of the Caribbees\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"Portrait of a Gentleman\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"Mr. Digweed and Mr. Lumb: A Mystery Novel\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"The Oldest Inhabitant: A Comedy\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"A Close Call\" (1936)\nBULLET::::- \"The Owl of Athene\" (1936)\nBULLET::::- \"The White Camel: A Story of Arabia\" (1936)\nBULLET::::- \"The Anniversary Murder\" (1936)\nBULLET::::- \"The Wife of Elias: A Mystery Novel\" (1937)\nBULLET::::- \"Wood-nymph\" (1937)\nBULLET::::- \"Farce in Three Acts\" (1937)\nBULLET::::- \"Portrait of a Scoundrel\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Saurus\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Lycanthrope, the Mystery of Sir William Wolf\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Dark Horses\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Golden Island\" (1938)\nBULLET::::- \"Thorn in Her Flesh\" (1939)\nBULLET::::- \"Tabletop\" (1939) with Arnold Bennett\nBULLET::::- \"Monkshood\" (1939)\nBULLET::::- \"Chorus of Clowns\" (1940)\nBULLET::::- \"Goldcross\" (1940)\nBULLET::::- \"Awake Deborah!\" (1941)\nBULLET::::- \"Ghostwater\" (1941)\nBULLET::::- \"The Deed Without a Name\" (1942)\nBULLET::::- \"Pilgrims of the Night\" (1942)\nBULLET::::- \"A Museum Piece\" (1943)\nBULLET::::- \"Flower of the Gods\" (1943)\nBULLET::::- \"The Changeling\" (1944)\nBULLET::::- \"The Drums of Dombali\" (1945)\nBULLET::::- \"They Were Seven: (A Mystery)\" (1945)\nBULLET::::- \"Quartet\" (1946)\nBULLET::::- \"The Fall of the House of Heron\" (1948)\nBULLET::::- \"Address Unknown\" (1949)\nBULLET::::- \"The Waters of Walla\" (1950)\nBULLET::::- \"Through a Glass Darkly\" (1951)\nBULLET::::- \"George and Georgina: A Mystery Story\" (1952)\nBULLET::::- \"His Brother's Keeper\" (1953)\nBULLET::::- \"The Widow Garland\" (1955)\nBULLET::::- \"Connie Woodland\" (1956)\nBULLET::::- \"Giglet Market\" (1957)\nBULLET::::- \"There Was an Old Man\" (1959)\n\nShort Fiction Books\nBULLET::::- \"My Adventure in the Flying Scotsman; a Romance of London and North-Western Railway Shares\" (1888)\nBULLET::::- \"The Human Boy\" (1899)\nBULLET::::- \"Loup-garou!\" (1899)\nBULLET::::- \"Summer Clouds and Other Stories\" (1893)\nBULLET::::- \"Fancy Free\" (1901)\nBULLET::::- \"The Striking Hours\" (1901)\nBULLET::::- \"The Transit of the Red Dragon: And Other Tales\" (1903)\nBULLET::::- \"Knock at a Venture\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"The Unlucky Number\" (1906)\nBULLET::::- \"The Folk Afield\" (1907)\nBULLET::::- \"Tales of the Tenements\" (1910)\nBULLET::::- \"The Judge's Chair\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Human Boy and the War\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"Chronicles of St. Tid\" (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"Black, White, and Brindled\" (1923)\nBULLET::::- \"Up Hill, Down Dale: A Volume of Short Stories\" (1925)\nBULLET::::- \"Peacock House and Other Mysteries\" (1926)\nBULLET::::- \"It happened Like That, a New Volume of Short Stories\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Brother Man\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"The Torch and Other Tales\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"Cherry Gambol and Other Stories\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"They Could Do No Other: A Volume of Stories\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Once upon a Time\" (1936)\nBULLET::::- \"The Hidden Hand\" (1952)\n\nPoetry\nBULLET::::- \"Up-Along and Down-Along\" (1905)\nBULLET::::- \"Wild Fruit\" (1911)\nBULLET::::- \"The Iscariot\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"Delight and Other Poems\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"Plain Song\" (1917)\nBULLET::::- \"A Shadow Passes'. [Observations and Poems] (1918)\nBULLET::::- \"As the Wind Blows\" (1920)\nBULLET::::- \"A Dish of Apples\" (1921)\nBULLET::::- \"Pixies' Plot\" (1922)\nBULLET::::- \"Thoughts in Prose and Verse\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Cherry-Stones\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"A Harvesting\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Brother Beast\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Goodwill\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"For Remembrance\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"A Hundred Sonnets\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"A Hundred Lyrics\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"Becoming\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"Song of a Sailor Man: A Narrative Poem\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"Sonnets from Nature\" (1935)\nBULLET::::- \"A Dartmoor Village\" (1937)\nBULLET::::- \"Miniatures\" (1942)\nBULLET::::- \"The Enchanted Wood\" (1948)\nBULLET::::- \"One Thing and Another\" [Essays and poems.] (1954)\n\nPlays\nBULLET::::- \"The Prude's Progress: A Comedy\" with Jerome K. Jerome (1895)\nBULLET::::- \"A Golden Wedding: An Original Comedy in One Act\" (1899)\nBULLET::::- \"A Breezy Morning\" (1904)\nBULLET::::- \"A Pair of Knickerbockers\" (1900)\nBULLET::::- \"Curtain Raisers\" (1912)\nBULLET::::- \"The Shadow; A Play in Three Acts\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"The Mother: A Play in Four Acts\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Secret Woman; A Play in Five Acts\" (1914)\nBULLET::::- \"The Angel in the House: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"The Farmer's Wife\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"Arachne; A Play\" (1920) By Adelaide Eden Phillpotts\nBULLET::::- \"St. George and the Dragons: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1919) AKA *\"The bishop's night out\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"The Market-Money. A Play in One Act\" (1923)\nBULLET::::- \"Bed Rock: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1924)\nBULLET::::- \"Devonshire Cream: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1925)\nBULLET::::- \"A Comedy Royal\" (1925) Dramatization of \"Eudocia (1921)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Yellow Sands\" (1926)\nBULLET::::- \"The Blue Comet: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1927)\nBULLET::::- \"The Runaways: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Three Short Plays: The Market-money; Something to Talk about; The Purple Bedroom\" (1928)\nBULLET::::- \"Buy a Broom: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1929)\nBULLET::::- \"Jane's Legacy: A Folk Play in Three Acts\" (1931)\nBULLET::::- \"The Good Old Days: A Comedy in Three Acts\" (1932) with his daughter\nBULLET::::- \"Bert: A Play in One Act\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"A Cup of Happiness: A Comedy\" (1933)\nBULLET::::- \"At the 'bus-stop: A Duologue for Two Women\" (1943)\nBULLET::::- \"The Orange Orchard\" (1951) Based on \"The Waters of Walla\"\n\nNonfiction\nBULLET::::- \"In Sugar-Cane Land\" (1890)\nBULLET::::- \"My Garden\" (1906)\nBULLET::::- \"Dance of the Months.\" [Sketches of Dartmoor and poems.] (1911)\nBULLET::::- \"My Shrubs\" (1915)\nBULLET::::- \"My Devon Year\" (1916)\nBULLET::::- \"One Hundred Pictures from Eden Phillpotts / Selected by L.H. Brewitt\" (1919)\nBULLET::::- \"A West Country Pilgrimage\" (1920) [Essays and verse.]\nBULLET::::- \"A West Country Sketch Book\" (1928) Essays from \"Dance of the Months\" and \"A West Country Pilgrimage\" with one new essay.\nBULLET::::- \"Essays in Little\" (1931)\nBULLET::::- \"Handmade Paper: Its Method of Manufacture as Described in the Novel \"Storm in a Teacup\"\" (1932)\nBULLET::::- \"A Year with Bisshe-Bantam\" (1934)\nBULLET::::- \"A Mixed Grill\" (1940) Essays.\nBULLET::::- \"From the Angle of 88\" (1951)\nBULLET::::- \"Selected Letters\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"Three plays: The shadows; The mother; The secret woman\" (1913)\nBULLET::::- \"Circe's Island and The Girl & The Faun\" (1925)\nBULLET::::- \"The Complete Human Boy. Comprising \"The Human Boy,\" \"The Human Boy Again,\" \"The Human Boy and the War,\" \"The Human Boy's Diary,\" \"From the Angle of Seventeen,\" Etc.\" (1930)\nBULLET::::- \"West Country Plays\" (1933) [\"Buy a Broom\" and \"A Cup of Happiness\".]\nBULLET::::- \"The Book of Avis: A Trilogy Comprising Bred in the Bone, Witch's Cauldron, A Shadow Passes\" [1936]\n\nBULLET::::- The New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature, George Watson, Ian R. Willison CUP Archive, 1987\n\nBULLET::::- Eden Phillpotts papers, MSS 1458 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Brigham Young University\n"}
{"id": "9725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9725", "title": "Ecuador–United States relations", "text": "Ecuador–United States relations\n\nEcuador and the United States maintained close ties based on mutual interests in maintaining democratic institutions; combating cannabis and cocaine; building trade, investment, and financial ties; cooperating in fostering Ecuador's economic development; and participating in inter-American organizations. Ties are further strengthened by the presence of an estimated 150,000-200,000 Ecuadorians living in the United States and by 24,000 U.S. citizens visiting Ecuador annually, and by approximately 15,000 U.S. citizens residing in Ecuador. The United States assists Ecuador's economic development directly through the Agency for International Development (USAID) program in Ecuador and through multilateral organizations such as the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank. In addition, the U.S. Peace Corps operates a sizable program in Ecuador. More than 100 U.S. companies are doing business in Ecuador.\nRelations between the two nations have been strained following Julian Assange's bid to seek political asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy in London following repeated claims that the US government was pursuing his extradition due to his work with Wikileaks.\n\nBoth nations are signatories of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (the \"Rio Treaty\") of 1947, the Western Hemisphere's regional mutual security treaty. Ecuador shares U.S. concern over increasing narcotrafficking and international terrorism and has energetically condemned terrorist actions, whether directed against government officials or private citizens. The government has maintained Ecuador virtually free of coca production since the mid-1980s and is working to combat money laundering and the transshipment of drugs and chemicals essential to the processing of cocaine.\n\nEcuador and the U.S. agreed in 1999 to a 10-year arrangement whereby U.S. military surveillance aircraft could use the airbase at Manta, Ecuador, as a \"Forward Operating Location\" to detect drug trafficking flights through the region. The arrangement expired in 2009; former president Rafael Correa vowed not to renew it, and since then the Ecuador has not had any foreign military facilities in the country.\n\nIn fisheries issues, the United States claims jurisdiction for the management of coastal fisheries up to 200 mile (370 km) from its coast, but excludes highly migratory species; Ecuador, on the other hand, claims a 200-mile (370-km) territorial sea, and imposes license fees and fines on foreign fishing vessels in the area, making no exceptions for catches of migratory species. In the early 1970s, Ecuador seized about 100 foreign-flag vessels (many of them U.S.) and collected fees and fines of more than $6 million. After a drop-off in such seizures for some years, several U.S. tuna boats were again detained and seized in 1980 and 1981.\n\nThe U.S. Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act then triggered an automatic prohibition of U.S. imports of tuna products from Ecuador. The prohibition was lifted in 1983, and although fundamental differences between U.S. and Ecuadorian legislation still exist, there is no current conflict. During the period that has elapsed since seizures which triggered the tuna import ban, successive Ecuadorian governments have declared their willingness to explore possible solutions to this problem with mutual respect for longstanding positions and principles of both sides. The election of Rafael Correa in October 2006, has strained relations between the two countries and relations have since been fraught with tension. Rafael Correa is quite critical of U.S. foreign policy.\n\nIn April 2011, relations between Ecuador and the United States soured particularly after Ecuador expelled the U.S. ambassador after a leaked diplomatic cable was shown accusing president Correa of knowingly ignoring police corruption. In reciprocation, the Ecuadorian ambassador Luis Gallegos was expelled from the United States.\n\nIn 2013, when Ecuador unilaterally pulled out of a preferential trade pact with the United States over claiming the U.S. used it as blackmail in regards to the asylum request of Edward Snowden, relations between Ecuador and the United States reached an all-time low. The pact offered Ecuador 23 million USD, which it offered to the U.S. for human rights training. Tariff free imports had been offered to Ecuador in exchange for drug elimination efforts.\n\nJulian Assange applied for Ecuadorian citizenship on 16 September 2017, which Ecuador granted on 12 December 2017. However, this development was not announced until 25 January 2018.\n\nIn April 2019, Assange was arrested by the Metropolitan Police on orders from the Embassy Staff. President of Ecuador, Lenin Moreno, stated that he had 'violated the terms of his asylum'. British Foreign Secretary, Jeremy Hunt stated that the British and Ecuadorian governments had been co-operating since Moreno's inauguration and aimed to resolve the situation. Assange is currently pending trial for extradition to the United States.\n\nAmerican schools in Ecuador:\nBULLET::::- Colegio Americano de Quito\nBULLET::::- Inter-American Academy of Guayaquil\n\nBULLET::::- United States and South and Central America\n\nBULLET::::- History of Ecuador - United States relations\nBULLET::::- - U.S. State Department Fact Sheet on U.S. Ecuador relations\n"}
{"id": "9727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9727", "title": "Eight-ball", "text": "Eight-ball\n\nEight-ball (also spelled 8-ball or eightball, and sometimes called solids and stripes, spots and stripes in the United Kingdom or highs and lows in Japan) is a pool (pocket billiards) game popular in much of the world, and the subject of international professional and amateur competition. Played on a pool table with six pockets, the game is so universally known in some countries that beginners are often unaware of other pool games and believe the word \"pool\" itself refers to eight-ball. The game has numerous variations, mostly regional. Standard eight-ball is the second most competitive professional pool game, after nine-ball, and for the last several decades ahead of straight pool. Unlike nine-ball, ten-ball, or seven-ball where the game's name reflects the number of object balls used, eight-ball uses all fifteen object balls.\n\nEight-ball is played with cue sticks and sixteen balls: a , and fifteen s consisting of seven striped balls, seven solid-colored balls and the black 8 ball. After the balls are scattered with a , the players are assigned either the group of solid balls or the stripes once a ball from a particular group is legally pocketed. The ultimate object of the game is to legally pocket the eight ball in a called pocket, which can only be done after all of the balls from a player's assigned group have been cleared from the table. There are various different rules in the game for example if a player takes the final shot and putts the 8 ball and white ball at the same time the other player wins the game.\n\nThe game of eight-ball is derived from an earlier game invented around 1900 (first recorded in 1908) in the United States and initially popularized under the name \"B.B.C. Co. Pool\" (a name that was still in use as late as 1925) by the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Company. This forerunner game was played with seven and seven s, a , and the cue ball. Today, numbered and are preferred in most of the world, though the British-style offshoot, blackball, uses the traditional colors (as did early televised \"casino\" tournaments in the United States). The game had relatively simple rules compared to today and was not added (under any name) to an official rule book (i.e., one published by a national or international sport governing body) until 1940.\n\nAmerican-style eight-ball rules are played around the world by professionals, and in many amateur leagues. Nevertheless, the rules for eight-ball may be the most contested of any billiard game. There are several competing sets of \"official\" rules. The non-profit World Pool-Billiard Association (WPA) – with national affiliates around the world, some of which long pre-date the WPA, such as the Billiard Congress of America (BCA) – promulgates standardized rules as \"Pool Billiards – The Rules of Play\" for amateur and professional play.\n\nMeanwhile, many amateur leagues – such as the American Poolplayers Association (APA) / Canadian Poolplayers Association (CPA), the Valley National Eight-ball Association (VNEA, international in scope despite its historic name) and the BCA Pool League (BCAPL) – use their own rulesets; most of these are at least loosely based on the WPA/BCA version. Millions of individuals play informally, using informal house rules which vary not only from area to area but even from venue to venue (\"house rules\"). \n\nThe regulation size of the table's playing surface is , though exact dimensions may vary slightly by manufacturer. Some leagues and tournaments using the World Standardized Rules may allow smaller sizes, down to . Early 20th-century models are occasionally also still used. WPA professional competition generally employs regulation tables, while the amateur league championships of various leagues, including ACS, BCAPL, VNEA, and APA, use the seven-foot tables in order to fit more of them into the hosting venue.\n\nThere are seven numbered 1 through 7, seven numbered 9 through 15, an , and a . The balls are usually colored as follows:\nBULLET::::- 1 and 9: yellow\nBULLET::::- 2 and 10: blue\nBULLET::::- 3 and 11: red\nBULLET::::- 4 and 12: purple (TV: pink)\nBULLET::::- 5 and 13: orange\nBULLET::::- 6 and 14: green\nBULLET::::- 7 and 15: maroon (TV: tan)\nBULLET::::- 8: black\nBULLET::::- Cue: white\n\nTo start the game, the s are placed in a triangular rack. The base of the rack is parallel to the (the short end of the pool table) and positioned so the apex ball of the rack is located on the . The balls in the rack are ideally placed so that they are all in contact with one another; this is accomplished by pressing the balls together toward the apex ball. The order of the balls should be random, with the exceptions of the 8 ball, which must be placed in the center of the rack (i.e., the middle of the third row), and the two back corner balls, one of which must be a stripe and the other a solid. The cue ball is placed anywhere the breaker desires behind the . \n\nOne person is chosen by some predetermined method (e.g., coin toss, , or win or loss of previous game or match) to shoot first, using the cue ball to the object-ball rack apart. In most leagues it is the breaker's opponent who racks the balls, but in some, players break their own racks. If the breaker fails to make a successful break—usually defined as at least four balls hitting cushions or an object ball being pocketed—then the opponent can opt either to play from the current position or to call for a and either re-break or have the original breaker repeat the break.\nIf the 8 ball is pocketed on the break, then the breaker can choose either to the 8 ball and play from the current position or to re-rack and re-break; but if the cue ball is also pocketed on the break then the opponent is the one who has the choice: either to re-spot the 8 ball and shoot with behind the , accepting the current position, or to re-break or have the breaker re-break. \n\nA player (or team) continues to shoot until committing a or failing to legally pocket an object ball (whether or not); thereupon it is the turn of the opposing players. Play alternates in this manner for the remainder of the game. Following a foul, the incoming player has anywhere on the table, unless the foul occurred on the break shot, as noted previously.\nThe table is \"open\" at the start of the game, meaning that either player may shoot at any ball. It remains open until one player legally pockets one or more object balls (excluding the 8) after the break. That player is assigned the \"group\", or \"suit\", of the pocketed ball – 1–7 (solids), or 9–15 (stripes) – and the other suit is assigned to the opponent. Balls pocketed on the break, or as the result of a foul while the table is still open, are not used to assign the suits. If a player pockets balls from both suits on an open table, they may claim either suit as their own.\n\nOnce the suits are assigned, they remain fixed throughout the game. If any balls from a player's suit are on the table, the player must hit one of them first on every shot; otherwise a foul is called and the turn ends. After all balls from the suit have been pocketed, the player's target becomes the 8 for the remainder of the game.\n\nOnce all of a player's (or team's) group of object balls are pocketed, the player attempts to sink the 8 ball. In order to win the game the player first designates which pocket the 8 ball will be pocketed into and then successfully pockets the 8 ball into that pocket. If the player knocks the 8 ball off the table then the player loses the game. If the player pockets the 8 ball and commits a foul or pockets it into another pocket than the one designated, then the player loses the game. \"(For regional amateur variations, such as fouling while trying to pocket the 8 ball resulting in instant loss despite not pocketing the 8 ball, see \"Informal rule variations\", below.)\" Otherwise (i.e., if the 8 ball is neither pocketed nor knocked off the table) the shooter's turn is simply over, even if a foul occurs. In short, a World Standardized Rules game of eight-ball, like a game of nine-ball, is not over until the \"\" is no longer on the table. This rule may be unfamiliar to some bar and league (e.g., APA) players, for whom such a foul normally means losing the game. The rule has been increasingly adopted by amateur leagues, including VNEA beginning with the season, BCAPL, and USAPL.\n\nAny of the following results in a player winning the game:\nBULLET::::- The player legally pockets the 8 ball into a designated pocket, after all of that player's object balls have been pocketed\nBULLET::::- The opposing player illegally pockets the 8 ball (e.g., before clearing all of that player's object balls, does so on the same shot as the last such object ball, or sinks the 8 ball into a pocket other than the one that was designated, or commits any foul, including scratching the cue ball into a pocket or knocking it off the table, while pocketing the 8 ball)\nBULLET::::- However, if you scratch after sinking your final designated ball (stripe or solid), you do not lose immediately.\nBULLET::::- The opposing player knocks the 8 ball off the table\nBecause of these rules, it's actually possible for a game to end with only one of the players having shot.\n\nBULLET::::- The shooter fails to strike one of their own object balls (or the 8 ball, if all of said object balls are already pocketed) with the cue ball, before other balls (if any) are contacted by the cue ball. This excludes \"\" shots, where the cue ball strikes one of the shooter's and one of the opponent's object balls simultaneously.\nBULLET::::- No ball comes into contact with a cushion or is pocketed, after legal cue ball contact with the (first) object ball (or 8 ball, if shooting for the 8).\nBULLET::::- If an attempt is made to pocket a ball, and the ball hits the pocket, bounces out and lands on the ground, the ball is placed in the pocket and the game continues.\nBULLET::::- The shooter does not have at least one foot on the floor (this requirement may be waived if the shooter has a relevant disability, or the venue has not provided a ).\nBULLET::::- The cue ball is pocketed.\nBULLET::::- The cue ball is shot before all balls have come to a complete stop from the previous shot.\nBULLET::::- The cue ball does not strike any ball.\nBULLET::::- The cue ball is struck more than once during a shot\nBULLET::::- The cue ball is jumped entirely or partially over an obstructing ball with an illegal jump shot that scoops under the cue ball.\nBULLET::::- The cue ball is clearly pushed (shoved slowly, rather than struck), with the cue tip remaining in contact with it more than momentarily.\nBULLET::::- The shooter touches the cue ball with something other than the tip of the cue.\nBULLET::::- The shooter touches any ball (with body, clothing or equipment), other than as necessary to move the cue ball when the player has .\nBULLET::::- The shooter knocks a ball off the table.\nBULLET::::- The shooter has shot out-of-turn.\nBULLET::::- The shooter has shot the black ball without designating the pot prior to opposite team members or the match referee, in advance.\nBULLET::::- The shooter deliberately pockets the opponents balls while shooting 8-ball.\nBULLET::::- On the break shot, no balls are pocketed and fewer than four balls reach the cushions (in which case the incoming player can demand a re-rack and take the break or force the original breaker to re-break, or may take ball-in-hand behind the and shoot the balls as they lie)\nIf these fouls are made, the ball can be placed anywhere on the table to prevent a player from making a purposeful foul to disadvantage the other player.\n\nIn Canada there are similar levels and types of variation as in the US \"(see below)\". One particularly common feature of Canadian bar pool is the \"hooked yourself on the eight\" rule, failure to hit the 8 ball when one is shooting for the 8 is a loss of game one was hooked (ed) by one's opponent. Even then, if for the 8 ball, as opposed to \"just a shot\" (i.e., a ), failure to hit the 8 ball is an instant loss. Pocketing an opponent's while shooting for the 8, even if the shot was otherwise legal, is also a game-loser often even in local league play. It is also an automatic loss if a player es while shooting for the 8 regardless of whether the eight ball is pocketed or not. \"\" shots, where the appears to simultaneously strike a legal and an opponent's object balls, are generally considered legal shots in informal games, as long as they are called as split shots, and the hit is in fact simultaneous to the human eye. A further Canadian bar-pool rule is that a shot is a -ending (but not ) foul if one pockets one's called shot but also pockets another ball incidentally, even if it is one's own (however, if that secondary pocketing was also called, the shot is legal, regardless of the order in which the balls were dropped). Finally, it is also a visit-ending foul if the cue ball touches any ball that is ultimately pocketed more than once on the same shot (this is colloquially known as a \"double kiss\"), even if the player called for the ball to enter that particular pocket on the shot.\nThe last black ball has just three chances to select pocket position.\n\nIf a scratch or other foul occurs while playing the 8 ball, as long as the opponent has at least one ball of his or her group present on the table and the 8 ball is not pocketed, the game continues. In both cases of this foul-on-the-8 situation, the opponent gets two chances (regardless of whether any balls are potted on the first chance) before the fouling player may shoot again. In these circumstances, treatment of the cue ball depends on the type of foul. If the cue ball had been scratched, the cue ball must be placed behind the break line. If it was some other foul which had occurred while playing the 8 ball, the cue ball is not moved. If the incoming opponent scratches, the player who originally fouled now receives two chances. When the 8 ball is the only ball on the table, any kind of foul ends the game, and the opponent of the fouling player wins.\n\nThe ed balls are often loose, crooked or not exactly on the (it is not considered to matter), and the rack itself may be made of rubber, and flexible, making a tight rack physically impossible to achieve. Other than the 8 ball, other balls may be placed far more randomly than players in other areas would tolerate, with large clusters of solids together, and stripes with each other.\n\nIn most of Latin America, including Mexico, shots are un-ed, as in British pool (i.e., shots count, a concept foreign to most American players other than APA league members). In many if not most areas (Brazil being an exception), fouls result in behind the only, as in American bar pool (allowing for intentional scratches that leave the opponent a very difficult shot if all opponent balls are \"in the \", behind the headstring).\n\nA common Latin American variant of \"\" is that each player is allowed either one (or even two) cue-ball scratches when shooting for the 8, which be pocketed in the same pocket as the shooter's final object ball. Such fouls simply end the shooter's turn at the table and give the opponent ball-in-hand behind the head string; only the second (or third, respectively) such scratch is a loss of game (though scratching the 8 ball itself off the table or into the wrong pocket is an instant loss). This version is common even in US pool bars that are frequented by recent Latino immigrants. This requirement has a profound effect upon game strategy – it is effectively 5 times harder to – and most North American (and British, etc.) players are completely unprepared for it, unless they are last-pocket players. Players must be very mindful what they do with their last few balls, and common failure to get that allows for the last object-ball shot to set the player up for an easy 8 ball shot into the same pocket leads to long games with many , and shots on the 8.\n\nIn some parts of Latin America, especially South America, the 1 ball often must be pocketed in the side pocket on the right-hand side of the table (relative to the end of the table one breaks from), and the 15 ball must be pocketed in the left side pocket. This rule probably developed to make it harder to run out after the first shot. Position play takes a larger role in this variation, and a player's strategy must necessarily initially revolve around getting the 1 or 15 in while preventing this opponent from doing likewise. When racking the balls for this variation, the 1 and 15 balls are placed behind the 8 ball at the center of the rack, the 1 ball on the left and the 15 ball on the right (from the perspective). Latino last-pocket is virtually the only version of eight-ball played in Mexico, other than in the Mexico–United States border area. Another variant in Latin America is that the only ball-in-hand (behind the head string) foul is ing the cue ball into a pocket; other fouls are simply loss-of-turn.\n\nIn Mexico, a minority of players rack with the 8 ball rather than the apex ball on the foot spot, a trait in common with British-style blackball/8-ball pool. Pocketing the 8 ball on the shot is an instant win, as it usually is in American bar pool, but is not in the international rules. Because Mexican pool, except near the US border, is almost always played on open-pocket pool-hall-style tables, rather than coin-operated tables that trap object balls, any of one's own balls pocketed on a foul are ted (but how they are spotted varies widely, with the balls often placed against the on the , and adjacent to nearby if more than one must be spotted, instead of on the foot spot, but sometimes even to the at diamonds, due to the influence of coyote, a Mexican variant of Chicago; foot-spot spotting is neither common nor uncommon.) Pool itself is not considered a very serious game in the country other than in the northern states; in most of Mexico, three-cushion billiards is the serious game, while pool is mostly played by youths, by groups of friends (including many young women) as a bar game to pass the time, and by older working-class men as an after-work activity. In many recreation halls, dominoes is more popular than pool. In Mexico, there is a legend of a pool player called El Motore. Nobody knows his real identity, only legends of him pocketing all the balls blind folded 20 times in a row.\n\nIn many bars in Brazil (and not an official rule), a foul is generally punished by pocketing the lowest-numbered ball of the opponent. In that case, the cue ball remains where it stopped, as ball-in-hand is not commonly used. Additionally, in the case of scratching the cue ball, the opponent places the cue ball in the , on the , or most commonly anywhere inside , indicating some British snooker or blackball influence.\n\nNew Zealand eight-ball in many respects is closer to British blackball, but with numbered balls being used. is typically drawn on the table above the (as on a snooker table) and the shooting player is required to place the cue ball within it on the and after an opponent . The shooting player can shoot the ball in any direction from within the \"D\". If no \"D\" is drawn on the table then the \"forward play\" rule is followed: After a scratch, the player with ball-in-hand must shoot forward of the baulk line (i.e., towards the rack area, even if all legal balls are behind the baulk line). The \"\" of blackball may or may not be followed; this depends on individual players and pubs.\n\nThe \"nomination\" rule is unique to New Zealand: A player ed on the 8 ball may nominate one of the opponent's balls (if any remain) to hit as an alternative, legal \"\". However, the shooter is not permitted to pot (pocket) such a nominated ball – doing so results in a loss of game.\n\nIn North African countries (as in Latin America, but reversed), both the 1 and 15 balls must be pocketed in the sides, the 15 on the right and 1 on the left (relative to the end of the table one breaks from). The North African version of the informal game is always played \"\". is not taken on fouls, and \"\" is a very common rule in addition to last-pocket.\n\nDuring game play, if the player fails to hit a ball of the designated group, or hits the opponent's ball with the cue ball, then the opponent receives 2 shots unless the opponent has pocketed all his or her balls and only the 8 ball remains, in which case the opponent will only get one shot. In case of such a foul, the game continues with the player playing the cue ball at the place where it stopped. If a scratch occurs, then the opponent plays ball-in-hand, but is only allowed to place it anywhere in the D. However, that player may shoot the cue ball in any direction. Knocking a ball (apart from the cue ball) off the table carries no penalty. Instead, the misplaced ball is returned to its original place and the game continues. Player should call the pocket for the 8th ball and the shot should be clean such as there is no kisses, caroms or combinations unless it is agreed prior to the game.\n\nPool is popularly played in two forms. Traditionally it is played with smaller balls than the internationally standardized version, on a 4.5 by 7 foot pub-sized table, with differently shaped, smaller pockets. The is also slightly smaller than the . \"American-style\" pool tables are also common in the UK, especially for nine-ball competition; the tables themselves are often referred to as \"nine-ball tables\", with that game being played only rarely on the more common, smaller traditional British-style tables. The two most common competitive rule sets used on the traditional tables are WEPF world rules (replacing old EPA rules), and WPA world-standardized blackball rules. Most amateurs play \"pub rules\", meaning the local rule variation established at that venue.\n\nUnlike the American variation of Spots and Stripes, British Pool is primarily played using two sets of colours, reds and yellows along with the standard black 8-ball and white cueball. These balls are two inches in diameter with the cue ball being either the same size or slightly smaller at one inch and 7/8, Aramith are the most popular brand of Pool balls used in Great Britain. English Pool is most often played using both sets of standardized competitive rule sets have features to which some amateur pub players object. As one example, WEPF rules permit intentional fouls. Despite opponents being awarded two visits for a standard foul in pub pool, for one to cause an intentional foul or to not try to play a legal shot is seen as unsportsmanlike (as it is in pub/bar pool in the US and many other places). As another example, in WPA rules, rather than after a foul, the incoming player gets one and then play returns to normal. As most pub rules are based around old EPA rules, in which two visits are awarded (rather than a free shot) amateurs are often unhappy with this difference in blackball, although it is in no way as offensive as intentional fouls which are illegal in blackball and result in .\n\nNot all differences are controversial. Both WEPF and WPA require a player to either pot on their visit, or drive any ball, including the white, into a cushion after hitting a legal object ball, or else they give a foul. Although the precise specifics of the rule are a mouthful, many amateur players find the it acceptable. It is primarily as a way to prevent \"tucking up\", whereby a player does not attempt to pot and instead just rolls up to their object ball to use it to snooker their opponent; tucking up is seen as unsporting, so being forced to play harder shots is quite welcomed.\n\nThere are several sets of rules which use a combination of many others in an attempt to find a balance between WPA rules, which are seen as more aggressive, and WEPF rules which are often referred to, pejoratively, as \"chess\" because of the amount of play they encourage, which can drag a game out.\n\nMost commonly of all in American – sometimes called straight eight by its aficionados, and usually played on coin-operated, smaller tables – a requirement may be that all shots be . This typically includes what balls and bank/kick cushions will be involved in the shot, and in what order. The shot considered a turn-ending (but not ball-in-hand) foul if not executed precisely as planned, but a loss of game if the \"foul\" shot pocketed the 8 ball. Contrariwise, some Americans hold that nothing other than the 8 ball has to be called in any way (i.e., that \"\" counts).\n\nIn informal amateur play in most areas, the table will only be considered open if no balls were pocketed, or an equal number of stripes and solids were pocketed, or the cue ball was ed (into a pocket or off the table), on the ; if an odd number of balls were legally pocketed, such as one solid and two stripes, or no solids and one stripe, the breaker must shoot the balls that were pocketed in the greatest quantity (stripes in these examples). The table is almost never considered so as for it to be legal to use a ball of the opposite , much less the 8 ball, as the first ball in a combination shot while the table is open (despite this being perfectly legal in WPA World Standardized and many US league rules). In non- it is fairly common for a foul break in which the rack was not struck at all (e.g., due to a ) to be re-shot by the original breaker.\n\nFouls, in common bar pool, that are not cue-ball scratches generally only cause loss of turn, with cue ball left in place (even if it is ed). Even in the case of a scratch, this only results in . Regionally, there is a great deal of bar pool variation in the handling of fouls while shooting at or pocketing the 8 ball. In some cases any foul while shooting at but not pocketing the 8 is a loss of game, in others only a foul while otherwise successfully pocketing the 8, and in yet others only certain fouls, such as also sinking an opponent's ball and the 8 ball on the same shot, or hitting the 8 then cue-ball scratching, are game-losing.\n\nWhat is considered a foul further diverges from established, published rulesets. Scoop-under s are usually considered valid (these are fouls in WPA and most league rules, as they are s, though few players realize it). When a cue ball is frozen or near-frozen to an object ball, shooting it dead-on, in line with both balls, is a foul in most formal rulesets (as another kind of double-hit), but is generally tolerated in bar pool.\n\nOther US bar pool oddities varying from area to area include: Knocking the cue ball off the table on the break may be an instant loss; scratching on the break may be an instant loss; pocketing the 8 ball on the break (without scratching) may be either an instant win or instant loss (the latter being a rare variant); no safeties may be allowed at all – all shots may be required to be at least vaguely plausible attempts to pocket a legal ball; all jump shots may be banned; shots may be banned; it may be illegal to use the 8 ball in any way in combinations, caroms, or kisses; the 8 ball may be required to be pocketed \"cleanly\" in the sense of no contact with other object balls (even if the shot can be accurately called); failure to hit one of one's own object balls (or the 8 if shooting for the 8) may be considered a \"table scratch\" that gives the opponent a shot in-hand from behind the head string; failure to hit the 8 if shooting for the 8 may be a loss of game; and a \"split\" shot, where the cue ball appears to simultaneously strike a legal ball and an opponent's object ball, may be considered a legal shot, as long as it is called as a split shot, and the hit is simultaneous to the naked eye.\n\n\"\" is a common American amateur variation, especially on coin-operated (because it usually makes the game last longer), in which the 8 ball must be off one or more (s may also qualify in some versions), into the ; either player may suggest bank-the-eight at any time before or during the game, and the other may accept or refuse; all other rules apply as usual. Playing bank-the-eight may be considered rude if other players are waiting for a turn at the table.\n\nA similarly motivated variant is \"\", in which the 8 ball must be pocketed in the same pocket as the shooting player's last object ball (i.e., each player may be said to eventually \"own\" a pocket in which their 8 ball shot must be played if they have already run out their ); all other rules apply as usual. This variant is also popular in Mexico.\n\nDue probably to the influence of nine-ball, in which the 1 ball \"must\" be the apex ball of the rack, most American bar players traditionally rack a game of eight-ball with the 1 ball in this position. Racking is also typically done solid-stripe-solid-stripe-solid along the two sides of the rack, resulting in solids being on all three corners. This is not a legal rack in World Standardized Rules, nor any other notable league ruleset other than APA.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, eight-ball pool (and its internationally standardized variant blackball) has evolved into an overall rather different game, influenced by English billiards and snooker, and has become popular in amateur competition in Britain, Ireland, Australia, and some other countries. As with American-style eight-ball, there are multiple competing standards bodies that have issued international rules. Aside from using unnumbered object balls (except for the 8), UK-style tables have pockets just larger than the balls. More than one type of is typically used. Most tables do not have s on the rails, and consequently the racking spot is on the not at the second-diamond . The rules significantly differ in numerous ways, including the handling of fouls, which may give the opponent two shots, racking (the 8 ball, not the apex ball, goes on the spot), selection of which group of balls will be shot by which player, handling of balls and s, and many other details.\n\nThe English Pool Association is recognized by the Sports Council as the governing body for pool including blackball in England.\n\nThe hybrid game eight-ball rotation is a combination of eight-ball and rotation, in which the players must pocket their balls (other than the 8, which remains last) in numerical order. Specifically, the solids player starts by pocketing the 1 ball and ascends to the 7 ball, and the stripes player starts by pocketing the 15 ball and descends to the 9 ball.\n\nBULLET::::- List of World Eight-ball Champions\n\nBULLET::::- World Pool-Billiard Association\n"}
{"id": "9728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9728", "title": "Earned value management", "text": "Earned value management\n\nEarned value management (EVM), earned value project management, or earned value performance management (EVPM) is a project management technique for measuring project performance and progress in an objective manner.\n\nEarned value management is a project management technique for measuring project performance and progress. It has the ability to combine measurements of the project management triangle: scope, time, and costs.\n\nIn a single integrated system, earned value management is able to provide accurate forecasts of project performance problems, which is an important contribution for project management.\n\nEarly EVM research showed that the areas of planning and control are significantly impacted by its use; and similarly, using the methodology improves both scope definition as well as the analysis of overall project performance. More recent research studies have shown that the principles of EVM are positive predictors of project success. Popularity of EVM has grown in recent years beyond government contracting, a sector in which its importance continues to rise (e.g. recent new DFARS rules), in part because EVM can also surface in and help substantiate contract disputes.\n\nEssential features of any EVM implementation include:\nBULLET::::- A project plan that identifies work to be accomplished\nBULLET::::- A valuation of planned work, called planned value (PV) or budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS)\nBULLET::::- Pre-defined \"earning rules\" (also called metrics) to quantify the accomplishment of work, called earned value (EV) or budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP)\nEVM implementations for large or complex projects include many more features, such as indicators and forecasts of cost performance (over budget or under budget) and schedule performance (behind schedule or ahead of schedule). However, the most basic requirement of an EVM system is that it quantifies progress using PV and EV.\n\nProject A has been approved for a duration of one year and with the budget of X. It was also planned that the project spends 50% of the approved budget and expects 50% of the work to be complete in the first six months. If now, six months after the start of the project, a project manager would report that he has spent 50% of the budget, one can initially think, that the project is perfectly on plan. However, in reality the provided information is not sufficient to come to such a conclusion. The project can spend 50% of the budget, whilst finishing only 25% of the work, which would mean the project is not doing well; or the project can spend 50% of the budget, whilst completing 75% of the work, which would mean that project is doing better than planned. EVM is meant to address such and similar issues.\n\nEarned Value Analysis (EVA) is sometimes used as a synonym of Earned Value Management. However, this is not exactly accurate, as the scope and purpose of both approaches is different. EVA refers to the determination of planned value (PV), earned value (EV) and actual cost (AC). It is a technique to measure the value generated and the cost incurred by a project. EVM, on the other hand, is a more holistic methodology that also includes further analyses such as variance and trend analysis as well as forecasting (see Advanced implementation). EVA can therefore be seen as a part or a subset of the EVM techniques.\n\nEVM emerged as a financial analysis specialty in United States Government programs in the 1960s, but it has since become a significant branch of project management and cost engineering. Project management research investigating the contribution of EVM to project success suggests a moderately strong positive relationship.\nImplementations of EVM can be scaled to fit projects of all sizes and complexities.\n\nThe genesis of EVM occurred in industrial manufacturing at the turn of the 20th century, based largely on the principle of \"earned time\" popularized by Frank and Lillian Gilbreth, but the concept took root in the United States Department of Defense in the 1960s. The original concept was called PERT/COST, but it was considered overly burdensome (not very adaptable) by contractors whom were mandated to use it, and many variations of it began to proliferate among various procurement programs. In 1967, the DoD established a criterion-based approach, using a set of 35 criteria, called the Cost/Schedule Control Systems Criteria (C/SCSC). In the 1970s and early 1980s, a subculture of C/SCSC analysis grew, but the technique was often ignored or even actively resisted by project managers in both government and industry. C/SCSC was often considered a financial control tool that could be delegated to analytical specialists.\n\nIn 1979, EVM was introduced to the architecture and engineering industry in a \"Public Works Magazine\" article by David Burstein, a project manager with a national engineering firm. This technique has been taught ever since as part of the project management training program presented by PSMJ Resources, an international training and consulting firm that specializes in the engineering and architecture industry.\n\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, EVM emerged as a project management methodology to be understood and used by managers and executives, not just EVM specialists. In 1989, EVM leadership was elevated to the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, thus making EVM an element of program management and procurement. In 1991, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney canceled the Navy A-12 Avenger II Program because of performance problems detected by EVM. This demonstrated conclusively that EVM mattered to secretary-level leadership. In the 1990s, many U.S. Government regulations were eliminated or streamlined. However, EVM not only survived the acquisition reform movement, but became strongly associated with the acquisition reform movement itself. Most notably, from 1995 to 1998, ownership of EVM criteria (reduced to 32) was transferred to industry by adoption of ANSI EIA 748-A standard.\n\nThe use of EVM expanded beyond the U.S. Department of Defense. It was adopted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, United States Department of Energy and other technology-related agencies. Many industrialized nations also began to utilize EVM in their own procurement programs.\n\nAn overview of EVM was included in the Project Management Institute's first PMBOK Guide in 1987 and was expanded in subsequent editions. In the most recent edition of the PMBOK guide, EVM is listed among the general tools and techniques for processes to control project costs.\n\nThe construction industry was an early commercial adopter of EVM. Closer integration of EVM with the practice of project management accelerated in the 1990s. In 1999, the Performance Management Association merged with the Project Management Institute (PMI) to become PMI's first college, the College of Performance Management. The United States Office of Management and Budget began to mandate the use of EVM across all government agencies, and, for the first time, for certain internally managed projects (not just for contractors). EVM also received greater attention by publicly traded companies in response to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.\n\nIn Australia EVM has been codified as standards AS 4817-2003 and AS 4817-2006.\n\nIt is helpful to see an example of project tracking that does not include earned value performance management. Consider a project that has been planned in detail, including a time-phased spend plan for all elements of work. Figure 1 shows the cumulative budget (cost) for this project as a function of time (the blue line, labeled PV). It also shows the cumulative actual cost of the project (red line, labeled AC) through week 8. To those unfamiliar with EVM, it might appear that this project was over budget through week 4 and then under budget from week 6 through week 8. However, what is missing from this chart is any understanding of how much work has been accomplished during the project. If the project was actually completed at week 8, then the project would actually be well under budget and well ahead of schedule. If, on the other hand, the project is only 10% complete at week 8, the project is significantly over budget and behind schedule. A method is needed to measure technical performance objectively and quantitatively, and that is what EVM accomplishes.\n\nConsider the same project, except this time the project plan includes pre-defined methods of quantifying the accomplishment of work. At the end of each week, the project manager identifies every detailed element of work that has been completed, and sums the EV for each of these completed elements. Earned value may be accumulated monthly, weekly, or as progress is made.\n\nformula_1\n\nEV is calculated by multiplying %complete of each task (completed or in progress) by its planned value\n\nFigure 2 shows the EV curve (in green) along with the PV curve from Figure 1. The chart indicates that technical performance (i.e. progress) started more rapidly than planned, but slowed significantly and fell behind schedule at week 7 and 8. This chart illustrates the schedule performance aspect of EVM. It is complementary to critical path or critical chain schedule management.\n\nFigure 3 shows the same EV curve (green) with the actual cost data from Figure 1 (in red). It can be seen that the project was actually under budget, relative to the amount of work accomplished, since the start of the project. This is a much better conclusion than might be derived from Figure 1.\n\nFigure 4 shows all three curves together – which is a typical EVM line chart. The best way to read these three-line charts is to identify the EV curve first, then compare it to PV (for schedule performance) and AC (for cost performance). It can be seen from this illustration that a true understanding of cost performance and schedule performance \"relies first on measuring technical performance objectively.\" This is the \"foundational principle\" of EVM.\n\nThe \"foundational principle\" of EVM, mentioned above, does not depend on the size or complexity of the project. However, the \"implementations\" of EVM can vary significantly depending on the circumstances. In many cases, organizations establish an all-or-nothing threshold; projects above the threshold require a full-featured (complex) EVM system and projects below the threshold are exempted. Another approach that is gaining favor is to scale EVM implementation according to the project at hand and skill level of the project team.\n\nThere are many more small and simple projects than there are large and complex ones, yet historically only the largest and most complex have enjoyed the benefits of EVM. Still, lightweight implementations of EVM are achievable by any person who has basic spreadsheet skills. In fact, spreadsheet implementations are an excellent way to learn basic EVM skills.\n\nThe \"first step\" is to define the work. This is typically done in a hierarchical arrangement called a work breakdown structure (WBS) although the simplest projects may use a simple list of tasks. In either case, it is important that the WBS or list be comprehensive. It is also important that the elements be mutually exclusive, so that work is easily categorized in one and only one element of work. The most detailed elements of a WBS hierarchy (or the items in a list) are called activities (or tasks).\n\nThe \"second step\" is to assign a value, called planned value (PV), to each activity. For large projects, PV is almost always an allocation of the total project budget, and may be in units of currency (e.g. dollar, euro or naira) or in labor hours, or both. However, in very simple projects, each activity may be assigned a weighted “point value\" which might not be a budget number. Assigning weighted values and achieving consensus on all PV quantities yields an important benefit of EVM, because it exposes misunderstandings and miscommunications about the scope of the project, and resolving these differences should always occur as early as possible. Some terminal elements can not be known (planned) in great detail in advance, and that is expected, because they can be further refined at a later time.\n\nThe \"third step\" is to define \"earning rules\" for each activity. The simplest method is to apply just one earning rule, such as the 0/100 rule, to all activities. Using the 0/100 rule, no credit is earned for an element of work until it is finished. A related rule is called the 50/50 rule, which means 50% credit is earned when an element of work is started, and the remaining 50% is earned upon completion. Other fixed earning rules such as a 25/75 rule or 20/80 rule are gaining favor, because they assign more weight to finishing work than for starting it, but they also motivate the project team to identify when an element of work is started, which can improve awareness of work-in-progress. These simple earning rules work well for small or simple projects because generally each activity tends to be fairly short in duration.\n\nThese initial three steps define the minimal amount of planning for simplified EVM. The \"final step\" is to execute the project according to the plan and measure progress. When activities are started or finished, EV is accumulated according to the earning rule. This is typically done at regular intervals (e.g. weekly or monthly), but there is no reason why EV cannot be accumulated in near real-time, when work elements are started/completed. In fact, waiting to update EV only once per month (simply because that is when cost data are available) only detracts from a primary benefit of using EVM, which is to create a technical performance scoreboard for the project team.\n\nIn a lightweight implementation such as described here, the project manager has not accumulated cost nor defined a detailed project schedule network (i.e. using a critical path or critical chain methodology). While such omissions are inappropriate for managing large projects, they are a common and reasonable occurrence in many very small or simple projects. Any project can benefit from using EV alone as a real-time score of progress. One useful result of this very simple approach (without schedule models and actual cost accumulation) is to compare EV curves of similar projects, as illustrated in Figure 5. In this example, the progress of three residential construction projects are compared by aligning the starting dates. If these three home construction projects were measured with the same PV valuations, the \"relative\" schedule performance of the projects can be easily compared.\n\nThe actual critical path is ultimately the determining factor of every project's duration. Because earned value schedule metrics take no account of critical path data, big budget activities that are not on the critical path have the potential to dwarf the impact of performing small budget critical path activities. This can lead to \"gaming\" the SV and Schedule Performance Index or SPI metrics by ignoring critical path activities in favor of big budget activities that may have lots of float. This can sometimes even lead to performing activities out-of-sequence just to improve the schedule tracking metrics, which can cause major problems with quality.\n\nA simple two-step process has been suggested to fix this:\nBULLET::::1. Create a second earned value baseline strictly for schedule, with the weighted activities and milestones on the as-late-as-possible dates of the backward pass of the critical path algorithm, where there is no float.\nBULLET::::2. Allow earned value credit for schedule metrics to be taken no earlier than the reporting period during which the activity is scheduled unless it is on the project's current critical path.\n\nIn this way, the distorting aspect of float would be eliminated. There would be no benefit to performing a non-critical activity with lots of float until it is due in proper sequence. Also, an activity would not generate a negative schedule variance until it had used up its float. Under this method, one way of gaming the schedule metrics would be eliminated. The only way of generating a positive schedule variance (or SPI over 1.0) would be by completing work on the current critical path ahead of schedule, which is in fact the only way for a project to get ahead of schedule.\n\nIn addition to managing technical and schedule performance, large and complex projects require that cost performance be monitored and reviewed at regular intervals. To measure cost performance, planned value (or BCWS - Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled) and earned value (or BCWP - Budgeted Cost of Work Performed) must be in units of currency (the same units that actual costs are measured.).\n\nIn large implementations, the planned value curve is commonly called a Performance Measurement Baseline (PMB) and may be arranged in control accounts, summary-level planning packages, planning packages and work packages.\n\nIn large projects, establishing control accounts is the primary method of delegating responsibility and authority to various parts of the performing organization. Control accounts are cells of a responsibility assignment (RACI) matrix, which is the intersection of the project WBS and the organizational breakdown structure (OBS). Control accounts are assigned to Control Account Managers (CAMs).\n\nLarge projects require more elaborate processes for controlling baseline revisions, more thorough integration with subcontractor EVM systems, and more elaborate management of procured materials.\n\nIn the United States, the primary standard for full-featured EVM systems is the ANSI/EIA-748A standard, published in May 1998 and reaffirmed in August 2002. The standard defines 32 criteria for full-featured EVM system compliance. As of the year 2007, a draft of ANSI/EIA-748B, a revision to the original is available from ANSI. Other countries have established similar standards.\n\nIn addition to using BCWS and BCWP, prior to 1998 implementations often use the term actual cost of work performed (ACWP) instead of AC. Additional acronyms and formulas include:\n\nBULLET::::- Budget at completion (BAC)\nBULLET::::- Cost variance (CV)\nBULLET::::- Cost performance index (CPI)\nBULLET::::- Estimate at completion (EAC)\nBULLET::::- Estimate to complete (ETC)\nBULLET::::- To-complete performance index (TCPI)\nBULLET::::- Independent estimate at completion (IEAC)\n\nProponents of EVM note a number of issues with implementing it, and further limitations may be inherent to the concept itself.\n\nBecause EVM requires quantification of a project plan, it is often perceived to be inapplicable to discovery-driven or Agile software development projects. For example, it may be impossible to plan certain research projects far in advance, because research itself uncovers some opportunities (research paths) and actively eliminates others. However, another school of thought holds that all work can be planned, even if in weekly timeboxes or other short increments.\n\nTraditional EVM is not intended for non-discrete (continuous) effort. In traditional EVM standards, non-discrete effort is called \"level of effort\" (LOE). If a project plan contains a significant portion of LOE, and the LOE is intermixed with discrete effort, EVM results will be contaminated. This is another area of EVM research.\n\nTraditional definitions of EVM typically assume that project accounting and project network schedule management are prerequisites to achieving any benefit from EVM. Many small projects don't satisfy either of these prerequisites, but they too can benefit from EVM, as described for simple implementations, above. Other projects can be planned with a project network, but do not have access to true and timely actual cost data. In practice, the collection of true and timely actual cost data can be the most difficult aspect of EVM. Such projects can benefit from EVM, as described for intermediate implementations, above, and Earned Schedule.\n\nAs a means of overcoming objections to EVM's lack of connection to qualitative performance issues, the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) PEO(A) organization initiated a project in the late 1990s to integrate true technical achievement into EVM projections by utilizing risk profiles. These risk profiles anticipate opportunities that may be revealed and possibly be exploited as development and testing proceeds. The published research resulted in a Technical Performance Management (TPM) methodology and software application that is still used by many DoD agencies in informing EVM estimates with technical achievement.\nThe research was peer-reviewed and was the recipient of the Defense Acquisition University Acquisition Research Symposium 1997 Acker Award for excellence in the exchange of information in the field of acquisition research.\n\nThere is the difficulty inherent for any periodic monitoring of synchronizing data timing: actual deliveries, actual invoicing, and the date the EVM analysis is done are all independent, so that some items have arrived but their invoicing has not and by the time analysis is delivered the data will likely be weeks behind events. This may limit EVM to a less tactical or less definitive role where use is combined with other forms to explain why or add recent news and manage future expectations.\n\nThere is a measurement limitation for how precisely EVM can be used, stemming from classic conflict between accuracy and precision, as the mathematics can calculate deceptively far beyond the precision of the measurements of data and the approximation that is the plan estimation. The limitation on estimation is commonly understood (such as the ninety-ninety rule in software) but is not visible in any margin of error. The limitations on measurement are largely a form of digitization error as EVM measurements ultimately can be no finer than by item, which may be the Work Breakdown Structure terminal element size, to the scale of reporting period, typically end summary of a month, and by the means of delivery measure. (The delivery measure may be actual deliveries, may include estimates of partial work done at the end of month subject to estimation limits, and typically does not include QC check or risk offsets.)\n\nBULLET::::- Critical chain project management\nBULLET::::- Earned schedule\nBULLET::::- List of project management topics\n\nBULLET::::- Humphreys, Gary (2001). \"Project Management Using Earned Value\". Humphreys and Associates.\nBULLET::::- Philipson, Erik and Sven Antvik (2009). \"Earned Value Management - an introduction\". Philipson Biz.\nBULLET::::- Project Management Institute (2005). \"Practice Standard for Earned Value Management\". Project Management Institute.\nBULLET::::- Solomon, Paul and Ralph Young (2006). \"Performance-Based Earned Value\". Wiley-IEEE Computer Society.\nBULLET::::- Stratton, Ray (2006). \"The Earned Value Maturity Model\". Management Concepts.\nBULLET::::- U.S. Air Force Materiel Command (1994). \"Guide to Analysis of Contractor Cost Data\". AFMCPAM 65-501\nBULLET::::- Defense Contract Management Agency (2006) \"Earned Value Implementation Guide\" DAU link\nBULLET::::- GAO (2009) \"GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide\" GAO-09-SSP\nBULLET::::- Bembers, Ivan, Ed Knox, Michelle Jones and Jeff Traczyk (Jan 2017). \"EVM System's High Cost, Fact or Fiction?\" Defense AT&L Magazine. https://www.dau.mil/library/defense-atl/_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/library/defense-atl/DATLFiles/Jan-Feb2017/Bembers_Knox_Jones_Traczyk.pdf\n\nBULLET::::- EVM at NASA\nBULLET::::- U.S. Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Earned Value Management website\nBULLET::::- Measuring Integrated Progress on Agile Software Development Projects\nBULLET::::- Monitoring Scrum Projects with AgileEVM and Earned Business Value (EBV) Metrics\nBULLET::::- UK MoD on-line training using Flash player\nBULLET::::- U.S. DoD DAU Acquisition Community Earned Value Management website\nBULLET::::- U.S. Defense Contract Management Agency Guidebook\nBULLET::::- EVM earned value management general definitions\nBULLET::::- EVMS Surveillance Instruction, U.S. Defense Contract Management Agency\nBULLET::::- What is Value Analysis?\nBULLET::::- AcqNotes Earned Value Management\n"}
