{"id": "8594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8594", "title": "Stab-in-the-back myth", "text": "Stab-in-the-back myth\n\nThe stab-in-the-back myth (, , literally \"dagger stab myth\") was the notion, widely believed and promulgated in right-wing circles in Germany after 1918, that the German Army did not lose World War I on the battlefield but was instead betrayed by the civilians on the home front, especially the republicans who overthrew the Hohenzollern monarchy in the German Revolution of 1918–19. Advocates denounced the German government leaders who signed the Armistice on November 11, 1918, as the \"November Criminals\" ().\n\nWhen the Nazi Party came to power in 1933, they made the legend an integral part of their official history of the 1920s, portraying the Weimar Republic as the work of the \"November criminals\" who stabbed the nation in the back to seize power while betraying it. The Nazi propaganda depicted Weimar as \"a morass of corruption, degeneracy, national humiliation, ruthless persecution of the honest 'national opposition'—fourteen years of rule by Jews, Marxists, and 'cultural Bolsheviks', who had at last been swept away by the National Socialist movement under Adolf Hitler and the victory of the 'national revolution' of 1933\".\n\nHistorians inside and outside Germany unanimously reject the notion, pointing out the German army was out of reserves, was being overwhelmed by the entrance of the United States into the war, and by late 1918 had lost the war militarily. To many Germans, the expression \"stab in the back\" was evocative of Richard Wagner's 1876 opera \"Götterdämmerung\", in which Hagen murders his enemy Siegfried – the hero of the opera – with a spear in his back.\n\nThe antisemitic instincts of the German Army were revealed well before the stab-in-the-back myth became the military's excuse for losing the war. In October 1916, in the middle of World War I, the army ordered a Jewish census of the troops, with the intent to show that Jews were under-represented in the \"Reichswehr\" (army), and that they were over-represented in non-fighting positions. Instead, the census showed just the opposite, that Jews were over-represented both in the army as a whole and in fighting positions at the front. The \"Reichswehr\" then suppressed the results of the census. \n\nIn the later part of the war, Germany was essentially a military dictatorship, with the Supreme High Command (German: OHL, \"Oberste Heeresleitung\") and General Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg as commander-in-chief advising Kaiser Wilhelm II – although Hindenburg was largely a figurehead, with his Chief-of-Staff, General Erich Ludendorff, in effective control of the state. After the last German offensive on the Western Front failed in 1918, OHL admitted that the war effort was doomed. In response, by autumn, OHL pressed for a rapid change to a civilian government. Ludendorff said:\n\nI have asked His Excellency to now bring those circles to power which we have to thank for coming so far. We will therefore now bring those gentlemen into the ministries. They can now make the peace which has to be made. They can eat the broth which they have prepared for us!\n\nAs the military situation for the Germans on the Western Front became ever more precarious, Prince Maximilian of Baden reached out to the American President Woodrow Wilson, indicating that Germany was willing to accept his Fourteen Points. \n\nOn November 11, 1918, the representatives of the newly formed Weimar Republic signed an armistice with the Allies which would end World War I. As the Kaiser had been forced to abdicate and the military relinquished executive power, it was the temporary \"civilian government\" that sued for peace—the signature on the armistice document was of Matthias Erzberger, a civilian, who was later murdered for his alleged treason. The subsequent Treaty of Versailles led to further territorial and financial losses. \n\nThe official birth of the term \"stab-in-the-back\" itself possibly can be dated to the autumn of 1919, when Ludendorff was dining with the head of the British Military Mission in Berlin, British general Sir Neill Malcolm. Malcolm asked Ludendorff why it was that he thought Germany lost the war. Ludendorff replied with his list of excuses, including that the home front failed the army.\n\nMalcolm asked him: \"Do you mean, General, that you were stabbed in the back?\" Ludendorff's eyes lit up and he leapt upon the phrase like a dog on a bone. \"Stabbed in the back?\" he repeated. \"Yes, that's it, exactly, we were stabbed in the back\". And thus was born a legend which has never entirely perished.\n\nThe phrase was to Ludendorff's liking, and he let it be known among the general staff that this was the \"official\" version, which led to it being disseminated throughout German society. It was picked up by right-wing political factions, and was even used by Kaiser Wilhelm II in the memoirs he wrote in the 1920s. Right-wing groups used it as a form of attack against the early Weimar Republic government, led by the Social Democratic Party (SPD), which had come to power with the abdication of the Kaiser. However, even the SPD furthered the myth when the party leader, Friedrich Ebert, told troops returning to Berlin that \"No enemy has overcome you.\"\n\nReviews in the German press that grossly misrepresented General Frederick Barton Maurice's book, \"The Last Four Months\", also contributed to the creation of this myth. William Shirer writes that \"Ludendorff made use of the reviews to convince Hindenburg\" about the validity of the myth.\n\nIn 1919, Deutschvölkischer Schutz und Trutzbund leader Alfred Roth, writing under the pseudonym Otto Arnim, published the book \"The Jew in the Army\" which he said was based on evidence gathered during his participation on the \"Judenzählung\", a military census which had in fact shown that German Jews had served in the front lines proportionately to their numbers. Roth's work claimed that most Jews involved in the war were only taking part as profiteers and spies, while he also blamed Jewish officers for fostering a defeatist mentality which impacted negatively on their soldiers. As such, the book offered one of the earliest published versions of the stab-in-the-back legend.\n\nIn November 1919, the newly elected Weimar National Assembly initiated a \"Untersuchungsausschuß für Schuldfragen\" to investigate the causes of the World War and Germany's defeat. On November 18, von Hindenburg testified in front of this parliamentary commission, and cited a December 17, 1918 \"Neue Zürcher Zeitung\" article that summarized two earlier articles in the \"Daily Mail\" by British General Frederick Barton Maurice with the phrase that the German army had been \"dagger-stabbed from behind by the civilian populace\" (\"von der Zivilbevölkerung von hinten erdolcht\"). Maurice later disavowed having used the term himself. It was particularly this testimony of Hindenburg that led to the widespread \"Dolchstoßlegende\" in post-World War I Germany.\n\nRichard Steigmann-Gall says that the stab-in-the-back legend traces back to a sermon preached on February 3, 1918, by Protestant Court Chaplain Bruno Doehring, nine months before the war had even ended. German scholar Boris Barth, in contrast to Steigmann-Gall, implies that Doehring did not actually use the term, but spoke only of 'betrayal'. Barth traces the first documented use to a centrist political meeting in the Munich Löwenbräu-Keller on November 2, 1918, in which , a member of the Progressive coalition in the Reichstag, used the term to exhort his listeners to keep fighting:\n\nAs long as the front holds, we damned well have the duty to hold out in the homeland. We would have to be ashamed of ourselves in front of our children and grandchildren if we attacked the battle front from the rear and gave it a dagger-stab. (\"wenn wir der Front in den Rücken fielen und ihr den Dolchstoß versetzten.)\"\n\nBarth also shows that the term was primarily popularized by the patriotic German newspaper \"Deutsche Tageszeitung\" that repeatedly quoted the \"Neue Zürcher\" article after Hindenburg had referred to it in front of the parliamentary inquiry commission.\n\nCharges of a Jewish conspiratorial element in Germany's defeat drew heavily upon figures like Kurt Eisner, a Berlin-born German Jew who lived in Munich. He had written about the illegal nature of the war from 1916 onward, and he also had a large hand in the Munich revolution until he was assassinated in February 1919. The Weimar Republic under Friedrich Ebert violently suppressed workers' uprisings with the help of Gustav Noske and Reichswehr General Groener, and tolerated the paramilitary Freikorps forming all across Germany. In spite of such tolerance, the Republic's legitimacy was constantly attacked with claims such as the stab-in-the-back. Many of its representatives such as Matthias Erzberger and Walther Rathenau were assassinated, and the leaders were branded as \"criminals\" and Jews by the right-wing press dominated by Alfred Hugenberg.\n\nThe noted German historian Friedrich Meinecke attempted to trace the roots of the expression in a June 11, 1922 article in the Viennese newspaper \"Neue Freie Presse\". In the 1924 national election, the Munich cultural journal \"Süddeutsche Monatshefte\" published a series of articles blaming the SPD and trade unions for Germany's defeat in World War I, which came out during the trial of Adolf Hitler and Ludendorff for high treason following the Beer Hall Putsch in 1923. The editor of an SPD newspaper sued the journal for defamation, giving rise to what is known as the \"Munich Dolchstoßprozess\" from October 19 to November 20, 1925. Many prominent figures testified in that trial, including members of the parliamentary committee investigating the reasons for the defeat, so some of its results were made public long before the publication of the committee report in 1928.\n\nThe \"Dolchstoß\" was a central image in propaganda produced by the many right-wing and traditionally conservative political parties that sprang up in the early days of the Weimar Republic, including Hitler's NSDAP. For Hitler himself, this explanatory model for World War I was of crucial personal importance. He had learned of Germany's defeat while being treated for temporary blindness following a gas attack on the front. In \"Mein Kampf\", he described a vision at this time which drove him to enter politics. Throughout his career, he railed against the \"November criminals\" of 1918, who had stabbed the German Army in the back.\n\nEven provisional President Friedrich Ebert contributed to the myth when he saluted returning veterans with the oration that \"no enemy has vanquished you\" (\"kein Feind hat euch überwunden!\") and \"they returned undefeated from the battlefield\" (\"sie sind vom Schlachtfeld unbesiegt zurückgekehrt\") on November 10, 1918. The latter quote was shortened to \"im Felde unbesiegt\" (\"undefeated on the battlefield\") as a semi-official slogan of the \"Reichswehr\". Ebert had meant these sayings as a tribute to the German soldier, but it only contributed to the prevailing feeling.\n\nA version of the stab-in-the-back myth was publicized in 1922 by German anti-Semitic theorist Alfred Rosenberg in his primary contribution to Nazi theory on Zionism, \"Der Staatsfeindliche Zionismus\" (\"Zionism, the Enemy of the State\"). Rosenberg accused German Zionists of working for a German defeat and supporting Britain and the implementation of the Balfour Declaration.\n\nThe theme of stab-in-the-back was articulated in 1919 most prominently by General Erich Ludendorff, one of the two top German commanders. He blamed the Berlin government and the civilian population for the armistice/surrender of November 1918, saying they had failed to support him, had let him down, and had proved themselves unworthy of the traditions of a fighting nation. He popularized the \"Dolchstoß\" terminology, and became a prominent right-wing leader in the 1920s.\n\nConservatives, nationalists and ex-military leaders began to speak critically about the peace and Weimar politicians, socialists, communists, Jews, and sometimes even Catholics were viewed with suspicion due to presumed extra-national loyalties. It was claimed that they had not supported the war and had played a role in selling out Germany to its enemies. These \"November Criminals\", or those who seemed to benefit from the newly formed Weimar Republic, were seen to have \"stabbed them in the back\" on the home front, by either criticizing German nationalism, instigating unrest and strikes in the critical military industries or profiteering. In essence, the accusation was that the accused committed treason against the \"benevolent and righteous\" common cause. These theories were given credence by the fact that when Germany surrendered in November 1918, its armies were still occupying French and Belgian territory, Berlin remained 450 miles from the nearest front, and the German armies retired from the field of battle in good order.\n\nThe Allies had been amply resupplied by the United States, which also had fresh armies ready for combat, but the UK and France were too war-weary to contemplate an invasion of Germany with its unknown consequences. On the Western Front, although the Hindenburg Line had been penetrated and German forces were in retreat, the Allied army had not reached the western German frontier, and on the Eastern Front, Germany had already won the war against Russia, concluded with the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. In the West, Germany had had successes with the Spring Offensive. Contributing to the \"Dolchstoßlegende\", its failure was blamed on strikes in the arms industry at a critical moment of the offensive, leaving soldiers without an adequate supply of materiel. The strikes were seen to be instigated by treasonous elements, with the Jews taking most of the blame.\n\nThe weakness of Germany's strategic position was exacerbated by the rapid collapse of the other Central Powers in late 1918, following Allied victories on the Macedonian and Italian fronts. Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice on September 29, 1918, at Salonica. On October 30 the Ottoman Empire capitulated at Mudros. On November 3 Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce to ask for an armistice. The terms, arranged by telegraph with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were communicated to the Austrian commander and accepted. The Armistice with Austria-Hungary was signed in the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on November 3. Austria and Hungary signed separate treaties following the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire.\n\nNevertheless, the idea of domestic betrayal resonated among its audience, and its claims would provide some basis for public support for the emerging National Socialist Party, under an autocratic and chauvinistic form of nationalism. Anti-Jewish sentiment was intensified by the Bavarian Soviet Republic, a Communist government which ruled the city of Munich for two weeks before being crushed by the Freikorps militia. Many of the Bavarian Soviet Republic's leaders were Jewish, allowing anti-Jewish propagandists to connect Jews with Communism (and thus treason).\n\nRichard M. Hunt argues in his 1958 article that the myth was an irrational belief which commanded the force of irrefutable emotional convictions for millions of Germans. He suggests that behind these myths was a sense of communal shame, not for causing the war, but for losing it. Hunt argues that it was not the guilt of wickedness, but the shame of weakness that seized Germany's national psychology, and \"served as a solvent of the Weimar democracy and also as an ideological cement of Hitler's dictatorship\".\n\nThe Allied policy of unconditional surrender was devised in 1943 in part to avoid a repetition of the stab-in-the-back theme. According to historian John Wheeler-Bennett, speaking from the British perspective,It was necessary for the Nazi régime and/or the German Generals to surrender unconditionally in order to bring home to the German people that they had lost the War by themselves; so that their defeat should not be attributed to a \"stab in the back\".\n\nParallel interpretations of national trauma after military defeat appear in other countries. For example, it was used regarding the United States' involvement in the Vietnam War, without the antisemitic slant. The song “The Battle-Hymn of Lieutenant Calley” claims that \"While we're fighting in the jungles they were marching in the street. / While we're dying in the rice fields they were helping our defeat. / While we're facing V.C. bullets they were sounding a retreat\". (See also Vietnam Syndrome.)\n\nBULLET::::- Causes of World War II\nBULLET::::- Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War (in German: \"Zentralstelle zur Erforschung der Kriegschuldfrage\")\nBULLET::::- Defeatism\nBULLET::::- German Revolution of 1918–19\n\nInformational notes\nCitations\nBibliography\n\nFurther reading\n\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism on the Florida Holocaust Museum website\nBULLET::::- Die Judischen Gefallenen A Roll of Honor Commemorating the 12,000 German Jews Who Died for their Fatherland in World War I.\nBULLET::::- Book review by Harold Marcuse, with 15 \"stab-in-the-back\" illustrations, 1918–1942\n"}
{"id": "8599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8599", "title": "Davenport, Iowa", "text": "Davenport, Iowa\n\nDavenport is the county seat of Scott County in Iowa and is located along the Mississippi River on the eastern border of the state. It is the largest of the Quad Cities, a metropolitan area with a population estimate of 382,630 and a CSA population of 474,226; it is the 90th largest CSA in the nation. Davenport was founded on May 14, 1836 by Antoine Le Claire and was named for his friend George Davenport, a former English sailor who served in the U.S. Army during the War of 1812, served as a supplier Fort Armstrong, worked as a fur trader with the American Fur Company, and was appointed a quartermaster with the rank of colonel during the Black Hawk War. According to the 2010 census, the city had a population of 99,685 (making it Iowa's third-largest city). The city appealed this figure, arguing that the Census Bureau missed a section of residents, and that its total population was more than 100,000. The Census Bureau estimated Davenport's 2018 population to be 102,085.\n\nLocated approximately halfway between Chicago and Des Moines, Davenport is on the border of Iowa across the river from Illinois. The city is prone to frequent flooding due to its location on the Mississippi River. There are two main universities: St. Ambrose University and Palmer College of Chiropractic, where the first chiropractic adjustment took place. Several annual music festivals take place in Davenport, including the Mississippi Valley Blues Festival, the Mississippi Valley Fair, and the Bix Beiderbecke Memorial Jazz Festival. An internationally known foot race, called the Bix 7, is run during the festival. The city has a Class A minor-league baseball team, the Quad Cities River Bandits. Davenport has 50 plus parks and facilities, as well as more than of recreational paths for biking or walking.\n\nThree interstates, 80, 74 and 280, and two major United States Highways serve the city. Davenport has seen steady population growth since its incorporation. National economic difficulties in the 1980s, resulted in job and population losses. The Quad Cities was ranked as the most affordable metropolitan area in 2010 by \"Forbes\" magazine. In 2007, Davenport, along with neighboring Rock Island, won the City Livability Award in the small-city category from the U.S. Conference of Mayors. In 2012, Davenport, and the Quad Cities Metropolitan Area, was ranked among the fastest-growing areas in the nation in the growth of high-tech jobs. Notable natives of the city have included jazz legend Bix Beiderbecke, Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Susan Glaspell, former National Football League running back Roger Craig, UFC Welterweight Champion Pat Miletich, and former two time WWE Champion and WWE Universal Champion Seth Rollins.\n\nThe land was originally owned by the historic Sauk people, Meskwaki (Fox), and Ho-Chunk (Winnebago) Native American tribes. France laid claim to this territory as part of its New France and Illinois Country in the 18th century. Its traders and missionaries came to the area from Canada (Quebec), but it did not have many settlers here. After losing to Great Britain in the Seven Years' War, France ceded its territory east of the Mississippi River to the victor, but retained lands to the west.\n\nIn 1803 France sold its holdings in North America west of the Mississippi River to the United States under the Louisiana Purchase. Lieutenant Zebulon Pike was the first United States representative to officially visit the Upper Mississippi River area. On August 27, 1805, Pike camped on the present-day site of Davenport.\n\nIn 1832, a group of Sauk, Meskwaki, and Kickapoo people were defeated by the United States in the Black Hawk War. The United States government concluded the Black Hawk Purchase, sometimes called the Forty-Mile Strip or Scott's Purchase, by which the US acquired lands in what is now eastern Iowa. The purchase was made for $640,000 on September 21, 1832 and contained an area of some , at a price equivalent to 11 cents/acre (26 $/km²). Although named after the defeated chief Black Hawk, he was being held prisoner by the US. Sauk chief Keokuk, who had remained neutral in the war, signed off on the purchase. It was made on the site of present-day Davenport. Army General Winfield Scott and Governor of Illinois, John Reynolds, acted on behalf of the United States, with Antoine Le Claire, a mixed-race (Métis) man, serving as translator. He later was credited with founding Davenport.\n\nChief Keokuk gave a generous portion of land to Antoine Le Claire's wife, Marguerite, the granddaughter of a Sauk chief. Le Claire built their home on the exact spot where the agreement was signed, as stipulated by Keokuk, or he would have forfeited the land. Le Claire finished the 'Treaty House' in the spring of 1833. He founded Davenport on May 14, 1836, naming it for his friend Colonel George Davenport, who was stationed at Fort Armstrong during the war. The city was incorporated on January 25, 1839. The area was successively governed by the legislatures of the Michigan Territory, the Wisconsin Territory, Iowa Territory and finally Iowa.\n\nScott County was formed by an act of the Wisconsin Territorial legislature in 1837. Both Davenport and its neighbor Rockingham campaigned to become the county seat. The city with the most votes from Scott County citizens in the February 1838 election would become the county seat. On the eve of the election, Davenport citizens acquired the temporary service of Dubuque laborers so they could vote in the election. Davenport won the election with the help of the laborers. Rockingham supporters protested the elections to the territorial governor, on the grounds the laborers from Dubuque were not Scott County residents. The governor refused to certify the results of the election. A second election was held the following August. To avoid another import of voters, the governor set a 60-day residency requirement for all voters. Davenport won by two votes. Because the margin of victory was so close, a third election was held in the summer of 1840. As the August election drew nearer, Rockingham residents grew tired of the county seat cause. Davenport easily won the third election. Consequently, to avoid questions about the county seat, Davenport quickly built the first county courthouse.\n\nThe Rock Island Railroad built the first railroad bridge across the Mississippi River in 1856. It connected Davenport to Rock Island, Illinois. This railway connection resulted in significant improvements to transportation and commerce with Chicago, a booming 19th-century city. The addition of new railroad lines to Muscatine and Iowa City, and the acquisition of other lines by the Rock Island Railroad, resulted in Davenport becoming a commercial railroad hub.\n\nSteamboat companies rightly saw nationwide railroads as a threat to their business. On May 6, 1856, just weeks after the bridge was completed, a steamboat captain deliberately crashed the \"Effie Afton\" into the bridge. The owner of the \"Effie Afton\", John Hurd, filed a lawsuit against the Rock Island Railroad Company. Abraham Lincoln was the lead defense lawyer for the railroad company. The decision of the United States Supreme Court upheld the right to bridge navigable streams, therefore the bridge was allowed to remain.\n\nThe Davenport City Hall was built in 1895 for price of $100,000 ($ in dollars). Architectural journals of the time poked fun at the project due to the small amount of money budgeted. The skyline began forming in the 1920s with the construction of the Kahl Building, the Parker Building, and the Capitol Theatre during a period of economic and building expansion.\n\nBy 1932, thousands of Davenport residents were on public relief, due to the Great Depression. A shantytown of the poor developed in the west end of the city, along the Mississippi River. Sickness, hunger, and unsanitary living conditions plagued the area.\n\nThe situation would soon change, as many citizens went to work for the Works Progress Administration. Davenport had an economic boom during and after World War II, driven by wartime industry and peacetime demand. As Davenport grew, it absorbed smaller surrounding communities, annexing Rockingham, Nahant, Probstei, East Davenport, Oakdale, Cawiezeel, Blackhawk, Mt. Joy, Green Tree, and others. Oscar Mayer, Ralston Purina, and other companies built plants in west Davenport. The Interstate highway network reached Davenport in 1956, improving transportation in the area. By 1959, more than 1,000 homes a year were being constructed.\n\nBy the late 1970s, the good times were over for both downtown and local businesses and industries. Railroad restructuring in the mid-20th century had caused a loss of jobs in the industry. The farm crisis of the 1980s negatively affected Davenport and the rest of the Quad Cities, where a total of 35,000 workers lost their jobs throughout the entire Quad Cities area. Restructuring of heavy industry also continued: the Caterpillar plant on the city's north side closed, causing another wave of job loss.\n\nWith the 1990s, the city finally showed the beginnings of a resurgence. In the early 21st century, many renovations and building additions have occurred to revitalize the downtown area, including repairing Modern Woodmen Park, the building of the Skybridge and the Figge Art Museum. In 2011, the Gold Coast and Hamburg Historic District was named as a 2011 \"America's Great Place\" by the American Planning Association.\n\nDavenport's longitude and latitude coordinates in decimal form are 41.542982, −90.590745. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. Davenport is located approximately west of Chicago and east of the Iowa state capital of Des Moines. The city is located about north of St. Louis, Missouri, and southeast of Minneapolis, Minnesota. Farmland surrounds Davenport, outside the Quad Cities area.\n\nDavenport is located on the banks of the Mississippi River. At this point the river has a maximum depth of around and is wide where the Centennial Bridge crosses it. The river flows from east to west in this area, as opposed to its usual north to south direction. From the river the city starts to slope north up a hill, which is steep at some points. The streets of the city, especially downtown and in the central part of the town, follow a grid design.\n\nDavenport often makes national headlines when it suffers seasonal flooding by the Mississippi River. It is the largest city bordering the Mississippi that has no permanent flood wall or levee. Davenport residents prefer to maintain open access to the river for parks and vistas father than have it cut off by dikes and levees. Davenport has adopted ordinances requiring any new construction in the floodplain to be elevated above the 100-year-flood level, or protected with walls. As a result, former mayor Phil Yerington said that if they \"let Mother Nature take her course, we'll all be better off\". An example of a Davenport building that is elevated or flood-proofed is the Figge Art Museum.\n\nUnder the Köppen climate classification, Davenport is considered to have a humid continental climate (\"Dfa\"). Summers are very warm to hot with high levels of humidity. Winters have cold temperatures and often high winds, with snow likely from November through February. Average snowfall in Davenport is per year. January is on average the coldest month, while July is the warmest. The highest temperature recorded in Davenport was on July 12, 1936. The lowest temperature, , was recorded on January 18, 2009. Substantial weather changes frequently occur at three- to four-day intervals as a result of mid-latitude storm tracks, which is where low and high pressure extratropical disturbances occur.\n\nAlthough several minor tornadoes have occurred, no devastating tornado has ever touched down in Davenport. Flooding, however, is often a problem in Davenport due to the lack of a flood wall. During the Great Flood of 1993, the water crested at on July 9. This is nearly above the flood stage. Major flooding in Davenport causes many problems. Roads in and around the downtown area, including U.S. Route 67, are closed and cause increased traffic on other city roads. The effects of major flooding can be long-lasting. For example, during the 2008 flooding, Credit Island in the city's southwest corner remained closed for 5½ months while crews worked on cleaning up damage and removing river debris. Duck Creek, a stream situated in Bettendorf and Davenport, is also vulnerable to flash flooding. Severe thunderstorms on June 16, 1990, created heavy flash flooding in Bettendorf and Davenport that killed four people. Another major flood happened on June 12, 2008, when severe thunderstorms caused Duck Creek to overflow its banks and flood properties and nearby streets (see Iowa flood of 2008).\n\nDavenport has several neighborhoods dating back to the 1840s. The original city plot was around current day Ripley and 5th Streets, where Antoine Le Claire had built his house. The city can be divided into five areas: downtown, central, east end, near north and northwest, and west end. Many architectural designs are found throughout the city including Victorian, Queen Anne, Tudor Revival, and others. Many of the original neighborhoods were inhabited by German settlers.\n\nThe east side of the city dates back to 1850 and has always contained higher end housing. The proximity and commanding view of the river kept these neighborhoods a fashionable address, long after the original families departed. Lindsay Park, in The Village of East Davenport, was used as parade grounds for Civil War soldiers from Camp McClellan.\n\nIn contrast to the east side, the central and west neighborhoods originally contained many of the working class Germans who settled the town. Development on the west side started in the 1850s, with extensive construction occurring in the 1870s. Housing was mostly one and a half to two story front gable American Foursquare and simplified Queen Anne style. The central Hamburg neighborhood contains the most architecturally significant residences in the old German neighborhoods. Also in central Davenport, the Vander Veer Park Historic District is a neighborhood anchored by Vander Veer Park, a large park with a botanical garden and a fountain. The park was modeled after New York City's Central Park and originally shared its name. Vander Veer is surrounded by large Queen Anne and Tudor Revival style houses that were built between 1895 and 1915. Development of the Vander Veer Park was one of the first major beautification efforts.\n\nToday, the eastern side of Davenport still contains many of the higher class houses in the city. The old Civil War parade grounds, in The Village of East Davenport (\"The Village\" for short), have been turned into Lindsay Park, which is surrounded by small specialty shops. West of The Village, Downtown contains the two tallest buildings in the Quad Cities; the Wells Fargo Bank Building, which is 255 feet tall, and the Mid-American Energy Building, which is 220 feet tall. Other tall buildings include the 11-story Hotel Blackhawk, the 150 foot Kahl Building and the Davenport City Hall.\nDavenport uses a mayor-council form of local government. , city government consists of mayor Frank Klipsch and a ten-person council. One person is elected from each of the eight wards and two at-large aldermen are elected to represent the whole city. Nonpartisan elections are held in odd-numbered years. The mayor is top elected individual for the city. The mayor's duties include running city council meetings and approves or vetoes all actions taken by the council members, and can vote in case of a tie. He or she also appoints city board members. The city council's job is to make laws and set the city budget. The city administrator, currently (no permanent administrator), is appointed by the mayor with confirmation by two-thirds of the council. Citywide goals through 2012 include having a financially responsible government, having a growing economy, revitalizing neighborhoods, and upgrading city infrastructure and public facilities. The establishment of Davenport as a political and government unit came in 1839, three years after the city was settled. The city was incorporated as a result of a resolution by Iowa Representative Jonathan W. Parker by special charter in the Iowa Territory on January 25, 1839. Parker was a resident of Davenport and one of six trustees elected to govern the city with Rodolphus Bennet being the first mayor. Activity for the first four months was minimal as the council failed to meet. In 1842, the city charter was amended for the first time. Changes include having six alderman replace the five trustees, dividing the city into three wards, and appointing a city clerk position to replace the recorder. The charter was amended again in 1851 to expand the city area, provide greater detail of the duties of the mayor, city council, and other officials. During the last half of the 19th century, government assumed expanding responsibilities for public welfare and public works improvements.\n\nThe city expanded police protection, even temporarily having volunteer police officers to assist the three paid officers. Fire protection was expanded in 1882, with the city's first 13 paid firefighters. Former mayor Henry Vollmer accomplished several public works achievements, including large street paving and new sub-divisions being plotted. A large city budget surplus brought the creation of the Davenport City Hall. After 1900, each mayor brought new agendas for city improvement. Waldo Becker encouraged new railroads for the city. He also promised a more business-like government, in terms of financial responsibility and to depoliticize the police department. In the mid-1920s the city established the first zoning ordinances, electrical traffic signals and street lighting. The city also expanded with the incorporation of the city of Rockingham and the establishment of the Davenport Municipal Airport.\n\nThe 2010 fiscal year budget was $199.2 million, an increase of $35 million from 2009. The city's general fund receives the largest amount of funds from property taxes, followed by service fees such as solid waste collection and swimming pool or golf course admission and 80% of its expenses go to personnel costs. The city has given a few surveys for citizens to rate the quality of life and city services. The largest department in the city is the public works department with a budget of $36.7 million. The police department is second with a budget of $22.4 million, while the fire department has a budget of $15 million. The parks department has $6.1 million, and the Davenport Public Library has a $3.8 million budget.\nAt the federal level, Davenport is in Iowa's 2nd congressional district. , it is represented by Democrat Dave Loebsack. The two Senators are Republicans Chuck Grassley and Joni Ernst. At the state level, Davenport is represented by the 41st, 42nd, and 43rd Iowa Senate districts and in the Iowa House of Representatives by the 81st, 84th, 85th, and 86th districts.\n\n, the 41st senate district covers the eastern third of the city and all of Bettendorf, Riverdale, and Panorama Park. It is more conservative then other Davenport districts being represented by a Republican since the 1970s. The district is slightly moving more liberal with an increase of 3,000 Democrats between 2006 and 2010. The district is represented by Republican Senator Roby Smith. The 42nd district covers the western third of the city along with all of Scott County that is not in Davenport, Bettendorf, Riverdale, or Panorama Park as well as western and southern rural Clinton County and is represented by Republican Senator Shawn Hamerlinck. The 43rd senate district covers the central third of the city and is represented by Democrat Joe Seng.\n\nThe 81st house district covers the eastern third of the city along with small western portion of Bettendorf. The district shares the same western boundaries as the forty-first senate district. The district is represented by Democrat Phyllis Thede. The 84th district covers the western third of the city, and has the same eastern boundary as Senate district forty-two and is represented by Republican Ross Paustian. The 85th and 86th districts are made up of the same area as the forty-third senate district. The 85th district covers the north and west-central area while the 86th district covers southern and eastern part of the senate district. Both are represented by Democrats with Jim Lykam representing the 85th and Cindy Winckler representing the 86th.\n\nDavenport has a Federal Court House for the United States District Court for the Southern District of Iowa.\n\nAccording to the 2010 United States Census estimate, the city population grew to 99,685 and the Quad Cities metropolitan area grew to 379,690. As of the 2000 census, there were 98,359 people, 39,124 households, and 24,804 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,566.5 people per square mile (604.8/km²). There were 41,350 housing units at an average density of 658.5 per square mile (254.3/km²). Davenport's population density is 30 times the average density of Iowa and 20 times the average density of the United States. However, it is about a third less than Des Moines and 20 percent less than Cedar Rapids, the only two cities in Iowa with higher populations than Davenport. Sioux City, the next city smaller than Davenport in population, has a density of 5 people more per square mile.\n\nThe racial makeup of the area is 83.7% White (410,861), 11.43% Black or African American (27,757), 0.4% American Indian and Alaskan Native (1,255), 2.0% Asian (6,624), 0.03% Pacific Islander (156), and 2.0% from two or more races (11,929). 7.1% of the population is Hispanic or Latino of any race (37,070). There were 39,124 households out of which 31.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.0% were married couples living together, 13.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.6% were non-families. Of all households, 29.5% were made up of individuals and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.03.\n\nThe percent of all races, with the exception of white, are higher in Davenport, than Iowa averages. All races in Davenport, except for white are at a higher percent than the rest of Iowa, and also the United States.\n\nAge spread: 26.2% under the age of 18, 10.7% from 18 to 24, 30.1% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.7 males.\n\nDavenport's biggest labor industry is manufacturing, with over 7,600 jobs in the sector. John Deere is the second largest employer in the Quad Cities, after the Rock Island Arsenal as a whole. Deere, however, is the largest single employer, employing 7,200 workers in the Quad Cities and 948 on its north side Davenport plant. John Deere World Headquarters is located in Moline. Other large employers in Davenport and the Quad Cities include, Genesis Health System with 5,125 employees and 4,900 in Davenport, Trinity Regional Health System with 3,333, regional grocery store Hy-Vee with 3,138 and the Davenport Community School District with 2,237 employees.\n\nDavenport is the headquarters for department store Von Maur, which has 24 stores. Davenport is also the headquarters of Lee Enterprises, which publishes fifty daily newspapers and more than 300 weekly newspapers, shoppers, and specialty publications, along with online sites in 23 states. As of September 2009, the unemployment rate in Davenport and the rest of the Quad Cities, had risen to 8.4%.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city is $40,378 with families earning $51,445. Males had a median income of $41,853 versus $30,002 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,828. About 10.5% of families and 14.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.2% of those under age 18 and 6.4% of those ages 65 or over.\n\nDavenport has a lower cost of living than the national average, in 2010 the average home price was $110,000; Forbes ranked Davenport as the best metropolitan area for cost of living, up from second in 2009. CNN Money ranked Davenport as the 16th most affordable housing in the country.\n\nThe surrounding Quad Cities have a few major places of employment, including the Rock Island Arsenal, which is the largest government-owned weapons manufacturing arsenal in the United States. KONE, Inc, a large manufacturer of elevators, is located in Moline, Illinois. Alcoa, a large aluminum manufacturer, is located in Riverdale, Iowa. Other local businesses include Whitey's Ice Cream, Hungry Hobo sandwich shop, and Happy Joe's and Harris Pizza – both local pizzerias (the former of which is also an ice cream parlor).\n\nDowntown Davenport has many points of interest including the Davenport Public Library, the Davenport Skybridge, Figge Art Museum, River Music Experience, Putnam Museum, the RiverCenter/Adler Theater, Modern Woodmen Park which is home of the Quad City River Bandits baseball team and the Centennial Bridge. The former Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Freight House, now known as The Freight House, is home to several small businesses featuring locally grown items, such as a deli, a grocery hub, and a tap room for a local brewery.\n\nDavenport's cultural and educational institutions include the Figge Art Museum, which houses The National Center for Midwest Art and Design, and was founded in 1925 as the Davenport Municipal Art Gallery. The Putnam Museum, which was founded in 1867 and was one of the first museums west of the Mississippi River. The Quad City Symphony Orchestra, headquartered in downtown Davenport, was founded in 1915. The Davenport Public Library was opened in 1839. The German American Heritage Center is located at the foot of the Centennial Bridge.\n\nUptown features a few historic landmarks such as the Iowa Soldiers' Orphans' Home which took in homeless children from all of Iowa's ninety-nine counties following the Civil War and Ambrose Hall which was the original building of St. Ambrose University. Aside from landmarks, uptown contains some entertainment venues too, such as the Great Mississippi Valley Fairgrounds, which hosts fairs, stock car racing, and many other events. NorthPark Mall is the city's main shopping mall and has 160 stores. Its companion, SouthPark Mall, is located in Moline. Brady Street Stadium is home to Davenport high school and Saint Ambrose University football games. Davenport has a number of parks, including Credit Island park which has a bike path, baseball diamonds, tennis courts, and fishing along the Mississippi River. Vander Veer Botanical Park has a small botanical garden and also features a walking path, a lagoon, and a large fountain. The Stampe Lilac Garden is located in Duck Creek Park, on Locust St.\n\nAdditional Parks and Recreation amenities:\n• 50+ parks and facilities\n• 25+ picnic areas and shelters\n• 20+ miles of recreational trails\n• 2 dog off leash parks\n• Multiple natural prairies and no-mow zones\n• 32 playgrounds\n• 30 ball diamonds\n• 17 outdoor basketball courts\n• 8 tennis/pickle ball courts\n• 8 volleyball courts\n• 3 golf courses\n• FootGolf course (Red Hawk Golf Course)\n• 3 disc golf courses\n• 8 river views\n• Multiple lagoons and pond\n• Various fishing locations including 3 boat launches\n• 3 pools\n• Spray park\n• 3 splash pads\n• Soccer complex\n• Indoor ice and turf facility (The River's Edge)\n• Skate park\n• Iowa's only indoor human foosball (The River's Edge)\n• Mobile environmental education trailer \n• Mobile show wagon\n• Botanical park and conservatory\n• 5 fountains\n• 2 lodges\n• Cemetery\n• Community center\n• Several historic sites including a bandshell\n• The second oldest children's theatre in America (Junior Theatre)\n\nBix Fest is a three-day music festival with many traditional jazz bands held in tribute to internationally renowned jazz cornetist, pianist, composer, and Davenport native Bix Beiderbecke. The festival was started in August 1971 and the Bix Beiderbecke Memorial Society was founded one year later to organize and sponsor it. 2009 was the 39th consecutive festival. In addition to the Bix Fest, the Wells Fargo Street Fest features live music, food, and vendors.\n\nThe annual Bix 7 is a road race held in late July in Davenport. The race was founded in 1975 by John A. Hudetz a resident of Bettendorf, Iowa, who wanted to bring to the Quad Cities some of the excitement he felt when he ran his first Boston Marathon. The first race had 84 participants, but today 12,000 to 18,000 runners take part. In late July or early August the six-day Great Mississippi Valley Fair features major grandstand concerts, carnival rides, attractions, and food vendors. Sturgis on the River is a large annual gathering of motorcycles which includes bands and food vendors. Other local expositions include River Roots Live, Beaux Arts Fair and many others.\n\nDavenport has four sister cities:\n\nDavenport (along with neighboring Rock Island, Illinois), won the 2007 City Livability Award in the small-city category from the U.S. Conference of Mayors. Tom Cochran, Executive Director of the Conference, stated that the award \"gives the Conference a chance to highlight mayoral leadership in making urban areas safer, cleaner and more livable.\" The award acknowledges achievements from the RiverVision plan of Davenport and Rock Island.\n\nDavenport and the Quad Cities are home to many sports teams. The Quad Cities River Bandits baseball team play games at Downtown Davenport's Modern Woodmen Park. The TaxSlayer Center in Moline is home the Quad City Steamwheelers indoor football team and the Quad City Storm hockey team. Davenport high schools are in the Mississippi Athletic Conference for sports.\n\nDavenport has over fifty parks or recreational trails. Major parks include Credit Island, which is a park in southwest Davenport located alongside the Mississippi River. Fejervary Park contains a pool and has had approximately 20,000 visitors each year since 1996. Junge Park is situated along the Duck Creek Parkway and includes baseball and softball fields, sand volleyball, and basketball courts. LeClaire Park is located right on the banks of the Mississippi River next to Modern Woodmen Park. LeClaire Park hosts many summer events including River Roots Live and Ribfest. Bands for the Bix Fest play in the park each July. Vander Veer Botanical Park welcomes approximately 25,000 visitors to continuous floral shows.\n\nThe city features two recreational trails for biking or walking. Duck Creek Parkway extends from Emeis Park in west Davenport east to Bettendorf along Duck Creek. Riverfront Parkway extends along the Mississippi waterfront from Credit Island to Bettendorf. Both these trails continue into Bettendorf. Plans are being discussed to connect the two trails in Riverdale. Three public golf courses are offered in the city. For river-related activities, The Channel Cat boat offers rides across the river and has two stops in Iowa and three stops in Illinois and connects the bike paths that each state has on its river front.\n\nDavenport is also home to Daytrotter, a recording studio and venue which has hosted and recorded many different indie-rock bands throughout the country. Daytrotter is located at 324 Brady Street in the heart of downtown Davenport.\n\nThere are two major daily newspapers in Davenport. The \"Quad-City Times\" is based out of Davenport and \"The Dispatch/Rock Island Argus\" is based out of Moline. An alternative free newspaper, the \"River Cities' Reader\", is published in Davenport. All four major television networks have stations in the area, including KWQC (NBC) and KLJB (Fox) in Davenport. WHBF (CBS) is located in Rock Island and WQAD (ABC) is in Moline.\n\nThe Quad Cities ranks as the 97th largest market for television and the 147th largest market for radio. Radio station WOC made its local broadcasting debut on February 18, 1922. It was the second licensed station on the air. In 1933 WOC hired future president Ronald Reagan as a staff announcer.\n\nBULLET::::- Bix Beiderbecke recorded a song in 1925 called \"Davenport Blues\".\nBULLET::::- The 1958 Johnny Cash song, \"Big River\", also later recorded by Bill Monroe and other artists, mentions \"cavortin' in Davenport.\"\nBULLET::::- Davenport is one of eight cities listed in the song \"Iowa Stubborn\" from the 1957 musical \"The Music Man\".\nBULLET::::- Davenport during and following the 1993 flood is a playable scenario in .\n\nDavenport public schools serve nearly 17,000 students in the communities of Davenport, Blue Grass, Buffalo, and Walcott. The Davenport Community School District is the second-largest school district in Iowa. Davenport has four public high schools: Central, West, Mid City and North and one private high school: Assumption. There are six public intermediate schools and 23 public elementary schools. Sudlow, one of the intermediate schools, was named after Phebe Sudlow, the first female public school superintendent in the United States. She was superintendent for Davenport schools from 1874 to 1878. The high schools are part of the Mississippi Athletic Conference for sports.\n\nThe city has four colleges and universities: Saint Ambrose University, established in 1882, is the oldest; Kaplan University, Palmer Chiropractic College, and Hamilton Technical College. Palmer College is the first chiropractic school and the site of the first chiropractic adjustment in the world.\n\nMarycrest International University was a university in Davenport from 1939 to 2002, when it closed. The campus was renovated and adapted to senior citizen housing.\n\nThree interstate highways serve Davenport: Interstate 80, Interstate 280, and Interstate 74. Interstate 88 serves the Illinois Quad Cities and runs east to Chicago. U.S. Route 6, U.S. Route 61, and U.S. Route 67 also go through Davenport; U.S. 67 crosses over to Illinois via the Rock Island Centennial Bridge. Davenport is connected to the Illinois side of the Quad Cities by a total of three bridges across the Mississippi River. The Government Bridge and the Centennial Bridge connect Downtown Davenport with the Rock Island Arsenal and downtown Rock Island, respectively. The I-280 Bridge connects the western edge of Davenport with the western edge of Rock Island.\n\nOther highways include Iowa Highway 22, which is on the city's southwest side, and Iowa Highway 130, which runs along Northwest Boulevard on Davenport's north edge. For air travel, Davenport Municipal Airport – located adjacent to the city's northern city limits – serves smaller aircraft, and is the home of the annual Quad City Airshow. The Quad City International Airport across the river in Moline, Illinois, is the closest commercial airport. Major railroads include the Iowa Interstate Railroad and the Iowa, Chicago and Eastern. Two national U.S. recreation trails intersect in Davenport: the Mississippi River Trail and the American Discovery Trail.\n\nAmtrak currently does not serve Davenport or the Quad Cities. The closest station currently is about away in Galesburg, Illinois. In 2008, the two current United States Senators from Iowa, Tom Harkin and Chuck Grassley, Illinois Senator Dick Durbin, and former Senator Barack Obama sent a letter to Amtrak asking them to begin plans to bring rail service to the Quad Cities. In October 2010, a $230 million federal fund was announced that will bring Amtrak service to the Quad Cities, with a new line running from Moline to Chicago. They had hoped to have the lined completed in 2015, and offer two round trips daily to Chicago. Currently the Moline station does not have any Amtrak service. Greyhound Lines/Burlington Trailways bus service has a station in Davenport. The building is shared with the local Davenport Citibus. Davenport does not have any river ports.\n\nDavenport has an infamous \"truck-eating bridge\". The bridge, or rather three bridges, is a set of railroad bridges that cross over north and southbound U.S. Route 61 and another street. Every year an average of 12 semi trucks hit the bridge, usually causing massive damage to the trucks. The bridges, made out of iron, steel, and concrete, are rarely damaged.\n\nPublic transit appeared in Davenport in 1969 when the city created a City Transit Authority. The authority at first provided monetary support to Davenport City Lines Bus Company, which was a privately owned company. After a few years the city purchased the Davenport City Lines and placed the operation of public transportation under the jurisdiction of the City's Department of Municipal Transportation. Today, CitiBus is a division of the Department of Public Works. CitiBus has a total of 20 vehicles and covers approximately of the city. CitiBus connects with both Bettendorf Transit and the Illinois Quad Cities mass transit system, MetroLINK. In 2007 Citibus saw a ridership of 1,022,815 customers. Ridership as of September 2008 had grown to 1,045,000 due in part to high gas prices.\n\nElectricity to Davenport, and the rest of the Iowa Quad Cities, is provided by MidAmerican Energy Company. Water is provided by the Mississippi River and is treated by the Iowa American Water Company. The water treatment facility is located in southeast Davenport.\n\nDavenport is served by two hospitals: Genesis Medical Center East – Rusholme Street and Genesis Medical Center – West Central Park Avenue part of the Genesis Health System. Together the facilities, along with two other facilities outside Davenport have 665 beds. The hospitals employ more than 600 physicians and 5,000 staff members. The American Nurses Credentialing Center, awarded Genesis Medical Center the Magnet designation for excellence in nursing services. Fewer than three percent of hospitals receive this honor.\n\nNotable Davenporters include jazz musician Bix Beiderbecke, after whom the Bix 7 road race and jazz festival are named. The artist Isabel Bloom was raised in Davenport; she is the creator of decorative concrete figurines that bear her name.\n\nGuitarist and vocalist John Kadlecik, who founded The Dark Star Orchestra and toured with the members of The Grateful Dead in the band Furthur, also grew up in Davenport.\n\nSports figures born in Davenport include NFL running back Roger Craig, NFL offensive lineman Julian Vandervelde, former NBA guard Ricky Davis, former middleweight boxing champion Michael Nunn, UFC welterweight champion Robbie Lawler and professional wrestler Seth Rollins.\n\nOther natives include the aviation pioneer Samuel Cody, actors Stuart Margolin, Lara Flynn Boyle, Sue Lyon, Linnea Quigley, and Greg Stolze. Otto Frederick Rohwedder, the inventor of mass-produced sliced bread, grew up in Davenport.\n\nThe current mayor of St. Louis, Lyda Krewson, was born in Davenport.\n\nBULLET::::- African Americans in Davenport, Iowa\nBULLET::::- Bucktown, Davenport\nBULLET::::- List of tallest buildings in the Quad Cities\n\nBULLET::::- Plan and Zoning Commission, \"Historic Preservation in Davenport, Iowa for Inclusion in the Davenport Comprehensive Plan\", Davenport (1985)\nBULLET::::- Svendsen, Marlys, \"Davenport A Pictorial History\", (1987) Davenport: G. Bradley Publishing, Inc.,\nBULLET::::- Svendsen, Marlys, \"Davenport Historical Survey Report : A Thematic History of Davenport, Iowa, 1836–1940 with reference to buildings, structures & sites\", (1980) Davenport,\n\nBULLET::::- City of Davenport\nBULLET::::- Gallery of trucks eaten by the bridge\n"}
{"id": "8603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8603", "title": "Diffraction", "text": "Diffraction\n\nDiffraction refers to various phenomena that occur when a wave encounters an obstacle or a slit. It is defined as the bending of waves around the corners of an obstacle or through an aperture into the region of geometrical shadow of the obstacle/aperture. The diffracting object or aperture effectively becomes a secondary source of the propagating wave. Italian scientist Francesco Maria Grimaldi coined the word \"diffraction\" and was the first to record accurate observations of the phenomenon in 1660.\n\nIn classical physics, the diffraction phenomenon is described by the Huygens–Fresnel principle that treats each point in a propagating wave-front as a collection of individual spherical wavelets. The characteristic banding pattern is most pronounced when a wave from a coherent source (such as a laser) encounters a slit/aperture that is comparable in size to its wavelength, as shown in the inserted image. This is due to the addition, or interference, of different points on the wave-front (or, equivalently, each wavelet) that travel by paths of different lengths to the registering surface. However, if there are multiple, closely spaced openings, a complex pattern of varying intensity can result. \n\nThese effects also occur when a light wave travels through a medium with a varying refractive index, or when a sound wave travels through a medium with varying acoustic impedance – all waves diffract, including gravitational waves, water waves, and other electromagnetic waves such as X-rays and radio waves. Furthermore, quantum mechanics also demonstrates that matter possesses wave-like properties, and hence, undergoes diffraction (which is measurable at subatomic to molecular levels).\n\nDiffraction and interference are closely related and are nearly – if not exactly – identical in meaning. Richard Feynman observes that \"diffraction\" tends to be used when referring to many wave sources, and \"interference\" when only a few are considered.\n\nThe effects of diffraction are often seen in everyday life. The most striking examples of diffraction are those that involve light; for example, the closely spaced tracks on a CD or DVD act as a diffraction grating to form the familiar rainbow pattern seen when looking at a disc. This principle can be extended to engineer a grating with a structure such that it will produce any diffraction pattern desired; the hologram on a credit card is an example. Diffraction in the atmosphere by small particles can cause a bright ring to be visible around a bright light source like the sun or the moon. A shadow of a solid object, using light from a compact source, shows small fringes near its edges. The speckle pattern which is observed when laser light falls on an optically rough surface is also a diffraction phenomenon. When deli meat appears to be iridescent, that is diffraction off the meat fibers. All these effects are a consequence of the fact that light propagates as a wave.\n\nDiffraction can occur with any kind of wave. Ocean waves diffract around jetties and other obstacles. Sound waves can diffract around objects, which is why one can still hear someone calling even when hiding behind a tree.\nDiffraction can also be a concern in some technical applications; it sets a fundamental limit to the resolution of a camera, telescope, or microscope.\n\nThe effects of diffraction of light were first carefully observed and characterized by Francesco Maria Grimaldi, who also coined the term \"diffraction\", from the Latin \"diffringere\", 'to break into pieces', referring to light breaking up into different directions. The results of Grimaldi's observations were published posthumously in 1665. Isaac Newton studied these effects and attributed them to \"inflexion\" of light rays. James Gregory (1638–1675) observed the diffraction patterns caused by a bird feather, which was effectively the first diffraction grating to be discovered. Thomas Young performed a celebrated experiment in 1803 demonstrating interference from two closely spaced slits. Explaining his results by interference of the waves emanating from the two different slits, he deduced that light must propagate as waves. Augustin-Jean Fresnel did more definitive studies and calculations of diffraction, made public in 1815 and 1818, and thereby gave great support to the wave theory of light that had been advanced by Christiaan Huygens and reinvigorated by Young, against Newton's particle theory.\n\nIn traditional classical physics diffraction arises because of the way in which waves propagate; this is described by the Huygens–Fresnel principle and the principle of superposition of waves. The propagation of a wave can be visualized by considering every particle of the transmitted medium on a wavefront as a point source for a secondary spherical wave. The wave displacement at any subsequent point is the sum of these secondary waves. When waves are added together, their sum is determined by the relative phases as well as the amplitudes of the individual waves so that the summed amplitude of the waves can have any value between zero and the sum of the individual amplitudes. Hence, diffraction patterns usually have a series of maxima and minima.\n\nIn the modern quantum mechanical understanding of light propagation through a slit (or slits) every photon has what is known as a wavefunction which describes its path from the emitter through the slit to the screen. The wavefunction — the path the photon will take — is determined by the physical surroundings such as slit geometry, screen distance and initial conditions when the photon is created. In important experiments (A low-intensity double-slit experiment was first performed by G. I. Taylor in 1909, see double-slit experiment) the existence of the photon's wavefunction was demonstrated. In the quantum approach the diffraction pattern is created by the distribution of paths, the observation of light and dark bands is the presence or absence of photons in these areas (no interference!). The quantum approach has some striking similarities to the Huygens-Fresnel principle; in that principle the light becomes a series of individually distributed light sources across the slit which is similar to the limited number of paths (or wave functions) available for the photons to travel through the slit.\n\nThere are various analytical models which allow the diffracted field to be calculated, including the Kirchhoff-Fresnel diffraction equation which is derived from wave equation, the Fraunhofer diffraction approximation of the Kirchhoff equation which applies to the far field and the Fresnel diffraction approximation which applies to the near field. Most configurations cannot be solved analytically, but can yield numerical solutions through finite element and boundary element methods.\n\nIt is possible to obtain a qualitative understanding of many diffraction phenomena by considering how the relative phases of the individual secondary wave sources vary, and in particular, the conditions in which the phase difference equals half a cycle in which case waves will cancel one another out.\n\nThe simplest descriptions of diffraction are those in which the situation can be reduced to a two-dimensional problem. For water waves, this is already the case; water waves propagate only on the surface of the water. For light, we can often neglect one direction if the diffracting object extends in that direction over a distance far greater than the wavelength. In the case of light shining through small circular holes we will have to take into account the full three-dimensional nature of the problem.\n\nSome examples of diffraction of light are considered below.\n\n \n\nA long slit of infinitesimal width which is illuminated by light diffracts the light into a series of circular waves and the wavefront which emerges from the slit is a cylindrical wave of uniform intensity, in accordance with Huygens–Fresnel principle.\n\nA slit which is wider than a wavelength produces interference effects in the space downstream of the slit. These can be explained by assuming that the slit behaves as though it has a large number of point sources spaced evenly across the width of the slit. The analysis of this system is simplified if we consider light of a single wavelength. If the incident light is coherent, these sources all have the same phase. Light incident at a given point in the space downstream of the slit is made up of contributions from each of these point sources and if the relative phases of these contributions vary by 2π or more, we may expect to find minima and maxima in the diffracted light. Such phase differences are caused by differences in the path lengths over which contributing rays reach the point from the slit.\n\nWe can find the angle at which a first minimum is obtained in the diffracted light by the following reasoning. The light from a source located at the top edge of the slit interferes destructively with a source located at the middle of the slit, when the path difference between them is equal to \"λ\"/2. Similarly, the source just below the top of the slit will interfere destructively with the source located just below the middle of the slit at the same angle. We can continue this reasoning along the entire height of the slit to conclude that the condition for destructive interference for the entire slit is the same as the condition for destructive interference between two narrow slits a distance apart that is half the width of the slit. The path difference is approximately formula_1 so that the minimum intensity occurs at an angle \"θ\" given by\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- \"d\" is the width of the slit,\nBULLET::::- formula_3 is the angle of incidence at which the minimum intensity occurs, and\nBULLET::::- formula_4 is the wavelength of the light\n\nA similar argument can be used to show that if we imagine the slit to be divided into four, six, eight parts, etc., minima are obtained at angles \"θ\" given by\nwhere\nBULLET::::- \"n\" is an integer other than zero.\n\nThere is no such simple argument to enable us to find the maxima of the diffraction pattern. The intensity profile can be calculated using the Fraunhofer diffraction equation as\nwhere\nBULLET::::- formula_7 is the intensity at a given angle,\nBULLET::::- formula_8 is the original intensity, and\nBULLET::::- the unnormalized sinc function above is given by formula_9 for formula_10, and formula_11\n\nThis analysis applies only to the far field, that is, at a distance much larger than the width of the slit.\n\nFrom the intensity profile above, if formula_12, the intensity will have little dependency on formula_13, hence the wavefront emerging from the slit would resemble a cylindrical wave of uniform intensity; If formula_14, only formula_15 would have appreciable intensity, hence the wavefront emerging from the slit would resemble that of geometrical optics.\n\nA diffraction grating is an optical component with a regular pattern. The form of the light diffracted by a grating depends on the structure of the elements and the number of elements present, but all gratings have intensity maxima at angles θ which are given by the grating equation\n\nwhere\nBULLET::::- θ is the angle at which the light is incident,\nBULLET::::- \"d\" is the separation of grating elements, and\nBULLET::::- \"m\" is an integer which can be positive or negative.\n\nThe light diffracted by a grating is found by summing the light diffracted from each of the elements, and is essentially a convolution of diffraction and interference patterns.\n\nThe figure shows the light diffracted by 2-element and 5-element gratings where the grating spacings are the same; it can be seen that the maxima are in the same position, but the detailed structures of the intensities are different.\n\nThe far-field diffraction of a plane wave incident on a circular aperture is often referred to as the Airy Disk. The variation in intensity with angle is given by\n\nwhere \"a\" is the radius of the circular aperture, \"k\" is equal to 2π/λ and J is a Bessel function. The smaller the aperture, the larger the spot size at a given distance, and the greater the divergence of the diffracted beams.\n\nThe wave that emerges from a point source has amplitude formula_18 at location r that is given by the solution of the frequency domain wave equation for a point source (The Helmholtz Equation),\n\nwhere formula_20 is the 3-dimensional delta function. The delta function has only radial dependence, so the Laplace operator (a.k.a. scalar Laplacian) in the spherical coordinate system simplifies to (see del in cylindrical and spherical coordinates)\n\nBy direct substitution, the solution to this equation can be readily shown to be the scalar Green's function, which in the spherical coordinate system (and using the physics time convention formula_22) is:\n\nThis solution assumes that the delta function source is located at the origin. If the source is located at an arbitrary source point, denoted by the vector formula_24 and the field point is located at the point formula_25, then we may represent the scalar Green's function (for arbitrary source location) as:\n\nTherefore, if an electric field, E(\"x\",\"y\") is incident on the aperture, the field produced by this aperture distribution is given by the surface integral:\n\nwhere the source point in the aperture is given by the vector\n\nIn the far field, wherein the parallel rays approximation can be employed, the Green's function,\n\nsimplifies to\n\nas can be seen in the figure to the right (click to enlarge).\n\nThe expression for the far-zone (Fraunhofer region) field becomes\n\nNow, since\n\nand\n\nthe expression for the Fraunhofer region field from a planar aperture now becomes,\n\nLetting,\n\nand\n\nthe Fraunhofer region field of the planar aperture assumes the form of a Fourier transform\n\nIn the far-field / Fraunhofer region, this becomes the spatial Fourier transform of the aperture distribution. Huygens' principle when applied to an aperture simply says that the far-field diffraction pattern is the spatial Fourier transform of the aperture shape, and this is a direct by-product of using the parallel-rays approximation, which is identical to doing a plane wave decomposition of the aperture plane fields (see Fourier optics).\n\nThe way in which the beam profile of a laser beam changes as it propagates is determined by diffraction. When the entire emitted beam has a planar, spatially coherent wave front, it approximates Gaussian beam profile and has the lowest divergence for a given diameter. The smaller the output beam, the quicker it diverges. It is possible to reduce the divergence of a laser beam by first expanding it with one convex lens, and then collimating it with a second convex lens whose focal point is coincident with that of the first lens. The resulting beam has a larger diameter, and hence a lower divergence. Divergence of a laser beam may be reduced below the diffraction of a Gaussian beam or even reversed to convergence if the refractive index of the propagation media increases with the light intensity. This may result in a self-focusing effect.\n\nWhen the wave front of the emitted beam has perturbations, only the transverse coherence length (where the wave front perturbation is less than 1/4 of the wavelength) should be considered as a Gaussian beam diameter when determining the divergence of the laser beam. If the transverse coherence length in the vertical direction is higher than in horizontal, the laser beam divergence will be lower in the vertical direction than in the horizontal.\n\nThe ability of an imaging system to resolve detail is ultimately limited by diffraction. This is because a plane wave incident on a circular lens or mirror is diffracted as described above. The light is not focused to a point but forms an Airy disk having a central spot in the focal plane with radius to first null of\n\nwhere λ is the wavelength of the light and \"N\" is the f-number (focal length divided by diameter) of the imaging optics. In object space, the corresponding angular resolution is\n\nwhere \"D\" is the diameter of the entrance pupil of the imaging lens (e.g., of a telescope's main mirror).\n\nTwo point sources will each produce an Airy pattern – see the photo of a binary star. As the point sources move closer together, the patterns will start to overlap, and ultimately they will merge to form a single pattern, in which case the two point sources cannot be resolved in the image. The Rayleigh criterion specifies that two point sources can be considered to be resolvable if the separation of the two images is at least the radius of the Airy disk, i.e. if the first minimum of one coincides with the maximum of the other.\n\nThus, the larger the aperture of the lens, and the smaller the wavelength, the finer the resolution of an imaging system. This is why telescopes have very large lenses or mirrors, and why optical microscopes are limited in the detail which they can see.\n\nThe speckle pattern which is seen when using a laser pointer is another diffraction phenomenon. It is a result of the superposition of many waves with different phases, which are produced when a laser beam illuminates a rough surface. They add together to give a resultant wave whose amplitude, and therefore intensity, varies randomly.\n\nBabinet's Principle is a useful theorem stating that the diffraction pattern from an opaque body is identical to that from a hole of the same size and shape, but with differing intensities. This means that the interference conditions of a single obstruction would be the same as that of a single slit.\n\nSeveral qualitative observations can be made of diffraction in general:\nBULLET::::- The angular spacing of the features in the diffraction pattern is inversely proportional to the dimensions of the object causing the diffraction. In other words: The smaller the diffracting object, the 'wider' the resulting diffraction pattern, and vice versa. (More precisely, this is true of the sines of the angles.)\nBULLET::::- The diffraction angles are invariant under scaling; that is, they depend only on the ratio of the wavelength to the size of the diffracting object.\nBULLET::::- When the diffracting object has a periodic structure, for example in a diffraction grating, the features generally become sharper. The third figure, for example, shows a comparison of a double-slit pattern with a pattern formed by five slits, both sets of slits having the same spacing, between the center of one slit and the next.\n\nQuantum theory tells us that every particle exhibits wave properties. In particular, massive particles can interfere and therefore diffract. Diffraction of electrons and neutrons stood as one of the powerful arguments in favor of quantum mechanics. The wavelength associated with a particle is the de Broglie wavelength\n\nwhere \"h\" is Planck's constant and \"p\" is the momentum of the particle (mass × velocity for slow-moving particles).\n\nFor most macroscopic objects, this wavelength is so short that it is not meaningful to assign a wavelength to them. A sodium atom traveling at about 30,000 m/s would have a De Broglie wavelength of about 50 pico meters.\n\nBecause the wavelength for even the smallest of macroscopic objects is extremely small, diffraction of matter waves is only visible for small particles, like electrons, neutrons, atoms and small molecules. The short wavelength of these matter waves makes them ideally suited to study the atomic crystal structure of solids and large molecules like proteins.\n\nRelatively larger molecules like buckyballs were also shown to diffract.\n\nDiffraction from a three-dimensional periodic structure such as atoms in a crystal is called Bragg diffraction.\nIt is similar to what occurs when waves are scattered from a diffraction grating. Bragg diffraction is a consequence of interference between waves reflecting from different crystal planes.\nThe condition of constructive interference is given by \"Bragg's law\":\n\nwhere\n\nBragg diffraction may be carried out using either electromagnetic radiation of very short wavelength like X-rays or matter waves like neutrons (and electrons) whose wavelength is on the order of (or much smaller than) the atomic spacing. The pattern produced gives information of the separations of crystallographic planes \"d\", allowing one to deduce the crystal structure. Diffraction contrast, in electron microscopes and x-topography devices in particular, is also a powerful tool for examining individual defects and local strain fields in crystals.\n\nThe description of diffraction relies on the interference of waves emanating from the same source taking different paths to the same point on a screen. In this description, the difference in phase between waves that took different paths is only dependent on the effective path length. This does not take into account the fact that waves that arrive at the screen at the same time were emitted by the source at different times. The initial phase with which the source emits waves can change over time in an unpredictable way. This means that waves emitted by the source at times that are too far apart can no longer form a constant interference pattern since the relation between their phases is no longer time independent.\n\nThe length over which the phase in a beam of light is correlated, is called the coherence length. In order for interference to occur, the path length difference must be smaller than the coherence length. This is sometimes referred to as spectral coherence, as it is related to the presence of different frequency components in the wave. In the case of light emitted by an atomic transition, the coherence length is related to the lifetime of the excited state from which the atom made its transition.\n\nIf waves are emitted from an extended source, this can lead to incoherence in the transversal direction. When looking at a cross section of a beam of light, the length over which the phase is correlated is called the transverse coherence length. In the case of Young's double slit experiment, this would mean that if the transverse coherence length is smaller than the spacing between the two slits, the resulting pattern on a screen would look like two single slit diffraction patterns.\n\nIn the case of particles like electrons, neutrons and atoms, the coherence length is related to the spatial extent of the wave function that describes the particle.\n\nBULLET::::- Angle-sensitive pixel\nBULLET::::- Atmospheric diffraction\nBULLET::::- Bragg diffraction\nBULLET::::- Brocken spectre\nBULLET::::- Cloud iridescence\nBULLET::::- Diffraction formalism\nBULLET::::- Diffraction limit\nBULLET::::- Diffraction spike\nBULLET::::- Diffraction vs. interference\nBULLET::::- Diffractometer\nBULLET::::- Dynamical theory of diffraction\nBULLET::::- Electron diffraction\nBULLET::::- Fraunhofer diffraction\nBULLET::::- Fresnel diffraction\nBULLET::::- Fresnel imager\nBULLET::::- Fresnel number\nBULLET::::- Fresnel zone\nBULLET::::- Neutron diffraction\nBULLET::::- Prism\nBULLET::::- Powder diffraction\nBULLET::::- Refraction\nBULLET::::- Schaefer–Bergmann diffraction\nBULLET::::- Thinned array curse\nBULLET::::- X-ray scattering techniques\nBULLET::::- Coherent diffraction imaging\n"}
{"id": "8605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8605", "title": "Stephen Donaldson (activist)", "text": "Stephen Donaldson (activist)\n\nStephen Donaldson (July 27, 1946 – July 18, 1996), born Robert Anthony Martin Jr and also known by the pseudonym Donny the Punk, was an American bisexual political activist. He is best known for his pioneering activism in LGBT rights and prison reform, and for his writing about punk rock and subculture.\n\nThe son of a career naval officer, Donaldson spent his early childhood in different seaport cities in the eastern United States and in Germany. Donaldson later described his father Robert, the son of Italian and German immigrants, as a man who \"frowned on display of emotion\" and his mother Lois as \"an English, Scottish Texan, artistic, free-spirited, emotional, impulsive.\" After his parents' divorce in 1953 when he was seven years old, Donaldson's mother was diagnosed with a mental disorder and abandoned her two sons. She did not contact them again until 1964.\n\nAt age 12, Donaldson was expelled from Boy Scouts for engaging in sexual behavior with other boys (who, as recipients, were not punished). \"The disgrace triggered a family crisis, resolved by sending the boy to live in Germany, where he could be watched over by his stepmother's relatives.\" He continued homosexual activity, hiding it from adults.\n\nIn April 1962, at the age of fifteen, Donny returned to the United States to live with his grandparents in West Long Branch, New Jersey. In high school he was news editor of the school paper, an actor, and a student government officer. He also became active in politics as a libertarian conservative, supporting Barry Goldwater for president\" and \"considered joining the Young Americans for Freedom but was so uptight that he first checked with J. Edgar Hoover by letter to inquire whether the YAF was 'a communist organization, communist subverted, or in danger of becoming either'. Hoover sent back a reply \"praising his concern about communism and then opened an FBI file on the boy\". (Years later, Donaldson received a copy of his FBI file through the Freedom of Information Act.)\n\nDonaldson later wrote about his developing sexual identity:\n\nIn the summer of 1965, Donaldson moved to Florida to live with his mother. \"When Lois discovered young Robert was having an affair with a Cuban man, she decided to punish her son by outing him in letters to her ex-husband and to Columbia University, which Donaldson had planned to attend in the fall.\" Donaldson ran away to New York, where, he later wrote, \"The gays of New York welcomed me enthusiastically, offered hospitality, and 'brought me out' as a 'butch' homosexual (in contrast to the \"queens\"). Among the Mattachine Society members he met were Julian Hodges, Frank Kameny, and Dick Leitsch.\n\nIn August 1965, Donaldson \"had a social worker call the dean's office to ask whether Columbia would register a known homosexual.\" After a delay of two weeks, the administration responded that he \"would be allowed to register, on condition that he undergo psychotherapy and not attempt to seduce other students.\"\n\nHe entered Columbia University that fall and began using the pseudonym Stephen Donaldson so he could be open about his sexuality without embarrassing his father. They both were named Robert Martin, and his father taught mathematics at Rider College in New Jersey. The surname was based on the first name, \"Donald\", of the baseball teammate who was his first love. His first year of college was difficult: he met no other bisexual students or faculty and had to move from a shared suite to a single room when his suitemates \"told the college dean David Truman that they felt uncomfortable living with a homosexual.\" Apparently ambivalent, they offered Donaldson \"great apologies and said they realized they shouldn't feel\" unwilling to live with him.\n\nIn the summer of 1966, Donaldson began a relationship with gay activist Frank Kameny, who had a great influence on him. Donaldson later wrote:\n\nIn August, Kameny took Donaldson to Cherry Grove on Fire Island, where he \"was thrilled to meet another gay Columbia student [James Millham] and to learn that Millham lived with his lover, a New York University student, in one of Columbia's dormitories.\"\n\nThat fall, Donaldson suggested to Millham \"that they form a Mattachine-like organization on campus, what he envisioned as 'the first chapter of a spreading confederation of student homophile groups.'\" At first, Donaldson was unable to gain official recognition for the Student Homophile League (SHL) \"(now called the Columbia Queer Alliance),\" as Columbia required a membership list. Donaldson and Millham were the only gay students willing to provide their names. This prevented the group from receiving university funding or holding public events on campus until Donaldson realized that by \"recruiting the most prominent student leaders to become \"pro forma\" members, he could satisfy the administration without compromising the anonymity of gay students, and Columbia officially chartered the country's first student gay rights group on April 19, 1967,\" and subsequently the first known LGBT student movement.\n\nOn April 27, an article about the organization appeared in the student paper, the \"Columbia Spectator\", which students \"seemed to think ... was some sort of April Fool hoax.\" It soon became clear that it was not. \"The Spectator\" ran an editorial praising the chartering of the group and printed letters from students attacking and defending the decision. At this point, there was no apparent opposition from Columbia faculty or staff. The fledgling group was advised by the university chaplain, the Rev. John D. Cannon, who gave permission for them to hold meetings in his office and later let Donaldson hold office hours there.\n\nDespite having \"assured the administration that publicity would be kept to a minimum,\" Donaldson \"launched an aggressive public information campaign about SHL and homosexuality\", making sure it was covered on Columbia radio station WKCR, where he was a staff member. He also sent out \"at least three press releases to several large newspapers, wire services, and magazines with national and international distribution.\" The group received little coverage until gay rights supporter Murray Schumach saw the \"Spectator\" piece and wrote an article, headlined \"Columbia Charters Homosexual Group\", which appeared on the front page of \"The New York Times\" on May 3, 1967:\n\nThe article also quoted Dr. Harold E. Love, the chairman of Columbia's Committee on Student Organizations, who said there was no reason to deny the request once they had determined it was a \"bona fide student organization.\" The article noted that \"[f]unds were said to have been supplied for the organization by some Columbia alumni who were reported to have learned about it from advertisements in magazines for homosexuals\" and that Donaldson said that the group \"maintains liaison\" with, but is not controlled by, outside homosexual groups. The alumnus supporter was Foster Gunnison Jr., a founding member of the North American Conference of Homophile Organizations, with whom Donaldson had strategized about getting the organization approved. Gunnison \"sent the administration a letter of support and made a cash contribution\".\n\nHistorian David Eisenbach argued in \"Gay Power: An American Revolution\" that \"much of the SHL's influence grew out of the media attention it attracted... Within a week [of the \"New York Times\" story], media outlets across the country had homed in, with coverage ranging from favorable to neutral to the Gainesville Sun's 'Student Group Seeks Rights for Deviants.'\".\n\nAs a result of the publicity, there were \"[s]harp [verbal] clashes\" between Columbia officials and the SHL. Brett Beemyn wrote about the backlash:\n\nA surprising source of opposition to Donaldson and the SHL was the Mattachine Society of New York (MSNY), whose president Dick Leitsch \"resented the media attention that SHL had generated\". With the unanimous support of the board, Leitsch contacted \"Frank Hogan, the Manhattan District Attorney and a Member of the Columbia Board of Trustees to advise him on how to undermine SHL.\" In a letter to Hogan, Leitsch wrote:\n\nDonaldson was defended by homophile leaders Barbara Gittings, Frank Kameny, and Forest Gunnison, although Eisenbach recorded that Gunnison acknowledged Donaldson's 'tendencies toward arbitrariness and manipulation.'\n\nThe publicity also led students at other universities to contact Donaldson about starting chapters. In 1968, Donaldson certified SHL chapters at Cornell University, led by Jearld Moldenhauer and advised by radical priest Daniel Berrigan; New York University, headed by Rita Mae Brown; and Stanford University. In 1969, chapters were started at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology by Stan Tillotson, San Francisco State University, and Rutgers University by African American Lionel Cuffie. The University of Massachusetts Amherst gained a chapter in 1970. Other early campus gay groups outside the SHL network included the Boston University Homophile Committee, Fight Repression of Erotic Expression (FREE) at the University of Minnesota, and Homosexuals Intransigent at the City College of New York.\n\nDonaldson was \"heavily involved throughout the rest of the 1960s not only as national leader of the Student Homophile League but also as an elected officer of the North American Conference of Homophile Organizations (NACHO) and of its Eastern Regional subsidiary\". By 1971, there were an estimated 150 gay student groups at colleges and universities \"often with official sanction and with remarkable acceptance from fellow students\".\n\nDonaldson began his writing career in college by working summers as a reporter for the Associated Press and Virginian Pilot and writing a regular column for the New York newsmagazine \"Gay Power\" and occasional reports for \"The Advocate\".\n\nHe also worked summers as a legislative intern in the offices of U.S. Representatives Howard H. Callaway (Republican, Georgia) and Donald E. Lukens (Republican, Ohio). Frank Kameny arranged his first internship, which was in the summer of 1966.\n\nIn New York, Donaldson funded \"his education by working as a hustler, first at the infamous intersection of Fifty-third Street and Third Avenue, then as a call boy through a house. He claimed to have serviced several famous clients, including Rock Hudson and Roy Cohn.\"\n\nWhile at Columbia, Donaldson \"experimented with cannabis and LSD\" and described himself as \"ordained in the psychedelic church,\" going on to guide first-time LSD users. He wrote that he became a liberal in 1967 in response to the Kerner Report on racism towards blacks in the United States and went on to become a \"full-fledged hippy-valued radical.\" He was arrested twice for participating in anti-war protests at Columbia, including a \"liberation\" of Columbia president Grayson Kirk's office, spending an uneventful night in jail in 1968.\n\nIn 1966, Donaldson fell in love with a woman, Judith \"JD Rabbit\" Jones (whom he later considered his \"lifetime companion\") and began to identify as a bisexual. His \"growing feeling of discomfort with biphobia in the homophile/gay liberation movement was a major factor\" in his deciding to quit the movement and enlist in the Navy after graduating from Columbia in 1970.\n\nDonaldson had a longstanding desire to join the Navy, even buying a sailor's uniform during college, in which he cruised the city and pretended to be a serviceman on a visit to a naval base in Pensacola, Florida, and maintained a \"lifelong identification with sailors and seafaring.\" After graduating from Columbia in 1970, he enlisted and served as a radioman at a NATO base in Italy with an unblemished record until \"he wrote to a former shipmate, Terry Fountain, about his latest sexual adventures [with both women and men] at his current home port of Naples, Italy\". After Fountain left the letter unattended on his desk, someone turned it over to the Naval Investigative Service, which allegedly coerced Fountain into signing a statement that he had sex with Donaldson, which Fountain later recanted. In 1971, \"the Navy announced its intention to release [Donaldson] by General Discharge on grounds of suspected homosexual involvement.\" As Randy Shilts wrote in :\n\nThese supporters included six congressional representatives, including New York's Bella Abzug (who called his case a \"witch-hunt\") and Edward Koch; senators Richard Schweiker of Pennsylvania and Sam Ervin of North Carolina; the president of the American Psychiatric Association (APA), Judd Marmor (who had been \"influential in having homosexuality removed from the APA's official list of clinical disorders\"); Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr.; and the American Civil Liberties Union, which provided a staff attorney to represent him.\n\nDespite the support, he received a general discharge in 1972. Donaldson continued to fight, and, in 1977, his discharge was upgraded to \"honorable\" as part of \"President Carter's sweeping amnesty program for Vietnam-era draft evaders, deserters, and service members\", at which time:\n\nAccording to Eisenbach:\n\nDonaldson later summarized his military experience and the subsequent transition in his life:\n\nThis group adopted by consensus the \"Ithaca Statement on Bisexuality\".\n\nAfter a series of meetings, the Committee of Friends on Bisexuality was formed, with Donaldson (using the name Bob Martin) as its chair until he left the Quakers in 1977.\n\nDonaldson was involved in the New York bisexual movement in the mid-1970s, for example appearing in 1974 on a New York Gay Activists Alliance panel with Kate Millet. Donaldson propounded the belief that ultimately bisexuality would be perceived as much more threatening to the prevailing sexual order than homosexuality, because it potentially subverted everyone's identity (the idea that everyone is potentially bisexual was widespread) and could not, unlike exclusive homosexuality, be confined to a segregated, stigmatized and therefore manageable ghetto.\n\nHe and bisexual activist Brenda Howard and gay activist L. Craig Schoonmaker are credited with popularizing the word \"Pride\" to describe LGBT Pride celebrations that are now held around the world every June.\n\nAfter being discharged from the Navy in 1972, Donaldson moved to Washington, D.C., where he \"worked as Pentagon correspondent for the \"Overseas Weekly\", a privately owned newspaper distributed to American servicemen stationed in Europe\". Donaldson considered himself a Quaker and took part in the Langley Hill Monthly Meeting, where he was part of a group influenced by \"a series of pray-ins at the White House sponsored by the Community for Creative Non-Violence (CCNV)\" who felt a call to \"hold a memorial meeting for worship at the White House to commemorate the nuclear bombing of Nagasaki [on its 28th anniversary] and for the victims of all wars and violence\" on August 9, 1973. The protesters (referred to as the \"White House Seven\") were arrested for unlawful entry and released on bail except for Donaldson, who refused and spent the night in the D.C. jail before being released by a judge the next morning. On August 14 Donaldson was one of 66 demonstrators (including Daniel Berrigan) who took part in a CCNV-sponsored pray-in at the White House protesting the bombing of Cambodia, where he was again arrested. Donaldson again refused to post bail. In a 1974 account under the pseudonym Donald Tucker, he explained:\n\nLiddy wrote in his autobiography that he heard that Donaldson worked for \"The Washington Post\", suspected him of being in prison \"to try to steal a march[(\"?\")]\" on Woodward and Bernstein by getting a first hand story\", and expressed the wish that he be transferred elsewhere.\n\nHowever, Donaldson himself in \"The Punk Who Wouldn't Shut Up\", states that guard captain Clinton Cobb had him moved to the most dangerous cell-block in the prison and his subsequent rapes arranged as he believed him to be writing a piece on prison corruption for \"The Washington Post\".\n\nThat night, Donaldson was lured into a cell by a prisoner who claimed that he and his friends wanted to 'discuss pacifism' with him in their cells. He was then anally and orally raped dozens of times by an estimated 45 male inmates. He suffered additional abuse a second night before he escaped from his tormentors (two of whom were pimping him to the others for cigarettes) and collapsed, sobbing, at the cell block gate where guards retrieved him. After a midnight examination at D.C. General Hospital (during which he remained handcuffed) he was returned to the jail hospital, untreated either for physical injury or emotional trauma.\n\nDonaldson later claimed that the guards told him he'd been deliberately set up by Captain Cobb. The following morning, Lucy Witt, one of the White House Seven, posted his bond and took him to a doctor.\n\nThe next day (August 24) Donaldson held a press conference, becoming the first male prison-rape survivor to publicly recount his experiences; this resulted in \"massive and prolonged\" publicity (under his legal name, Robert Martin). All three Washington newspapers carried lengthy stories; newspapers from Hartford to Miami picked it up from wire services, and all three network-affiliated TV stations carried filmed interviews.\n\nOne television station and one newspaper carried editorials. Under the headline \"Nightmares at D.C. Jail,\" the \"Star-News\" wrote: \"...It is particularly ironic that the victim of this latest nightmare chose to go to the jail rather than post collateral because he 'wanted to understand at an experience level what the prison system is all about.' He survived the lesson but only just. And being a man of uncommon understanding, he may also survive its after-effects.\"\n\nOn August 28 Donaldson met with attorney William Schaffer, who agreed to represent him in a possible civil suit against the D.C. Department of Corrections with the goal of pressuring officials to make major improvements to the jail system. Donaldson wrote the following year about this \"time of agony\":\n\nAfter deliberations with the Langley Hill Meeting, Donaldson decided on October 20 not to file a civil suit and to not cooperate with the grand jury inquiry into a criminal suit against his attackers.\n\nDonaldson and the rest of the White House Seven defended themselves against the August 9 charge of illegal entry; they were found guilty and sentenced on September 26 to \"the choice of $25 or five days in jail or a one-year unsupervised probation conditional on a promise not to violate any local, state or federal law during that period\". Donaldson rejected the probation outright. \"I cannot promise to abide by all the laws of the United States\", he said, \"because if there is an unjust law that has to be broken to further divine purposes, I will break it\".\n\nAt first Donaldson chose to go to jail rather than pay the fine, which he viewed as cooperating with the government. He changed his mind after finding out he would be returned to the same jail in Washington, D.C. He regretfully said: \"My conscience tells me I should have gone (to jail), but I was shaking all over. It was obvious I just couldn't go through it again. I couldn't go back.\"\n\nAs for the August 14 charge which led to his traumatic imprisonment, Donaldson refused to plead (unlike most of those arrested, who pleaded no contest) and went to trial alone on September 28. Representing himself, Donaldson testified on legal, moral and religious issues (including an explanation of \"karma\" and of silent meditation). When the jury returned a not guilty verdict on October 1, there was much rejoicing in the small courtroom.\n\nThe injuries to Donaldson's rectum were so severe that they required surgery, and he had to spend a week in the Washington D.C. Veterans' Hospital. He later said: \"The government sewed up the tears in my rectum which the government occasioned.\"\n\nIn a 1974 account in the \"Friends Journal\", Donaldson asked:\n\nIn 1982, Donaldson wrote about his lack of success in getting needed psychological counseling after the rapes:\n\nDonaldson wrote that he was aided in his sexual recovery by an understanding woman who helped him regain his confidence. After a year and a half, he returned to his prior level of sexual activity. In 1975, \"the suppressed emotions began to rise to the level of consciousness, primarily in the form of anger, aggression, and a vigorous reassertion of [his] own masculinity,\" leading him to join a male consciousness raising group and then, in 1976, to pursue \"individual Gestalt therapy (not being able to afford anything else) with a lay therapist.\"\n\nWhile traveling in late 1976, Donaldson was arrested after urinating in a motel parking lot, then was charged with possession after the police searched his hotel room and found cannabis. He was placed in a small cell block with four white and eight black prisoners, most Marines from a nearby base, who demanded sexual services. Donaldson later wrote:\n\nDonaldson was pleasantly surprised that they treated him not with the contempt he expected but with genuine warmth and affection. Grateful for their kindness and protection, Donaldson decided to embrace his role as \"punk\" and do his best to keep his men happy.\n\nAfter the black prisoners fought the white Marines over him, Donaldson was placed in solitary confinement, where he remained until his bail was posted. Donaldson was defended against the possession charge by the chief counsel of the state chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union. The case was thrown out due to unconstitutional police behavior.\n\nIn the spring of 1977, Donaldson became depressed enough to cut his wrist and arranged to get himself arrested for sale of LSD in Norfolk, Virginia, with the hope, he later wrote, \"to find myself being wanted and needed, to find the warm security I had experienced with the marines in the county jail.\" Donaldson was placed in the city jail, where he was gang-raped nightly until the guards were alerted and he was put in solitary confinement for his protection (to which Donaldson vigorously objected, believing the loss of rights and privileges unfair). After being released into a cell with blacks (who had allegedly paid $5 to receive him), Donaldson was again raped and \"paralyzed with terror, the emotions of D.C. Jail overwhelming [him]\", he fought his assailant, for which he was returned to solitary. After being released into a white cell, he was greeted: \"Why, it's Donny the Punk!\", giving him his nickname.\n\nDonaldson experienced another mental shift:\n\nDonaldson was eventually claimed by a cellmate, Terry, who treated him with kindness. The two had a cell to themselves when a frightened newcomer was moved in and, with Terry's consent, Donaldson decided to emotionally manipulate the newcomer into becoming his own punk. Donaldson wrote:\n\nAfter several months, Donaldson's case was dropped by the prosecution after the arresting officer's suicide. Donaldson wrote:\n\nDonaldson continued to suffer from depression, insomnia, and panic attacks in the late 1970s, and attempted suicide in 1977, the year after the suicide of his mother Lois Vaugahn. In 1980, Donaldson \"hit rock bottom\" and committed a semi-deranged incident at a Veterans' Hospital in the Bronx. Having been denied medicine for a sexually transmitted disease, Donaldson returned with a gun and fired it. During the subsequent trial, Donaldson heavily criticized the United States Government's policies. The judge ultimately found him guilty.\n\nAlthough nobody was hurt, Donaldson was convicted of assault with intent to commit murder and sentenced to ten years in federal prison. He was guilty of counts 1–6, \"Unlawfully, willfully and knowingly within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States did seize, confine, inveigle, decoy, kidnap and abduct and hold for ransom and reward and otherwise a person and did commit assault with intent to commit murder, in that while at a Hospital\".\n\nIn a 1982 essay written from jail, Donaldson described the event:\n\nLess than a year into his term, Donaldson had been \"raped once, assaulted once, and claimed by five different men\" in jail and was fearing his upcoming transfer to his first maximum security prison, where he went on to spend over a year in protective custody, which he described as \"a solitary retreat\" in a letter to Bo Lozoff. Lozoff was leader of the Prison-Ashram Project, which encourages convicts to use their prisons as ashrams (religious retreats) for spiritual growth. In their correspondence, Donaldson expressed his desire to help other survivors but lamented that:\n\nDonaldson was released on parole in April 1984 and returned to New York City. He violated his parole by visiting India for religious study in 1987–1988, which led to his final prison term, in federal prison, in 1990.\n\nThrough Bo Lozoff, Donaldson met Tom Cahill, whose correspondence with Lozoff also appeared in \"We're All Doing Time\". Cahill was \"an Air Force veteran turned peace activist when [he] was jailed for civil disobedience in San Antonio, Texas in 1968. For the first twenty-four hours, [he] was beaten, gang-raped and otherwise tortured\", allegedly as part of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Counter Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO) due to Cahill's anti-Vietnam War activity.\n\nAround 1983, Cahill resurrected the defunct organization \"People Organized to Stop Rape of Imprisoned Persons\" (POSRIP), which had been founded in 1980 by Russell Smith. In 2004, Cahill recollected:\n\nDonaldson became president of Stop Prisoner Rape, Inc. (SPR), which he and Cahill incorporated in the mid-1990s from POSRIP. The organization (since 2008 known as Just Detention International) helps prisoners deal with the psychological and physical trauma of rape, and works to prevent rape from happening. Donaldson was perhaps the first activist against male rape in the United States to gain significant media attention. Writing on behalf of SPR, he appeared on the Op-Ed page of \"The New York Times\", as well as in other major media. He testified on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union in its case \"ACLU et al. v. Reno\", which went to the U.S. Supreme Court.\n\nAs \"Donny the Punk\", Donaldson was already a respected writer and personality in the punk and anti-racist skinhead subcultures. He had published in punk zines such as \"Maximum RocknRoll\", \"Flipside\" and \"J.D.s\". In the mid-1980s, Donny was the chief organizer of The Alternative Press & Radio Council (APRC), which brought together members of the punk community (such as fanzine editors and college radio DJs) of New York City, New Jersey, and Connecticut. This co-operative group met on Sundays before the weekly CBGB Sunday hardcore matinees and organized several benefit concerts. The group published a newsletter, and released a compilation LP on Mystic Records in 1986, which was entitled \"Mutiny On The Bowery.\" The compilation featured live recordings from the group's benefit concerts. Among other active members of the APRC were WFMU-FM DJ Pat Duncan, MaximumRockNRoll columnist Mykel Board and \"Jersey Beat\" editor Jim Testa.\n\nDonaldson was associate editor of the \"Encyclopedia of Homosexuality\" (Garland Publishing, 1990). He was editor-in-chief of a concise edition of the encyclopedia, which remains unpublished.\n\nDonaldson died of AIDS in 1996 at the age of 49.\n\nAfter Donaldson's death, the Columbia Queer Alliance renamed its student lounge in his honor. SPR continued to work for prisoners' rights. It contributed to gaining the passage of the first US law against rape in prison Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003. The issue of rape and prisoners' rights continues to receive national and state attention.\n\nBULLET::::- Sexual orientation and the United States military\n\nBULLET::::- Stop Prisoner Rape, Inc. is now Just Detention International\nBULLET::::- Writings by and about Stephen Donaldson at Just Detention International website (previously SPR.org)\nBULLET::::- Stephen Donaldson papers at the New York Public Library\nBULLET::::- (pdf)\n"}
{"id": "8608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8608", "title": "Dolmen", "text": "Dolmen\n\nA dolmen () is a type of single-chamber megalithic tomb, usually consisting of two or more vertical megaliths supporting a large flat horizontal capstone or \"table\". Most date from the early Neolithic (40003000 BC) and were sometimes covered with earth or smaller stones to form a tumulus. Small pad-stones may be wedged between the cap and supporting stones to achieve a level appearance. In many instances, the covering has weathered away, leaving only the stone \"skeleton\" of the mound intact.\n\nIt remains unclear when, why and by whom the earliest dolmens were made. The oldest known are found in Western Europe, dating from c 7,000 years ago. Archaeologists still do not know who erected these dolmens, which makes it difficult to know why they did it. They are generally all regarded as tombs or burial chambers, despite the absence of clear evidence for this. Human remains, sometimes accompanied by artefacts, have been found in or close to the dolmens which could be scientifically dated using radiocarbon dating. However, it has been impossible to prove that these remains date from the time when the stones were originally set in place.\n\nThe word \"dolmen\" has an unclear history. The word entered archaeology when Théophile Corret de la Tour d'Auvergne used it to describe megalithic tombs in his \"Origines gauloises\" (1796) using the spelling \"dolmin\" (the current spelling was introduced about a decade later and had become standard in French by about 1885). The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" does not mention \"dolmin\" in English and gives its first citation for \"dolmen\" from a book on Brittany in 1859, describing the word as \"The French term, used by some English authors, for a cromlech ...\". The name was supposedly derived from a Breton language term meaning \"stone table\" but doubt has been cast on this, and the \"OED\" describes its origin as \"Modern French\". A book on Cornish antiquities from 1754 said that the current term in the Cornish language for a cromlech was \"tolmen\" (\"hole of stone\") and the OED says that \"There is reason to think that this was the term inexactly reproduced by Latour d'Auvergne [sic] as \"dolmen\", and misapplied by him and succeeding French archaeologists to the \"cromlech\"\". Nonetheless it has now replaced cromlech as the usual English term in archaeology, when the more technical and descriptive alternatives are not used.\n\nDolmens are known by a variety of names in other languages, including , Galician and , Bulgarian: Долмени Dolmeni, , Afrikaans and , , , Adyghe Ispun, \"dysse\" (Danish and Norwegian), \"dös\" (Swedish), \"goindol (mordenized word: stacked stone)\", \"dol (stone)\", and . Granja is used in Portugal, Galicia, and Spain. The rarer forms \"anta\" and \"ganda\" also appear. In the Basque Country, they are attributed to the \"jentilak\", a race of giants.\n\nThe etymology of the and - with \"Hüne/hune\" meaning \"giant\" - all evoke the image of giants buried (bett/bed/grab = bed/grave)there. Of other Celtic languages, was borrowed into English and \"quoit\" is commonly used in English in Cornwall.\n\nBULLET::::- Great dolmen\nBULLET::::- Passage grave\nBULLET::::- Polygonal dolmen\nBULLET::::- Rectangular, enlarged or extended dolmen\nBULLET::::- Simple dolmen\n\nBULLET::::- List of Dolmens\nBULLET::::- Gochang, Hwasun and Ganghwa Dolmen Sites\nBULLET::::- Antequera Dolmens Site\nBULLET::::- Irish megalithic tombs\nBULLET::::- Kistvaen\nBULLET::::- List of megalithic sites\nBULLET::::- Megalithic art\nBULLET::::- Neolithic Europe\nBULLET::::- Nordic megalith architecture\nBULLET::::- Taula\nBULLET::::- Murphy, Cornelius. \"The Prehistoric Archaeology of the Beara Peninsula, Co. Cork\". Department of Archaeology, University College Cork, 1997\n\nBULLET::::- Trifonov, V., 2006. Russia's megaliths: unearthing the lost prehistoric tombs of Caucasian warlords in the Zhane valley. St.Petersburg: The Institute for Study of Material Culture History, Russian Academy of Sciences. Available from\nBULLET::::- Kudin, M., 2001. Dolmeni i ritual. Dolmen Path – Russian Megaliths. Available from\nBULLET::::- Knight, Peter. Ancient Stones of Dorset, 1996.\n\nBULLET::::- World heritage site of dolmen in Korea\nBULLET::::- Piccolo, Salvatore. \"Dolmen.\" Ancient History Encyclopedia.\nBULLET::::- The Megalith Map\nBULLET::::- The Megalithic Portal and Megalith Map\nBULLET::::- Dolmen Museum in Italian and English\nBULLET::::- Goindol: Dolmen of Korea\nBULLET::::- Research Centre of Dolmens in Northeast Asia\nBULLET::::- Poulnabrone Dolmen in the Burren, County Clare, Ireland\nBULLET::::- on UNESCO's World Heritage List.\nBULLET::::- Jersey Heritage Trust\nBULLET::::- Dolmen Pictures by Robert Triest.\nBULLET::::- Dolmens of Russia\nBULLET::::- Dolmens. Part 2. How and for which purpose were they built? Hypotheses\n"}
{"id": "8612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8612", "title": "Declination", "text": "Declination\n\nIn astronomy, declination (abbreviated dec; symbol δ) is one of the two angles that locate a point on the celestial sphere in the equatorial coordinate system, the other being hour angle. Declination's angle is measured north or south of the celestial equator, along the hour circle passing through the point in question.\n\nThe root of the word \"declination\" (Latin, \"declinatio\") means \"a bending away\" or \"a bending down\". It comes from the same root as the words \"incline\" (\"bend toward\") and \"recline\" (\"bend backward\").\n\nIn some 18th and 19th century astronomical texts, declination is given as \"North Pole Distance\" (N.P.D.), which is equivalent to 90 - (declination). For instance an object marked as declination -5 would have a NPD of 95, and a declination of -90 (the south celestial pole) would have a NPD of 180.\n\nDeclination in astronomy is comparable to geographic latitude, projected onto the celestial sphere, and hour angle is likewise comparable to longitude.\nPoints north of the celestial equator have positive declinations, while those south have negative declinations. Any units of angular measure can be used for declination, but it is customarily measured in the degrees ( ° ), minutes ( ′ ), and seconds ( ″ ) of sexagesimal measure, with 90° equivalent to a quarter circle. Declinations with magnitudes greater than 90° do not occur, because the poles are the northernmost and southernmost points of the celestial sphere.\n\nAn object at the\nBULLET::::- celestial equator has a declination of 0°\nBULLET::::- north celestial pole has a declination of +90°\nBULLET::::- south celestial pole has a declination of −90°\n\nThe sign is customarily included whether positive or negative.\n\nThe Earth's axis rotates slowly westward about the poles of the ecliptic, completing one circuit in about 26,000 years. This effect, known as precession, causes the coordinates of stationary celestial objects to change continuously, if rather slowly. Therefore, equatorial coordinates (including declination) are inherently relative to the year of their observation, and astronomers specify them with reference to a particular year, known as an epoch. Coordinates from different epochs must be mathematically rotated to match each other, or to match a standard epoch.\n\nThe currently used standard epoch is J2000.0, which is January 1, 2000 at 12:00 TT. The prefix \"J\" indicates that it is a Julian epoch. Prior to J2000.0, astronomers used the successive Besselian Epochs B1875.0, B1900.0, and B1950.0.\n\nA star's direction remains nearly fixed due to its vast distance, but its right ascension and declination do change gradually due to precession of the equinoxes and proper motion, and cyclically due to annual parallax. The declinations of Solar System objects change very rapidly compared to those of stars, due to orbital motion and close proximity.\n\nAs seen from locations in the Earth's Northern Hemisphere, celestial objects with declinations greater than 90° −  (where = observer's latitude) appear to circle daily around the celestial pole without dipping below the horizon, and are therefore called circumpolar stars. This similarly occurs in the Southern Hemisphere for objects with declinations less (i.e. more negative) than −90° −  (where is always a negative number for southern latitudes). An extreme example is the pole star which has a declination near to +90°, so is circumpolar as seen from anywhere in the Northern Hemisphere except very close to the equator.\n\nCircumpolar stars never dip below the horizon. Conversely, there are other stars that never rise above the horizon, as seen from any given point on the Earth's surface (except extremely close to the equator. Upon flat terrain, the distance has to be within approximately 2 km, although this varies based upon the observer's altitude and surrounding terrain). Generally, if a star whose declination is is circumpolar for some observer (where is either positive or negative), then a star whose declination is − never rises above the horizon, as seen by the same observer. (This neglects the effect of atmospheric refraction.) Likewise, if a star is circumpolar for an observer at latitude , then it never rises above the horizon as seen by an observer at latitude −.\n\nNeglecting atmospheric refraction, declination is always 0° at east and west points of the horizon. At the north point, it is 90° − , and at the south point, −90° + . From the poles, declination is uniform around the entire horizon, approximately 0°.\n\n+ Stars visible by latitude\nNon-circumpolar stars are visible only during certain days or seasons of the year.\n\nThe Sun's declination varies with the seasons. As seen from arctic or antarctic latitudes, the Sun is circumpolar near the local summer solstice, leading to the phenomenon of it being above the horizon at midnight, which is called midnight sun. Likewise, near the local winter solstice, the Sun remains below the horizon all day, which is called polar night.\n\nWhen an object is directly overhead its declination is almost always within 0.01 degrees of the observer's latitude; it would be exactly equal except for two complications.\nThe first complication applies to all celestial objects: the object's declination equals the observer's astronomic latitude, but the term \"latitude\" ordinarily means geodetic latitude, which is the latitude on maps and GPS devices. In the continental United States and surrounding area, the difference (the vertical deflection) is typically a few arcseconds (1 arcsecond = of a degree) but can be as great as 41 arcseconds.\n\nThe second complication is that, assuming no deflection of the vertical, \"overhead\" means perpendicular to the ellipsoid at observer's location, but the perpendicular line does not pass through the center of the earth; almanacs provide declinations measured at the center of the Earth. (An ellipsoid is an approximation to sea level that is mathematically manageable).\n\nBULLET::::- Celestial coordinate system\nBULLET::::- Ecliptic\nBULLET::::- Equatorial coordinate system\nBULLET::::- Geographic coordinate system\nBULLET::::- Lunar standstill\nBULLET::::- Position of the Sun\nBULLET::::- Right ascension\nBULLET::::- Setting circles\nBULLET::::- MEASURING THE SKY A Quick Guide to the Celestial Sphere James B. Kaler, University of Illinois\nBULLET::::- Celestial Equatorial Coordinate System University of Nebraska-Lincoln\nBULLET::::- Celestial Equatorial Coordinate Explorers University of Nebraska-Lincoln\n"}
{"id": "8613", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8613", "title": "Diaspora", "text": "Diaspora\n\nA diaspora () is a scattered population whose origin lies in a separate geographic locale. In particular, the word diaspora is used to refer to the involuntary mass dispersion of a population from its indigenous territories, most notably the Jews who were dispersed from the Land of Israel in antiquity (known as the Jewish diaspora). Some other diasporas are the African transatlantic slave trade, the southern Chinese or Indians during the coolie trade, the Irish during and after the Irish Famine, the Romani from India, the Italian diaspora, the exile and deportation of Circassians, the flight or expulsion of Arabs from Palestine, fleeing of Greeks after the fall of Constantinople, Expulsion of the Acadians, and the emigration of Anglo-Saxon warriors and their families after the Norman Conquest of England.\n\nRecently, scholars have distinguished between different kinds of diaspora, based on its causes such as imperialism, trade or labor migrations, or by the kind of social coherence within the diaspora community and its ties to the ancestral lands. Some diaspora communities maintain strong political ties with their homeland. Other qualities that may be typical of many diasporas are thoughts of return, relationships with other communities in the diaspora, and lack of full integration into the host countries. Diasporas often maintain ties to the country of their historical affiliation and influence the policies of the country where they are located.\n\nIn 2019, according to data released by United Nations with 17.5 million Indian diaspora is world's largest diaspora, followed by 11.8 million Mexican diaspora and 10.7 million of Chinese diaspora.\n\nThe term is derived from the Greek verb διασπείρω (\"diaspeirō\"), \"I scatter\", \"I spread about\" which in turn is composed of διά (\"dia\"), \"between, through, across\" and the verb σπείρω (\"speirō\"), \"I sow, I scatter\". In Ancient Greece the term διασπορά (\"diaspora\") hence meant \"scattering\" and was inter alia used to refer to citizens of a dominant city-state who emigrated to a conquered land with the purpose of colonization, to assimilate the territory into the empire. An example of a diaspora from classical antiquity is the century-long exile of the Messenians under Spartan rule and the Ageanites as described by Thucydides in his \"history of the Peloponnesian wars.\"\n\nIts use began to develop from this original sense when the Hebrew Bible was translated into Greek; the first mention of a diaspora created as a result of exile is found in the Septuagint, first in\nBULLET::::- Deuteronomy 28:25, in the phrase , \"esē en diaspora en pasais tais basileiais tēs gēs\", translated to mean \"thou shalt be a dispersion in all kingdoms of the earth\"\nand secondly in\nBULLET::::- Psalms 146(147).2, in the phrase , \"oikodomōn Ierousalēm ho Kyrios kai tas diasporas tou Israēl episynaxē\", translated to mean \"The Lord doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel\".\nSo after the Bible's translation into Greek, the word \"diaspora\" would then have been used to refer to the Northern Kingdom exiled between 740–722 BC from Israel by the Assyrians, as well as Jews, Benjaminites, and Levites exiled from the Southern Kingdom in 587 BC by the Babylonians, and from Roman Judea in 70 AD by the Roman Empire. It subsequently came to be used to refer to the historical movements and settlement patterns of the dispersed populations of Israel.\n\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary Online\", the first known recorded usage of the word \"diaspora\" in the English language was in 1876 referring \"extensive \"diaspora\" work (as it is termed) of evangelizing among the National Protestant Churches on the continent\". The term became more widely assimilated into English by the mid 1950s, with long-term expatriates in significant numbers from other particular countries or regions also being referred to as a diaspora. An academic field, diaspora studies, has become established relating to this sense of the word. In English when capitalized (referring to the Jewish community) without modifiers (that is simply, \"the Diaspora\"), the term refers specifically to the Jewish diaspora.\n\nIn all cases, the term \"diaspora\" carries a sense of displacement the population so described finds itself for whatever reason separated from its national territory, and usually its people have a hope, or at least a desire, to return to their homeland at some point, if the \"homeland\" still exists in any meaningful sense. Some writers have noted that diaspora may result in a loss of nostalgia for a single home as people \"re-root\" in a series of meaningful displacements. In this sense, individuals may have multiple homes throughout their diaspora, with different reasons for maintaining some form of attachment to each. Diasporic cultural development often assumes a different course from that of the population in the original place of settlement. Over time, remotely separated communities tend to vary in culture, traditions, language and other factors. The last vestiges of cultural affiliation in a diaspora is often found in community resistance to language change and in maintenance of traditional religious practice.\n\nWilliam Safran in an article published in 1991, set out six rules to distinguish diasporas from migrant communities. These included criteria that the group maintains a myth or collective memory of their homeland; they regard their ancestral homeland as their true home, to which they will eventually return; being committed to the restoration or maintenance of that homeland; and they relate \"personally or vicariously\" to the homeland to a point where it shapes their identity. While Safran's definitions were influenced by the idea of the Jewish diaspora, he recognised the expanding use of the term.\n\nRogers Brubaker (2005) also notes that use of the term diaspora has been widening. He suggests that one element of this expansion in use \"involves the application of the term diaspora to an ever-broadening set of cases: essentially to any and every nameable population category that is to some extent dispersed in space\". Brubaker has used the WorldCat database to show that 17 out of the 18 books on diaspora published between 1900 and 1910 were on the Jewish diaspora. The majority of works in the 1960s were also about the Jewish diaspora, but in 2002 only two out of 20 books sampled (out of a total of 253) were about the Jewish case, with a total of eight different diasporas covered.\n\nBrubaker outlines the original use of the term diaspora as follows:\n\nMost early discussions of diaspora were firmly rooted in a conceptual 'homeland'; they were concerned with a paradigmatic case, or a small number of core cases. The paradigmatic case was, of course, the Jewish diaspora; some dictionary definitions of diaspora, until recently, did not simply illustrate but defined the word with reference to that case.\n\nBrubaker argues that the initial expansion of the use of the phrase extended it to other, similar cases, such as the Armenian and Greek diasporas. More recently, it has been applied to emigrant groups that continue their involvement in their homeland from overseas, such as the category of long-distance nationalists identified by Benedict Anderson. Brubaker notes that (as examples): Albanians, Basques, Hindu Indians, Irish, Japanese, Kashmiri, Koreans, Kurds, Palestinians, and Tamils have been conceptualised as diasporas in this sense. Furthermore, \"labour migrants who maintain (to some degree) emotional and social ties with a homeland\" have also been described as diasporas.\n\nIn further cases of the use of the term, \"the reference to the conceptual homeland – to the 'classical' diasporas – has become more attenuated still, to the point of being lost altogether\". Here, Brubaker cites \"transethnic and transborder linguistic categories...such as Francophone, Anglophone and Lusophone 'communities'\", along with Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Confucian, Huguenot, Muslim and Catholic 'diasporas'. Brubaker notes that, , there were also academic books or articles on the Dixie, white, liberal, gay, queer and digital diasporas.\n\nSome observers have labeled evacuation from New Orleans and the Gulf Coast in the wake of Hurricane Katrina the New Orleans diaspora, since a significant number of evacuees have not been able to return, yet maintain aspirations to do so. Agnieszka Weinar (2010) notes the widening use of the term, arguing that recently, \"a growing body of literature succeeded in reformulating the definition, framing diaspora as almost any \"population\" on the move and no longer referring to the specific \"context\" of their existence\". It has even been noted that as charismatic Christianity becomes increasingly globalized, many Christians conceive of themselves as a diaspora, and form an imaginary that mimics salient features of ethnic diasporas.\n\nProfessional communities of individuals no longer in their homeland can also be considered diaspora. For example, science diasporas are communities of scientists who conduct their research away from their homeland. In an article published in 1996, Khachig Tölölyan argues that the media have used the term corporate diaspora in a rather arbitrary and inaccurate fashion, for example as applied to “mid-level, mid-career executives who have been forced to find new places at a time of corporate upheaval” (10) The use of corporate diaspora reflects the increasing popularity of the diaspora notion to describe a wide range of phenomena related to contemporary migration, displacement and transnational mobility. While corporate diaspora seems to avoid or contradict connotations of violence, coercion and unnatural uprooting historically associated to the notion of diaspora, its scholarly use may heuristically describe the ways in which corporations function alongside diasporas. In this way, corporate diaspora might foreground the racial histories of diasporic formations without losing sight of the cultural logic of late capitalism in which corporations orchestrate the transnational circulation of people, images, ideologies and capital.\n\nOne of the largest diasporas of modern times is that of Sub-Saharan Africans, which dates back several centuries. During the Atlantic slave trade, 9.4 to 12 million people from West Africa survived transportation to arrive in the Americas as slaves. This population and their descendants were major influences on the culture of British, French, Portuguese, and Spanish New World colonies. Prior to the trans-Atlantic slave trade, millions of Africans had moved and settled as merchants, seamen and slaves in different parts of Europe and Asia. From the 8th through the 19th centuries, an Arab-controlled slave trade dispersed millions of Africans to Asia and the islands of the Indian Ocean.\n\nCurrently, migrant Africans can only enter thirteen African countries without advanced visas. In pursuing a unified future, the African Union (AU) will allow people to move freely between the 54 countries of the AU under a visa free passport and encourage migrants to return to Africa.\n\nThe largest Asian diaspora is the Indian diaspora. The overseas Indian community, estimated at over 17.5 million, is spread across many regions in the world, on every continent. It constitutes a diverse, heterogeneous and eclectic global community representing different regions, languages, cultures, and faiths (see Desi). Similarly, the Romani, numbering roughly 12 million in Europe trace their origins to the Indian subcontinent, and their presence in Europe is first attested to in the Middle Ages.\n\nThe earliest known Asian diaspora of note is the Jewish diaspora. The majority of the Diaspora can be attributed to the Roman conquest, expulsion, and enslavement of the Jewish population of Judea, whose descendants became the Ashkenazim, Sephardim, and Mizrahim of today.\n\nChinese emigration (also known as the Chinese Diaspora; see also Overseas Chinese) first occurred thousands of years ago. The mass emigration that occurred from the 19th century to 1949 was caused mainly by wars and starvation in mainland China, as well as political corruption. Most migrants were illiterate or poorly educated peasants, called by the now-recognized racial slur coolies (Chinese: 苦力, literally \"hard labor\"), who migrated to developing countries in need of labor, such as the Americas, Australia, South Africa, Southeast Asia, Malaya and other places.\n\nAt least three waves of Nepalese diaspora can be identified. The earliest wave dates back to hundreds of years as early marriage and high birthrates propelled Hindu settlement eastward across Nepal, then into Sikkim and Bhutan. A backlash developed in the 1980s as Bhutan's political elites realized that Bhutanese Buddhists were at risk of becoming a minority in their own country. At least 60,000 ethnic Nepalese from Bhutan have been resettled in the United States. A second wave was driven by British recruitment of mercenary soldiers beginning around 1815 and resettlement after retirement in the British Isles and southeast Asia. The third wave began in the 1970s as land shortages intensified and the pool of educated labor greatly exceeded job openings in Nepal. Job-related emigration created Nepalese enclaves in India, the wealthier countries of the Middle East, Europe and North America. Current estimates of the number of Nepalese living outside Nepal range well up into the millions.\n\nIn Siam, regional power struggles among several kingdoms in the region led to a large diaspora of ethnic Lao between the 1700s–1800s by Siamese rulers to settle large areas of the Siamese kingdom's northeast region, where Lao ethnicity is still a major factor in 2012. During this period, Siam decimated the Lao capital, capturing, torturing and killing the Lao king Anuwongse.\n\nEuropean history contains numerous diaspora-like events. In ancient times, the trading and colonising activities of the Greek tribes from the Balkans and Asia Minor spread people of Greek culture, religion and language around the Mediterranean and Black Sea basins, establishing Greek city-states in Magna Graecia (Sicily, southern Italy), northern Libya, eastern Spain, the south of France, and the Black Sea coasts. Greeks founded more than 400 colonies. Tyre and Carthage also colonised the Mediterranean.\n\nAlexander the Great's conquest of the Achaemenid Empire marked the beginning of the Hellenistic period, characterized by a new wave of Greek colonization in Asia and Africa, with Greek ruling-classes established in Egypt, southwest Asia and northwest India. Subsequent waves of colonization and migration during the Middle Ages added to the older settlements, or created new ones, thus replenishing the Greek diaspora and making it one of the most long-standing and widespread in the world.\n\nThe Migration-Period relocations, which included several phases, are just one set of many in history. The first phase Migration-Period displacement (between CE 300 and 500) included relocation of the Goths (Ostrogoths and Visigoths), Vandals, Franks, various other Germanic peoples (Burgundians, Lombards, Angles, Saxons, Jutes, Suebi, Alemanni, Varangians and Normans), Alans and numerous Slavic tribes. The second phase, between CE 500 and 900, saw Slavic, Turkic, and other tribes on the move, resettling in Eastern Europe and gradually leaving it predominantly Slavic, and affecting Anatolia and the Caucasus as the first Turkic tribes (Avars, Huns, Khazars, Pechenegs), as well as Bulgars, and possibly Magyars arrived. The last phase of the migrations saw the coming of the Hungarian Magyars. The Viking expansion out of Scandinavia into southern and eastern Europe, Iceland and Greenland. The recent application of the word \"diaspora\" to the Viking lexicon highlights their cultural profile distinct from their predatory reputation in the regions they settled, especially in the North Atlantic. The more positive connotations associated with the social science term helping to view the movement of the Scandinavian peoples in the Viking Age in a new way.\n\nSuch colonizing migrations cannot be considered indefinitely as diasporas; over very long periods, eventually the migrants assimilate into the settled area so completely that it becomes their new mental homeland. Thus the modern Magyars of Hungary do not feel that they belong in the Western Siberia that the Hungarian Magyars left 12 centuries ago; and the English descendants of the Angles, Saxons and Jutes do not yearn to reoccupy the plains of Northwest Germany.\n\nIn 1492 a Spanish-financed expedition headed by Christopher Columbus arrived in the Americas, after which European exploration and colonization rapidly expanded. Historian James Axtell estimates that 240,000 people left Europe for the Americas in the 16th century. Emigration continued. In the 19th century alone over 50 million Europeans migrated to North and South America.\nOther Europeans moved to Siberia, Africa, and Australasia.\n\nA specific 19th-century example is the Irish diaspora, beginning in the mid-19th century and brought about by \"An Gorta Mór\" or \"the Great Hunger\" of the Irish Famine. An estimated 45% to 85% of Ireland's population emigrated to areas including Britain, the United States of America, Canada, Argentina, Australia and New Zealand. The size of the Irish diaspora is demonstrated by the number of people around the world who claim Irish ancestry; some sources put the figure at 80 to 100 million.\n\nFrom the 1860s the Circassian people, originally from Eastern Europe, were dispersed through Anatolia, Australia, the Balkans, the Levant, North America and West Europe, leaving less than 10% of their population in the homeland – parts of historical Circassia (in the modern-day Russian portion of the Caucasus).\n\nIn the United States of America, approximately 4.3 million people moved outside their home states in 2010, according to IRS tax-exemption data. In a 2011 TEDx presentation, Detroit native Garlin Gilchrist referenced the formation of distinct \"Detroit diaspora\" communities in Seattle and in Washington, D.C., while layoffs in the auto industry also led to substantial blue-collar migration from Michigan to Wyoming 2005. In response to a statewide exodus of talent, the State of Michigan continues to host \"MichAGAIN\" career-recruiting events in places throughout the United States with significant Michigan-diaspora populations.\n\nIn the People's Republic of China, millions of migrant workers have sought greater opportunity in the country's booming coastal metropolises, though this trend has slowed with the further development of China's interior. Migrant social structures in Chinese megacities are often based on place of origin, such as a shared hometown or province, and recruiters and foremen commonly select entire work-crews from the same village. In two separate June 2011 incidents, Sichuanese migrant workers organized violent protests against alleged police misconduct and migrant-labor abuse near the southern manufacturing hub of Guangzhou.\n\nMuch of Siberia's population has its origins in internal migration – voluntary or otherwise – from European Russia since the 16th century.\n\nThe twentieth century saw huge population movements. Some involved large-scale transfers of people by government action. Some migrations occurred to avoid conflict and warfare. Other diasporas were created as a consequence of political decisions, such as the end of colonialism.\n\nAs World War II unfolded, Nazi Germany deported and killed millions of Jews. Millions of others were enslaved or murdered, including Ukrainians, Russians and other Slavs. Some Jews fled from persecution to unoccupied parts of western Europe and the Americas before borders closed. Later, other eastern European refugees moved west, away from Soviet annexation, and the Iron Curtain regimes after World War II. Hundreds of thousands of these anti-Soviet political refugees and displaced persons ended up in western Europe, Australia, Canada and the United States of America.\n\nAfter World War II, the Soviet Union and Communist-controlled Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Yugoslavia expelled millions of ethnic Germans, most of whom were descendants of immigrants who had settled in those areas nearly two centuries before. This was allegedly in retaliation for the German Nazi invasion and their pan-German attempts at annexation. Most of the refugees moved to the West, including western Europe, and with tens of thousands seeking refuge in the United States.\n\nSpain sent many political activists into exile during Franco's military regime from 1936 to his death in 1975.\n\nPrior to World War II and the re-establishment of Israel, a series of anti-Jewish pogroms broke out in the Arab world and caused many to flee, mostly to Israel. The 1948 War of Independence likewise saw several hundred thousand Jews expelled from the West Bank, and at least 750,000 Palestinians expelled or forced to flee from Israel. Many Palestinians continue to live in refugee camps, while others have resettled in other countries.\n\nThe 1947 Partition resulted in the migration of millions of people between India and Pakistan. Millions were murdered in the religious violence of the period, with estimates of fatalities up to 2 million people. Thousands of former subjects of the British Raj went to the UK from the Indian subcontinent after India and Pakistan became independent in 1947.\n\nFrom the late 19th century, and formally from 1910, Japan made Korea a colony. Millions of Chinese fled to western provinces not occupied by Japan (that is, in particular Ssuchuan/Szechwan and Yunnan in the Southwest and Shensi and Kansu in the Northwest) and to Southeast Asia. More than 100,000 Koreans moved across the Amur River into Eastern Russia (then the Soviet Union) away from the Japanese.\n\nDuring and after the Cold War-era, huge populations of refugees migrated from conflict, especially from then-developing countries.\n\nUpheaval in the Middle East and Central Asia, some of which was related to power struggles between the United States and the Soviet Union, created new refugee populations which developed into global diasporas.\n\nIn Southeast Asia, many Vietnamese people emigrated to France and later millions to the United States, Australia and Canada after the Cold War-related Vietnam War. Later, 30,000 French \"colons\" from Cambodia were displaced after being expelled by the Khmer Rouge regime under Pol Pot. A small, predominantly Muslim ethnic group, the Cham people long residing in Cambodia, were nearly eradicated. The mass exodus of Vietnamese people from Vietnam coined the term 'Boat people'.\n\nIn Southwest China, many Tibetan people emigrated to India, following the 14th Dalai Lama in 1959 after the failure of his Tibetan uprising. This wave lasted until the 1960s, and another wave followed when Tibet was opened up to trade and tourism in the 1980s. It is estimated that about 200,000 Tibetans live now dispersed worldwide, half of whom in are India, Nepal and Bhutan. In lieu of lost citizenship papers, the Central Tibetan Administration offers Green Book identity documents to Tibetan refugees.\n\nSri Lankan Tamils have historically migrated to find work, notably during the British colonial period. Since the beginning of the civil war in 1983, more than 800,000 Tamils have been displaced within Sri Lanka as local diaspora, and over a half million Tamils living as the Tamil diaspora in destinations such as India, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the UK and Europe.\n\nThe Afghan diaspora resulted from the 1979 invasion by the former Soviet Union; both official and unofficial records indicate that the war displaced over 6 million people, resulting in the creation of the second largest refugee population worldwide today (2,7 million in 2018) \n\nMany Iranians fled the 1979 Iranian Revolution which culminated in the fall of the USA/British-ensconced Shah.\n\nIn Africa, a new series of diasporas formed following the end of colonial rule. In some cases as countries became independent, numerous minority descendants of Europeans emigrated; others stayed in the lands which had been family homes for generations. Uganda expelled 80,000 South Asians in 1972 and took over their businesses and properties. The 1990s Civil war in Rwanda between rival ethnic groups Hutu and Tutsi turned deadly and produced a mass efflux of refugees.\n\nIn Latin America, following the 1959 Cuban Revolution and the introduction of communism, over a million people have left Cuba.\n\nThere was a Jamaican diaspora around the start of the 21st century. More than 1 million Dominicans live abroad a majority living in the US.\n\nA million Colombian refugees have left Colombia since 1965 to escape the country's violence and civil wars. \n\nIn Southern America, thousands of Argentine and Uruguayan refugees fled to Europe during periods of military rule in the 1970s and 1980s.\n\nIn Central America, Nicaraguans, Salvadorans, Guatemalans, and Hondurans fled conflict and poor economic conditions.\n\nHundreds of thousands of people fled from the Rwandan genocide in 1994 into neighboring countries. Thousands of refugees from deteriorating conditions in Zimbabwe have gone to South Africa. The long war in Congo, in which numerous nations have been involved, has also created millions of refugees.\n\nThe South Korean diaspora during the 1990s caused the fertility rate to drop when a large amount of the middle class emigrated, as the rest of the population continued to age. To counteract the change in these demographics, the South Korean government initiated a diaspora engagement policy in 1997.\n\nMany Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian Croats escaped persecution, death and rape when fleeing.\n\nFollowing the Iraq War, nearly 3 million Iraqis had been displaced as of 2011, with 1.3 million within Iraq and 1.6 million in neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Syria. The Syrian Civil War has forced further migration, with at least 4 million displaced as per UN estimates.\n\nFollowing the presidency of Hugo Chávez and the establishment of his Bolivarian Revolution, over 1.6 million Venezuelans emigrated from Venezuela in what has been called the Bolivarian diaspora. The analysis of a study by the Central University of Venezuela titled \"Venezuelan Community Abroad. A New Method of Exile\" by \"El Universal\" states that the Bolivarian diaspora in Venezuela has been caused by the \"deterioration of both the economy and the social fabric, rampant crime, uncertainty and lack of hope for a change in leadership in the near future\".\n\nThere are numerous web-based news portals and forum sites dedicated to specific diaspora communities, often organized on the basis of an origin characteristic and a current location characteristic. The location-based networking features of mobile applications such as China's WeChat have also created de facto online diaspora communities when used outside of their home markets. Now, large companies from the emerging countries are looking at leveraging diaspora communities to enter the more mature market.\n\n\"Gran Torino\", a 2008 drama starring Clint Eastwood, was the first mainstream American film to feature the Hmong American diaspora.\n\nBULLET::::- List of diasporas\nBULLET::::- 1948 Palestinian exodus\nBULLET::::- Armenian Genocide\nBULLET::::- Ethnic cleansing\nBULLET::::- The Exodus\nBULLET::::- Expulsions and exoduses of Jews\nBULLET::::- Forced displacement\nBULLET::::- Human migration\nBULLET::::- Long Walk of the Navajo\nBULLET::::- Population transfer\nBULLET::::- Rural exodus\nBULLET::::- State collapse\nBULLET::::- Stateless nation\nBULLET::::- Trail of Tears\nBULLET::::- Ummah\nBULLET::::- Yom HaAliyah\nBULLET::::- Barclay, John M. G., (ed.), \"Negotiating Diaspora: Jewish Strategies in the Roman Empire\", Continuum International Publishing Group, 2004\nBULLET::::- Baser, B and Swain, A. “Diasporas as Peacemakers: Third Party Mediation in Homeland Conflicts” with Ashok Swain. International Journal on World Peace 25, 3, September 2008.\nBULLET::::- Braziel, Jana Evans. 2008. Diaspora – an introduction. Malden, MA: Blackwell.\nBULLET::::- Bueltmann, Tanja, et al. eds. \"Locating the English Diaspora, 1500–2010\" (Liverpool University Press, 2012)\nBULLET::::- Galil, Gershon, & Weinfeld, Moshe, Studies in Historical Geography and Biblical Historiography: Presented to Zekharyah Ḳalai, Brill, 2000\nBULLET::::- Forbes, Andrew, and Henley, David, \"People of Palestine\" (Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books, 2012),\nBULLET::::- Jayasuriya, S. and Pankhurst, R. eds. (2003) \"The African Diaspora in the Indian Ocean\". Trenton: Africa World Press\nBULLET::::- Kenny, Kevin, Diaspora: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press, 2013.\nBULLET::::- Kantor, Mattis, \"The Jewish time line encyclopedia: a year-by-year history from Creation to the Present\", (New updated edition), Jason Aronson, Northvale NJ, 1992\nBULLET::::- Luciuk, Lubomyr, \"Searching for Place: Ukrainian Displaced Persons, Canada and the Migration of Memory,\" University of Toronto Press, 2000.\nBULLET::::- Nesterovych, Volodymyr (2013). \"Impact of ethnic diasporas on the adoption of normative legal acts in the United States\". Viche. 8: 19–23.\nBULLET::::- Oonk, G, 'Global Indian Diasporas: trajectories of migration and theory, Amsterdam University Press, 2007 Free download: https://web.archive.org/web/20141205054154/http://dare.uva.nl/aup/en/record/260518\nBULLET::::- Shain, Yossi, Kinship and Diasporas in International Politics, Michigan University Press, 2007\nBULLET::::- Sami Mahroum, Cynthia Eldridge, Abdallah S Daar (2006), Transnational diaspora options: How developing countries could benefit from their emigrant populations. International Journal on Multicultural Societies, 2006.\nBULLET::::- S Mahroum, P De Guchteneire (2007), Transnational Knowledge Through Diaspora Networks-Editorial. International Journal of Multicultural Societies 8 (1), 1–3\nBULLET::::- Tetlow, Elisabeth Meier, Women, Crime, and Punishment in Ancient Law and Society, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005\nBULLET::::- B. Xharra and M. Wählisch, \"Beyond Remittances: Public Diplomacy and Kosovo's Diaspora\", Foreign Policy Club, Pristina (2012), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2108317.\nBULLET::::- Weheliye, Alexander G. \"My Volk to Come: Peoplehood in Recent Diaspora Discourse and Afro-German Popular Music.\" Black Europe and the African Diaspora. Ed. Darlene Clark. Hine, Trica Danielle. Keaton, and Stephen Small. Urbana: U of Illinois, 2009. 161–79. Print.\n\nBULLET::::- Gewecke, Frauke. \"Diaspora\" (2012). University Bielefeld – Center for InterAmerican Studies.\n\nBULLET::::- Livius.org: Diaspora\nBULLET::::- https://web.archive.org/web/20141205054154/http://dare.uva.nl/aup/en/record/260518 Open access book on Diasporas\nBULLET::::- Integration: Building Inclusive Societies (IBIS) UN Alliance of Civilizations online community on Good Practices of Integration of Migrants across the World\nBULLET::::- Diasporic Trajectories: Transnational Cultures in the 21st Century Podcast playlist of a seminar series held in 2015 at the University of Edinburgh, School of Literatures, Languages and Cultures\n"}
{"id": "8615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8615", "title": "List of dog breeds", "text": "List of dog breeds\n\nDogs have been selectively bred for thousands of years either by inbreeding dogs from the same ancestral lines or by mixing dogs from very different lines. The process continues, resulting in a widening in appearance without speciation. The list uses a wide interpretation of the word \"breed\".\n\nDog breeds are usually categorized by the functional type from which the breed was developed. The basic types are companion dogs, guard dogs, hunting dogs, herding dogs and working dogs. Breeds listed here may be traditional breeds with long histories as registered breeds, rare breeds with their own registries, or new breeds that may still be under development. In some cases, a breed's origin overlaps the boundaries of two or more countries; the dog is normally listed only in the country with which it is most commonly associated; for example, by its designated country according to the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI). Some dogs, such as the Löwchen, have an uncertain origin and are thus listed under several countries.\n\n! class=\"unsortable\" Image\n!Breed!!Origin!!Fédération Cynologique Internationale!!American Kennel Club!!Australian National Kennel Council!!Canadian Kennel Club!!The Kennel Club!!New Zealand Kennel Club!!United Kennel Club\n\nAffenpinscherGermany, FranceGroup 02 Section 01 #186Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nAfghan HoundAfghanistanGroup 10 Section 01 #228Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nAfghan ShepherdAfghanistan      \n\nAidiMoroccoGroup 02 Section 02 #247      Guardian Dog\n\nAiredale Terrier United Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #007 Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nAkbashTurkey      Guardian Dog\n\nAkitaJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #255 \"See \"Group 06 (Utility)\"See \"Utility UtilityNorthern Breed\n\nAlano EspañolSpain      \n\nAlaskan huskyUnited States      \n\nAlaskan Klee KaiUnited States      Northern Breed\n\nAlaskan MalamuteUnited StatesGroup 05 Section 01 #243Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityNorthern Breed\n\nAlauntAlbania\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nAlopekisGreece      \n\nAlpine DachsbrackeAustria Group 06 Section 02 #254     Scenthound\n\nAlpine MastiffSwitzerland\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nAlpine SpanielSwitzerland, Savoy\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nAmerican AkitaJapan/United StatesGroup 05 Section 05 #344 Working Group Group 06 (Utility) Group 03 - Working DogsUtilityUtilityNorthern Breed\n\nAmerican BulldogUnited States FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nAmerican Bully\nUnited States\n\nCompanion Dog\n\nAmerican Cocker SpanielUnited StatesGroup 08 Section 02 #167 Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs) Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nAmerican English CoonhoundUnited States Hound Group    Scenthound\n\nAmerican Eskimo DogGermany Non-Sporting Group Group 05 - Toys, Group 06 - Non-Sporting  Northern Breed\n\nAmerican FoxhoundUnited StatesGroup 06 Section 01 #303Hound Group Group 02 - Hounds  Scenthound\n\nAmerican Hairless TerrierUnited States Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)   Terrier\n\nAmerican Pit Bull TerrierUnited States      Terrier\n\nAmerican Staffordshire TerrierUnited StatesGroup 03 Section 03 #286Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - Terriers Terrier\n\nAmerican Water SpanielUnited StatesGroup 08 Section 03 #301Sporting Group Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundog Gun Dog\n\nAnatolian Shepherd DogTurkey\"See Kangal Shepherd Dog\"Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working Dogs, listedPastoralUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nAndalusian HoundSpain      \n\nAnglo-Français de Petite VénerieFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #325     Scenthound\n\nAppenzeller SennenhundSwitzerlandGroup 02 Section 03 #046 FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nArgentine Polar DogArgentina\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nAriegeoisFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #020     Scenthound\n\nArmantEgypt      \n\nArmenian Gampr dogArmenia      \n\nArtois HoundFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #028     Scenthound\n\nAustralian Cattle DogAustraliaGroup 01 Section 02 #287Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nAustralian KelpieAustraliaGroup 01 Section 01 #293FSS (as Working Kelpie and Australian Kelpie)Group 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listed WorkingHerding Dog\n\nAustralian ShepherdUnited StatesGroup 01 Section 01 #342Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nAustralian Stumpy Tail Cattle DogAustraliaGroup 01 Section 02 #351 ProvisionalFSSGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs WorkingHerding Dog\n\nAustralian TerrierAustraliaGroup 03 Section 02 #008Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nAustrian Black and Tan HoundAustriaGroup 06 Section 01 #063     Scenthound\n\nAustrian PinscherAustriaGroup 02 Section 01 #064     Terrier\n\nAzawakhMaliGroup 10 Section 03 #307Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds) HoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nBakharwal dogIndia      \n\nBarbado da Terceira\nPortugal\n\nBarbetFranceGroup 08 Section 03 #105Miscellaneous Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundog Gun Dog\n\nBasenjiDemocratic Republic of the CongoGroup 05 Section 06 #043Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nBasque Shepherd DogSpain      \n\nBasset Artésien NormandFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #034     Scenthound\n\nBasset Bleu de GascogneFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #035   Hound Scenthound\n\nBasset Fauve de BretagneFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #036FSSGroup 04 (Hounds) HoundHoundScenthound\n\nBasset HoundFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #163Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nBavarian Mountain HoundGermanyGroup 06 Section 02 #217FSS  Hound Scenthound\n\nBeagleUnited Kingdom (England)Group 06 Section 01 #161Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nBeagle-HarrierFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #290     Scenthound\n\nBearded CollieUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 01 Section 01 #271Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBeauceronFranceGroup 01 Section 01 #044Herding Group Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listedPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBedlington TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #009Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nBelgian Shepherd Dog (Groenendael)BelgiumGroup 01 Section 01 #015Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBelgian Shepherd Dog (Laekenois)BelgiumGroup 01 Section 01 #015Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBelgian Shepherd Dog (Malinois)BelgiumGroup 01 Section 01 #015Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBelgian Shepherd Dog (Tervuren)BelgiumGroup 01 Section 01 #015Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBergamasco ShepherdItalyGroup 01 Section 01 #194Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs) PastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBerger Blanc SuisseSwitzerlandGroup 01 Section 01 #347 Group 05 (Working Dogs) PastoralWorking\n\nBerger PicardFranceGroup 01 Section 01 #176Herding Group Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoral Herding Dog\n\nBernese Mountain DogSwitzerlandGroup 02 Section 03 #045Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nBichon FriséSpainGroup 09 Section 01 #215Non-Sporting GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 06 - Non-SportingToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nBillyFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #025     Scenthound\n\nBlack and Tan CoonhoundUnited StatesGroup 06 Section 01 #300Hound Group Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nBlack and Tan Virginia FoxhoundUnited States      \n\nBlack Norwegian ElkhoundNorwayGroup 05 Section 02 #268     \n\nBlack Russian TerrierRussiaGroup 02 Section 01 #327Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working Dogs, listedWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nBlack Mouth CurUnited States      Scenthound\n\nBloodhoundBelgium, FranceGroup 06 Section 01 #084Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nBlue HeelerAustralia\"See Australian Cattle Dog\"     \n\nBlue LacyUnited States      \n\nBlue Paul TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nBlue Picardy SpanielFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #106  Group 01 - Sporting Dogs  Gun Dog\n\nBluetick CoonhoundUnited States Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)  HoundScenthound\n\nBoerboelSouth Africa Working Group    Guardian Dog\n\nBohemian ShepherdCzech Republic FSS    \n\nBologneseItalyGroup 09 Section 01 #196FSS  ToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nBorder CollieUnited Kingdom (Scotland, England, Wales)Group 01 Section 01 #297Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listedPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBorder TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland, England)Group 03 Section 01 #010Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nBorzoiRussiaGroup 10 Section 01 #193Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nBosnian Coarse-haired HoundBosnia and HerzegovinaGroup 06 Section 01 #155     Scenthound\n\nBoston TerrierUnited StatesGroup 09 Section 11 #140Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nBouvier des ArdennesBelgiumGroup 01 Section 02 #171     Herding Dog\n\nBouvier des FlandresBelgiumGroup 01 Section 02 #191Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsWorkingWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBoxerGermanyGroup 02 Section 02 #144Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nBoykin SpanielUnited States Sporting Group    Gun Dog\n\nBracco ItalianoItalyGroup 07 Section 01 #202FSSGroup 03 (Gundogs) GundogGundogGun Dog\n\nBraque d'AuvergneFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #180  Group 01 - Sporting Dogs, listedGundog Gun Dog\n\nBraque de l'AriegeFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #177     Gun Dog\n\nBraque du BourbonnaisFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #179FSS    Gun Dog\n\nBraque du PuyFrance\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nBraque FrancaisFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #133 (Gascogne), #134 (Pyrenees)FSS (Pyrenean) Group 01 - Sporting Dogs  Gun Dog (Grande Taille, Petite Taille)\n\nBraque Saint-GermainFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #115     Gun Dog\n\nBrazilian DogoBrazil      \n\nBrazilian TerrierBrazilGroup 03 Section 01 #341     \n\nBriardFranceGroup 01 Section 01 #113Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nBriquet Griffon VendéenFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #019     Scenthound\n\nBrittanyFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #095Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nBroholmerDenmarkGroup 02 Section 02 #315FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nBruno Jura HoundSwitzerland, France      \n\nBrussels GriffonBelgiumGroup 09 Section 03 #080, 081, 082Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nBucovina Shepherd DogRomaniaGroup 02 Section 02 #357 Provisional     \n\nBull and TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nBull TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 03 #011Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nBulldogUnited Kingdom (England)Group 02 Section 02 #149Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nBullenbeisserGermany\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nBullmastiffUnited Kingdom (England)Group 02 Section 02 #157Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nBully KuttaPakistan, India      \n\nBurgos PointerSpainGroup 07 Section 01 #090     Gun Dog\n\nCairn TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 03 Section 02 #004Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nCanaan DogMiddle East (Lebanon - Israel)Group 05 Section 06 #273Herding GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 03 - Working DogsUtilityNon SportingSighthound and Pariah\n\nCanadian Eskimo DogCanadaGroup 05 Section 01 #211 Group 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityNorthern Breed\n\nCane CorsoItalyGroup 02 Section 02 #343Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working Dogs, listed UtilityGuardian Dog\n\nCantabrian Water DogSpain      \n\nCão da Serra de AiresPortugalGroup 01 Section 01 #093FSS Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listed  Herding Dog\n\nCão de Castro LaboreiroPortugalGroup 02 Section 02 #170     Guardian Dog\n\nCão de Gado TransmontanoPortugal      \n\nCão Fila de São MiguelPortugalGroup 02 Section 02 #340     \n\nCarolina DogUnited States FSS    Sighthound and Pariah\n\nCarpathian Shepherd DogRomaniaGroup 01 Section 01 #350     Herding Dog\n\nCatalan SheepdogSpainGroup 01 Section 01 #087   Pastoral Herding Dog\n\nCaucasian Shepherd DogGeorgia, Armenia, AzerbaijanGroup 02 Section 02 #328FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nCavalier King Charles SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 09 Section 07 #136Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nCentral Asian Shepherd DogRussiaGroup 02 Section 02 #335FSSGroup 06 (Utility)  UtilityGuardian Dog\n\nCesky FousekCzech RepublicGroup 07 Section 01 #245    GundogGun Dog\n\nCesky TerrierCzech RepublicGroup 03 Section 02 #246Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nChesapeake Bay RetrieverUnited StatesGroup 08 Section 01 #263Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nChien Français Blanc et NoirFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #220     Scenthound\n\nChien Français Blanc et OrangeFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #316     Scenthound\n\nChien Français TricoloreFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #219     Scenthound\n\nChien-grisFrance\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nChihuahuaMexicoGroup 09 Section 06 #218Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nChilean TerrierChile      \n\nChinese Chongqing DogChina      \n\nChinese Crested DogChinaGroup 09 Section 04 #288Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nChinookUnited States Working Group    Northern Breed\n\nChippiparaiIndia      \n\nChiribaya DogPeru\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nChow ChowChinaGroup 05 Section 05 #205Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingNorthern Breed\n\nCierny SerySlovakia      \n\nCirneco dell'EtnaItalyGroup 05 Section 07 #199Hound Group  Hound Sighthound and Pariah\n\nClumber SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 02 #109Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nCollie, RoughUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 01 Section 01 #156Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nCollie, SmoothUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 01 Section 01 #296Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nCombaiIndia      \n\nCordoba Fighting DogArgentina\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nCoton de TulearMadagascarGroup 09 Section 01 #283Non-Sporting GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - Toys, listedToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nCretan HoundGreece      \n\nCroatian SheepdogCroatiaGroup 01 Section 01 #277FSS    Herding Dog\n\nCumberland SheepdogUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nCurly-Coated RetrieverUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 01 #110Sporting Group Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nCursinuCorsica (France)       \n\nCzechoslovakian WolfdogCzech Republic, SlovakiaGroup 01 Section 01 #332FSS    Herding Dog\n\nDachshundGermanyGroup 04 Section 01 #148Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nDalbo dogSweden\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nDalmatianCroatiaGroup 06 Section 03 #153Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nDandie Dinmont TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 03 Section 02 #168Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nDanish-Swedish FarmdogDenmark, SwedenGroup 02 Section 01 #356 ProvisionalFSS    Terrier\n\nDeutsche BrackeGermanyGroup 06 Section 01 #299     Scenthound\n\nDoberman PinscherGermanyGroup 02 Section 01 #143Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nDogo ArgentinoArgentina Group 02 Section 02 #292Miscellaneous    Guardian Dog\n\nDogo CubanoCuba\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nDogue de BordeauxFranceGroup 02 Section 02 #116Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working Dogs, listedWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nDrentse PatrijshondNetherlandsGroup 07 Section 01 #224FSS    Gun Dog\n\nDreverSwedenGroup 06 Section 01 #130FSS Group 02 - Hounds  Scenthound\n\nDunkerNorwayGroup 06 Section 01 #203     Scenthound\n\nDutch ShepherdNetherlandsGroup 01 Section 01 #223MiscellaneousGroup 05 (Working Dogs)  WorkingHerding Dog\n\nDutch SmoushondNetherlandsGroup 02 Section 01 #308     Terrier\n\nEast Siberian LaikaRussiaGroup 05 Section 02 #305     Northern Breed\n\nEast European ShepherdRussia      \n\nEloGermany      \n\nEnglish Cocker SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 02 #005Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nEnglish FoxhoundUnited Kingdom (England)Group 06 Section 01 #159Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nEnglish MastiffUnited Kingdom (England)Group 02 Section 02 #264Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nEnglish PointerUnited Kingdom (England)Group 07 Section 02 #001Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nEnglish SetterUnited Kingdom (England)Group 07 Section 02 #002Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nEnglish ShepherdUnited Kingdom (England)      Herding Dog\n\nEnglish Springer SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 02 #125Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nEnglish Toy Terrier (Black & Tan)United Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 04 #013 Group 01 (Toys) ToyToy\n\nEnglish Water SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nEnglish White TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nEntlebucher Mountain DogSwitzerlandGroup 02 Section 03 #047Herding Group Group 03 - Working DogsWorking Guardian Dog\n\nEstonian HoundEstonia      \n\nEstrela Mountain DogPortugalGroup 02 Section 02 #173FSSGroup 06 (Utility) PastoralUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nEurasierGermanyGroup 05 Section 05 #291FSSGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 03 - Working DogsUtilityNon SportingNorthern Breed\n\nField SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 02 #123Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nFila BrasileiroBrazilGroup 02 Section 02 #225     \n\nFinnish HoundFinlandGroup 06 Section 01 #051     Scenthound\n\nFinnish LapphundFinlandGroup 05 Section 03 #189Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listedPastoralWorkingNorthern Breed\n\nFinnish SpitzFinlandGroup 05 Section 02 #049Non-Sporting GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundNorthern Breed\n\nFlat-Coated RetrieverUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 01 #121Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nFox Terrier, SmoothUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #012Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nFox Terrier, WireUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #169Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nFrench BrittanyFrance      Gun Dog\n\nFrench BulldogUnited Kingdom (England), FranceGroup 09 Section 11 #101Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nFrench SpanielFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #175FSS Group 01 - Sporting Dogs  Gun Dog\n\nGaddi KuttaIndia      \n\nGalgo EspañolSpainGroup 10 Section 03 #285     Sighthound and Pariah\n\nGalician Shepherd DogSpain      \n\nGarafian ShepherdSpain      \n\nGascon SaintongeoisFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #21     Scenthound (Grand and Petit)\n\nGeorgian ShepherdGeorgia      \n\nGerman Longhaired PointerGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #117FSS Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundog Gun Dog\n\nGerman PinscherGermanyGroup 02 Section 01 #184Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 06 - Non-SportingWorkingUtilityTerrier\n\nGerman Roughhaired PointerGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #232     Gun Dog\n\nGerman Shepherd DogGermanyGroup 01 Section 01 #166Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nGerman Shorthaired PointerGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #119Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nGerman SpanielGermanyGroup 08 Section 02 #104FSS    Gun Dog\n\nGerman SpitzGermanyGroup 05 Section 04 #097FSSGroup 07 (Non-Sporting) (Klein, Mittel only) Utility (Klein, Mittel only)Non Sporting (Klein, Mittel only)Northern Breed\n\nGerman Wirehaired PointerGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #098Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nGiant SchnauzerGermanyGroup 02 Section 01 #181Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nGlen of Imaal TerrierIrelandGroup 03 Section 01 #302Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - Terriers, listedTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nGolden RetrieverUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 08 Section 01 #111Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nGordon SetterUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 07 Section 02 #006Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nGran Mastín de BorínquenPuerto Rico      \n\nGrand Anglo-Français Blanc et NoirFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #323     Scenthound\n\nGrand Anglo-Français Blanc et OrangeFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #324     Scenthound\n\nGrand Anglo-Français TricoloreFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #322     Scenthound\n\nGrand Basset Griffon VendéenFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #033Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds) HoundHoundScenthound\n\nGrand Bleu de GascogneFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #022   Hound Scenthound\n\nGrand Griffon VendéenFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #282     Scenthound\n\nGreat DaneGermanyGroup 02 Section 02 #235Working GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingNon SportingGuardian Dog\n\nGreat PyreneesFrance, SpainGroup 02 Section 02 #137Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsPastoralUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nGreater Swiss Mountain DogSwitzerlandGroup 02 Section 03 #058Working Group Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nGreek HarehoundGreeceGroup 06 Section 01 #214     Scenthound\n\nGreek Shepherd\nGreece\n\nGuardian Dog\n\nGreenland DogGreenlandGroup 05 Section 01 #274  Group 03 - Working DogsWorking Northern Breed\n\nGreyhoundUnited Kingdom (England), Middle EastGroup 10 Section 03 #158Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nGriffon Bleu de GascogneFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #032     Scenthound\n\nGriffon Fauve de BretagneFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #066   Hound Scenthound\n\nGriffon NivernaisFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #017     Scenthound\n\nGuatemalan DogoGuatemala      \n\nGull TerrierIndia, Pakistan      \n\nHamiltonstövareSwedenGroup 06 Section 01 #132FSSGroup 04 (Hounds) HoundHoundScenthound\n\nHanover HoundGermanyGroup 06 Section 02 #213FSS    Scenthound\n\nHare Indian DogCanada, United States\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nHarrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 06 Section 01 #295Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - Hounds HoundScenthound\n\nHavaneseCubaGroup 09 Section 01 #250Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nHawaiian Poi DogUnited States\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nHimalayan SheepdogNepal      \n\nHokkaidoJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #261FSS    Northern Breed\n\nHortaya borzayaUkraine, Belarus, Southern Russia      \n\nHovawartGermanyGroup 02 Section 02 #190FSS Group 03 - Working DogsWorking Guardian Dog\n\nHuntawayNew Zealand     Working\n\nHygen HoundNorwayGroup 06 Section 01 #266     Scenthound\n\nIbizan HoundSpainGroup 05 Section 07 #089Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nIcelandic SheepdogIcelandGroup 05 Section 03 #289Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs WorkingHerding Dog\n\nIndian pariah dogIndia      \n\nIndian SpitzIndia      \n\nIrish Red and White SetterIrelandGroup 07 Section 02 #330Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nIrish SetterIrelandGroup 07 Section 02 #120Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nIrish TerrierIrelandGroup 03 Section 01 #139Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nIrish Water SpanielIrelandGroup 08 Section 03 #124Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nIrish WolfhoundIrelandGroup 10 Section 02 #160Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nIstrian Coarse-haired HoundCroatiaGroup 06 Section 01 #152     Scenthound\n\nIstrian Short-haired HoundCroatiaGroup 06 Section 01 #151     Scenthound\n\nItalian GreyhoundItalyGroup 10 Section 03 #200Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nJack Russell TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 02 #345 Group 02 (Terriers) TerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nJagdterrierGermanyGroup 03 Section 01 #103FSSGroup 02 (Terriers)  TerrierTerrier\n\nSwedish ElkhoundSwedenGroup 05 Section 02 #042     Northern Breed\n\nJapanese ChinJapanGroup 09 Section 08 #206Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nJapanese SpitzJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #262FFSGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingNorthern Breed\n\nJapanese TerrierJapanGroup 03 Section 02 #259     Terrier\n\nJindoSouth KoreaGroup 05 Section 05 #334FSS   UtilityNorthern Breed\n\nJonangiIndia      \n\nKaikadi dogIndia      \n\nKai KenJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #317FSS    Northern Breed\n\nKangal Shepherd DogTurkeyGroup 02 Section 02 #331 Group 06 (Utility) PastoralUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nKanniIndia      \n\nKarakachan dogBulgaria      \n\nKarelian Bear DogFinlandGroup 05 Section 02 #048FSS Group 03 - Working Dogs  Northern Breed\n\nKarst ShepherdSloveniaGroup 02 Section 02 #278     Guardian Dog\n\nKeeshondNetherlands, GermanyGroup 05 Section 04 #097Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingNorthern Breed\n\nKerry BeagleIreland      \n\nKerry Blue TerrierIrelandGroup 03 Section 01 #003Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nKing Charles SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 09 Section 07 #128Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nKing ShepherdUnited States      \n\nKintamaniIndonesiaGroup 05 Section 05 #362 Provisional     \n\nKishu KenJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #318FSS    Northern Breed\n\nKomondorHungaryGroup 01 Section 01 #053Working GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 03 - Working DogsPastoralWorkingGuardian Dog\n\nKoolieAustralia      \n\nKoyun dogTurkey      \n\nKromfohrländerGermanyGroup 09 Section 10 #192FSS    Companion Dog\n\nKumaon MastiffIndia      \n\nKunming WolfdogChina      \n\nKurīNew Zealand\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nKuvaszHungaryGroup 01 Section 01 #054Working GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 03 - Working DogsPastoralWorkingGuardian Dog\n\nKyi-LeoUnited States      \n\nLabrador HuskyCanada      \n\nLabrador RetrieverCanada, United Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 01 #122Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nLagotto RomagnoloItalyGroup 08 Section 03 #298Sporting Group Group 01 - Sporting Dogs, listedGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nLakeland TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #070Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nLancashire HeelerUnited Kingdom (England)Group 01 Section 01 #360Miscellaneous Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listedPastoral Herding Dog\n\nLandseerCanadaGroup 02 Section 02 #226     \n\nLapponian HerderFinlandGroup 05 Section 03 #284FSS    Herding Dog\n\nLapponian ShepherdFinland\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nLeonbergerGermanyGroup 02 Section 02 #145Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nLhasa ApsoTibetGroup 09 Section 05 #227Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nLithuanian HoundLithuania      \n\nLouisiana Catahoula Leopard DogUnited States FSS    Herding Dog\n\nLöwchenGermany, France, Netherlands, SpainGroup 09 Section 01 #233Non-Sporting GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 06 - Non-SportingToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nMackenzie River huskyCanada and Alaska      \n\nMagyar agárHungary, RomaniaGroup 10 Section 03 #240     Sighthound and Pariah\n\nMahratta GreyhoundIndia      \n\nMalteseItalyGroup 09 Section 01 #065Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nManchester TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #071Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nMaremma SheepdogItalyGroup 01 Section 01 #201 Group 05 (Working Dogs) PastoralWorkingGuardian Dog\n\nMarquesan DogMarquesas Islands (French Polynesia)\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nMcNab dogUnited States      \n\nMiniature American ShepherdUnited States Herding Group Group 7 - Herding Dogs, listed  Herding Dog\n\nMiniature Bull TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 03 #011Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nMiniature Fox TerrierAustralia      \n\nMiniature PinscherGermanyGroup 02 Section 01 #185Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nMiniature SchnauzerGermanyGroup 02 Section 01 #183Terrier GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 04 - TerriersUtilityUtilityTerrier\n\nMiniature Shar PeiChina      \n\nMolossusGreece\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nMolossus of EpirusGreece\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nMontenegrin Mountain HoundMontenegroGroup 06 Section 01 #279     Scenthound\n\nMoscow WatchdogRussia      \n\nMoscow Water DogRussia\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nMountain CurUnited States FSS    Scenthound\n\nMucuchiesVenezuela      \n\nMudhol HoundIndia      \n\nMudiHungaryGroup 01 Section 01 #238Miscellaneous Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listed  Herding Dog\n\nMünsterländer, LargeGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #118 Group 03 (Gundogs) GundogGundogGun Dog\n\nMünsterländer, SmallGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #102FSS Group 01 - Sporting Dogs, listedGundog Gun Dog\n\nNeapolitan MastiffItalyGroup 02 Section 02 #197Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nNederlandse KooikerhondjeNetherlandsGroup 08 Section 02 #314Sporting Group  Utility Gun Dog\n\nNewfoundlandCanadaGroup 02 Section 02 #050Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nNew Zealand Heading DogNew Zealand      \n\nNorfolk SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nNorfolk TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 02 #272Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nNorrbottenspetsSwedenGroup 05 Section 02 #276Miscellaneous Group 02 - Hounds  Northern Breed\n\nNorth Country BeagleUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nNorthern Inuit DogUnited Kingdom (England)      \n\nNorwegian BuhundNorwayGroup 05 Section 03 #237Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingNorthern Breed\n\nNorwegian ElkhoundNorwayGroup 05 Section 02 #242Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundNorthern Breed\n\nNorwegian LundehundNorwayGroup 05 Section 02 #265Non-Sporting Group Group 02 - Hounds  Northern Breed\n\nNorwich TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 02 #072Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nNova Scotia Duck Tolling RetrieverCanadaGroup 08 Section 01 #312Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nOld Croatian SighthoundCroatia      \n\nOld Danish PointerDenmarkGroup 07 Section 01 #281     Gun Dog\n\nOld English BulldogUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nOld English SheepdogUnited Kingdom (England)Group 01 Section 01 #016Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nOld English TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)      \n\nOld German Shepherd DogGermany      \n\nOld Spanish PointerSpain\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nOld Time Farm ShepherdUnited States      \n\nOlde English BulldoggeUnited States      Guardian Dog\n\nOtterhoundUnited Kingdom (England)Group 06 Section 01 #294Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nPachon NavarroSpain      \n\nPandikonaIndia      \n\nPaisley TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nPapillonSpain, Belgium, FranceGroup 09 Section 09 #077Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nParson Russell TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 01 #339Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - Terriers, listedTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nPastore della Lessinia e del LagoraiItaly      \n\nPatterdale TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)      Terrier\n\nPekingeseChinaGroup 09 Section 08 #207Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nPerro de Pastor MallorquinSpain      Herding Dog\n\nPerro de Presa CanarioSpainGroup 02 Section 02 #346FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nPerro de Presa MallorquinSpainGroup 02 Section 02 #249     Guardian Dog\n\nPeruvian Inca OrchidPeruGroup 05 Section 06 #310MiscellaneousGroup 04 (Hounds)  HoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nPetit Basset Griffon VendéenFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #067Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundScenthound\n\nPetit Bleu de GascogneFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #031     Scenthound\n\nPhalèneBelgium, SpainGroup 09 Section 09 #077     \n\nPharaoh HoundMaltaGroup 05 Section 06 #248Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nPhu Quoc RidgebackVietnam      \n\nPicardy SpanielFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #108     Gun Dog\n\nPlummer TerrierUnited Kingdom      \n\nPlott HoundUnited States Hound Group    Scenthound\n\nPodenco CanarioSpainGroup 05 Section 07 #329     Sighthound and Pariah\n\nPoitevin France Group 06 Section 01 #024     Scenthound\n\nPolish GreyhoundPolandGroup 10 Section 03 #333     Sighthound and Pariah\n\nPolish HoundPolandGroup 06 Section 01 #052     Scenthound\n\nPolish Hunting DogPolandGroup 06 Section 01 #354     \n\nPolish Lowland SheepdogPolandGroup 01 Section 01 #251Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nPolish Tatra SheepdogPolandGroup 01 Section 01 #252 Group 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listed WorkingGuardian Dog\n\nPomeranianGermany, PolandGroup 05 Section 04 #097Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nPont-Audemer SpanielFranceGroup 07 Section 01 #114     \n\nPoodleGermany, FranceGroup 09 Section 02 #172Non-Sporting Group (Standard Poodle and Minature Poodle), Toy Group (Toy Poodle)Group 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 05 - Toys, Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog, Gun Dog\n\nPorcelaineFranceGroup 06 Section 01 #030FSS    Scenthound\n\nPortuguese PodengoPortugalGroup 05 Section 07 #094Hound (Pequeno), Miscellaneous (Grande and Medio)Group 04 (Hounds) HoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nPortuguese PointerPortugalGroup 07 Section 01 #187FSS  Gundog Gun Dog\n\nPortuguese Water DogPortugalGroup 08 Section 03 #037Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGun Dog\n\nPosavac HoundCroatiaGroup 06 Section 01 #154     Scenthound\n\nPotsdam GreyhoundItaly\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nPražský KrysaříkCzech Republic      \n\nPudelpointerGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #216FSS Group 01 - Sporting Dogs  Gun Dog\n\nPugChinaGroup 09 Section 11 #253Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nPuliHungaryGroup 01 Section 01 #055Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nPumiHungaryGroup 01 Section 01 #056Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs) PastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nPungsan dogNorth Korea      \n\nPyrenean MastiffSpainGroup 02 Section 02 #092FSSGroup 06 (Utility) WorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nPyrenean ShepherdFranceGroup 01 Section 01 #138 (smooth), #141 (longhaired)Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs) (longhaired only)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoral (longhaired only)Working (longhaired only)Herding Dog\n\nRafeiro do AlentejoPortugalGroup 02 Section 02 #096FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nRajapalayamIndia      \n\nRampur GreyhoundIndia      \n\nRastreador BrasileiroBrazil\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nRat TerrierUnited States Terrier Group Group 04 - Terriers, listed  Terrier\n\nRatonero Bodeguero AndaluzSpain      \n\nRatonero MallorquinSpain      \n\nRatonero Murciano de HuertaSpain      \n\nRatonero ValencianoSpain      \n\nRedbone CoonhoundUnited States Hound Group    Scenthound\n\nRhodesian RidgebackZimbabweGroup 06 Section 03 #146Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nRomanian Mioritic Shepherd DogRomaniaGroup 01 Section 01 #349FSS    Herding Dog\n\nRomanian Raven Shepherd Dog\nRomania\n\nRottweilerGermanyGroup 02 Section 02 #147Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nRussian SpanielRussia      \n\nRussian ToyRussiaGroup 09 Section 09 #352MiscellaneousGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - Toys, listedToyToyCompanion Dog\n\nRussian TrackerRussia\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nRusso-European LaikaRussiaGroup 05 Section 02 #304     Northern Breed\n\nRussell TerrierUnited Kingdom (England) Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - Terriers, listed  \n\nSaarloos WolfdogNetherlands, GermanyGroup 01 Section 01 #311     Herding Dog\n\nSabueso EspañolSpainGroup 06 Section 01 #204     Scenthound\n\nSabueso fino ColombianoColombia      \n\nSaint BernardItaly, SwitzerlandGroup 02 Section 02 #061Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nSaint John's water dogNewfoundland, Canada\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nSaint-Usuge SpanielFrance      \n\nSakhalin HuskyJapan, Russia\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nSalish Wool DogUnited States, Canada\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nSalukiFertile CrescentGroup 10 Section 01 #269Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nSamoyedRussiaGroup 05 Section 01 #212Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsPastoralUtilityNorthern Breed\n\nSapsaliKorea      \n\nŠarplaninacSerbia, North Macedonia Group 02 Section 02 #041     Guardian Dog\n\nSchapendoesNetherlandsGroup 01 Section 01 #313FSS Group 07 - Herding Dogs  Herding Dog\n\nSchillerstövareSwedenGroup 06 Section 01 #131     Scenthound\n\nSchipperkeBelgiumGroup 01 Section 01 #083Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nSchweizer LaufhundSwitzerlandGroup 06 Section 01 #059     Scenthound\n\nSchweizerischer NiederlaufhundSwitzerlandGroup 06 Section 01 #060     Scenthound\n\nScotch CollieUnited Kingdom (Scotland)      \n\nScottish DeerhoundUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 10 Section 02 #164Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nScottish TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 03 Section 02 #073Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nSealyham TerrierUnited Kingdom (Wales)Group 03 Section 02 #074Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nSegugio ItalianoItalyGroup 06 Section 01 #337 #198FSS  Hound Scenthound\n\nSeppala Siberian SleddogCanada      \n\nSerbian HoundSerbiaGroup 06 Section 01 #150     Scenthound\n\nSerbian Tricolour HoundSerbiaGroup 06 Section 01 #229     Scenthound\n\nSeskar Seal DogFinland\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nShar PeiChinaGroup 02 Section 02 #309Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingNorthern Breed\n\nShetland SheepdogUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 01 Section 01 #088Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nShiba InuJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #257Non-Sporting GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityUtilityNorthern Breed\n\nShih TzuChinaGroup 09 Section 05 #208Toy GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nShikokuJapanGroup 05 Section 05 #319FSS Group 02 - Hounds, listed  Northern Breed\n\nShiloh ShepherdUnited States      \n\nSiberian HuskyRussiaGroup 05 Section 01 #270Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsWorkingUtilityNorthern Breed\n\nSilken WindhoundUnited States      Sighthound and Pariah\n\nSilky TerrierAustraliaGroup 03 Section 04 #236Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyTerrier\n\nSinhala HoundSri Lanka      \n\nSkye TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 03 Section 02 #075Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nSloughiMoroccoGroup 10 Section 03 #188Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds) HoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nSlovak CuvacSlovakiaGroup 01 Section 01 #142FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nSlovakian Wirehaired PointerSlovakiaGroup 07 Section 01 #320FSS  Gundog Gun Dog\n\nSlovenský kopovSlovakiaGroup 06 Section 01 #244FSS    Scenthound\n\nSmålandsstövareSwedenGroup 06 Section 01 #129     Scenthound\n\nSmall Greek Domestic DogGreece      \n\nSoft-Coated Wheaten TerrierIrelandGroup 03 Section 01 #040Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nSouth Russian OvcharkaRussiaGroup 01 Section 01 #326     Herding Dog\n\nSouthern HoundUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nSpanish MastiffSpainGroup 02 Section 02 #091FSS   UtilityGuardian Dog\n\nSpanish Water DogSpainGroup 08 Section 03 #336Herding GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 07 - Herding Dogs, listedGundogGundogHerding Dog\n\nSpinone ItalianoItalyGroup 07 Section 01 #165Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nSporting Lucas TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)      Terrier\n\nStabyhounNetherlandsGroup 07 Section 01 #222FSS    Gun Dog\n\nStaffordshire Bull TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 03 #076Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nStandard SchnauzerGermanyGroup 02 Section 01 #182Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working DogsUtilityUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nStephens CurUnited States      Scenthound\n\nStyrian Coarse-haired HoundAustriaGroup 06 Section 01 #062     Scenthound\n\nSussex SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)Group 08 Section 02 #127Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nSwedish LapphundSwedenGroup 05 Section 03 #135FSSGroup 05 (Working Dogs) Pastoral Northern Breed\n\nSwedish VallhundSwedenGroup 05 Section 03 #014Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nTahitian DogTahiti, Society Islands (French Polynesia)\n\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nTahltan Bear DogCanada\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nTaiganKyrgyzstan      \n\nTaiwan DogTaiwanGroup 05 Section 07 #348FSS    \n\nTalbot HoundUnited Kingdom (England), Belgium, France\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nTamaskan DogFinland      \n\nTeddy Roosevelt TerrierUnited States FSS    Terrier\n\nTelomianMalaysia      \n\nTenterfield TerrierAustralia  Group 02 (Terriers)  Terrier\n\nTerceira MastiffPortugal      \n\nThai Bangkaew DogThailandGroup 05 Section 05 #358 Provisional     \n\nThai RidgebackThailandGroup 05 Section 07 #338FSS   HoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nTibetan MastiffTibetGroup 02 Section 02 #230Working GroupGroup 06 (Utility)Group 03 - Working Dogs, listedWorkingUtilityGuardian Dog\n\nTibetan SpanielTibetGroup 09 Section 05 #231Non-Sporting GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nTibetan TerrierTibetGroup 09 Section 05 #209Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingCompanion Dog\n\nTornjakBosnia and Herzegovina, CroatiaGroup 02 Section 02 #355FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nTosaJapanGroup 02 Section 02 #260FSS    Guardian Dog\n\nToy BulldogUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nToy Fox TerrierUnited States Toy Group Group 05 - Toys  Terrier\n\nToy Manchester TerrierUnited Kingdom (England), United States Toy Group Group 05 - Toys  Terrier\n\nToy Trawler SpanielUnited Kingdom (England)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nTransylvanian HoundHungaryGroup 06 Section 01 #241FSS    Scenthound\n\nTreeing CurUnited States      Scenthound\n\nTreeing Tennessee BrindleUnited States FSS    Scenthound\n\nTreeing Walker CoonhoundUnited States Hound Group    Scenthound\n\nTrigg HoundKentucky, United States      \n\nTweed Water SpanielUnited Kingdom (Scotland)\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\"Extinct\"\n\nTyrolean HoundAustriaGroup 06 Section 01 #068     Scenthound\n\nVillano de Las EncartacionesSpain      \n\nVillanuco de Las EncartacionesSpain      \n\nVizslaHungaryGroup 07 Section 01 #057Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nVolpino ItalianoItalyGroup 05 Section 04 #195     Northern Breed\n\nWeimaranerGermanyGroup 07 Section 01 #099Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nWelsh Corgi, CardiganUnited Kingdom (Wales)Group 01 Section 01 #038Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nWelsh Corgi, PembrokeUnited Kingdom (Wales)Group 01 Section 01 #039Herding GroupGroup 05 (Working Dogs)Group 07 - Herding DogsPastoralWorkingHerding Dog\n\nWelsh SheepdogUnited Kingdom (Wales)      \n\nWelsh Springer SpanielUnited Kingdom (Wales)Group 08 Section 02 #126Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nWelsh TerrierUnited Kingdom (Wales)Group 03 Section 01 #078Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nWest Highland White TerrierUnited Kingdom (Scotland)Group 03 Section 02 #085Terrier GroupGroup 02 (Terriers)Group 04 - TerriersTerrierTerrierTerrier\n\nWest Siberian LaikaRussiaGroup 05 Section 02 #306     Northern Breed\n\nWestphalian DachsbrackeGermanyGroup 06 Section 01 #100     Scenthound\n\nWetterhounNetherlandsGroup 08 Section 03 #221FSS    Gun Dog\n\nWhippetUnited Kingdom (England)Group 10 Section 03 #162Hound GroupGroup 04 (Hounds)Group 02 - HoundsHoundHoundSighthound and Pariah\n\nWhite ShepherdUnited States      Herding Dog\n\nWirehaired Pointing GriffonNetherlands, FranceGroup 07 Section 01 #107Sporting Group Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundog Gun Dog\n\nWirehaired VizslaHungaryGroup 07 Section 01 #239Sporting GroupGroup 03 (Gundogs)Group 01 - Sporting DogsGundogGundogGun Dog\n\nXiasi DogChina      \n\nXoloitzcuintliMexicoGroup 05 Section 06 #234Non-Sporting GroupGroup 07 (Non-Sporting)Group 05 - Toys, Group 06 - Non-SportingUtilityNon SportingSighthound and Pariah\n\nYakutian LaikaRussia FSS    \n\nYorkshire TerrierUnited Kingdom (England)Group 03 Section 04 #086Toy GroupGroup 01 (Toys)Group 05 - ToysToyToyCompanion Dog\nclass=\"sortbottom\"\n!Image\n!Breed!!Origin!!Fédération Cynologique Internationale!!American Kennel Club!!Australian National Kennel Council!!Canadian Kennel Club!!The Kennel Club!!New Zealand Kennel Club!!United Kennel Club\n\nBULLET::::- Canidae - the entire dog family\nBULLET::::- List of police dog breeds\nBULLET::::- Lists of domestic animal breeds\nBest Dogs for Kids and Families in 2020\n\n"}
{"id": "8617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8617", "title": "Daniel Jones (phonetician)", "text": "Daniel Jones (phonetician)\n\nDaniel Jones (12 September 1881 – 4 December 1967) was a London-born British phonetician who studied under Paul Passy, professor of phonetics at the École des Hautes Études at the Sorbonne (University of Paris). He was head of the Department of Phonetics at University College, London.\n\nIn 1900, Jones studied briefly at William Tilly's Marburg Language Institute in Germany, where he was first introduced to phonetics. In 1903, he received his BA degree in mathematics at Cambridge, converted by payment to MA in 1907. From 1905 to 1906, he studied in Paris under Paul Passy, who was one of the founders of the International Phonetic Association, and in 1911, he married Passy's niece Cyrille Motte. He briefly took private lessons from the British phonetician Henry Sweet.\n\nIn 1907, he became a part-time lecturer at University College London and was afterwards appointed to a full-time position. In 1912, he became the head of the Department of Phonetics and was appointed to a chair in 1921, a post he held until his retirement in 1949. From 1906 onwards, Jones was an active member of the International Phonetic Association, and was Assistant Secretary from 1907 to 1927, Secretary from 1927 to 1949, and President from 1950 to 1967.\n\nIn 1909, Jones wrote the short \"Pronunciation of English\", a book he later radically revised. The resulting work, \"An Outline of English Phonetics\", followed in 1918 and is the first truly comprehensive description of British Received Pronunciation, and the first such description of the standard pronunciation of any language.\n\nThe year 1917 was a landmark for Jones in many ways. He became the first linguist in the western world to use the term phoneme in its current sense, employing the word in his article \"The phonetic structure of the Sechuana Language\". Jones had made an earlier notable attempt at a pronunciation dictionary but it was now that he produced the first edition of his famous \"English Pronouncing Dictionary\", a work which in revised form is still in print. It was here that the cardinal vowel diagram made a first appearance.\n\nThe problem of the phonetic description of vowels is of long standing, going back to the era of the ancient Indian linguists. Three nineteenth-century British phoneticians worked on this topic. Alexander Melville Bell (1867) devised an ingenious iconic phonetic alphabet which included an elaborate system for vowels. Alexander Ellis had also suggested vowel symbols for his phonetic alphabets. Henry Sweet did much work on the systematic description of vowels, producing an elaborate system of vowel description involving a multitude of symbols. Jones however was the one who is generally credited with having gone much of the way towards a practical solution through his scheme of 'Cardinal Vowels', a relatively simple system of reference vowels which for many years has been taught systematically to students within the British tradition. Much of the inspiration for this scheme can be found in the earlier publications of Paul Passy.\nIn the original form of the Cardinal Vowels, Jones employed a dual-parameter system of description based on the supposed height of the tongue arch together with the shape of the lips. This he reduced to a simple quadrilateral diagram which could be used to help visualize how vowels are articulated. Tongue height (close vs. open) is represented on the vertical axis and front vs. back on the horizontal axis indicates the portion of the tongue raised on the horizontal axis. Lip-rounding is also built into the system, so that front vowels (such as [i, e, a]) have spread or neutral lip postures, but the back vowels (such as [o, u]) have more marked lip-rounding as vowel height increases. Jones thus arrived at a set of eight \"primary Cardinal Vowels\", and recorded these on gramophone disc for HMV in 1917.\n\nLater modifications to his theory allowed for an additional set of eight \"secondary Cardinal Vowels\" with reverse lip shapes, permitting the representation of eight secondary cardinal vowels (front rounded and back unrounded). Eventually Jones also devised symbols for central vowels and positioned these on the vowel diagram. He made two further disc recordings for Linguaphone in 1943 and 1956.\n\nWith the passing years, the accuracy of many of Jones's statements on vowels has come increasingly under question, and most linguists now consider that the vowel quadrilateral must be viewed as a way of representing auditory space in visual form, rather than the tightly defined articulatory scheme envisaged by Jones. Nevertheless, the International Phonetic Association still uses a version of Jones's model, and includes a Jones-type vowel diagram on its influential International Phonetic Alphabet leaflet contained in the \"Handbook of the International Association\". Many phoneticians (especially those trained in the British school) resort to it constantly as a quick and convenient form of reference.\n\nAlthough Jones is especially remembered for his work on the phonetics and phonology of English, he ranged far more widely. He produced phonetic/phonolological treatments which were masterly for their time on the sound systems of Cantonese, Tswana (Sechuana as it was then known), Sinhalese, and Russian. He was the first phonetician to produce, in his \"Sechuana Reader\", a competent description of an African tone language, including the concept of downstep. Jones helped develop new alphabets for African languages, and suggested systems of romanisation for Indian languages and Japanese. He also busied himself with support for revised spelling for English through the Simplified Spelling Society.\n\nApart from his own vast array of published work, Jones will be remembered for having acted as mentor to numerous scholars who later went on to become famous linguists in their own right. These included such names as Lilias Armstrong, Harold Palmer, Ida Ward, Hélène Coustenoble, Arthur Lloyd James, Dennis Fry, A. C. Gimson, Gordon Arnold, J.D. O'Connor, Clive Sansom, and many more. For several decades his department at University College was pivotal in the development of phonetics and in making its findings known to the wider world. Collins and Mees (1998) speculate that it is Jones, not as is often thought Henry Sweet, who provided George Bernard Shaw with the basis for his fictional character Professor Henry Higgins in \"Pygmalion\".\n\nAfter retirement, Jones worked assiduously at his publications almost up to the end of his long life. He died at his home in Gerrards Cross on 4 December 1967.\n\nBULLET::::- Asher, R. E. (1994), \"Encyclopedia of language and linguistics\", Oxford: Pergamon Press.\nBULLET::::- Bell, A. Melville (1967), \"Visible Speech\", London: Simpkin Marshall; rpt in facsimile in B. Collins and I. Mees (2006), \"Phonetics of English in the 19th Century\", London: Routledge.\nBULLET::::- Collins, B. and I. Mees (1998), \"The Real Professor Higgins: The Life and Career of Daniel Jones\", Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.\nBULLET::::- IPA (1999), \"Handbook of the International Phonetic Association\", Cambridge: CUP.\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. (1909), \"The Pronunciation of English\", Cambridge: CUP; rpt in facsimile in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. (1917a), \"An English Pronouncing Dictionary\", London: Dent, rpt in facsimile in Jones (2002). 17th edn, P. Roach, J. Hartman and J. Setter (eds), Cambridge: CUP, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. (1917b), The phonetic structure of the Sechuana language, Transactions of the Philological Society 1917-20, pp. 99–106; rpt in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. (1918), \"An Outline of English Phonetics\", Leipzig: Teubner; rpt in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. and Kwing Tong Woo (1912), \"A Cantonese Phonetic Reader\", London: University of London Press; rpt in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. and S. Plaatje (1916), \"A Sechuana Reader\", London: ULP; rpt in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. and H. S. Perera (1919), \"A Colloquial Sinhalese Reader\", Manchester: Manchester University Press; rpt in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. and M. Trofimov (1923), \"The Pronunciation of Russian\", Cambridge: CUP; rpt in facsimile in Jones (2002).\nBULLET::::- Jones, D. (2002), Daniel Jones: Collected Works, Vols. 1-8, ed. B. Collins and I.M. Mees, London: Routledge.\nBULLET::::- Michaelis, H. and D. Jones (1913), \"A Phonetic Dictionary of the English Language\", Hanover-Berlin: Carl Meyer and Gustav Prior; rpt in Jones (2002).\n\nBULLET::::- Ling Links, People, I-M, Section on Daniel Jones\nBULLET::::- Parts of his book \"An Outline of English Phonetics\"\nBULLET::::- 'The Daniel Jones Legacy', J. Windsor Lewis\nBULLET::::- 'Anniversary of the Death of Daniel Jones', J. Windsor Lewis\nBULLET::::- 'Daniel Jones b 12th Sept 1881', J. Windsor Lewis (includes a recording of Jones speaking)\n"}
{"id": "8618", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8618", "title": "David Beckham", "text": "David Beckham\n\nDavid Robert Joseph Beckham (; born 2 May 1975) is an English former professional footballer, the current president of Inter Miami CF and co-owner of Salford City. He played for Manchester United, Preston North End, Real Madrid, Milan, LA Galaxy, Paris Saint-Germain and the England national team, for which he held the appearance record for an outfield player until 2016. He is the first English player to win league titles in four countries: England, Spain, the United States and France. He retired in May 2013 after a 20-year career, during which he won 19 major trophies.\n\nBeckham's professional club career began with Manchester United, where he made his first-team debut in 1992 at age 17. With United, he won the Premier League title six times, the FA Cup twice, and the UEFA Champions League in 1999. He then played four seasons with Real Madrid, winning the La Liga championship in his final season with the club. In July 2007, Beckham signed a five-year contract with Major League Soccer club LA Galaxy. While a Galaxy player, he spent two loan spells in Italy with Milan in 2009 and 2010. He was the first British footballer to play 100 UEFA Champions League games. In international football, Beckham made his England debut on 1 September 1996 at the age of 21. He was captain for six years, earning 58 caps during his tenure. He made 115 career appearances in total, appearing at three FIFA World Cup tournaments, in 1998, 2002 and 2006, and two UEFA European Championship tournaments, in 2000 and 2004.\n\nKnown for his range of passing, crossing ability and bending free-kicks as a right winger, Beckham has been hailed as one of the greatest and most recognisable midfielders of his generation, as well as one of the best set-piece specialists of all time. He was runner-up in the Ballon d'Or in 1999, twice runner-up for FIFA World Player of the Year and in 2004 was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world's greatest living players. He was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2008. A global ambassador for the sport, Beckham is regarded as a British cultural icon.\n\nBeckham has consistently ranked among the highest earners in football, and in 2013 was listed as the highest-paid player in the world, having earned over $50 million in the previous 12 months. He has been married to Victoria Beckham since 1999 and they have four children. He has been a UNICEF UK ambassador since 2005, and in 2015 he launched \"7: The David Beckham UNICEF Fund\". In 2014, MLS announced that Beckham and a group of investors would own an Inter Miami CF, which will begin in 2020.\n\nBeckham was born at Whipps Cross University Hospital in Leytonstone, London, England. He is the son of Sandra Georgina (\"née\" West; b. 1949), a hairdresser, and David Edward Alan \"Ted\" Beckham (b. Edmonton, London, 1948), a kitchen fitter, who married in the London Borough of Hackney in 1969. He has an older sister, Lynne Georgina, and a younger sister, Joanne Louise. He regularly played football in Ridgeway Park, Chingford, as a child, and attended Chase Lane Primary School and Chingford County High School. In a 2007 interview, Beckham said that, \"At school whenever the teachers asked, 'What do you want to do when you're older?' I'd say, 'I want to be a footballer.' And they'd say, 'No, what do you really want to do, for a job?' But that was the only thing I ever wanted to do.\" Beckham's maternal grandfather was Jewish, and Beckham has referred to himself as \"half Jewish\" and wrote in his autobiography \"I've probably had more contact with Judaism than with any other religion\". In his book \"Both Feet on the Ground\", he stated that growing up he attended church every week with his parents, because that was the only way he could play football for their team.\n\nHis parents were fanatical Manchester United supporters who frequently travelled to Old Trafford from London to attend the team's home matches. David inherited his parents' love of Manchester United, and his main sporting passion was football. He attended one of Bobby Charlton's football schools in Manchester and won the chance to take part in a training session with Barcelona, as part of a talent competition. He played for a local youth team called Ridgeway Rovers, which was coached by his father, Stuart Underwood, and Steve Kirby. Beckham was a Manchester United mascot for a match against West Ham United in 1986. Young Beckham had trials with his local club Leyton Orient, Norwich City and attended Tottenham Hotspur's school of excellence. Tottenham Hotspur was the first club he played for. During a two-year period in which Beckham played for Brimsdown Rovers' youth team, he was named Under-15 Player of the Year in 1990. He also attended Bradenton Preparatory Academy, but signed schoolboy forms at Manchester United on his 14th birthday, and subsequently signed a Youth Training Scheme contract on 8 July 1991.\n\nHaving signed for Manchester United as a trainee on 8 July 1991, Beckham was part of a group of young players, including Ryan Giggs, Gary Neville, Phil Neville, Nicky Butt and Paul Scholes, who were coached by Eric Harrison, and helped the club win the FA Youth Cup in . Beckham scored Manchester United's second goal in the 30th minute of their 3–1 first-leg win of the final against Crystal Palace on 14 April 1992. In the second leg on 15 May, Beckham played a full 90-minutes of the fixture which ended 3–2 in favour of Manchester United and 6–3 on aggregate. Beckham's impact led to a first-team debut on 23 September 1992, as a substitute for Andrei Kanchelskis in a League Cup match against Brighton & Hove Albion. Shortly afterwards, Beckham signed as a professional on 23 January 1993.\n\nManchester United again reached the , where they faced Leeds United. The first leg was played on 10 May 1993, where Beckham started in Manchester United's 2–0 home loss but was replaced by substitute Robbie Savage. In the second leg on 13 May 1993, Beckham played the full 90 minutes of Manchester United's 2–1 defeat, which gave Leeds United a 4–1 aggregate score. Beckham also received honours with the club's reserve team when the squad won the league in 1994. In September 1994, Beckham made his first full appearance in the club's first team against Port Vale in a League Cup fixture. On 7 December 1994, Beckham made his UEFA Champions League debut, scoring a goal in a 4–0 victory at home to Galatasaray in the final game of the group stage. Despite the victory, however, they finished third out of four in their group, behind Barcelona.\n\nBeckham then went to Preston North End on loan for part of the 1994–95 season to get some first team experience. He impressed, scoring two goals in five appearances, notably scoring directly from a corner kick.\n\nBeckham returned to Manchester and made his Premier League debut for Manchester United on 2 April 1995, in a goalless draw against Leeds United. He played four times for United in the league that season, as they finished second behind Blackburn Rovers, missing out on a third successive Premier League title by a single point. He was not in the squad for the FA Cup final with Everton on 20 May, which United lost 1–0, leaving the club without a major trophy for the first time since 1989.\n\nUnited manager Sir Alex Ferguson had a great deal of confidence in the club's young players. Beckham was part of a group of young talents Ferguson brought into United in the 1990s (known as \"Fergie's Fledglings\"), which included Nicky Butt and Gary and Phil Neville. When experienced players Paul Ince, Mark Hughes, and Andrei Kanchelskis left the club after the end of the 1994–95 season, his decision to let youth team players replace them instead of buying star players from other clubs (United had been linked with moves for players including Darren Anderton, Marc Overmars and Roberto Baggio, but no major signings were made that summer), drew a great deal of criticism. The criticism increased when United started the season with a 3–1 defeat at Aston Villa, with Beckham scoring United's only goal of the game. However, United recovered from this early season defeat and the young players performed well.\n\nBeckham swiftly established himself as United's right-sided midfielder (rather than a right-winger in the style of his predecessor Andrei Kanchelskis) and helped them to win the Premier League title and FA Cup double that season, scoring the winner in the semi-final against Chelsea and also providing the corner from which Eric Cantona scored in the FA Cup Final. Beckham's first title medal had, for a while, looked like it would not be coming that season, as United were still 10 points adrift of leaders Newcastle United at the turn of the new year, but Beckham and his teammates had overhauled the Tynesiders at the top of the league by mid March and they remained top until the end of the season. Despite playing regularly and to a consistently high standard for Manchester United, Beckham did not break into the England squad before Euro 1996.\n\nAt the beginning of the 1996–97 season, Beckham was given the number 10 shirt that had most recently been worn by Mark Hughes. On 17 August 1996 (the first day of the Premier League season), Beckham became something of a household name when he scored a spectacular goal in a match against Wimbledon. With United leading 2–0, Beckham noticed that Wimbledon's goalkeeper Neil Sullivan was standing a long way out of his goal, and hit a shot from the halfway line – 60 yards out – that floated over the goalkeeper and into the net.\n\nHis goal celebration for the 60-yard strike saw him raise his arms and walk away smiling rather than run as he often would. When Beckham scored the goal he was wearing Adidas Predator boots. In a UK poll conducted by Channel 4 in 2002, the British public voted the goal No.18 in the list of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments. In a 2016 Sky Sports poll it was ranked the best opening day goal in Premier League history. During the 1996–97 season, Beckham became an automatic first-choice player at Manchester United, helping them to retain the Premier League title, and was voted PFA Young Player of the Year by his peers. Prior to the 1997–98 season, Beckham inherited the number 7 shirt, a number previously worn by such United legends as George Best and Eric Cantona. Manchester United started the season well but erratic performances in the second half of the season saw United finish second behind Arsenal.\n\nIn the 1998–99 season, he was part of the United team that won the treble of the Premier League, FA Cup and Champions League, a unique feat in English football. There had been speculation that the criticism that he had received after being sent off in the World Cup would lead to him leaving England, but Beckham decided to stay at Manchester United.\n\nTo ensure they would win the Premier League title, United needed to win their final league match of the season, at home to Tottenham. There were reports suggesting that the opposition would allow themselves to be beaten to prevent their local rivals Arsenal from retaining the title, but Tottenham took an early lead in the match. Beckham scored the equaliser with a curling strike from 25 yards out into the top left corner of the goal and United went on to win the match and the league.\n\nBeckham played in central midfield in United's win over Bayern Munich in the 1999 UEFA Champions League Final, since United's first string centre-midfielders Paul Scholes and Roy Keane were suspended for the match. United were losing the match 1–0 at the end of normal time, but won the trophy by scoring two goals in injury time. Both of the goals came from corners taken by Beckham. Those crucial assists, coupled with great performances over the rest of the season, led to him finishing runner up to Rivaldo for 1999's European Footballer of the Year and FIFA World Player of the Year awards.\n\nDespite Beckham's achievements in the 1998–99 season, he was still unpopular among some opposition fans and journalists, and he was criticised after being sent off for a deliberate foul in Manchester United's World Club Championship match against Necaxa. It was suggested in the press that his wife was a bad influence on him, and that it might be in United's interests to sell him, but his manager publicly backed him and he stayed at the club. During the 1999–2000 season, there was a talk of a transfer to Juventus in Italy, but this never happened. Beckham helped United retain the Premier League title in 1999–2000 by an 18-point margin, after being pushed by Arsenal and Leeds United for much of the season. United won their final 11 league games of the season, with Beckham scoring five goals during this run, with his last goal coming from a swerving shot from the edge of the penalty area in their final home game against Tottenham Hotspur.\n\nBy the early 2000s, the relationship between Ferguson and Beckham had begun to deteriorate, possibly as a result of Beckham's fame and commitments away from football. In 2000, Beckham was given permission to miss training to look after his son Brooklyn, who had gastroenteritis, but Ferguson was furious when Victoria Beckham was photographed at a London Fashion Week event on the same night, claiming that Beckham would have been able to train if Victoria had looked after Brooklyn that day. He responded by fining Beckham the maximum amount that was permitted (two weeks' wages – then £50,000) and dropping him for a crucial match against United's rivals Leeds United. He later criticised Beckham for this in his autobiography, claiming he had not been \"fair to his teammates\" Beckham had a good season for his club, though, and helped United to win the Premier League by a record margin.\n\n\"He was never a problem until he got married. He used to go into work with the academy coaches at night time, he was a fantastic young lad. Getting married into that entertainment scene was a difficult thing – from that moment, his life was never going to be the same. He is such a big celebrity, football is only a small part.\"' – Alex Ferguson speaking about Beckham's marriage in 2007.\nHe was a key player in United's third successive league title in 2000–01, only the fourth time that any club had achieved three league titles in a row. He scored nine goals that season, all in the Premier League.\n\nOn 10 April 2002, Beckham was injured during a Champions League match against Deportivo de La Coruña, breaking the second metatarsal bone in his left foot. There was speculation in the British media that the injury might have been caused deliberately, as the player who had injured Beckham was Argentine Aldo Duscher, and England and Argentina were due to meet in that year's World Cup. The injury prevented Beckham from playing for United for the rest of the season and they missed out on the Premier League title to Arsenal (also being knocked out of the Champions League by Bayer Leverkusen on away goals in the semi-finals), but he signed a three-year contract in May, following months of negotiations with the club, mostly concerning extra payments for his image rights. The income from his new contract, and his many endorsement deals, made him the highest-paid player in the world at the time. Despite the injury, 2001–02 was arguably Beckham's best season as a United player; he scored 11 goals in 28 league games, and a total of 16 goals in 42 games in all competitions, the best of his career.\n\nFollowing an injury early in the 2002–03 season, Beckham was unable to regain his place on the Manchester United team, with Ole Gunnar Solskjær having replaced him on the right side of midfield. His relationship with his manager deteriorated further on 15 February 2003 when, in the changing room following an FA Cup defeat to Arsenal, a furious Alex Ferguson threw or kicked a boot that struck Beckham over the eye, causing a cut that required stitches. The incident led to a great deal of transfer speculation involving Beckham, with bookmakers offering odds on whether he or Ferguson would be first to leave the club. Although the team had started the season badly, their results improved greatly from December onwards and they won the league, with Beckham managing a total of 11 goals in 52 games in all competitions. He was still a first-choice player for England, however, and was appointed an Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBE) for services to football on 13 June 2003.\n\nBeckham had made 265 Premier league appearances for United and scored 61 goals. He also made 81 Champions league appearances, scoring 15 goals. Beckham won six Premier League titles, two FA Cups, one European Cup, one Intercontinental Cup and one FA Youth Cup in the space of 12 years. By this stage, he was their joint second longest serving player behind Ryan Giggs (having joined them at the same time as Nicky Butt, Gary Neville and Paul Scholes).\n\nAs the summer 2003 transfer window approached, Manchester United appeared keen to sell Beckham to Barcelona and the two clubs even announced that they reached a deal for Beckham's transfer, but instead he joined reigning Spanish champions Real Madrid for €37 million on a four-year contract. Beckham was the latest signing in the \"Galácticos\" era of global stars signed by club president Florentino Pérez every summer. The news came as a bitter blow to the newly elected Barcelona president Joan Laporta, who based much of his presidential campaign on signing Beckham. Though announced in mid-June, the transfer was completed on 1 July 2003, making him the third Englishman to play for the club, after Laurie Cunningham and Steve McManaman. Following a successful medical on 2 July, Beckham was unveiled in front of 500 accredited journalists from 25 countries at Real's basketball facility, where he was handed the famous white shirt by club legend Alfredo Di Stéfano. Although Beckham had worn the number seven shirt for Manchester United and England, he was unable to wear it at Madrid as it was assigned to club captain Raúl. He decided to wear number 23 instead, citing his admiration of basketball player Michael Jordan, who also wore the number 23 shirt, as the reason behind his decision.\n\nIn the week before Beckham's presentation, Real named Carlos Queiroz as their new head coach, meaning that Beckham was reunited with a familiar face upon arriving to Madrid, since Queiroz had spent the previous season as Alex Ferguson's assistant at Manchester United. In late July 2003, the club went on a tour of the Far East as part of pre-season training, but also to cash in on Beckham's huge marketing appeal in Asia, where he enjoyed tremendous following. Real's brand recognition in that part of the globe was already well established as the club made financially successful trips to Asia during previous off-seasons. The presence of a global marketing icon such as Beckham, however, made this particular tour a financial smash for \"los Merengues\".\n\nShortly after his transfer to Real, Beckham also ended his relationship with agent Tony Stephens of SFX Europe, who had guided him through his career until that point, including helping to engineer Beckham's move from Manchester to Madrid. Beckham signed on with Simon Fuller and his company 19 Entertainment, which already managed the career of Victoria. Beckham also appointed close friend Terry Byrne to be his personal manager.\nIn late August 2003, Real Madrid won the Spanish Super Cup over two legs versus RCD Mallorca, with Beckham scoring the final goal in a 3–0 return leg win at home, thus setting the stage for the start of the league season. Playing in a star-laden team which included three former FIFA World Player of the Year recipients, Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo and Luís Figo, in addition to Roberto Carlos, Raúl and Iker Casillas, Beckham did not require much time to settle in, scoring five times in his first 16 matches (including a goal less than three minutes into his La Liga debut). Queiroz mostly favoured the adaptable 5–3–2 formation, with two fullbacks Míchel Salgado and Roberto Carlos, often joining the attack down the wings, while Beckham played on the right of the three-man midfield, alongside Zidane and Figo.\n\nReal Madrid were runners-up in the Copa del Rey, were knocked out of the UEFA Champions League at the quarter-final stage and finished the league season in fourth place, meaning the team, whose president Pérez expected them to win either the Spanish league or the Champions League each season, did not match expectations. In July 2004, while Beckham was in pre-season training in Spain, an intruder scaled a wall at the Beckham home while carrying a can of petrol. Victoria and their children were in the house at the time, but security guards apprehended the man before he reached the house.\n\nThe league season began with new head coach José Antonio Camacho at the helm, but he ended up lasting only three matches, handing in his resignation as Real dropped to eighth spot in the La Liga standings. Camacho's assistant Mariano García Remón took over on temporary basis as Real's leadership scrambled to find a permanent replacement. Beckham made more headlines on 9 October 2004 when he admitted intentionally fouling Ben Thatcher in an England match against Wales to get himself booked. Beckham was due to receive a one-match suspension for his next caution, and had picked up an injury which he knew would keep him out of England's next match, so he deliberately fouled Thatcher to serve his suspension in a match that he would have had to miss anyway. The Football Association asked Beckham for an explanation of his actions and he admitted that he had \"made a mistake\" and apologised. He was sent off shortly afterwards, this time in a league match for Real Madrid against Valencia. Having received a yellow card, he was judged to have sarcastically applauded the referee and was given a second yellow card, causing an automatic dismissal, although the suspension was cancelled on appeal.\n\nBy Christmas 2004, with the team sitting in second position in the league, García Remón was dismissed, and Vanderlei Luxemburgo became the new head coach. However, the well-travelled Brazilian failed to inspire the team to the title as Real again finished the season in second position. On 3 December 2005, Beckham was sent off for the third time that season in a league match against Getafe CF. A day later Luxemburgo was sacked and was replaced by Juan Ramón López Caro. By the end of that season, Beckham led La Liga in number of assists.\n\nDuring the season, Beckham established football academies in Los Angeles and east London and was named a judge for the 2006 British Book Awards. \nReal Madrid finished second to Barcelona in the 2005–06 La Liga, albeit with a large 12-point gap, and only reached the last 16 in the Champions League after losing to Arsenal. The season also marked the end of an era for the club as Pérez resigned his post as president in January 2006, with Vicente Boluda named as replacement on an interim basis until the end of the season.\n\nThe summer 2006 off-season marked a turbulent time as the club's presidential elections were held. Ramón Calderón became the new Real president. As expected, none of the club officials who served under the previous president was kept, including head coach López Caro. Initially out of favour with newly arrived head coach Fabio Capello, Beckham started only a few games at the beginning of the season, as the speedier José Antonio Reyes was normally preferred on the right wing. Of the first nine matches Beckham started, Real lost seven. On 10 January 2007, after prolonged contractual negotiations, Real Madrid's sporting director Predrag Mijatović announced that Beckham would not remain at Real Madrid after the end of the season. However, he later claimed that he was mistranslated and that he actually said that Beckham's contract had not yet been renewed.\n\nOn 11 January 2007, Beckham announced that he had signed a five-year deal to play for the LA Galaxy beginning 1 July 2007. On 13 January 2007, Fabio Capello said that Beckham had played his last game for Real Madrid, although he continued to train with the team. A few days later, while speaking to the students at Villanueva University Center in Madrid, Calderón said that Beckham is \"going to Hollywood to be half a film star\", adding \"our technical staff were right not to extend his contract, which has been proved by the fact that no other technical staff in the world wanted him except Los Angeles\".\n\nAbout a month later, however, Capello backtracked on his earlier statement, allowing Beckham to rejoin the team for the match against Real Sociedad on 10 February 2007. The player immediately repaid his head coach's trust by scoring the equalising goal from a 27-yard free kick, as Real Madrid eventually recorded a 2–1 victory. In his final UEFA Champions League appearance for the club, Real Madrid were knocked out of the competition by Bayern Munich at the round-of-16 stage (on the away goals rule) on 7 March 2007. Beckham played a pivotal role in all three Madrid goals in the home game, with Bayern goalkeeper Oliver Kahn describing his performance as \"world class\".\nOn 17 June 2007, the last day of the La Liga season, Beckham started in his final match for the club, a 3–1 win over Mallorca which saw them clinch the title from Barcelona. With Real down 0–1, Beckham limped off the field and was replaced by José Antonio Reyes, who scored two goals, leading the team to that season's La Liga title, their first since Beckham had signed with them and 30th overall in the club's history. Although Real and Barçelona both finished level on points, Madrid took the title because of their superior head-to-head record, capping a remarkable six-month turnaround for Beckham. With his wife and children, along with celebrity friends Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes, watching from a luxury box at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium, it was only Beckham's second piece of silverware since he joined the famous club.\n\nTowards the end of the season, as Beckham was getting back into Capello's good books after successfully fighting his way back into the first team, Real Madrid announced they would try to untie his transfer to LA Galaxy, but were ultimately unsuccessful. Several weeks before Beckham's scheduled arrival in the United States, Real's management contacted LA Galaxy's ownership group about reacquiring the player, but were quickly turned down.\n\nA month after the conclusion of Beckham's Real career, \"Forbes\" magazine reported that he had been the party primarily responsible for the team's huge increase in merchandise sales, a total reported to top US$600 million during Beckham's four years at the club.\n\nBeckham's involvement with Major League Soccer (MLS) began while he was still a Real Madrid player when it was confirmed on 11 January 2007 that he would be leaving Madrid in six months to join MLS side LA Galaxy. The speculation about his new contract in Madrid was thus put to an end and the following day Beckham's official press conference was held in conjunction with the 2007 MLS SuperDraft.\n\nThe announcement made global headlines and elevated the league's profile. Though many worldwide media outlets reported the deal to be worth US$250 million, the astronomical figure was soon revealed to be something of a PR stunt engineered by Beckham's media handlers (British representative agency 19 Entertainment). To maximise the media effect, in the press release they decided to list the potential sum that Beckham could make over the five-year period from all his revenue sources, which in addition to his Galaxy pay also include his personal endorsements. Beckham's actual deal with the Galaxy was a five-year contract worth US$32.5 million in total or $6.5 million per year.\n\nThe high-profile acquisition paid immediate financial dividends for Galaxy long before Beckham joined the team. On the strength of the signing and the media frenzy it created, the club was able to pull off a new five-year shirt sponsorship deal with Herbalife nutrition company worth US$20 million. The gate revenue peaked as well with 11,000 new season tickets holders and sold-out luxury suites (each one of the 42 inside the team's home stadium, the Home Depot Center). LA Galaxy owners Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) also reported an immediate spike in business. Involved on many business fronts worldwide, AEG was already leveraging its Beckham association in places such as China, where the company had been working aggressively in Shanghai and Beijing for years to receive clearance to build arenas and stadiums. The company's CEO Tim Leiweke put it as follows: \"Suddenly, we're known as the company that owns the team that David Beckham is going to play for, so our world changed\".\n\nIn the months following the announcement, the additional terms of Beckham's contract became public knowledge. One unique contract provision was giving him the option of buying an MLS expansion franchise in any market except New York City at the fixed price of $25 million whenever he stopped playing in the league – an allowance that the league's owners had never given to a player before. Another provision was the opt-out clause after the 2009 season, meaning that should he decide so, Beckham was free to leave the club after completing year three of his five-year contract. The league had a salary cap in place, requiring the creation of the Designated Player Rule for Beckham to bypass the cap; the rule was later nicknamed in his honor. In April 2007, he and wife Victoria bought an $18.2 million home on San Ysidro Drive in Beverly Hills.\nBeckham's contract with LA Galaxy took effect on 11 July, and on 13 July, the Englishman was officially unveiled as a Galaxy player at the Home Depot Center to much fanfare and world media interest in front of more than 5,000 gathered fans and some 700 accredited media members. Beckham chose to wear number 23. It was announced that Galaxy jersey sales had already reached a record figure of over 250,000 prior to this formal introduction.\n\nIn parallel, Beckham's handlers at 19 Entertainment succeeded in putting together an unprecedented US media rollout designed to expand his carefully crafted personal brand in America. He made the cover of \"Sports Illustrated\", a few weeks earlier Adidas launched the extensive 13-part ad campaign \"Fútbol meets Football\" starring Beckham and NFL running back Reggie Bush, and \"W\" magazine published a racy photo spread featuring David and wife Victoria photographed by Steven Klein. Meanwhile, ESPN sports network was running a promotional campaign and it also agreed to air \"David Beckham: New Beginnings\" documentary produced by 19 Entertainment before the friendly match versus Chelsea, which was expected to be Beckham's American debut. In addition to popularising soccer, Beckham's arrival was used as platform for entertainment industry endeavours. Since both Beckham's and his wife's often overlapping careers were handled by 19 Entertainment, which is owned by Simon Fuller, who in turn has a business relationship with the Creative Artists Agency (CAA), one of Hollywood's most powerful talent agencies, it was important also for CAA that the Beckhams made as big an impact as possible upon their arrival in the United States. On 16 July, CAA had hosted a welcoming bash for David at its new eight-storey, $400 million headquarters in Century City with CAA employees reportedly instructed beforehand to line the staircase and clap for Beckham upon his arrival. That night Victoria's reality show prime-time special \"\" aired on NBC, drawing negative reviews in the press and poor viewership ratings.\nOn Saturday afternoon, 21 July, despite still nursing the injured left ankle that he picked up a month earlier during the final match of La Liga's season, Beckham made his Galaxy debut, coming on for Alan Gordon in the 78th minute of a 0–1 friendly loss to Chelsea as part of the World Series of Soccer. With a capacity crowd, along with a long Hollywood celebrity list featuring Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Eva Longoria, Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger, and Drew Carey among others, present at the Home Depot Center, the match was broadcast live on ESPN's main network. However, the proceedings on the field of play took a back seat to the Beckham spectacle, and despite the presence of worldwide football stars such as Andriy Shevchenko, Didier Drogba, Michael Ballack, and Frank Lampard, the US television cameras were firmly focused on Beckham who spent most of the match on the bench. The match's added time featured a scare for already injured Beckham when he got tackled by Steve Sidwell whose cleats struck Beckham's right foot, sending him airborne before he crumpled hard to the ground. Though the existing injury was not aggravated too much, Beckham's recovery process was set back by about a week. ESPN's presentation of Beckham's debut earned a 1.0 TV rating, meaning it was seen in an average of 947,000 television homes in the US – a disappointing figure given the national media buzz and two weeks of constant promotion by ESPN. As far as sporting events that were televised that weekend in the United States, Beckham's much publicised debut drew fewer TV viewers than British Open golf tournament, a regular-season national baseball game, and even the Indy Racing League's Honda 200 motor race.\n\nThe day after the made-for-TV debut was reserved for the welcoming party for the Beckhams at LA's Museum of Contemporary Art, formally billed as being hosted by Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Will Smith, and Jada Pinkett Smith though in actuality a CAA-organized event. Attended by many Hollywood A-listers, the lavish bash was big news in the US celebrity tabloid media, including daily entertainment TV magazines such as \"Entertainment Tonight\" and \"Access Hollywood\".\n\nBeckham missed the next four LA Galaxy matches – three in the North American SuperLiga and an MLS game away at Toronto FC though he still made the trip with his teammates, sitting on the bench in street clothes. It was in Toronto on 5 August that the team got its first taste of what life would be like on the road with Beckham on the roster. Due to security concerns, it was the first time the team flew on a charter for a road match, rather than flying commercial (MLS normally forbids charter flights for away matches, claiming they provide competitive advantage, but in this case they made an exception due to the frenzy created around Beckham and resulting security issues). Also, instead of the usual MLS-mandated modest hotels, LA Galaxy stayed at the five-star Le Méridien King Edward in downtown Toronto (an expense paid for by the local Toronto promoter), while the glitz and glamour continued with the velvet rope, red carpet party at the Ultra Supper Club with Beckham as the centerpiece guest.\n\nTwo weeks after his 12-minute appearance against Chelsea, Beckham made his league debut as a substitute on 9 August away versus D.C. United in front of the sellout crowd of 46,686 (nearly three times the average D.C. United home crowd) at the RFK Stadium, coming on for Quavas Kirk in the 71st minute. Coming into the nationally televised match on ESPN, played under a heavy downpour with his team down a man and down a goal, Beckham left a mark during the remaining 20-plus minutes. He hit a long free kick that Carlos Pavón failed to finish on for the equaliser, and then in the final minutes Beckham served a weighted through ball into Landon Donovan's path that United's keeper Troy Perkins managed to break up in the last moment – the Galaxy lost 1–0. The next match on the road trip was at New England Revolution and Beckham decided to sit it out, fearing further aggravating his ankle injury on the Gillette Stadium's artificial surface.\n\nBeckham returned to the pitch the following week, again facing D.C. United, in the SuperLiga semi-final on 15 August. During this game he had many firsts with the Galaxy; his first start, first yellow card and first game as team captain. He also scored his first goal for the team, from a free kick, and also made his first assist, for Landon Donovan in the second half. These goals gave the team a 2–0 victory, and a place in the North American SuperLiga final versus Pachuca on 29 August.\n\nDuring the SuperLiga final against Pachuca, Beckham injured his right knee, with an MRI scan revealing that he had sprained his medial collateral ligament and would be out for six weeks. He returned to play in the final home match of the season. The Galaxy were eliminated from playoff contention on 21 October, in the final MLS match of the season, a 1–0 loss to the Chicago Fire. Beckham played as a substitute in the match, bringing his season totals to eight matches played (5 league); one goal scored (0 league); and three assists (2 league).\n\nBeckham trained with Arsenal from 4 January 2008 for three weeks until he returned to the Galaxy for pre-season training. Beckham scored his first league goal with the Galaxy on 3 April against the San Jose Earthquakes in the ninth minute. On 24 May 2008, the Galaxy defeated the Kansas City Wizards 3–1, giving the Galaxy their first winning record in two years and moving the club into first place in the Western Conference. In the match, Beckham scored an empty-net goal from 70 yards out. The goal marked the second time in Beckham's career that he had scored from his own half, the other being a 1996-goal from the half-way line against Wimbledon at Selhurst Park. Overall, however, the Galaxy had a disappointing year, failing to qualify for the end-of-season play-offs.\n\nIn 2008, Beckham's success in the England national team under Fabio Capello led to speculation that he might return to Europe to retain match fitness for the World Cup qualifying matches in 2009. On 30 October 2008, Milan announced that Beckham was to join them on loan from 7 January 2009. Despite this and other speculation, Beckham made it clear that the move in no way signalled his intent to leave MLS and announced his intent to return to the Galaxy in time for the start of the 2009 season in March. Many at Milan both within and outside of the club expressed serious reservations about the transfer, with it considered by some players no more than a marketing move.\n\nBeckham was unveiled at Milan's training facility by the club's chief executive Adriano Galliani on 20 December 2008. The player chose the number 32 shirt previously worn by Christian Vieri, as both the number 7 and 23 shirts were already used by Alexandre Pato and club vice captain Massimo Ambrosini, respectively. The day after his unveiling, Beckham was brought to San Siro where he got introduced to home fans by walking out on the pitch before the league match versus Udinese and proclaiming \"Forza Milan\" over the public address system. Afterwards, he and wife Victoria watched from a luxury box as Milan won 5–1.\nPlaying on the squad led by the 26-year-old superstar Kaká in addition to several other world-class players at or near the peak of their careers – 28-year-old Ronaldinho, and 29-year-old Andrea Pirlo – as well as club veterans Paolo Maldini, Clarence Seedorf, Massimo Ambrosini, Giuseppe Favalli, Gianluca Zambrotta, Filippo Inzaghi and Andriy Shevchenko, Beckham made his competitive debut for the \"rossoneri\" in Serie A as a starter away at Roma on 11 January 2009, playing 89 minutes of the 2–2 draw in front of 53,444 at the Stadio Olimpico. Playing his first competitive match in almost three months, Beckham gave a decent performance in right midfield alongside Pirlo. Though clearly lacking match fitness, occasionally struggling to keep up in a high-tempo match, Beckham put in enough useful crosses and corners to justify the coach Carlo Ancelotti's decision to play him from the start. In Beckham's home debut against Fiorentina a week later, he turned in another understated performance on the right side of midfield before advancing into a more active central role in the second half thus effectively taking over Seedorf's role after the Dutchman was subbed off. Milan won 1–0 courtesy of Pato, but the 65,000+ San Siro crowd mostly focused on Kaká, imploring him to stay.\n\nA noticeably older team, Ancelotti-coached Milan was proving a good fit for the 33-year-old Englishman. He scored his first goal in Serie A for Milan in a 4–1 victory over Bologna on 25 January, his third appearance for the club. Though Beckham was expected to return to Los Angeles in March, after impressing at the Italian club, scoring two goals in his first four matches and assisting on several more, rumours began to swirl that Beckham would stay in Milan, with the Italian club reportedly offering to pay a multimillion-dollar fee for him. The rumours were confirmed on 4 February, when Beckham stated that he was seeking a permanent transfer to Milan in a bid to sustain his England career through the 2010 World Cup. Milan, however, failed to match Galaxy's valuation of Beckham, in the US$10–15 million range.\n\nStill, negotiations continued during a month of speculation. On 2 March, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that Beckham's loan had been extended through mid-July. This was later confirmed by Beckham, revealing what was described as a unique \"timeshare\" deal, in which Beckham would play with L.A. from mid-July until the end of the 2009 MLS season.\n\nAfter his return from Milan, many LA fans showed dislike and anger towards him as he missed the first half of the season and several held up signs saying \"Go home fraud\", and \"Part-time player\". The Galaxy, however, had a much more successful season than in previous years, rising from third to first in the Western Conference during Beckham's time with them. He remained a key part of the squad which saw Galaxy win the 2009 Western Conference final after a 2–0 overtime victory over the Houston Dynamo.\nIn the final on 22 November 2009, the Galaxy lost to Real Salt Lake by 5–4 in a penalty shoot-out after a 1–1 draw. Beckham also scored in the shootout.\n\nIn November 2009, after the end of 2009 MLS season, it was confirmed that Beckham would return to Milan for a second loan period beginning in January 2010. On 6 January 2010, Beckham made a winning return in a Milan shirt, playing 75 minutes of a 5–2 victory over Genoa. On 16 February 2010, Beckham played against Manchester United for the first time since he left the club in 2003. He played 76 minutes of the match at the San Siro – which ended 3–2 to Manchester United – before being substituted for Clarence Seedorf.\n\nBeckham returned to Old Trafford for the second leg of the tie on 10 March 2010; he did not start the match, but was brought on for Ignazio Abate in the 64th minute to a positive reception from the Manchester United fans. The score was 3–0 for United at that point and the tie was all but decided. The match was the first time Beckham had played against Manchester United at Old Trafford and saw him create several scoring opportunities via crosses and corner kicks, but Manchester United dominated Milan and beat them 4–0, winning the tie 7–2. Following the final whistle, he aroused a bit of controversy by draping the green-and-gold scarf around his neck that was given to him by the Manchester United supporters protesting against club owner Malcolm Glazer. As the fan protests against Glazer by the people gathered around Manchester United Supporters' Trust gained steam in 2010, the green-and-gold scarf had come to be seen as an anti-Glazer symbol, and by extension many saw Beckham's decision to publicly put it on as gesture of support. When asked about it later, however, Beckham responded that protests are not his business.\n\nIn Milan's next game, against Chievo, Beckham suffered a torn left Achilles tendon, causing him to miss the World Cup as well as the MLS season due to the injury, which took him out of action for the next five months. Doctor Sakari Orava performed surgery on Beckham's tendon in Turku, Finland, on 15 March 2010. After the operation, Orava affirmed that, \"it went quite fine. The prognosis is he needs a rehabilitation for the next few months, and the plaster cast is the next six to eight weeks. I would say that [it will be] maybe four months before he's running, but six months before he's jumping and kicking.\"\n\nOn 11 September 2010, after recovering from his Achilles tendon injury, Beckham returned to the game as a substitute in the 70th minute in the Galaxy's 3–1 win over Columbus Crew. On 4 October, Beckham scored a trademark free kick in a 2–1 win over Chivas USA to mark his first goal in 2010. On 24 October, Beckham scored his second goal of the season in the Galaxy's 2–1 win over FC Dallas which secured them their second successive Western Conference title and first MLS Supporters' Shield since 2002.\n\nDuring January and February 2011, ahead of the 2011 MLS season, Beckham trained with Tottenham Hotspur. Rumours in the media claimed that the club were in talks with the Galaxy to sign the player on loan, but, according to Spurs manager Harry Redknapp, the move was blocked by Galaxy, who wanted a full final season from their number 23. As a result, he ended up only training with the club as he had done with Arsenal three years earlier. With Beckham playing in the centre of midfield, the Galaxy won the 2011 MLS cup.\nOn 15 May, Beckham scored his first goal of the season for the Galaxy from a 30-yard free kick, in a 4–1 victory over Sporting Kansas City. On 9 July, Beckham scored directly from a corner in a 2–1 win over Chicago Fire, repeating a feat he also achieved while playing for Preston North End.\n\nAfter having his best season with the Galaxy to date and finishing second in the league in assists, Beckham finished his fifth MLS season on a high. On 20 November 2011, he joined an elite group of players to have won league titles in three countries, when Los Angeles won their third MLS Cup against the Houston Dynamo, winning 1–0 on a goal by captain Landon Donovan, with assists from Beckham and fellow designated player Robbie Keane.\n\nFollowing the 2011 season, in which the Galaxy won their second consecutive Supporters' Shield, having the second most points in MLS history, Beckham's five-year contract with the Galaxy expired on 31 December 2011. Despite being 36, he stated that he did not intend to retire. Beckham was heavily linked with Paris Saint-Germain, but on 18 January 2012, Galaxy announced Beckham had signed a new two-year contract to remain in Los Angeles. In May 2012, Beckham and his victorious teammates were received by President of the United States Barack Obama at the White House.\n\nBeckham helped the Galaxy to a fourth-place finish in the MLS Western Conference 2012 regular season with Beckham scoring seven goals and adding nine assists. The Galaxy defeated Vancouver Whitecaps FC, the San Jose Earthquakes, and Seattle Sounders FC on their way to the MLS Cup final, where they defeated the Houston Dynamo 3–1 to retain the cup. He was subbed off in the 89th minute for Marcelo Sarvas and was given a standing ovation at their home venue. Beckham had earlier announced that the 2012 MLS Cup Final would be his final game with the Galaxy despite having another year remaining on his contract.\n\nOn 31 January 2013, ahead of the transfer deadline it was announced that Beckham would be undergoing a medical with Paris Saint-Germain ahead of a potential move to the Ligue 1 side. Beckham signed a five-month deal with the club later that afternoon and confirmed that his entire salary during his time in Paris would be donated to a local children's charity. His PSG debut came on 24 February 2013, when he came off the bench in the 76th minute in a Ligue 1 home match against Marseille. This made him the 400th player in the history of the club. On 12 May 2013, Beckham won a fourth different top flight winners' medal after PSG beat Lyon 1–0 to claim the Ligue 1 title.\n\nOn 16 May 2013, Beckham announced that he would retire from professional football at the end of that year's French football season. Following his decision to retire at the end of the 2012–13 season, Beckham was given specially designed boots in the colours of the Union Jack to wear in his final game. These boots had the names of his wife and children stitched on to them. On 18 May 2013, Beckham was made captain in his final home game against Brest. In this game, Beckham assisted a goal by Matuidi from a corner. Beckham was subbed after 80 minutes, receiving hugs from his fellow players and manager, as well as a standing ovation from fans. PSG went on to win the game 3–1.\n\nBeckham made his first appearance for the England national team on 1 September 1996, in a World Cup qualifying match against Moldova. In June 1997, he participated in the Tournoi de France, the friendly international football tournament held in France as a warm-up to the 1998 FIFA World Cup.\n\nBeckham had played in all of England's qualifying matches for the 1998 World Cup and was part of the England squad at the World Cup finals in France, but the team's manager Glenn Hoddle publicly accused him of not concentrating on the tournament, and he did not start in either of England's first two games. He was picked for the third game against Colombia and scored with a bending 30-yard free kick in a 2–0 victory, which was his first goal for England.\n\nIn the second round (last 16) of that competition, he received a red card in England's match against Argentina. Beckham, after having been fouled by Diego Simeone, kicked Simeone while lying on the floor, striking him on the calf muscle. \"Sports Illustrated\" was critical of the Argentinians' theatrics in that incident, stating that Simeone first delivered a \"heavy-handed challenge\" on Beckham and then \"fell like a ton of bricks\" when Beckham retaliated. Simeone later admitted to trying to get Beckham sent off by over-reacting to the kick and then, along with other members of his team, urging the referee to send Beckham off. The match finished in a draw and England were eliminated in a penalty shootout. Many supporters and journalists blamed him for England's elimination and he became the target of criticism and abuse, including the hanging of an effigy outside a London pub, and the \"Daily Mirror\" printing a dartboard with a picture of him centred on the bullseye. Beckham also received death threats after the World Cup.\n\nThe abuse that Beckham was receiving from English supporters peaked during England's 3–2 defeat by Portugal in Euro 2000, a match where Beckham set up two goals, when a group of England supporters taunted him throughout the match. Beckham responded by raising his middle finger and, while the gesture attracted some criticism, many of the newspapers that had previously encouraged his vilification asked their readers to stop abusing him.\nOn 15 November 2000, following Kevin Keegan's resignation as England manager in October, Beckham was promoted to team captain by the caretaker manager Peter Taylor, and then kept the role under new manager Sven-Göran Eriksson.\n\nBeckham played a major role in helping England qualify for the 2002 FIFA World Cup, starring in an impressive 5–1 victory over Germany in Munich. The final step in Beckham's conversion from villain to national hero happened in England's final qualifying game against Greece on 6 October 2001. England needed to win or draw the match to qualify outright for the World Cup, but were losing 2–1 with little time remaining. When Teddy Sheringham was fouled eight yards outside the Greek penalty area, England were awarded a free-kick and Beckham ensured England's qualification with a curling strike of the kind that had become his trademark. Beckham was voted the BBC Sports Personality of the Year for 2001, and finished runner-up, to Luís Figo of Portugal, for the FIFA World Player of the Year award.\n\nBeckham was partially fit by the time of the 2002 World Cup held in Japan and South Korea, and played in the first match against Sweden. After the events of four years earlier, Beckham achieved a degree of revenge over Argentina by scoring the winning goal with a penalty, causing Argentina to fail to qualify for the knockout stage. England defeated Denmark in the second round with Beckham providing an assist in a 3–0 win. England were knocked out in the quarter-finals by eventual winners Brazil after Ronaldinho scored the winner.\n\nThe following month, at the opening ceremony of the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, Beckham escorted Kirsty Howard as she presented the Jubilee Baton to the Queen. Beckham played in all of England's matches at Euro 2004. He had a penalty saved in England's 2–1 defeat to France and missed another in a penalty shootout in the quarter-final match against Portugal. England lost the shootout thus going out of the competition.\n\nBeckham became a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in January 2005 and was involved in promoting London's successful bid for the 2012 Olympic Games. In October 2005, Beckham's sending off against Austria made him the first England captain to be sent off and the first player to be sent off twice while playing for England. He captained England for the 50th time in a friendly international against Argentina the following month.\n\nIn England's opening game at the 2006 World Cup, against Paraguay on 10 June 2006, Beckham's free kick led to an own-goal by Carlos Gamarra as England won 1–0. In England's next match, played against Trinidad and Tobago on 15 June 2006, Beckham's cross in the 83rd minute led to a Peter Crouch goal, which put England into the lead 1–0. Beckham gave another assist to Steven Gerrard. In the end they won 2–0. He was named Man of the Match by tournament sponsor Budweiser.\n\nDuring England's second round match against Ecuador, Beckham scored from a free kick in the 59th minute, becoming the first English player to score in three separate World Cups, and giving England a 1–0 victory and a place in the quarter-finals. He was sick before the game and vomited several times as a result of dehydration and illness that he got after having scored the winning goal for England. In the quarter-final against Portugal, Beckham was substituted following an injury shortly after half time and the England team went on to lose the match on penalties (3–1), the score having been 0–0 after extra time. After his substitution, Beckham was visibly shaken and emotional for not being able to play, being in tears at one point.\n\nA day after England were knocked out of the World Cup, an emotional Beckham made a statement in a news conference that he had stepped down as England captain, stating, \"It has been an honour and privilege to captain my country but, having been captain for 58 of my 95 games, I feel the time is right to pass on the armband as we enter a new era under Steve McClaren.\" (Beckham had won 94 caps up to that point.) He was succeeded by Chelsea captain John Terry.\n\nHaving stepped down as captain after the World Cup, Beckham was dropped completely from the England national team selected by new coach Steve McClaren on 11 August 2006. McClaren claimed that he was \"looking to go in a different direction\" with the team, and that Beckham \"wasn't included within that.\" McClaren said Beckham could be recalled in future. Shaun Wright-Phillips, Kieran Richardson, and the World Cup alternative to Beckham, Aaron Lennon, were all included, although McClaren eventually opted to employ Steven Gerrard in that role.\n\nOn 26 May 2007, McClaren announced that Beckham would be recalled to the England squad for the first time since stepping down as their captain. Beckham started against Brazil in England's first match at the new Wembley Stadium and put in a positive performance. In the second half, he set up England's goal converted by captain John Terry. It looked as though England would claim victory over Brazil, but newcomer Diego equalised in the dying seconds. In England's next match, a Euro 2008 qualifier against Estonia, Beckham sent two trademark assists for Michael Owen and Peter Crouch, helping England to prevail 3–0. Beckham had assisted in three of England's four total goals in those two games, and he stated his desire to continue to play for England after his move to Major League Soccer.\n\nOn 22 August 2007, Beckham played in a friendly for England against Germany, becoming the first to play for England while with a non-European club team. On 21 November 2007, Beckham earned his 99th cap against Croatia, setting up a goal for Peter Crouch to tie the game at 2–2. Following the 2–3 loss, England failed to qualify for the Euro 2008 Finals. Despite this, Beckham said that he has no plans to retire from international football and wanted to continue playing for the national team. After being passed over by new England coach and Beckham's former manager at Real Madrid, Fabio Capello, for a friendly against Switzerland which would have given him his hundredth cap; Beckham admitted that he was not in shape at the time, as he had not played a competitive match in three months.\n\nOn 20 March 2008, Beckham was recalled to the England squad by Capello for the friendly against France in Paris on 26 March. Beckham became only the fifth Englishman to win 100 caps. Capello had hinted on 25 March 2008 that Beckham had a long-term future in his side ahead of crucial qualifiers for the 2010 World Cup.\n\nOn 11 May 2008, Capello included an in-form Beckham in his 31-man England squad to face the United States at Wembley Stadium on 28 May before the away fixture with Trinidad and Tobago on 1 June. Beckham was honoured before the match by receiving an honorary gold cap representing his 100th cap from Bobby Charlton, and was given a standing ovation from the crowd. He played well and assisted John Terry on the match-winning goal. When substituted at half-time for David Bentley, the pro-Beckham crowd booed the decision. In a surprise move, Capello handed Beckham the captaincy for England's friendly against Trinidad and Tobago on 1 June 2008. The match was the first time since the 2006 World Cup that Beckham had skippered England and marked a dramatic turnaround for Beckham. In two years, he had gone from being dropped completely from the England squad to being reinstated (though temporarily) as England captain.\n\nDuring the 2010 World Cup Qualifier against Belarus in which England won 3–1 in Minsk, Beckham came off the bench in the 87th minute to earn his 107th cap making him England's third-most-capped player in history, overtaking Bobby Charlton in the process. On 11 February 2009, Beckham drew level with Bobby Moore's record of 108 caps for an English outfield player, coming on as a substitute for Stewart Downing in a friendly match against Spain. On 28 March 2009, Beckham surpassed Moore to hold the record outright when he came on as a substitute in a friendly against Slovakia, providing the assist for a goal from Wayne Rooney in the process. In all, Beckham had made 16 appearances out of a possible 20 for England under Capello until his ruptured Achilles tendon of March 2010 ruled him out of selection for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. His last game for England before injury had been on 14 October 2009 as a substitute in England's last World Cup qualifying game, which ended England 3 – 0 Belarus.\n\nAfter a poor performance from England at the World Cup, Capello remained as manager but was under pressure to revamp the England squad for the imminent UEFA Euro 2012 qualification campaign. He unveiled a new team at the next England match, a home friendly game against Hungary on 11 August 2010, with Beckham still unavailable for selection but aiming for a return to playing in MLS by the following month. In the post-match interview, Capello said of the prospect of the now 35-year-old Beckham playing any future competitive matches for England, that \"I need to change it. David is a fantastic player but I think we need new players for the future\", referring to the new players that play in Beckham's right midfield position, including Theo Walcott and Adam Johnson, adding \"This is the future of the team under Fabio Capello or another manager.\" He said that Beckham may be selected for one last friendly game, stating, \"If he is fit, I hope we will play one more game here at Wembley so the fans can say goodbye.\" In response to the comments, Beckham's agent released a statement reiterating Beckham's position that he had no desire to retire from international football, and would always make himself available for selection for England if fit and if needed. He remained 10 caps short of the record number of 125 caps by goalkeeper Peter Shilton, for a player of any position. Beckham was named in the provisional squad to represent the Great Britain Olympic football team at the 2012 Olympics. He was not included in the final selection by manager Stuart Pearce.\n\nBeckham was a product of Sir Alex Ferguson's hard-working approach at Manchester United, and was renowned for his long-range passing, crossing ability, and bending free-kicks as a right winger, which enabled him to excel in this role, despite his lack of significant pace and his preference for using his stronger right foot. Ferguson noted that Beckham \"practised with a discipline to achieve an accuracy that other players wouldn't care about.\" Beckham reportedly spent hours practising his free kicks after training sessions had ended.\nBeckham maintained his training routine at Real Madrid and even when his relationship with management was strained in early 2007, Real Madrid president Ramón Calderón and manager Fabio Capello praised Beckham for maintaining his professionalism and commitment to the club. Beckham's Real Madrid teammate Roberto Carlos regarded Beckham to be the best free-kick exponent he had ever seen. Two of the best free kick exponents of their generation, Roberto Carlos commented on the dilemma the team faced when they won a free kick on the edge of the penalty area: \"I would stand on one side and Beckham on the other but I wanted to see Beckham take the free-kick because it's beautiful how he hits the ball.\"\n\nIn May 2013, asked about how he wanted to be remembered in his retirement, Beckham said, \"I just want people to see me as a hardworking footballer, someone that's passionate about the game, someone that – every time I stepped on the pitch – I've given everything that I have, because that's how I feel. That's how I look back on it and hope people will see me.\"\n\nBeckham was the first England player ever to collect two red cards, and the first England captain to be sent off. Beckham's most notorious red card was during the 1998 World Cup after Argentina's Diego Simeone had fouled him: Beckham, lying face down on the pitch, kicked out at the Argentine midfielder, who fell dramatically.\n\nHe amassed 41 yellow cards and four red cards in his time at Real Madrid; all four reds came in La Liga. He received one red card while at Paris Saint-Germain, picked up in injury time in a match against Evian on 28 April 2013. Between 2000 and 2013, Beckham played 420 competitive games for England, Milan, LA Galaxy, Manchester United, Real Madrid and PSG, and received seven red cards, one every 60 matches on average.\n\nIn 2005, Beckham founded the David Beckham Academy football school, operating from two sites, in London and Los Angeles. It was announced in late 2009 that both would close. A mobile academy is being developed by Beckham, to travel around the UK and further afield.\n\nOn 5 February 2014, MLS announced that Beckham had exercised his option to buy a MLS expansion team for $25 million, which he had received as part of the contract he signed with the LA Galaxy in 2007. The ownership group, led by Beckham, originally hoped the Miami-based team would begin play in 2016 or 2017. After delays getting a stadium deal completed, MLS announced in January 2018 that the team had been approved and would likely begin play in 2020. The team name and crest were revealed on 5 September. Club Internacional de Futbol Miami – more commonly known as, Inter Miami – is represented by a black crest with neon pink trimmings and herons whose legs clasp to form an \"M\" for Miami.\n\nIn January 2019 it was announced that Beckham was set to join his Class of '92 teammates as part owner of English non-league club Salford City, taking 10% of the club previously held by Peter Lim, with the deal being subject to Football Association approval. On 31 January, the club announced that the FA had approved him to become a director of the club.\n\nIn 1997, Beckham started dating Victoria Adams, after she attended a Manchester United match. She was famously known as \"Posh Spice\" of the pop music group Spice Girls, one of the world's top pop groups at the time, and his team was also enjoying a great run of success. Therefore, their relationship instantly attracted a great deal of media attention. The couple were dubbed \"Posh and Becks\" by the media. He proposed to her on 24 January 1998 in a restaurant in Cheshunt, England.\n\nOn 4 July 1999, they married at Luttrellstown Castle in Ireland. Beckham's teammate Gary Neville was the best man, and the couple's infant son, Brooklyn, was the ring bearer. The media were kept away from the ceremony, as the Beckhams had an exclusive deal with \"OK! Magazine\", but newspapers were still able to obtain photographs showing them sitting on golden thrones. 437 staff were employed for the wedding reception, which was estimated to have cost £500,000.\n\nDavid and Victoria Beckham have four children: sons Brooklyn Joseph (born 4 March 1999 at Portland Hospital, London), Romeo James (born 1 September 2002 at Portland Hospital, London), Cruz David (born 20 February 2005 at Ruber International Hospital, Madrid), and daughter Harper Seven (born 10 July 2011 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles). Elton John is godfather to Brooklyn and Romeo Beckham; their godmother is Elizabeth Hurley. Beckham's three sons have all played football in the Arsenal Academy. Like their father, Brooklyn and Romeo have both done modelling work and been named among GQ's best dressed British men. Brooklyn previously played football for Arsenal U16, but was released at the end of the 2014–15 season.\n\nIn his early Manchester United career, Beckham lived in a four-bedroom house in Worsley that he bought directly from the property developer as a 20-year-old in 1995. In 1999, shortly after his wedding he and Victoria bought a country house set in 24 acres in Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, which the media nicknamed \"Beckingham Palace\".\n\nKnown by the nickname \"Golden Balls\", Beckham acquired the name from Victoria, who revealed it on national TV in 2008 while praising him for rebuilding his reputation after the 1998 World Cup.\n\nBeckham suffers from obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), which he says makes him \"have everything in a straight line or everything has to be in pairs.\" Victoria Beckham claims, \"If you open our fridge, it's all co-ordinated down either side. We've got three fridges – food in one, salad in another and drinks in the third. In the drinks one, everything is symmetrical. If there's three cans, he'll throw one away because it has to be an even number.\"\nIn April 2004, the British tabloid \"News of the World\" carried claims by Beckham's former personal assistant Rebecca Loos that he and Loos had an extramarital affair. A week later, the Malaysian-born Australian model Sarah Marbeck claimed that she had slept with Beckham on two occasions. Beckham dismissed both claims as \"ludicrous\".\n\nIn September 2010, Beckham announced that he was making a court application against prostitute Irma Nici and several others over claims in the magazine \"In Touch\" that he had sex with her. His court application was dismissed under US freedom of speech laws and the magazine later accepted that the allegations against Beckham were untrue.\n\nOn 9 May 2019, at Bromley Magistrates Court, Beckham was banned from driving for six months. He previously pleaded guilty to using a mobile phone while driving his Bentley in central London on 21 November 2018. The court heard he was photographed by a member of the public holding a phone as he drove in \"slowly moving\" traffic. Beckham received 6 points on his licence to add to the 6 he already had for previous speeding matters. He was also fined £750, ordered to pay £100 in prosecution costs and a £75 surcharge fee within seven days.\n\n, Beckham had more than 50 tattoos. There are names of his sons Romeo, Cruz and Brooklyn, and of his wife Victoria. His wife's name, tattooed on his left forearm, is in Sanskrit script because Beckham thought it would be \"tacky\" to have it in English. However, this was misspelt as the equivalent of \"Vihctoria\". In his autobiography \"David Beckham: My Side\", he said that the idea of having tattoos came to him in 1999 after his son Brooklyn was born, following a conversation on the subject of tattoos with Mel B and her then-husband, Jimmy Gulzar. Beckham said: \"When you see me, you see the tattoos. You see an expression of how I feel about Victoria and the boys. They're part of me.\" In 2018, Beckham added to his collection with a tattoo of a solar system covering the left side of his scalp.\n\nBeckham's fame extends beyond the pitch; in much of the world his name is \"as instantly recognisable as that of multinational companies like Coca-Cola and IBM.\" Beckham's relationship and marriage to Victoria, who has been famous in her own right as part of the Spice Girls, contributed to his celebrity beyond football.\n\nBeckham became known as a fashion icon, and together with Victoria, the couple became lucrative spokespeople sought after by clothing designers, health and fitness specialists, fashion magazines, perfume and cosmetics manufacturers, hair stylists, exercise promoters, and spa and recreation companies. One example is a line of aftershave and fragrances called David Beckham Instinct. In 2002, Beckham was hailed as the ultimate \"metrosexual\" by the man who invented the term and has been described as such by numerous other articles since.\n\nThe Beckhams were paid $13.7 million in 2007 to launch his fragrance line in the United States In the world of fashion, David has already appeared on the covers of many magazines. United States covers have included the men's magazine \"Details\", and with his wife for the August 2007 issue of \"W\". According to Google, \"David Beckham\" was searched for more than any other sports topic on their site in 2003 and 2004. According to Ask Jeeves, Beckham ranked third, after Britney Spears and Osama bin Laden, among subjects most searched for by British users of that site in the first decade of the 2000s.\nUpon their arrival in Los Angeles on 12 July 2007, the night before Beckham's formal introduction, Los Angeles International Airport was filled with paparazzi and news reporters. On the next night, Victoria appeared on \"The Tonight Show\" with Jay Leno to talk about their move to LA, and presented Leno with a number 23 Galaxy jersey with his own name on the back. Victoria also talked about her NBC TV show \"\". On 22 July, a private welcoming party was held for the couple at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. A-list celebrities attending included Steven Spielberg, Jim Carrey, George Clooney, Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Will Smith, Jada Pinkett Smith, and Oprah Winfrey.\n\nBeckham's many endorsement deals make him one of the most recognisable athletes throughout the world. Having worn Adidas football boots from the start of his career (notably Adidas Predator), in 2003 he signed a $160 million lifetime contract with Adidas, earning nearly half the money upfront, and will continue to earn percentages of profits on all of his branded Adidas products. He had a 10-year collaboration with PepsiCo that expired in 2009. He has also promoted The Walt Disney Company theme parks.\n\nBeckham has several eponymous video games, including \"Go! Go! Beckham! Adventure on Soccer Island\", a platform game for the Game Boy Advance, and \"David Beckham Soccer\", a football game for a number of platforms, and he was brand ambassador for exercise video game \"EA Sports Active 2\". Beckham featured in EA Sports' \"FIFA\" video game series; he was on the cover for the International edition of \"\". During his playing career (which ended in May 2013), Beckham generated an estimated £1 billion in shirt and boot sales. In 2006, Lloyd's of London insured his legs for £100m, at the time he was playing for Real Madrid. \n\nBeckham played a critical part in bringing the Olympics to London in 2012, travelling with the British delegation to Singapore in 2005 for the host city selection. At the 2008 Beijing Olympics closing ceremony, Beckham, Jimmy Page and Leona Lewis represented Britain during the handover segment for the 2012 Olympics. Beckham rode a London double-decker bus into the stadium and Page and Lewis performed \"Whole Lotta Love\". He also featured at the Opening Ceremony of the 2012 London Olympics, carrying the Olympic flame to the stadium by speedboat.\n\nBeckham visited Afghanistan in May 2010 for a morale-boosting visit to British troops fighting the Taliban insurgency. The appearance of Beckham as well as British Foreign Secretary William Hague and Defence Secretary Liam Fox was believed to have prompted a Taliban attack on Kandahar airfield.\n\nChinese authorities appointed Beckham as global ambassador for Chinese football in March 2013. After numerous officials had been banned for match-fixing, and the Chinese Super League had failed to retain the services of well-known international names, Beckham's role was to help improve the image of the game and raise its profile both in China and abroad.\n\nFrom 14 July 2013, Beckham started appearing in adverts for BSkyB advertising their Sky Sports coverage via the Sky Go app. In January 2014, Beckham appeared on \"Late Night with Jimmy Fallon\" on NBC in the U.S, and in March he made a guest appearance in the BBC's Sport Relief special of \"Only Fools and Horses\". He was named one of \"GQ\"s 50 best dressed British men in 2015.\n\nIn March 2015 Beckham had the third highest social media rank in the world among sportspeople, behind Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi, with over 52 million Facebook fans. He also has over 57 million Instagram followers, the fourth highest for a sportsperson, behind Cristiano Ronaldo, Messi and Neymar, and the most for a person from the UK.\n\nDuring the 2016 EU referendum, Beckham voiced his opposition to Brexit (the United Kingdom leaving the European Union) stating “For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons, I am voting to remain.” Beckham was announced as the new Ambassadorial president of the British Fashion Council on 11 May 2018. Prior to the June 2018 vote by FIFA member nations for selecting the hosts of the 2026 FIFA World Cup, Beckham endorsed the North American bid (Canada, Mexico and the United States).\n\nBeckham's former club LA Galaxy unveiled a statue of him outside of their stadium in March 2019, the first of its kind in the MLS. He was subject of prank by his friend James Corden who presented a ‘hideous’ fake statue before the real one was unveiled.\n\nBeckham has supported UNICEF since his days at Manchester United and in January 2005, the English national team captain became a Goodwill Ambassador with a special focus on UNICEF's Sports for Development program. In 2012, he met with UK Prime Minister David Cameron at 10 Downing Street to call for more action to help children affected by malnutrition around the world. In 2015, his tenth year as a UNICEF Ambassador, Beckham launched \"7: The David Beckham UNICEF Fund\" to help protect children in danger. In June 2015 he visited Siem Reap in Cambodia, where he met with child victims of violence. Beckham has pledged his support for the Unite for Children, Unite Against AIDS campaign. He is a former patron of the Elton John AIDS Foundation. In 2013, he also donated all his £3.4 million salary taken from Paris Saint-Germain to two children's charities in France. Beckham has been supporting the charity named Help For Heroes for many years whose aim is to help soldiers injured in Iraq and Afghan wars.\n\nOn 17 January 2007, Rebecca Johnstone, a 19-year-old cancer patient from Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, received a surprise phone call from Beckham. After the conversation, he sent her a Real Madrid jersey with his signature on it. Rebecca died on 29 January 2007. On 1 July 2007, Beckham appeared as a speaker at the Concert for Diana held at Wembley Stadium, London to celebrate the life of Princess Diana almost 10 years after her death. Proceeds from the concert went to Diana's charities as well as to charities of which her sons Princes William and Harry are patrons.\n\nBeckham is a founding member of the Malaria No More UK Leadership Council and helped launch the charity in 2009 with Andy Murray at Wembley Stadium. Beckham also appeared in a 2007 public service announcement for Malaria No More U.S, advertising the need for inexpensive bed nets. The TV spot aired in the United States on Fox Networks, including Fox Soccer Channel, and can also be seen on YouTube.\n\nSince joining Major League Soccer, Beckham has been a very public advocate in the United States for related charities such as \"MLS W.O.R.K.S.\" On 17 August 2007, he conducted a youth clinic in Harlem, along with other current and former MLS players. This was in advance of his first New York City area match the following day against the New York Red Bulls. That team's Jozy Altidore and Juan Pablo Ángel were also with Beckham, teaching skills to disadvantaged youth to benefit FC Harlem Lions.\n\nBeckham never personally appeared in the 2002 film \"Bend It Like Beckham\", except in archive footage. He and his wife wanted to make cameo appearances, but scheduling proved difficult, so the director used lookalike Andy Harmer instead.\n\nBeckham makes a cameo appearance with Zinedine Zidane and Raúl, in the 2005 film \"Goal!\". Harmer also doubled for him in the party scene. Beckham himself appears in the sequel \"\" in a larger role, when the film's lead character gets transferred to Real Madrid. This time, the story centres on the Real Madrid team, with other Madrid players also appearing on and off the pitch, alongside the fictional characters. Though the use of stock footage from the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Beckham appeared in \"\", which was released straight to DVD on 15 June 2009.\n\nBeckham has expressed no interest in pursuit of acting roles, saying he is too \"stiff\". However, due to his friendship with Guy Ritchie, he has made two cameo appearances in Ritchie's films: as a projectionist in \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\" (based on the 1964 MGM television series of the same name), and as Trigger in \"\".\n\nBeckham has played along to jokes about his voice. In a 2018 promo for \"Deadpool 2\", Beckham is seen watching the first instalment of the film franchise in which Ryan Reynolds' character compares Beckham's voice to inhaling helium. Beckham is seen rolling his eyes at the voice jibe before receiving an apology text from Deadpool. Beckham answers his door to the antihero who presents him with milk and cookies, before Deadpool knocks again and has a bunch of helium-filled red balloons.\n\n!rowspan=\"2\"Club\n!rowspan=\"2\"Season\n!rowspan=\"2\"League\n!colspan=\"2\"League\n!colspan=\"2\"Cup\n!colspan=\"2\"League Cup\n!colspan=\"2\"Continental\n!colspan=\"2\"Other\n!colspan=\"2\"Total\n!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals!!Apps!!Goals\nrowspan=\"2\"Manchester United\n1992–93\nrowspan=\"2\"FA Premier League\n00001000colspan=\"2\"–10\n1993–94\n000000000000\nPreston North End (loan)\n1994–95\nThird Division\n520000colspan=\"2\"–0052\nrowspan=\"10\"Manchester United\n1994–95\nrowspan=\"9\"FA Premier League\n4020301100101\n1995–96\n337312020colspan=\"2\"–408\n1996–97\n3682100102114912\n1997–98\n379420080105011\n1998–99\n346711012210559\n1999–2000\n316colspan=\"2\"–0012250488\n2000–01\n319200012010469\n2001–02\n28111000135104316\n2002–03\n3163151133colspan=\"2\"–5211\n!colspan=\"2\"Manchester United total\n!265!!62!!24!!6!!12!!1!!83!!15!!10!!1!!394!!85\nrowspan=\"5\"Real Madrid\n2003–04\nrowspan=\"4\"La Liga\n32342colspan=\"2\"–7121457\n2004–05\n30400colspan=\"2\"–8000384\n2005–06\n31331colspan=\"2\"–7100415\n2006–07\n23321colspan=\"2\"–6000314\n!colspan=\"2\"Real Madrid total\n!116!!13!!9!!4!!colspan=\"2\"–!!28!!2!!2!!1!!155!!20\nrowspan=\"2\"LA Galaxy\n2007\nrowspan=\"2\"MLS\n5000colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–2171\n2008\n25500colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–00255\nMilan (loan)\n2008–09\nSerie A\n18200colspan=\"2\"–2000202\nLA Galaxy\n2009\nMLS\n11200colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–40152\nrowspan=\"2\"Milan (loan)\n2009–10\nSerie A\n11000colspan=\"2\"–2000130\n!colspan=\"2\"Milan total\n!29!!2!!0!!0!!colspan=\"2\"–!!4!!0!!0!!0!!33!!2\nrowspan=\"4\"LA Galaxy\n2010\nrowspan=\"3\"MLS\n7200colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–30102\n2011\n26200colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–40302\n2012\n24700colspan=\"2\"–1160318\n!colspan=\"2\"LA Galaxy total\n!98!!18!!0!!0!!colspan=\"2\"–!!1!!1!!19!!1!!118!!20\nParis Saint-Germain\n2012–13\nLigue 1\n10020colspan=\"2\"–2000140\n!colspan=\"3\"Career total\n!523!!97!!35!!10!!12!!1!!118!!18!!31!!3!!719!!129\n\n!colspan=3England national team\n!Year!!Apps!!Goals\n199630\n199790\n199881\n199970\n2000100\n2001105\n200293\n200394\n2004122\n200591\n200681\n200750\n200880\n200980\n!Total11517\n\n! # !! Date !! Venue !! Opponent !! Score !! Result !! Competition\n\nManchester United\nBULLET::::- FA Youth Cup: 1992\nBULLET::::- Premier League: 1995–96, 1996–97, 1998–99, 1999–2000, 2000–01, 2002–03\nBULLET::::- FA Cup: 1995–96, 1998–99\nBULLET::::- FA Community Shield: 1996, 1997\nBULLET::::- UEFA Champions League: 1998–99\nBULLET::::- Intercontinental Cup: 1999\n\nReal Madrid\nBULLET::::- La Liga: 2006–07\nBULLET::::- Supercopa de España: 2003\n\nLA Galaxy\nBULLET::::- MLS Cup: 2011, 2012\nBULLET::::- Western Conference (Regular Season): 2009, 2010, 2011\nBULLET::::- Western Conference (Playoffs): 2009, 2011, 2012\nBULLET::::- Supporters' Shield: 2010, 2011\n\nParis Saint-Germain\nBULLET::::- Ligue 1: 2012–13\n\nBULLET::::- Ballon d'Or – Runner-up: 1999\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Player of the Year – Silver Award: 1999, 2001\nBULLET::::- Premier League Player of the Month: August 1996\nBULLET::::- Premier League top assist provider: 1997–98, 1999–2000, 2000–01\nBULLET::::- PFA Young Player of the Year: 1996–97\nBULLET::::- FWA Tribute Award: 2008\nBULLET::::- Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year: 1996–97\nBULLET::::- England Player of the Year: 2003\nBULLET::::- ESM Team of the Year: 1998–99\nBULLET::::- UEFA Club Footballer of the Year: 1998–99\nBULLET::::- UEFA Club Midfielder of the Year: 1998–99\nBULLET::::- UEFA Team of the Year: 2001, 2003\nBULLET::::- Premier League 10 Seasons Awards (1992–93 to 2001–02):\nBULLET::::- Domestic & Overall Team of the Decade\nBULLET::::- Goal of the Decade (vs. Wimbledon, 17 August 1996)\nBULLET::::- BBC Sports Personality of the Year: 2001\nBULLET::::- BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award: 2010\nBULLET::::- Real Madrid Player of the Year: 2005–06\nBULLET::::- PFA Team of the Year: 1996–97 Premier League, 1997–98 Premier League, 1998–99 Premier League, 1999–2000 Premier League\nBULLET::::- FIFA 100\nBULLET::::- ESPY Awards:\nBULLET::::- Best Male Soccer Player: 2004\nBULLET::::- Best MLS Player: 2008, 2012\nBULLET::::- English Football Hall of Fame: 2008\nBULLET::::- MLS Comeback Player of the Year Award: 2011\nBULLET::::- PFA Team of the Century (1997–2007): 2007\nBULLET::::- International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) Legends\nBULLET::::- UEFA President's Award: 2018\n\nBULLET::::- Officer of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II: 2003\nBULLET::::- United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) Goodwill Ambassador (2005–present)\nBULLET::::- \"Britain's Greatest Ambassador\" – 100 Greatest Britons awards\nBULLET::::- \"The Celebrity 100,\" number 15 – \"Forbes,\" 2007\nBULLET::::- Number 1 on the list of the 40 most influential men under the age of 40 in the UK – \"Arena\", 2007\nBULLET::::- Time 100: 2008\nBULLET::::- Gold Blue Peter Badge winner, 2001\nBULLET::::- Do Something Athlete Award, 2011\nBULLET::::- A.C. Milan Hall of Fame\n\nBULLET::::- First Englishman to win league titles in four countries (England, Spain, United States, France).\nBULLET::::- First England player to score at three FIFA World Cups.\nBULLET::::- First British footballer to play 100 UEFA Champions League games.\nBULLET::::- Seventh in the Premier League's all time assist provider chart, with 80 assists in 265 appearances.\nBULLET::::- Fourth highest number of games as captain of the England national football team: 59.\n\nBULLET::::- Beckham rule\nBULLET::::- List of footballers with 100 or more caps\nBULLET::::- List of professional sports team owners\n\n\nBULLET::::- David Beckham at RealMadrid.com\nBULLET::::- David Beckham at ManUtd.com\n"}
{"id": "8620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8620", "title": "Dianic Wicca", "text": "Dianic Wicca\n\nDianic Wicca, also known as Dianic Witchcraft, is a neopagan religion female-centered goddess ritual and tradition. While some adherents identify as Wiccan, it differs from most traditions of Wicca in that only goddesses are honored (whereas most Wiccan traditions honor both female and male deities).\n\nWhile there is more than one tradition that calls itself Dianic, the best known is the female-only variety, founded by Zsuzsanna Budapest in the United States in the 1970s. It is notable for its worship of a single Goddess and focus on egalitarian matriarchy. It is named after the Roman goddess Diana, but Dianics worship goddesses from many cultures, seeing them as \"aspects\" of a monotheistic goddess. Dianic Wicca is an eclectic combination of elements from British Traditional Wicca, Italian folk-magic as recorded by Charles Leland in \"Aradia\", the importance of womanhood, folk magic and healing practices from a variety of different cultures.\n\nDianic Wiccans of the Budapest lineage worship the Goddess, who they see as containing all goddesses, from all cultures; she is seen as the source of all living things and containing all that is within her. Dianic covens practice magic in the form of mediation and visualization in addition to spell work. They focus especially on healing themselves from the wounds of the patriarchy while affirming their own womanhood.\n\nRituals can include reenacting religious and spiritual lore from a female-centered standpoint, celebrating the female body, and mourning society's abuses of women. The practice of magic is rooted in the belief that energy or 'life force' can be directed to enact change. However it is important to note that rituals are often improvised to suit individual or group needs and vary from coven to coven. Some Dianic Wiccans eschew manipulative spellwork and hexing because it goes against the Wiccan Rede. However, many other Dianic witches (notably Budapest) do not consider hexing or binding of those who attack women to be wrong, and actively encourage the binding of rapists.\n\nLike other Wiccans, Dianics may form covens, attend festivals, celebrate the eight major Wiccan holidays, and gather on Esbats. They use many of the same altar tools, rituals, and vocabulary as other Wiccans. Dianics may also gather in less formal Circles. The most noticeable difference between the two are that Dianic covens of Budapest lineage are composed entirely of women.\n\nWhen asked why \"men and gods\" are excluded from her rituals, Budapest stated:\n\nThere is therapeutic value inherent in Dianic ritual—many women use it to overcome personal trauma and raise awareness about violence towards women, earning comparisons to female-centered consciousness-raising groups in the 1960s and 70s. In fact, some groups develop rituals specifically to confront gendered personal trauma, such as battery, rape, incest, and partner abuse. In one ethnographic study of such a ritual, women shifted their understanding of power from the hands of their abusers to themselves. It was found that this ritual had improved self-perception in participants in the short-term, and that the results could be sustained with ongoing practice. \nDianics pride themselves on the inclusion of lesbian and bisexual members. It is a goal within many covens to explore female sexuality and sensuality outside of male control, and many rituals function to affirm lesbian sexuality, making it a popular tradition for women who have come out. Some covens exclusively consist of same-sex oriented women and advocate lesbian separatism.\n\nDianic Wicca developed from the Women's Liberation Movement and covens traditionally compare themselves with radical feminism. Some of these covens reject transgender people who were assigned male at birth. Some groups also directly challenge gender identity.\n\nAradia, or the Gospel of the Witches claims that ancient Diana, Aphrodite, Aradia, and Herodius cults linked to the Sacred Mysteries are the origin of the all-female coven and many witch myths as we know them.\nDianic Wicca began on the Winter Solstice of 1971, when Budapest led a ceremony in Hollywood, California. Self-identifying as a \"hereditary witch,\" and claiming to have learned folk magic from her mother, Budapest is frequently considered the mother of modern Dianic Wiccan tradition. Dianic Wicca itself is named after the Roman goddess of the same name.\n\nBULLET::::- Traditions derived from Zsuzsanna Budapest - Female-only covens run by priestesses trained and initiated by Budapest.\nBULLET::::- Independent Dianic witches - who may have been inspired by Budapest, her published work (such as \"The Holy Book of Women's Mysteries\") or other woman's spirituality movements, and who emphasize independent study and self-initiation.\n\nMcFarland Dianic is a Neopagan tradition of goddess worship founded by Morgan McFarland and Mark Roberts which, despite the shared name, has a different theology and in some cases accepts male participants. McFarland largely bases their tradition on the work of Robert Graves and his book \"The White Goddess\". While some McFarland covens will initiate men, the leadership is limited to female priestesses. Like other Dianic traditions, \"McFarland Dianic covens espouse feminism as an all-important concept.\" They consider the decision whether to include or exclude males as \"solely the choice of [a member coven's] individual High Priestess.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Feminist theology\nBULLET::::- Goddess movement\nBULLET::::- Thealogy\nBULLET::::- Pachamama\nBULLET::::- Sacred feminine\nBULLET::::- Sacred Mysteries\nBULLET::::- Shaktism\nBULLET::::- Gynocentrism\n\nBULLET::::- Barrett, Ruth. \"Women's Rites, Women's Mysteries: Intuitive Ritual Creation\". Llewellyn Publications; 2007, . Earlier publishing: \"Women's Rites, Women's Mysteries: Creating Ritual in the Dianic Wiccan Tradition\". Authorhouse; 2004, .\nBULLET::::- Eisler, Riane, \"The Chalice and the Blade\".\nBULLET::::- Mountainwater, Shekhinah, \"Ariadne's Thread\".\nBULLET::::- Ochshorn, Judith and Cole, Ellen. \"Women's Spirituality, Women's Lives\". Haworth Press 1995. . pp 122 & 133 referring to Z Budapest and Shekinah Mountainwater, among others, in a discussion of Dianic Witchcraft.\nBULLET::::- Pond, Gina, et al. \"Gender and Transgender in Modern Paganism\". Circle of Cerridwen Press, 2012.\nBULLET::::- On Starhawk, the Reclaiming Tradition and feminism, M. Macha NightMare.\nBULLET::::- \"Interview with Starhawk in Modern Pagans: An Investigation of Contemporary Pagan Practices\", ed. V. Vale and John Sulak, Re/Search, San Francisco, 2001, .\n\nBULLET::::- Dianic Wicca, Official Website\nBULLET::::- Dianic Tradition, Official Website\nBULLET::::- Dianic Wicca, Website\nBULLET::::- Z. Budapest\nBULLET::::- International Goddess Conference\nBULLET::::- Susan B. Anthony Coven, Dianic Wicca Website\nBULLET::::- Temple of Diana\nBULLET::::- The McFarland Dianic Tradition\n"}
{"id": "8622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8622", "title": "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", "text": "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol\n\nThe Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is a network management protocol used on UDP/IP networks whereby a DHCP server dynamically assigns an IP address and other network configuration parameters to each device on a network so they can communicate with other IP networks. A DHCP server enables computers to request IP addresses and networking parameters automatically from the Internet service provider (ISP), reducing the need for a network administrator or a user to manually assign IP addresses to all network devices. In the absence of a DHCP server, a computer or other device on the network needs to be manually assigned an IP address, or to assign itself an APIPA address, which will not enable it to communicate outside its local subnet.\n\nDHCP can be implemented on networks ranging in size from home networks to large campus networks and regional Internet service provider networks. A router or a residential gateway can be enabled to act as a DHCP server. Most residential network routers receive a globally unique IP address within the ISP network. Within a local network, a DHCP server assigns a local IP address to each device connected to the network.\n\nIn 1984, the Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP), defined in RFC 903, was introduced to allow simple devices such as diskless workstations to dynamically obtain a suitable IP address. However, because it acted at the data link layer it made implementation difficult on many server platforms, and also required that a server be present on each individual network link. RARP was superseded by the Bootstrap Protocol (BOOTP) defined in RFC 951 in September 1985. This introduced the concept of a \"relay agent\", which allowed the forwarding of BOOTP packets across networks, allowing one central BOOTP server to serve hosts on many IP subnets.\n\nDHCP is based on BOOTP but can dynamically allocate IP addresses from a pool and reclaim them when they are no longer in use. It can also be used to deliver a wide range of extra configuration parameters to IP clients, including platform-specific parameters. DHCP was first defined in RFC 1531 in October 1993; but due to errors in the editorial process was almost immediately reissued as RFC 1541.\n\nFour years later the DHCPINFORM message type and other small changes were added by RFC 2131; which remains the standard for IPv4 networks.\n\nDHCPv6 was initially described by RFC 3315 in 2003, but this has been updated by many subsequent RFCs. RFC 3633 added a DHCPv6 mechanism for prefix delegation, and stateless address autoconfiguration was added by RFC 3736.\n\nUDP/IP defines how devices on one network communicate with devices on another network, and the DHCP server can manage UDP/IP settings for devices on a network, by automatically or dynamically assigning IP addresses to the devices.\n\nDHCP operates based on the client–server model. When a computer or other device connects to a network, the DHCP client software sends a DHCP broadcast query requesting the necessary information. Any DHCP server on the network may service the request. The DHCP server manages a pool of IP addresses and information about client configuration parameters such as default gateway, domain name, the name servers, and time servers. On receiving a DHCP request, the DHCP server may respond with specific information for each client, as previously configured by an administrator, or with a specific address and any other information valid for the entire network and for the time period for which the allocation (\"lease\") is valid. A DHCP client typically queries for this information immediately after booting, and periodically thereafter before the expiration of the information. When a DHCP client refreshes an assignment, it initially requests the same parameter values, but the DHCP server may assign a new address based on the assignment policies set by administrators.\n\nOn large networks that consist of multiple links, a single DHCP server may service the entire network when aided by DHCP relay agents located on the interconnecting routers. Such agents relay messages between DHCP clients and DHCP servers located on different subnets.\n\nDepending on implementation, the DHCP server may have three methods of allocating IP addresses:\n\nBULLET::::- Dynamic allocation: A network administrator reserves a range of IP addresses for DHCP, and each DHCP client on the LAN is configured to request an IP address from the DHCP server during network initialization. The request-and-grant process uses a lease concept with a controllable time period, allowing the DHCP server to reclaim and then reallocate IP addresses that are not renewed.\n\nBULLET::::- Automatic allocation: The DHCP server permanently assigns an IP address to a requesting client from the range defined by the administrator. This is like dynamic allocation, but the DHCP server keeps a table of past IP address assignments, so that it can preferentially assign to a client the same IP address that the client previously had.\n\nBULLET::::- Manual allocation: Also commonly called \"static allocation\" and \"reservations\".The DHCP server issues a private IP address dependent upon each client's \"client id\" (or, traditionally, the client MAC address), based on a predefined mapping by the administrator. This feature is variously called \"static DHCP assignment\" by DD-WRT, \"fixed-address\" by the dhcpd documentation, \"address reservation\" by Netgear, \"DHCP reservation\" or \"static DHCP\" by Cisco and Linksys, and \"IP address reservation\" or \"MAC/IP address binding\" by various other router manufacturers. If no match for the client's \"client ID\" (if provided) or MAC address (if no client id is provided) is found, the server may or may not optionally fall back to either Dynamic or Automatic allocation.\n\nDHCP is used for Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) and IPv6. While both versions serve the same purpose, the details of the protocol for IPv4 and IPv6 differ sufficiently that they may be considered separate protocols. For the IPv6 operation, devices may alternatively use stateless address autoconfiguration. IPv6 hosts may also use link-local addressing to achieve operations restricted to the local network link.\n\nThe DHCP employs a connectionless service model, using the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). It is implemented with two UDP port numbers for its operations which are the same as for the bootstrap protocol (BOOTP). UDP port number 67 is the destination port of a server, and UDP port number 68 is used by the client.\n\nDHCP operations fall into four phases: server discovery, IP lease offer, IP lease request, and IP lease acknowledgement. These stages are often abbreviated as DORA for discovery, offer, request, and acknowledgement.\n\nThe DHCP operation begins with clients broadcasting a request. If the client and server are on different subnets, a DHCP Helper or DHCP Relay Agent may be used. Clients requesting renewal of an existing lease may communicate directly via UDP unicast, since the client already has an established IP address at that point. Additionally, there is a BROADCAST flag (1 bit in 2 byte flags field, where all other bits are reserved and so are set to 0) the client can use to indicate in which way (broadcast or unicast) it can receive the DHCPOFFER: 0x8000 for broadcast, 0x0000 for unicast. Usually, the DHCPOFFER is sent through unicast. For those hosts which cannot accept unicast packets before IP addresses are configured, this flag can be used to work around this issue.\n\nThe DHCP client broadcasts a DHCPDISCOVER message on the network subnet using the destination address 255.255.255.255 (limited broadcast) or the specific subnet broadcast address (directed broadcast). A DHCP client may also request its last known IP address. If the client remains connected to the same network, the server may grant the request. Otherwise, it depends whether the server is set up as authoritative or not. An authoritative server denies the request, causing the client to issue a new request. A non-authoritative server simply ignores the request, leading to an implementation-dependent timeout for the client to expire the request and ask for a new IP address.\n\nFor example, if HTYPE is set to 1, to specify that the medium used is Ethernet, HLEN is set to 6 because an Ethernet address (MAC address) is 6 octets long. The CHADDR is set to the MAC address used by the client. Some options are set as well.\n\n+ Example DHCPDISCOVER message\nEthernet: source=sender's MAC; destination=FF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FF\nIP: source=0.0.0.0; destination=255.255.255.255 \nUDP: source port=68; destination port=67\n! Octet 0 !! Octet 1 !! Octet 2 !! Octet 3\n! OP !! HTYPE !! HLEN !! HOPS\n! colspan=4  XID\n! colspan=2  SECS !! colspan=2  FLAGS\n! colspan=4  CIADDR (Client IP address)\n! colspan=4  YIADDR (Your IP address)\n! colspan=4  SIADDR (Server IP address)\n! colspan=4  GIADDR (Gateway IP address)\n! colspan=4  CHADDR (Client hardware address)\n! colspan=4  Magic cookie\n! colspan=4  DHCP options\n\nWhen a DHCP server receives a DHCPDISCOVER message from a client, which is an IP address lease request, the DHCP server reserves an IP address for the client and makes a lease offer by sending a DHCPOFFER message to the client. This message contains the client's client id (traditionally a MAC address), the IP address that the server is offering, the subnet mask, the lease duration, and the IP address of the DHCP server making the offer. The DHCP server may also take notice of the hardware-level MAC address in the underlying transport layer: according to current RFCs the transport layer MAC address may be used if no client ID is provided in the DHCP packet.\n\nThe DHCP server determines the configuration based on the client's hardware address as specified in the CHADDR (client hardware address) field. Here the server, 192.168.1.1, specifies the client's IP address in the YIADDR (your IP address) field.\n\n+ DHCPOFFER message\nEthernet: source=sender's MAC; destination=client mac address\nIP: source=192.168.1.1; destination=255.255.255.255 \nUDP: source port=67; destination port=68\n! Octet 0 !! Octet 1 !! Octet 2 !! Octet 3\n! OP !! HTYPE !! HLEN !! HOPS\n! colspan=4  XID\n! colspan=2  SECS !! colspan=2  FLAGS\n! colspan=4  CIADDR (Client IP address)\n! colspan=5  YIADDR (Your IP address)\n! colspan=4  SIADDR (Server IP address)\n! colspan=4  GIADDR (Gateway IP address)\n! colspan=4  CHADDR (Client hardware address)\n! colspan=4  Magic cookie\n! colspan=4  DHCP options\n\nIn response to the DHCP offer, the client replies with a DHCPREQUEST message, broadcast to the server, requesting the offered address. A client can receive DHCP offers from multiple servers, but it will accept only one DHCP offer. Based on required \"server identification\" option in the request and broadcast messaging, servers are informed whose offer the client has accepted. When other DHCP servers receive this message, they withdraw any offers that they have made to the client and return the offered IP address to the pool of available addresses.\n\n+ DHCPREQUEST message\nEthernet: source=sender's MAC; destination=FF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FF\nIP: source=0.0.0.0; destination=255.255.255.255; \nUDP: source port=68; destination port=67\n! Octet 0 !! Octet 1 !! Octet 2 !! Octet 3\n! OP !! HTYPE !! HLEN !! HOPS\n! colspan=5  XID\n! colspan=2  SECS !! colspan=2  FLAGS\n! colspan=4  CIADDR (Client IP address)\n! colspan=4  YIADDR (Your IP address)\n! colspan=4  SIADDR (Server IP address)\n! colspan=4  GIADDR (Gateway IP address)\n! colspan=4  CHADDR (Client hardware address)\n! colspan=4  Magic cookie\n! colspan=4  DHCP options\n\nWhen the DHCP server receives the DHCPREQUEST message from the client, the configuration process enters its final phase. The acknowledgement phase involves sending a DHCPACK packet to the client. This packet includes the lease duration and any other configuration information that the client might have requested. At this point, the IP configuration process is completed.\n\nThe protocol expects the DHCP client to configure its network interface with the negotiated parameters.\n\nAfter the client obtains an IP address, it should probe the newly received address (e.g. with ARP Address Resolution Protocol) to prevent address conflicts caused by overlapping address pools of DHCP servers.\n\n+ DHCPACK message\nEthernet: source=sender's MAC; destination=client's MAC\nIP: source=192.168.1.1; destination=255.255.255.255 \nUDP: source port=67; destination port=68\n! Octet 0 !! Octet 1 !! Octet 2 !! Octet 3\n! OP !! HTYPE !! HLEN !! HOPS\n! colspan=4  XID\n! colspan=2  SECS !! colspan=2  FLAGS\n! colspan=4  CIADDR (Client IP address)\n! colspan=4  YIADDR (Your IP address)\n! colspan=4  SIADDR (Server IP address)\n! colspan=4  GIADDR (Gateway IP address switched by relay)\n! colspan=4  CHADDR (Client hardware address)\n! colspan=4  Magic cookie\n! colspan=4  DHCP options\n\nA DHCP client may request more information than the server sent with the original DHCPOFFER. The client may also request repeat data for a particular application. For example, browsers use \"DHCP Inform\" to obtain web proxy settings via .\n\nThe client sends a request to the DHCP server to release the DHCP information and the client deactivates its IP address. As client devices usually do not know when users may unplug them from the network, the protocol does not mandate the sending of \"DHCP Release\".\n\nA DHCP server can provide optional configuration parameters to the client. RFC 2132 describes the available DHCP options defined by Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) - DHCP and BOOTP PARAMETERS.\n\nA DHCP client can select, manipulate and overwrite parameters provided by a DHCP server. In Unix-like systems this client-level refinement typically takes place according to the values in the configuration file \"/etc/dhclient.conf\".\n\nOptions are octet strings of varying length. The first octet is the option code, the second octet is the number of following octets and the remaining octets are code dependent.\nFor example, the DHCP message-type option for an offer would appear as 0x35, 0x01, 0x02, where 0x35 is code 53 for \"DHCP message type\", 0x01 means one octet follows and 0x02 is the value of \"offer\".\n\nThe following tables list the available DHCP options, as listed in RFC 2132 and IANA registry.\n\n+ RFC 1497 (BOOTP Vendor Information Extensions) vendor extensions\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\n+ IP layer parameters per host\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\n+ IP Layer Parameters per Interface\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\n+ Link layer parameters per interface\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\n+ TCP parameters\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\n+ Application and service parameters\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\n+ DHCP extensions\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! Notes\n\nAn option exists to identify the vendor and functionality of a DHCP client. The information is a variable-length string of characters or octets which has a meaning specified by the vendor of the DHCP client. One method that a DHCP client can utilize to communicate to the server that it is using a certain type of hardware or firmware is to set a value in its DHCP requests called the Vendor Class Identifier (VCI) (Option 60).\n\nThis method allows a DHCP server to differentiate between the two kinds of client machines and process the requests from the two types of modems appropriately. Some types of set-top boxes also set the VCI (Option 60) to inform the DHCP server about the hardware type and functionality of the device. The value this option is set to gives the DHCP server a hint about any required extra information that this client needs in a DHCP response.\n\n+ Documented DHCP options\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! RFC\n\nThe relay agent information option (option 82) specifies container for attaching sub-options to DHCP requests transmitted between a DHCP relay and a DHCP server.\n\n+ Relay agent sub-options\n! Code !! Name !! Length !! RFC\n\nIn small networks, where only one IP subnet is being managed, DHCP clients communicate directly with DHCP servers. However, DHCP servers can also provide IP addresses for multiple subnets. In this case, a DHCP client that has not yet acquired an IP address cannot communicate directly with the DHCP server using IP routing, because it does not have a routable IP address, does not know the link layer address of a router and does not know the IP address of the DHCP server.\n\nIn order to allow DHCP clients on subnets not directly served by DHCP servers to communicate with DHCP servers, DHCP relay agents can be installed on these subnets. The DHCP client broadcasts on the local link; the relay agent receives the broadcast and transmits it to one or more DHCP servers using unicast. The relay agent stores its own IP address in field \"GIADDR\" field of the DHCP packet. The DHCP server uses the GIADDR-value to determine the subnet on which the relay agent received the broadcast, and allocates an IP address on that subnet. When the DHCP server replies to the client, it sends the reply to the GIADDR-address, again using unicast. The relay agent then retransmits the response on the local network.\n\nIn this situation, the communication between the relay agent and the DHCP server typically uses both a source and destination UDP port of 67.\n\nThe DHCP ensures reliability in several ways: periodic renewal, rebinding, and failover. DHCP clients are allocated leases that last for some period of time. Clients begin to attempt to renew their leases once half the lease interval has expired. They do this by sending a unicast \"DHCPREQUEST\" message to the DHCP server that granted the original lease. If that server is down or unreachable, it will fail to respond to the \"DHCPREQUEST\". However, in that case the client repeats the \"DHCPREQUEST\" from time to time, so if the DHCP server comes back up or becomes reachable again, the DHCP client will succeed in contacting it and renew the lease.\n\nIf the DHCP server is unreachable for an extended period of time, the DHCP client will attempt to rebind, by broadcasting its \"DHCPREQUEST\" rather than unicasting it. Because it is broadcast, the \"DHCPREQUEST\" message will reach all available DHCP servers. If some other DHCP server is able to renew the lease, it will do so at this time.\n\nIn order for rebinding to work, when the client successfully contacts a backup DHCP server, that server must have accurate information about the client's binding. Maintaining accurate binding information between two servers is a complicated problem; if both servers are able to update the same lease database, there must be a mechanism to avoid conflicts between updates on the independent servers. A proposal for implementing fault-tolerant DHCP servers was submitted to the Internet Engineering Task Force, but never formalized.\n\nIf rebinding fails, the lease will eventually expire. When the lease expires, the client must stop using the IP address granted to it in its lease. At that time it will restart the DHCP process from the beginning by broadcasting a codice_1 message. Since its lease has expired, it will accept any IP address offered to it. Once it has a new IP address (presumably from a different DHCP server) it will once again be able to use the network. However, since its IP address has changed, any ongoing connections will be broken.\n\nAs of 2018, DHCP remains widely-used to automatically assign IP addresses. Newer iterations for assigning IP addresses include DHCPv6 and SLAAC.\n\nThe base DHCP does not include any mechanism for authentication. Because of this, it is vulnerable to a variety of attacks. These attacks fall into three main categories:\nBULLET::::- Unauthorized DHCP servers providing false information to clients.\nBULLET::::- Unauthorized clients gaining access to resources.\nBULLET::::- Resource exhaustion attacks from malicious DHCP clients.\n\nBecause the client has no way to validate the identity of a DHCP server, unauthorized DHCP servers (commonly called \"rogue DHCP\") can be operated on networks, providing incorrect information to DHCP clients. This can serve either as a denial-of-service attack, preventing the client from gaining access to network connectivity, or as a man-in-the-middle attack. Because the DHCP server provides the DHCP client with server IP addresses, such as the IP address of one or more DNS servers, an attacker can convince a DHCP client to do its DNS lookups through its own DNS server, and can therefore provide its own answers to DNS queries from the client. This in turn allows the attacker to redirect network traffic through itself, allowing it to eavesdrop on connections between the client and network servers it contacts, or to simply replace those network servers with its own.\n\nBecause the DHCP server has no secure mechanism for authenticating the client, clients can gain unauthorized access to IP addresses by presenting credentials, such as client identifiers, that belong to other DHCP clients. This also allows DHCP clients to exhaust the DHCP server's store of IP addresses—by presenting new credentials each time it asks for an address, the client can consume all the available IP addresses on a particular network link, preventing other DHCP clients from getting service.\n\nDHCP does provide some mechanisms for mitigating these problems. The Relay Agent Information Option protocol extension (RFC 3046, usually referred to in the industry by its actual number as \"Option 82\") allows network operators to attach tags to DHCP messages as these messages arrive on the network operator's trusted network. This tag is then used as an authorization token to control the client's access to network resources. Because the client has no access to the network upstream of the relay agent, the lack of authentication does not prevent the DHCP server operator from relying on the authorization token.\n\nAnother extension, Authentication for DHCP Messages (RFC 3118), provides a mechanism for authenticating DHCP messages. As of 2002, <nowiki>RFC 3118</nowiki> had not seen widespread adoption because of the problems of managing keys for large numbers of DHCP clients. A 2007 book about DSL technologies remarked that:there were numerous security vulnerabilities identified against the security measures proposed by RFC 3118. This fact, combined with the introduction of 802.1x, slowed the deployment and take-rate of authenticated DHCP, and it has never been widely deployed. A 2010 book notes that:[t]here have been very few implementations of DHCP Authentication. The challenges of key management and processing delays due to hash computation have been deemed too heavy a price to pay for the perceived benefits.\n\nArchitectural proposals from 2008 involve authenticating DHCP requests using 802.1x or PANA (both of which transport EAP). An IETF proposal was made for including EAP in DHCP itself, the so-called EAPoDHCP; this does not appear to have progressed beyond IETF draft level, the last of which dates to 2010.\n\nBULLET::::- RFC 2131, Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol\nBULLET::::- RFC 2132, DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor Extensions\nBULLET::::- RFC 3046, DHCP Relay Agent Information Option\nBULLET::::- RFC 3397, Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) Domain Search Option\nBULLET::::- RFC 3942, Reclassifying Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol Version Four (DHCPv4) Options\nBULLET::::- RFC 4242, Information Refresh Time Option for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6\nBULLET::::- RFC 4361, Node-specific Client Identifiers for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol Version Four (DHCPv4)\nBULLET::::- RFC 4436, Detecting Network Attachment in IPv4 (DNAv4)\nBULLET::::- RFC 3442, Classless Static Route Option for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 4\n\nBULLET::::- Boot Service Discovery Protocol (BSDP) a DHCP extension used by Apple's NetBoot\nBULLET::::- Comparison of DHCP server software\nBULLET::::- Peg DHCP (RFC 2322)\nBULLET::::- Preboot Execution Environment (PXE)\nBULLET::::- Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP)\nBULLET::::- Rogue DHCP\nBULLET::::- UDP Helper Address a tool for routing DHCP requests across subnet boundaries\nBULLET::::- Zeroconf Zero Configuration Networking\n"}
{"id": "8623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8623", "title": "Dava Sobel", "text": "Dava Sobel\n\nDava Sobel (born June 15, 1947) is an American writer of popular expositions of scientific topics. Her books include \"Longitude\", about English clockmaker John Harrison, and \"Galileo's Daughter\", about Galileo's daughter Maria Celeste, and \"The Glass Universe: How the Ladies of the Harvard Observatory Took the Measure of the Stars\".\n\nSobel was born in The Bronx, New York City. She graduated from the Bronx High School of Science and Binghamton University. She wrote \"\" in 1995. The story was made into a television movie, of the same name by Charles Sturridge and Granada Film in 1999, and was shown in the United States by A&E.\n\nHer book \"\" was a finalist for the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography.\n\nShe holds honorary doctor of letters degrees from the University of Bath and Middlebury College, Vermont, both awarded in 2002.\n\nSobel made her first foray into teaching at the University of Chicago as the Vare Writer-in-Residence in the winter of 2006. She taught a one-quarter seminar on writing about science.\n\nShe served as a judge for the PEN/E. O. Wilson Literary Science Writing Award in 2012.\n\nSobel is the niece of journalist Ruth Gruber and the cousin of epidemiologist David Michaels.\n\nThe asteroid 30935 Davasobel is named after her.\n\nSobel states she is a chaser of solar eclipses and that \"it's the closest thing to witnessing a miracle\". As of August 2012 she had seen eight, and planned to see the November 2012 total solar eclipse in Australia.\n\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1995) . – the genius in question was John Harrison, who spent decades trying to convince the British Admiralty of the accuracy of his naval timepieces and their use in determining longitude when at sea in order to win the longitude prize. The book itself won the 1997 British Book of the Year award.\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"The Best American Science Writing\" 2004 (editor) ,\nBULLET::::- \"The Planets: A discourse on the discovery, science, history and mythology, of the planets in our solar system, with one chapter devoted to each of the celestial spheres.\" (2005) ,\nBULLET::::- \"The Glass Universe: How the Ladies of the Harvard Observatory Took the Measure of the Stars\" (2016) ,\n\nBULLET::::- Podcast of Dava Sobel discussing \"The Origins of Longitude\" at the Shanghai International Literary Festival\n"}
{"id": "8625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8625", "title": "Differential geometry", "text": "Differential geometry\n\nDifferential geometry is a mathematical discipline that uses the techniques of differential calculus, integral calculus, linear algebra and multilinear algebra to study problems in geometry. The theory of plane and space curves and surfaces in the three-dimensional Euclidean space formed the basis for development of differential geometry during the 18th century and the 19th century.\n\nSince the late 19th century, differential geometry has grown into a field concerned more generally with the geometric structures on differentiable manifolds. Differential geometry is closely related to differential topology and the geometric aspects of the theory of differential equations. The differential geometry of surfaces captures many of the key ideas and techniques endemic to this field.\n\nDifferential geometry arose and developed as a result of and in connection to the mathematical analysis of curves and surfaces. Mathematical analysis of curves and surfaces had been developed to answer some of the nagging and unanswered questions that appeared in calculus, like the reasons for relationships between complex shapes and curves, series and analytic functions. These unanswered questions indicated greater, hidden relationships.\n\nThe general idea of natural equations for obtaining curves from local curvature appears to have been first considered by Leonhard Euler in 1736, and many examples with fairly simple behavior were studied in the 1800s.\n\nWhen curves, surfaces enclosed by curves, and points on curves were found to be quantitatively, and generally, related by mathematical forms, the formal study of the nature of curves and surfaces became a field of study in its own right, with Monge's paper in 1795, and especially, with Gauss's publication of his article, titled 'Disquisitiones Generales Circa Superficies Curvas', in \"Commentationes Societatis Regiae Scientiarum Gottingesis Recentiores\" in 1827.\n\nInitially applied to the Euclidean space, further explorations led to non-Euclidean space, and metric and topological spaces.\n\nRiemannian geometry studies Riemannian manifolds, smooth manifolds with a \"Riemannian metric\". This is a concept of distance expressed by means of a smooth positive definite symmetric bilinear form defined on the tangent space at each point. Riemannian geometry generalizes Euclidean geometry to spaces that are not necessarily flat, although they still resemble the Euclidean space at each point infinitesimally, i.e. in the first order of approximation. Various concepts based on length, such as the arc length of curves, area of plane regions, and volume of solids all possess natural analogues in Riemannian geometry. The notion of a directional derivative of a function from multivariable calculus is extended in Riemannian geometry to the notion of a covariant derivative of a tensor. Many concepts and techniques of analysis and differential equations have been generalized to the setting of Riemannian manifolds.\n\nA distance-preserving diffeomorphism between Riemannian manifolds is called an isometry. This notion can also be defined \"locally\", i.e. for small neighborhoods of points. Any two regular curves are locally isometric. However, the Theorema Egregium of Carl Friedrich Gauss showed that for surfaces, the existence of a local isometry imposes strong compatibility conditions on their metrics: the Gaussian curvatures at the corresponding points must be the same. In higher dimensions, the Riemann curvature tensor is an important pointwise invariant associated with a Riemannian manifold that measures how close it is to being flat. An important class of Riemannian manifolds is the Riemannian symmetric spaces, whose curvature is not necessarily constant. These are the closest analogues to the \"ordinary\" plane and space considered in Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry.\n\nPseudo-Riemannian geometry generalizes Riemannian geometry to the case in which the metric tensor need not be positive-definite. \nA special case of this is a Lorentzian manifold, which is the mathematical basis of Einstein's general relativity theory of gravity.\n\nFinsler geometry has \"Finsler manifolds\" as the main object of study. This is a differential manifold with a \"Finsler metric\", that is, a Banach norm defined on each tangent space. Riemannian manifolds are special cases of the more general Finsler manifolds. A Finsler structure on a manifold is a function such that:\nBULLET::::1. for all in and all ,\nBULLET::::2. is infinitely differentiable in ,\nBULLET::::3. The vertical Hessian of is positive definite.\n\nSymplectic geometry is the study of symplectic manifolds. An almost symplectic manifold is a differentiable manifold equipped with a smoothly varying non-degenerate skew-symmetric bilinear form on each tangent space, i.e., a nondegenerate 2-form \"ω\", called the \"symplectic form\". A symplectic manifold is an almost symplectic manifold for which the symplectic form \"ω\" is closed: .\n\nA diffeomorphism between two symplectic manifolds which preserves the symplectic form is called a symplectomorphism. Non-degenerate skew-symmetric bilinear forms can only exist on even-dimensional vector spaces, so symplectic manifolds necessarily have even dimension. In dimension 2, a symplectic manifold is just a surface endowed with an area form and a symplectomorphism is an area-preserving diffeomorphism. The phase space of a mechanical system is a symplectic manifold and they made an implicit appearance already in the work of Joseph Louis Lagrange on analytical mechanics and later in Carl Gustav Jacobi's and William Rowan Hamilton's formulations of classical mechanics.\n\nBy contrast with Riemannian geometry, where the curvature provides a local invariant of Riemannian manifolds, Darboux's theorem states that all symplectic manifolds are locally isomorphic. The only invariants of a symplectic manifold are global in nature and topological aspects play a prominent role in symplectic geometry. The first result in symplectic topology is probably the Poincaré–Birkhoff theorem, conjectured by Henri Poincaré and then proved by G.D. Birkhoff in 1912. It claims that if an area preserving map of an annulus twists each boundary component in opposite directions, then the map has at least two fixed points.\n\nContact geometry deals with certain manifolds of odd dimension. It is close to symplectic geometry and like the latter, it originated in questions of classical mechanics. A \"contact structure\" on a -dimensional manifold \"M\" is given by a smooth hyperplane field \"H\" in the tangent bundle that is as far as possible from being associated with the level sets of a differentiable function on \"M\" (the technical term is \"completely nonintegrable tangent hyperplane distribution\"). Near each point \"p\", a hyperplane distribution is determined by a nowhere vanishing 1-form formula_1, which is unique up to multiplication by a nowhere vanishing function:\n\nA local 1-form on \"M\" is a \"contact form\" if the restriction of its exterior derivative to \"H\" is a non-degenerate two-form and thus induces a symplectic structure on \"H\" at each point. If the distribution \"H\" can be defined by a global one-form formula_1 then this form is contact if and only if the top-dimensional form\n\nis a volume form on \"M\", i.e. does not vanish anywhere. A contact analogue of the Darboux theorem holds: all contact structures on an odd-dimensional manifold are locally isomorphic and can be brought to a certain local normal form by a suitable choice of the coordinate system.\n\n\"Complex differential geometry\" is the study of complex manifolds.\nAn almost complex manifold is a \"real\" manifold formula_5, endowed with a tensor of type (1, 1), i.e. a vector bundle endomorphism (called an \"almost complex structure\")\n\nIt follows from this definition that an almost complex manifold is even-dimensional.\n\nAn almost complex manifold is called \"complex\" if formula_8, where formula_9 is a tensor of type (2, 1) related to formula_10, called the Nijenhuis tensor (or sometimes the \"torsion\").\nAn almost complex manifold is complex if and only if it admits a holomorphic coordinate atlas.\nAn \"almost Hermitian structure\" is given by an almost complex structure \"J\", along with a Riemannian metric \"g\", satisfying the compatibility condition\n\nAn almost Hermitian structure defines naturally a differential two-form\n\nThe following two conditions are equivalent:\n\nBULLET::::1. formula_13\nBULLET::::2. formula_14\n\nwhere formula_15 is the Levi-Civita connection of formula_16. In this case, formula_17 is called a \"Kähler structure\", and a \"Kähler manifold\" is a manifold endowed with a Kähler structure. In particular, a Kähler manifold is both a complex and a symplectic manifold. A large class of Kähler manifolds (the class of Hodge manifolds) is given by all the smooth complex projective varieties.\n\nCR geometry is the study of the intrinsic geometry of boundaries of domains in complex manifolds.\n\nDifferential topology is the study of global geometric invariants without a metric or symplectic form.\n\nDifferential topology starts from the natural operations such as Lie derivative of natural vector bundles and de Rham differential of forms. Beside Lie algebroids, also Courant algebroids start playing a more important role.\n\nA Lie group is a group in the category of smooth manifolds. Beside the algebraic properties this enjoys also differential geometric properties. The most obvious construction is that of a Lie algebra which is the tangent space at the unit endowed with the Lie bracket between left-invariant vector fields. Beside the structure theory there is also the wide field of representation theory.\n\nThe apparatus of vector bundles, principal bundles, and connections on bundles plays an extraordinarily important role in modern differential geometry. A smooth manifold always carries a natural vector bundle, the tangent bundle. Loosely speaking, this structure by itself is sufficient only for developing analysis on the manifold, while doing geometry requires, in addition, some way to relate the tangent spaces at different points, i.e. a notion of parallel transport. An important example is provided by affine connections. For a surface in R, tangent planes at different points can be identified using a natural path-wise parallelism induced by the ambient Euclidean space, which has a well-known standard definition of metric and parallelism. In Riemannian geometry, the Levi-Civita connection serves a similar purpose. (The Levi-Civita connection defines path-wise parallelism in terms of a given arbitrary Riemannian metric on a manifold.) More generally, differential geometers consider spaces with a vector bundle and an arbitrary affine connection which is not defined in terms of a metric. In physics, the manifold may be the space-time continuum and the bundles and connections are related to various physical fields.\n\nFrom the beginning and through the middle of the 18th century, differential geometry was studied from the \"extrinsic\" point of view: curves and surfaces were considered as lying in a Euclidean space of higher dimension (for example a surface in an ambient space of three dimensions). The simplest results are those in the differential geometry of curves and differential geometry of surfaces. Starting with the work of Riemann, the \"intrinsic\" point of view was developed, in which one cannot speak of moving \"outside\" the geometric object because it is considered to be given in a free-standing way. The fundamental result here is Gauss's theorema egregium, to the effect that Gaussian curvature is an intrinsic invariant.\n\nThe intrinsic point of view is more flexible. For example, it is useful in relativity where space-time cannot naturally be taken as extrinsic (what would be \"outside\" of the universe?). However, there is a price to pay in technical complexity: the intrinsic definitions of curvature and connections become much less visually intuitive.\n\nThese two points of view can be reconciled, i.e. the extrinsic geometry can be considered as a structure additional to the intrinsic one. (See the Nash embedding theorem.) In the formalism of geometric calculus both extrinsic and intrinsic geometry of a manifold can be characterized by a single bivector-valued one-form called the shape operator.\n\nBelow are some examples of how differential geometry is applied to other fields of science and mathematics.\nBULLET::::- In physics, differential geometry has many applications, including:\nBULLET::::- Differential geometry is the language in which Einstein's general theory of relativity is expressed. According to the theory, the universe is a smooth manifold equipped with a pseudo-Riemannian metric, which describes the curvature of space-time. Understanding this curvature is essential for the positioning of satellites into orbit around the earth. Differential geometry is also indispensable in the study of gravitational lensing and black holes.\nBULLET::::- Differential forms are used in the study of electromagnetism.\nBULLET::::- Differential geometry has applications to both Lagrangian mechanics and Hamiltonian mechanics. Symplectic manifolds in particular can be used to study Hamiltonian systems.\nBULLET::::- Riemannian geometry and contact geometry have been used to construct the formalism of geometrothermodynamics which has found applications in classical equilibrium thermodynamics.\nBULLET::::- In chemistry and biophysics when modelling cell membrane structure under varying pressure.\nBULLET::::- In economics, differential geometry has applications to the field of econometrics.\nBULLET::::- Geometric modeling (including computer graphics) and computer-aided geometric design draw on ideas from differential geometry.\nBULLET::::- In engineering, differential geometry can be applied to solve problems in digital signal processing.\nBULLET::::- In control theory, differential geometry can be used to analyze nonlinear controllers, particularly geometric control\nBULLET::::- In probability, statistics, and information theory, one can interpret various structures as Riemannian manifolds, which yields the field of information geometry, particularly via the Fisher information metric.\nBULLET::::- In structural geology, differential geometry is used to analyze and describe geologic structures.\nBULLET::::- In computer vision, differential geometry is used to analyze shapes.\nBULLET::::- In image processing, differential geometry is used to process and analyse data on non-flat surfaces.\nBULLET::::- Grigori Perelman's proof of the Poincaré conjecture using the techniques of Ricci flows demonstrated the power of the differential-geometric approach to questions in topology and it highlighted the important role played by its analytic methods.\nBULLET::::- In wireless communications, Grassmannian manifolds are used for beamforming techniques in multiple antenna systems.\n\nBULLET::::- Abstract differential geometry\nBULLET::::- Affine differential geometry\nBULLET::::- Analysis on fractals\nBULLET::::- Basic introduction to the mathematics of curved spacetime\nBULLET::::- Discrete differential geometry\nBULLET::::- Gauss\nBULLET::::- Glossary of differential geometry and topology\nBULLET::::- Important publications in differential geometry\nBULLET::::- Important publications in differential topology\nBULLET::::- Integral geometry\nBULLET::::- List of differential geometry topics\nBULLET::::- Noncommutative geometry\nBULLET::::- Projective differential geometry\nBULLET::::- Synthetic differential geometry\nBULLET::::- Systolic geometry\nBULLET::::- Classical geometric approach to differential geometry without tensor analysis.\nBULLET::::- Good classical geometric approach to differential geometry with tensor machinery.\n\nBULLET::::- B. Conrad. Differential Geometry handouts, Stanford University\nBULLET::::- Michael Murray's online differential geometry course, 1996\nBULLET::::- A Modern Course on Curves and Surface, Richard S Palais, 2003\nBULLET::::- Richard Palais's 3DXM Surfaces Gallery\nBULLET::::- Balázs Csikós's Notes on Differential Geometry\nBULLET::::- N. J. Hicks, Notes on Differential Geometry, Van Nostrand.\nBULLET::::- MIT OpenCourseWare: Differential Geometry, Fall 2008\n"}
{"id": "8626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8626", "title": "Dhole", "text": "Dhole\n\nThe dhole (\"Cuon alpinus\") is a canid native to Central, South, and Southeast Asia. Other English names for the species include Asian wild dog, Asiatic wild dog, Indian wild dog, whistling dog, red dog, and mountain wolf. It is genetically close to species within the genus \"Canis\", but distinct in several anatomical aspects: its skull is convex rather than concave in profile, it lacks a third lower molar and the upper molars sport only a single cusp as opposed to between two and four. During the Pleistocene, the dhole ranged throughout Asia, Europe, and North America but became restricted to its historical range 12,000–18,000 years ago.\n\nThe dhole is a highly social animal, living in large clans without rigid dominance hierarchies and containing multiple breeding females. Such clans usually consist of 12 individuals, but groups of over 40 are known. It is a diurnal pack hunter which preferentially targets medium- and large-sized ungulates. In tropical forests, the dhole competes with tiger and leopard, targeting somewhat different prey species, but still with substantial dietary overlap.\n\nIt is listed as Endangered by the IUCN as populations are decreasing and are estimated at fewer than 2,500 adults. Factors contributing to this decline include habitat loss, loss of prey, competition with other species, persecution due to livestock predation and disease transfer from domestic dogs.\n\nThe etymology of \"dhole\" is unclear. The possible earliest written use of the word in English occurred in 1808 by soldier Thomas Williamson, who encountered the animal in Ramghur district. He stated that \"dhole\" was a common local name for the species. In 1827, Charles Hamilton Smith claimed that it was derived from a language spoken in 'various parts of the East'.\n\nTwo years later, Smith connected this word with 'mad, crazy', and erroneously compared the Turkish word with and (cfr. also ; ), which are in fact from the Proto-Germanic *\"dwalaz\" 'foolish, stupid'. Richard Lydekker wrote nearly 80 years later that the word was not used by the natives living within the species' range. The Merriam-Webster \"Dictionary\" theorises that it may have come from the ('wolf').\n\n\"Canis alpinus\" was the binomial name proposed by Peter Simon Pallas in 1811, who described its range as encompassing the upper levels of Udskoi Ostrog in Amurland, towards the eastern side and in the region of the upper Lena River, around the Yenisei River and occasionally crossing into China. This northern Russian range reported by Pallas during the 18th and 19th centuries is \"considerably north\" of where this species occurs today.\n\n\"Canis primaevus\" was a name proposed by Brian Houghton Hodgson in 1833 who thought that the dhole is a primitive \"Canis\" form and the progenitor of the domestic dog. Hodgson later took note of the dhole's physical distinctiveness from the genus \"Canis\" and proposed the genus \"Cuon\".\n\nThe first study on the origins of the species was conducted by paleontologist Erich Thenius, who concluded that the dhole was a post-Pleistocene descendant of a golden jackal-like ancestor. The earliest known member of the genus \"Cuon\" is the Chinese \"Cuon majori\" of the Villafranchian period. It resembled \"Canis\" in its physical form more than the modern species, which has greatly reduced molars, whose cusps have developed into sharply trenchant points. By the Middle Pleistocene, \"C. majori\" had lost the last lower molar altogether. \"C. alpinus\" itself arose during the late Middle Pleistocene, by which point the transformation of the lower molar into a single cusped, slicing tooth had been completed.\n\nLate Middle Pleistocene dholes were virtually indistinguishable from their modern descendants, save for their greater size, which closely approached that of the gray wolf. The dhole became extinct in much of Europe during the late Würm period, though it may have survived up until the early Holocene in the Iberian Peninsula. and at Riparo Fredian in northern Italy The vast Pleistocene range of this species also included numerous islands in Asia that this species no longer inhabits, such as Sri Lanka, Borneo and possibly Palawan in the Philippines. The fossil record indicates that the species also occurred in North America, with remains being found in Beringia and Mexico.\n\nThe dhole's distinctive morphology has been a source of much confusion in determining the species' systematic position among the Canidae. George Simpson placed the dhole in the subfamily Simocyoninae alongside the African wild dog and the bush dog, on account of all three species' similar dentition. Subsequent authors, including Juliet Clutton-Brock, noted greater morphological similarities to canids of the genera \"Canis\", \"Dusicyon\", and \"Alopex\" than to either \"Speothos\" or \"Lycaon\", with any resemblance to the latter two being due to convergent evolution.\n\nSome authors consider the extinct \"Canis\" subgenus named \"Xenocyon\" as ancestral to both the genus \"Lycaon\" and the genus \"Cuon\". Subsequent studies on the canid genome revealed that the dhole and African wild dog are closely related to members of the genus \"Canis\". This closeness to \"Canis\" may have been confirmed in a menagerie in Madras, where according to zoologist Reginald Pocock there is a record of a dhole interbred with a golden jackal.\n\nIn 2018, whole genome sequencing was used to compare all members (apart from the black-backed and side-striped jackals) of the genus \"Canis\", along with the dhole and the African wild dog (\"Lycaon pictus\"). There was strong evidence of ancient genetic admixture between the dhole and the African wild dog. Today, their ranges are remote from each other; however, during the Pleistocene era the dhole could be found as far west as Europe. The study proposes that the dhole's distribution may have once included the Middle East, from where it may have admixed with the African wild dog in North Africa. However, there is no evidence of the dhole having existed in the Middle East nor North Africa.\n\nHistorically, up to 10 subspecies of dholes have been recognised. , only three subspecies are recognised by MSW3.\n\n!Subspecies\n!Image\n!Trinomial authority\n!Common names\n!Description\n!Range\n!Synonyms\n\"C. a. alpinus\"\nPallas, 1811\nIndian dhole,<br>eastern Asiatic dhole,<br>southern dhole,<br>Chinese dhole,<br>Ussuri dhole<br>\nLarge subspecies with bright red coat and narrow skull.\nThe Russian Far East, Mongolia, China, Nepal, the Indian subcontinent, Bhutan, Burma, Indochina and Java.\n\"adustus\" (Pocock, 1941), \"antiquus\" (Matthew & Granger, 1923), \"clamitans\" (Heude, 1892), \"dukhunensis\" (Sykes, 1831), \"fumosus\" (Pocock, 1936), \"grayiformis\" (Hodgson, 1863), \"infuscus\" (Pocock, 1936), \"javanicus\" (Desmarest, 1820), \"laniger\" (Pocock, 1936), \"lepturus\" (Heude, 1892), \"primaevus\" (Hodgson, 1833), \"rutilans\" (Müller, 1839)\n\"C. a. hesperius\"\nAfanasjev and Zolotarev, 1935\nSiberian dhole,<br>western Asiatic dhole,<br>northern dhole,<br>Tian Shan dhole\nSmaller than \"C. a. alpinus\", with wider skull and lighter-coloured winter fur\nThe Altai Mountains, the Tian Shan and possibly the Pamir Mountains and Kashmir\n\"C. a. sumatrensis\"\nHardwicke, 1821\nSumatran dhole,<br>Javan dhole,<br>Malayan dhole\nHas short, coarse fur with no woolly underfur and much black on the back\nSumatra, Java and the Malayan Peninsula\n\nHowever, studies on the dhole's mtDNA and microsatellite genotype showed no clear subspecific distinctions. Nevertheless, two major phylogeographic groupings were discovered in dholes of the Asian mainland, which likely diverged during a glaciation event. One population extends from South, Central and North India (south of the Ganges) into Burma, and the other extends from India north of the Ganges into northeastern India, Burma, Thailand and the Malaysian Peninsula. The origin of dholes in Sumatra and Java is, , unclear, as they show greater relatedness to dholes in India, Burma and China rather than with those in nearby Malaysia. In the absence of further data, the researchers involved in the study speculated that Javan and Sumatran dholes could have been introduced to the islands by humans.\n\nIn appearance, the dhole has been variously described as combining the physical characteristics of the gray wolf and the red fox, and as being \"cat-like\" on account of its long backbone and slender limbs. It has a wide and massive skull with a well-developed sagittal crest, and its masseter muscles are highly developed compared to other canid species, giving the face an almost hyena-like appearance. The rostrum is shorter than that of domestic dogs and most other canids. The species has six rather than seven lower molars. The upper molars are weak, being one third to one half the size of those of wolves and have only one cusp as opposed to between two and four, as is usual in canids, an adaptation thought to improve shearing ability, thus allowing it to compete more successfully with kleptoparasites. Adult females can weigh from , while the slightly larger male may weigh from . The mean weight of adults from three small samples was . Occasionally, dholes may be sympatric with the Indian wolf (\"Canis lupus pallipes\"), which is one of the smallest races of the gray wolf, but is still approximately 25% heavier on average. It stands at the shoulder and measures in body length. Its ears are somewhat rounded, but less so than the African wild dog.\nThe general tone of the fur is reddish, with the brightest hues occurring in winter. In the winter coat, the back is clothed in a saturated rusty-red to reddish colour with brownish highlights along the top of the head, neck and shoulders. The throat, chest, flanks, and belly and the upper parts of the limbs are less brightly coloured, and are more yellowish in tone. The lower parts of the limbs are whitish, with dark brownish bands on the anterior sides of the forelimbs. The muzzle and forehead are greyish-reddish. The tail is very luxuriant and fluffy, and is mainly of a reddish-ocherous colour, with a dark brown tip. The summer coat is shorter, coarser, and darker. The dorsal and lateral guard hairs in adults measure 20–30 mm in length. Dholes in the Moscow Zoo moult once a year from March to May.\n\nDholes produce whistles resembling the calls of red foxes, sometimes rendered as \"coo-coo\". How this sound is produced is unknown, though it is thought to help in coordinating the pack when travelling through thick brush. When attacking prey, they emit screaming \"KaKaKaKAA\" sounds. Other sounds include whines (food soliciting), growls (warning), screams, chatterings (both of which are alarm calls) and yapping cries. In contrast to wolves, dholes do not howl or bark. Dholes have a complex body language. Friendly or submissive greetings are accompanied by horizontal lip retraction and the lowering of the tail, as well as licking. Playful dholes open their mouths with their lips retracted and their tails held in a vertical position whilst assuming a play bow. Aggressive or threatening dholes pucker their lips forward in a snarl and raise the hairs on their backs, as well as keep their tails horizontal or vertical. When afraid, they pull their lips back horizontally with their tails tucked and their ears flat against the skull.\n\nIn Central Asia, dholes primarily inhabit mountainous areas; in the western half of their range, they live mostly in alpine meadows and high-montane steppes high above sea level, while in the east, they mainly range in montane taigas, though they may appear along coastlines. In India, Myanmar, Indochina, Indonesia and China, they prefer forested areas in alpine zones and occasionally also in plains regions.\n\nThe dhole might still be present in the Tunkinsky National Park in extreme southern Siberia near Lake Baikal. It possibly still exists in the Primorsky Krai province in far eastern Russia, where it was considered a rare and endangered species in 2004, with unconfirmed reports in the Pikthsa-Tigrovy Dom protected forest area; no sighting was reported in other areas such as the Mataisky Zakaznik forest since the late 1970s.\n\nCurrently, no other recent reports are confirmed of dhole being present in Russia, with no recent reports from Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan or Tajikistan, though one specimen was caught in southern China's Jiangxi district. Also, in 2011 to 2013, local government officials and herders reported the presence of several packs at altitudes of 2,000 to 3,500 m near the Taxkorgan Reserve in the Karakoram/Pamir Mountains region of the Xinjiang Autonomous Region, on China's border with Pakistan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan.\n\nDholes have been also recently reported from the Altyn-Tagh (Altun) Mountains in the southern portion of the Xinjiang Autonomous Region close to Tibet, as well. It is unknown if dholes continue to inhabit the Tian Shan, though they occur in small numbers in the Gansu Province, with one pack being sighted in the Qilian Mountains within that province in 2006; camera-trap surveys in the Yanchiwan National Nature Reserve in the northern edge of the Gansu Province in 2013–2014 confirmed the continued presence of several packs and a female adult with pups in this area at altitudes around 2,500 to 4,000 m.\n\nDholes still occur in Tibet and possibly also in North Korea. They once occurred in the alpine steppes extending into Kashmir to the Ladakh area, but have not been recorded in Pakistan.\n\nThey occur in most of India south of the Ganges, particularly in the Central Indian Highlands and the Western and Eastern Ghats. In northeast India, it is present in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, and West Bengal and in the Indo-Gangetic Plain's Terai region. Dhole populations in the Himalayas and northwest India are fragmented.\n\nIn 2011, dhole packs were recorded by camera traps in the Chitwan National Park. Its presence was confirmed in the Kanchenjunga Conservation Area in 2011 by camera traps.\n\nIn Bhutan, dholes have recovered from a poisoning campaign during the 1970s and became re-established in the 1990s. Today they occur in the Jigme Dorji National Park.\n\nDholes still occur in northeastern Bangladesh's forest reserves in the Sylhet area, as well the Chittagong Hill Tracts in the southeast. These zones are unlikely to contain viable populations, considering most sightings involve small groups or solitary specimens, and they are likely decreasing in number due to the lack of prey.\n\nThe presence of dholes in Myanmar was confirmed by camera-trapping in 11 areas, and alongside leopards, have apparently replaced tigers as the country's top predators. In 2015, dholes and tigers were recorded by camera-traps for the first time in the hill forests of Karen State.\n\nTheir range is highly fragmented in the Malaysian Peninsula, Sumatra, Java, Vietnam and Thailand. In 2014, camera-trap videos in the montane tropical forests at 2,000 m in the Kerinci Seblat National Park in Sumatra revealed the continued presence of this species. A camera-trapping survey in the Khao Ang Rue Nai Wildlife Sanctuary in Thailand from January 2008 to February 2010 revealed at least one healthy dhole pack. In northern Laos, dholes have been studied (2012) in protected areas.\n\nA disjunct population of this species has been reported from the area of Trabzon and Rize in northeastern Turkey near the border with Georgia in the 1990s by two Turkish zoologists. Some authorities have accepted this report, but others considered it to be unreliable. Also, one single individual was claimed to have been shot in 2013 in the nearby Kabardino-Balkaria Republic (a subject republic of Russia immediately north of Georgia in the Central Caucasus); its remains (including a skull) were analysed by a biologist from the Kabardino-Balkarian State University in May 2015, who concluded the skull was from a dhole. Recently, in August 2015, researchers from the National Museum of Natural History from Sofia, Bulgaria (including Dr. Nikolai Spassov, the current director of this museum) and the Karadeniz Technical University began an expedition to track and document this possible Turkish population of dhole. On October 12, 2015, this research team reported the preliminary conclusion that no real evidence exists of a living population of the dhole in Turkey (or in the Kabardino-Balkaria Republic), pending DNA analysis of samples from the original 1994 Serez-Eroglu skins.\n\nDholes are more social than gray wolves, and have less of a dominance hierarchy, as seasonal scarcity of food is not a serious concern for them. In this manner, they closely resemble African wild dogs in social structure. They live in clans rather than packs, as the latter term refers to a group of animals that always hunt together. In contrast, dhole clans frequently break into small packs of 3 to 5 animals, particularly during the spring season, as this is the optimal number for catching fawns. Dominant dholes are hard to identify, as they do not engage in dominance displays as wolves do, though other clan members will show submissive behaviour toward them. Intragroup fighting is rarely observed.\n\nDholes are far less territorial than wolves, with pups from one clan often joining another without trouble once they mature sexually. Clans typically number 5 to 12 individuals in India, though clans of 40 have been reported. In Thailand, clans rarely exceed three individuals. Unlike other canids, there is no evidence of dholes using urine to mark their territories or travel routes. When urinating, dholes, especially males, may raise one hind leg or both to result in a handstand. Handstand urination is also seen in bush dogs (\"Speothos venaticus\"). They may defecate in conspicuous places, though a territorial function is unlikely, as faeces are mostly deposited within the clan's territory rather than the periphery. Faeces are often deposited in what appear to be communal latrines. They do not scrape the earth with their feet, as other canids do, to mark their territories.\n\nFour kinds of den have been described; simple earth dens with one entrance (usually remodeled striped hyena or porcupine dens); complex cavernous earth dens with more than one entrance; simple cavernous dens excavated under or between rocks; and complex cavernous dens with several other dens in the vicinity, some of which are interconnected. Dens are typically located under dense scrub or on the banks of dry rivers or creeks. The entrance to a dhole den can be almost vertical, with a sharp turn three to four feet down. The tunnel opens into an antechamber, from which extends more than one passage. Some dens may have up to six entrances leading up to of interconnecting tunnels. These \"cities\" may be developed over many generations of dholes, and are shared by the clan females when raising young together. Like African wild dogs and dingoes, dholes will avoid killing prey close to their dens.\n\nIn India, the mating season occurs between mid-October and January, while captive dholes in the Moscow Zoo breed mostly in February. Unlike wolf packs, dhole clans may contain more than one breeding female. More than one female dhole may den and rear their litters together in the same den. During mating, the female assumes a crouched, cat-like position. There is no copulatory tie characteristic of other canids when the male dismounts. Instead, the pair lie on their sides facing each other in a semicircular formation. The gestation period lasts 60–63 days, with litter sizes averaging four to six pups. Their growth rate is much faster than that of wolves, being similar in rate to that of coyotes.\n\nPups are suckled at least 58 days. During this time, the pack feeds the mother at the den site. Dholes do not use rendezvous sites to meet their pups as wolves do, though one or more adults will stay with the pups at the den while the rest of the pack hunts. Once weaning begins, the adults of the clan will regurgitate food for the pups until they are old enough to join in hunting. They remain at the den site for 70–80 days. By the age of six months, pups accompany the adults on hunts and will assist in killing large prey such as sambar by the age of eight months. Maximum longevity in captivity is 15–16 years.\n\nBefore embarking on a hunt, clans go through elaborate prehunt social rituals involving nuzzling, body rubbing and homo- and heterosexual mounting. Dholes are primarily diurnal hunters, hunting in the early hours of the morning. They rarely hunt nocturnally, except on moonlit nights, indicating they greatly rely on sight when hunting. Although not as fast as jackals and foxes, they can chase their prey for many hours. During a pursuit, one or more dholes may take over chasing their prey, while the rest of the pack keeps up at a steadier pace behind, taking over once the other group tires. Most chases are short, lasting only 500 m. When chasing fleet-footed prey, they run at a pace of . Dholes frequently drive their prey into water bodies, where the targeted animal's movements are hindered.\n\nOnce large prey is caught, one dhole will grab the prey's nose, while the rest of the pack pulls the animal down by the flanks and hindquarters. They do not use a killing bite to the throat. They occasionally blind their prey by attacking the eyes. Serows are among the only ungulate species capable of effectively defending themselves against dhole attacks, due to their thick, protective coats and short, sharp horns capable of easily impaling dholes. They will tear open their prey's flanks and disembowel it, eating the heart, liver, lungs and some sections of the intestines. The stomach and rumen are usually left untouched. Prey weighing less than 50 kg is usually killed within two minutes, while large stags may take 15 minutes to die. Once prey is secured, dholes will tear off pieces of the carcass and eat in seclusion. Unlike wolf packs, in which the breeding pair monopolises food, dholes give priority to the pups when feeding at a kill, allowing them to eat first. They are generally tolerant of scavengers at their kills. Both mother and young are provided with regurgitated food by other pack members.\n\nPrey animals in India include chital, sambar deer, muntjac, mouse deer, barasingha, wild boar, gaur, water buffaloes, banteng, cattle, nilgai, goats, Indian hares, Himalayan field rats and langurs. There is one record of a pack bringing down an Indian elephant calf in Assam, despite desperate defense of the mother, resulting in numerous losses to the pack. In Kashmir, they prey on markhor, and thamin in Myanmar, Malayan tapir, Sumatran serow in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula and Javan rusa in Java. In the Tian Shan and Tarbagatai Mountains, dholes prey on Siberian ibexes, arkhar, roe deer, maral and wild boar. In the Altai and Sayan Mountains, they prey on musk deer and reindeer. In eastern Siberia, they prey on roe deer, Manchurian wapiti, wild pig, musk deer and reindeer, while in Primorye they feed on sika deer and goral. In Mongolia, they prey on argali and rarely Siberian ibex.\n\nLike African wild dogs, but unlike wolves, dholes are not known to attack people. Dholes eat fruit and vegetable matter more readily than other canids. In captivity, they eat various kinds of grasses, herbs and leaves, seemingly for pleasure rather than just when ill. In summertime in the Tian Shan Mountains, dholes eat large quantities of mountain rhubarb. Although opportunistic, dholes have a seeming aversion to hunting cattle and their calves. Livestock predation by dholes has been a problem in Bhutan since the late 1990s, as domestic animals are often left outside to graze in the forest, sometimes for weeks at a time. Livestock stall-fed at night and grazed near homes are never attacked. Oxen are killed more often than cows, probably because they are given less protection.\n\nIn some areas, dholes are sympatric to tigers and leopards. Competition between these species is mostly avoided through differences in prey selection, although there is still substantial dietary overlap. Along with leopards, dholes typically target animals in the 30–175 kg range (mean weights of 35.3 kg for dhole and 23.4 kg for leopard), while tigers selected for prey animals heavier than 176 kg (but their mean prey weight was 65.5 kg). Also, other characteristics of the prey, such as sex, arboreality and aggressiveness, may play a role in prey selection. For example, dholes preferentially select male chital, whereas leopards kill both sexes more evenly (and tigers prefer larger prey altogether), dholes and tigers kill langurs rarely compared to leopards due to the leopards' greater arboreality, while leopards kill wild boar infrequently due to the inability of this relatively light predator to tackle aggressive prey of comparable weight.\n\nOn some occasions, dholes may attack tigers. When confronted by dholes, tigers will seek refuge in trees or stand with their backs to a tree or bush, where they may be mobbed for lengthy periods before finally attempting escape. Escaping tigers are usually killed, while tigers which stand their ground have a greater chance of survival. Tigers are dangerous opponents for dholes, as they have sufficient strength to kill a dhole with a single paw strike. Dhole packs may steal leopard kills, while leopards may kill dholes if they encounter them singly or in pairs. Since leopards are smaller than tigers and are more likely to hunt dholes, dhole packs tend to react more aggressively toward them than they do towards tigers.\n\nThere are numerous records of leopards being treed by dholes. Dholes sometimes drive tigers, leopards, snow leopards and bears (see below) from their kills. Dholes were once thought to be a major factor in reducing Asiatic cheetah populations, though this is doubtful, as cheetahs live in open areas as opposed to forested areas favoured by dholes.\n\nDhole packs occasionally attack Asiatic black bears, snow leopards, and sloth bears. When attacking bears, dholes will attempt to prevent them from seeking refuge in caves and lacerate their hindquarters.\n\nAlthough usually antagonistic toward wolves, they may hunt and feed alongside one another. There is at least one record of a lone wolf associating with a pair of dholes in Debrigarh Wildlife Sanctuary. They infrequently associate in mixed groups with Eurasian golden jackals. Domestic dogs may kill dholes, though they will feed alongside them on occasion.\n\nDholes are vulnerable to a number of different diseases, particularly in areas where they are sympatric with other canid species. Infectious pathogens such as \"Toxocara canis\" are present in their faeces. They may suffer from rabies, canine distemper, mange, trypanosomiasis, canine parvovirus and endoparasites such as cestodes and roundworms.\n\nThe dhole only rarely takes domestic livestock. Certain people, such as the Kurumbas and some Mon Khmer-speaking tribes will appropriate dhole kills; some Indian villagers welcome the dhole because of this appropriation of dhole kills. Dholes were persecuted throughout India for bounties until they were given protection by the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. Methods used for dhole hunting included poisoning, snaring, shooting and clubbing at den sites. Native Indian people killed dholes primarily to protect livestock, while British sporthunters during the British Raj did so under the conviction that dholes were responsible for drops in game populations. Persecution of dholes still occurs with varying degrees of intensity according to the region. Bounties paid for dholes used to be 25 rupees, though this was reduced to 20 in 1926 after the number of presented dhole carcasses became too numerous to maintain the established reward. In Indochina, dholes suffer heavily from nonselective hunting techniques such as snaring.\n\nThe fur trade does not pose a significant threat to dholes. The people of India do not eat dhole flesh and their fur is not considered overly valuable. Due to their rarity, dholes were never harvested for their skins in large numbers in the Soviet Union and were sometimes accepted as dog or wolf pelts (being labeled as \"half wolf\" for the latter). The winter fur was prized by the Chinese, who bought dhole pelts in Ussuriysk during the late 1860s for a few silver rubles. In the early 20th century, dhole pelts reached eight rubles in Manchuria. In Semirechye, fur coats made from dhole skin were considered the warmest, but were very costly.\n\nIn India, the dhole is protected under Schedule 2 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. The creation of reserves under Project Tiger provided some protection for dhole populations sympatric with tigers. In 2014, the Indian government sanctioned its first dhole conservation breeding centre at the Indira Gandhi Zoological Park (IGZP) in Visakhapatnam. The dhole has been protected in Russia since 1974, though it is vulnerable to poison left out for wolves. In China, the animal is listed as a category II protected species under the Chinese wildlife protection act of 1988. In Cambodia, the dhole is protected from all hunting, while conservation laws in Vietnam limit extraction and utilisation.\n\nIn 2016, the Korean company Sooam Biotech was reported to be attempting to clone the dhole using dogs as surrogate mothers to help conserve the species.\n\nThree dhole-like animals are featured on the coping stone of the Bharhut stupa dating from 100 BC. They are shown waiting by a tree, with a woman or spirit trapped up it, a scene reminiscent of dholes treeing tigers. The animal's fearsome reputation in India is reflected by the number of pejorative names it possesses in Hindi, which variously translate as \"red devil\", \"devil dog\", \"jungle devil\", or \"hound of Kali\". According to zoologist and explorer Leopold von Schrenck, he had trouble obtaining dhole specimens during his exploration of Amurland, as the local Gilyaks greatly feared the species. This fear and superstition was not, however, shared by neighbouring Tungusic peoples.\n\nVon Schrenk speculated that this differing attitude towards dholes was due to the Tungusic people's more nomadic, hunter-gatherer lifestyle. Dhole-like animals are described in numerous old European texts, including the Ostrogoth sagas, where they are portrayed as hellhounds. The demon dogs accompanying Hellequin in Mediaeval French Passion Plays, as well as the ones inhabiting the legendary forest of Brocéliande, have been attributed to dholes. According to Charles Hamilton Smith, the dangerous wild canids mentioned by Scaliger as having lived in the forests of Montefalcone could have been based on dholes, as they were described as unlike wolves in habits, voice and appearance. The Montefalcone family's coat of arms had a pair of red dogs as supporters.\n\nDholes appear in Rudyard Kipling's \"Red Dog\", where they are portrayed as aggressive and bloodthirsty animals which descend from the Deccan Plateau into the Seeonee Hills inhabited by Mowgli and his adopted wolf pack to cause carnage among the jungle's denizens. They are described as living in packs numbering hundreds of individuals, and that even Shere Khan and Hathi make way for them when they descend into the jungle. The dholes are despised by the wolves because of their destructiveness, their habit of not living in dens and the hair between their toes. With Mowgli and Kaa's help, the Seeonee wolf pack manages to wipe out the dholes by leading them through bee hives and torrential waters before finishing off the rest in battle.\n\nJapanese author Uchida Roan wrote 犬物語 (\"Inu monogatari\"; A dog's tale) in 1901 as a nationalistic critique of the declining popularity of indigenous dog breeds, which he asserted were descended from the dhole. A fictional version of the dhole, imbued with supernatural abilities, appears in the season 6 episode of TV series \"The X-Files\", titled \"Alpha\".\n\nDholes also appear as enemies in the video game \"Far Cry 4\", alongside other predators such as the Bengal tiger, honey badger, snow leopard, clouded leopard, Tibetan wolf and Asian black bear. They can be found hunting the player and other NPCs across the map, but are easily killed, being one of the weakest enemies in the game. They once again appear in the video game \"Far Cry Primal\", where they play similar roles as their counterparts in the previous game, but can now also be tamed and used in combat by Takkar, the main protagonist of the game.\n\nBrian Houghton Hodgson kept captured dholes in captivity, and found, with the exception of one animal, they remained shy and vicious even after 10 months. According to Richard Lydekker, adult dholes are nearly impossible to tame, though pups are docile and can even be allowed to play with domestic dog pups until they reach early adulthood. A dhole may have been presented as a gift to Ibbi-Sin as tribute.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Wild Dog Diaries\"\n\nBULLET::::- Dhole Home Page (Archive)\nBULLET::::- ARKive – images and movies of the dhole\nBULLET::::- Saving the dhole: The forgotten 'badass' Asian dog more endangered than tigers, \"The Guardian\" (25 June 2015)\nBULLET::::- Photos of dhole in Bandipur\n"}
{"id": "8629", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8629", "title": "Donald Rumsfeld", "text": "Donald Rumsfeld\n\nDonald Henry Rumsfeld (born July 9, 1932) is an American former politician. Rumsfeld served as Secretary of Defense from 1975 to 1977 under Gerald Ford, and again from January 2001 to December 2006 under George W. Bush. He is both the youngest and the second-oldest person to have served as Secretary of Defense. Additionally, Rumsfeld was a three-term U.S. Congressman from Illinois (1963–1969), director of the Office of Economic Opportunity (1969–1970), counsellor to the president (1969–1973), the United States Permanent Representative to NATO (1973–1974), and White House Chief of Staff (1974–1975). Between his terms as Secretary of Defense, he served as the CEO and chairman of several companies.\n\nBorn in Illinois, Rumsfeld attended Princeton University, graduating in 1954 with a degree in political science. After serving in the Navy for three years, he mounted a campaign for Congress in Illinois's 13th Congressional District, winning in 1962 at the age of 30. While in Congress, he was a leading co-sponsor of the Freedom of Information Act. Rumsfeld reluctantly accepted an appointment by President Richard Nixon to head the Office of Economic Opportunity in 1969; appointed counsellor by Nixon and entitled to Cabinet-level status, he would also head up the Economic Stabilization Program before being appointed ambassador to NATO. Called back to Washington in August 1974, Rumsfeld was appointed chief of staff by President Ford. Rumsfeld recruited a young one-time staffer of his, Dick Cheney, to succeed him when Ford nominated him to be Secretary of Defense in 1975. When Ford lost the 1976 election, Rumsfeld returned to private business and financial life, and was named president and CEO of the pharmaceutical corporation G. D. Searle & Company. He was later named CEO of General Instrument from 1990 to 1993 and chairman of Gilead Sciences from 1997 to 2001.\n\nRumsfeld was appointed Secretary of Defense for a second time in January 2001 by President George W. Bush. As Secretary of Defense, Rumsfeld played a central role in the invasion of Afghanistan and invasion of Iraq. Before and during the Iraq War, he claimed that Iraq had an active weapons of mass destruction program; no stockpiles were ever found. A Pentagon Inspector General report found that Rumsfeld's top policy aide \"developed, produced, and then disseminated alternative intelligence assessments on the Iraq and al Qaida relationship, which included some conclusions that were inconsistent with the consensus of the Intelligence Community, to senior decision-makers.\" Rumsfeld's tenure was controversial for its use of torture and the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal. Rumsfeld gradually lost political support and he resigned in late 2006. In his retirement years, he published an autobiography \"\" as well as \"Rumsfeld's Rules: Leadership Lessons in Business, Politics, War, and Life\".\n\nDonald Henry Rumsfeld was born on July 9, 1932, in Chicago, Illinois, the son of Jeannette Kearsley (née Husted) and George Donald Rumsfeld. His father came from a German-American family that had emigrated in the 1870s from Weyhe in Lower Saxony, but young Donald was sometimes ribbed about looking like a \"tough German\". Growing up in Winnetka, Illinois, Rumsfeld became an Eagle Scout in 1949 and is the recipient of both the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award from the Boy Scouts of America and its Silver Buffalo Award in 2006. Living in Winnetka, his family attended a Congregational Church. From 1943 to 1945, Rumsfeld lived in Coronado, California, while his father was stationed on an aircraft carrier in the Pacific in World War II. He was a ranger at Philmont Scout Ranch in 1949.\n\nRumsfeld attended Baker Demonstration School, and later graduated from New Trier High School. He attended Princeton University on academic and NROTC partial scholarships. He graduated in 1954 with an A.B. in political science. During his time at Princeton, he was an accomplished amateur wrestler, becoming captain of the varsity wrestling team, and captain of the Lightweight Football team playing defensive back. His Princeton University senior thesis was titled \"The Steel Seizure Case of 1952 and Its Effects on Presidential Powers\". While at Princeton he was friends with another future Secretary of Defense, Frank Carlucci.\n\nRumsfeld married Joyce P. Pierson on December 27, 1954. They have three children, six grandchildren, and one great grandchild. He attended Case Western Reserve University School of Law and Georgetown University Law Center, but did not take a degree from either institution.\n\nRumsfeld served in the United States Navy from 1954 to 1957, as a naval aviator and flight instructor. His initial training was in the North American SNJ Texan basic trainer after which he transitioned to the T-28 advanced trainer. In 1957, he transferred to the Naval Reserve and continued his naval service in flying and administrative assignments as a drilling reservist. On July 1, 1958, he was assigned to Anti-submarine Squadron 662 at Naval Air Station Anacostia, District of Columbia, as a selective reservist. Rumsfeld was designated aircraft commander of Anti-submarine Squadron 731 on October 1, 1960, at Naval Air Station Grosse Ile, Michigan, where he flew the S2F Tracker. He transferred to the Individual Ready Reserve when he became Secretary of Defense in 1975 and retired with the rank of captain in 1989.\n\nIn 1957, during the Dwight D. Eisenhower administration, Rumsfeld served as administrative assistant to David S. Dennison Jr., a Congressman representing the 11th district of Ohio. In 1959, he moved on to become a staff assistant to Congressman Robert P. Griffin of Michigan. Engaging in a two-year stint with an investment banking firm, A. G. Becker & Co., from 1960 to 1962, Rumsfeld would instead set his sights on becoming a member of Congress.\n\nHe was elected to the United States House of Representatives for Illinois's 13th congressional district in 1962, at the age of 30, and was re-elected by large majorities in 1964, 1966, and 1968. While in Congress, he served on the Joint Economic Committee, the Committee on Science and Aeronautics, and the Government Operations Committee, as well as on the Subcommittees on Military and Foreign Operations. He was also a co-founder of the Japanese-American Inter-Parliamentary Council in addition to being a leading cosponsor of the Freedom of Information Act.\n\nAs a young Congressman, Rumsfeld attended seminars at the University of Chicago, an experience he credits with introducing him to the idea of an all volunteer military, and to the economist Milton Friedman and the Chicago School of Economics. He would later take part in Friedman's PBS series \"Free to Choose\".\n\nDuring his years in Congress, Rumsfeld supported civil rights legislation such as the 1964 Civil Rights Act.\n\nRumsfeld resigned from Congress in 1969his fourth termto serve President Richard Nixon in his administration, and he would serve in a variety of executive branch positions throughout the Nixon presidency. In 1969, Nixon sought to reform and reorganize the United States Office of Economic Opportunity, an organization created during the Kennedy administration and greatly expanded as a part of Lyndon Johnson's Great Society programs, rather than eliminate it outright. He appointed Rumsfeld Director of the organization with Cabinet rank. Rumsfeld had voted against the creation of OEO when he was in Congress, and initially rejected Nixon's offer, citing his own inherent belief that the OEO did more harm than good, and he felt that he was not the right person for the job. He only accepted after personal pleas from the president.\n\nAs director, Rumsfeld sought to reorganize the Office to serve as \"a laboratory for experimental programs\". Several beneficial anti-poverty programs were saved by allocating funds to them from other less-successful government programs. During this time, he hired Frank Carlucci and Dick Cheney to serve under him.\n\nHe was the subject of one of legendary writer Jack Anderson's columns, alleging that \"anti-poverty czar\" Rumsfeld had cut programs to aid the poor while spending thousands to redecorate his office. Rumsfeld dictated a four-page response to Anderson, labeling the accusations as falsehoods, and invited Anderson to tour his office. Despite the tour, Anderson did not retract his claims, and would only much later admit that his column was a mistake.\n\nWhen he left OEO in December 1970, Nixon named Rumsfeld Counselor to the President, a general advisory position; in this role, he retained Cabinet status. He was given an office in the West Wing in 1969 and regularly interacted with the Nixon administration hierarchy. He was named director of the Economic Stabilization Program in 1970 as well, and later headed up the Cost of Living Council. In March 1971 Nixon was recorded saying about Rumsfeld \"at least Rummy is tough enough\" and \"He's a ruthless little bastard. You can be sure of that.\"\n\nIn February 1973, Rumsfeld left Washington to serve as U.S. Ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Brussels, Belgium. He served as the United States' Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council and the Defense Planning Committee, and the Nuclear Planning Group. In this capacity, he represented the United States in wide-ranging military and diplomatic matters, and was asked to help mediate a conflict on behalf of the United States between Cyprus and Turkey.\n\nIn August 1974, after Nixon resigned as president in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, Rumsfeld was called back to Washington to serve as transition chairman for the new president, Gerald Ford. He had been Ford's confidant since their days in the House, before Ford was House minority leader. As the new president became settled in, Ford appointed Rumsfeld White House Chief of Staff, where he served from 1974 to 1975.\n\nIn October 1975, Ford reshuffled his cabinet in the Halloween Massacre. He named Rumsfeld to become the 13th U.S. Secretary of Defense; George H. W. Bush became Director of Central Intelligence. According to Bob Woodward's 2002 book \"Bush at War\", a rivalry developed between the two men and \"Bush senior was convinced that Rumsfeld was pushing him out to the CIA to end his political career.\"\n\nAt the Pentagon, Rumsfeld oversaw the transition to an all-volunteer military. He sought to reverse the gradual decline in the defense budget and to build up U.S. strategic and conventional forces, skillfully undermining Secretary of State Henry Kissinger at the SALT talks. He asserted, along with Team B (which he helped to set up), that trends in comparative U.S.-Soviet military strength had not favored the United States for 15 to 20 years and that, if continued, they \"would have the effect of injecting a fundamental instability in the world\". For this reason, he oversaw the development of cruise missiles, the B-1 bomber, and a major naval shipbuilding program.\n\nIn 1977, Rumsfeld was awarded the nation's highest civilian award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Kissinger, his bureaucratic adversary, would later pay him a different sort of compliment, pronouncing him \"a special Washington phenomenon: the skilled full-time politician-bureaucrat in whom ambition, ability, and substance fuse seamlessly\".\n\nIn early 1977 Rumsfeld briefly lectured at Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School and Northwestern's Kellogg School of Management, located in Chicago, Illinois. His sights instead turned to business, and from 1977 to 1985 Rumsfeld served as chief executive officer, president, and then chairman of G. D. Searle & Company, a worldwide pharmaceutical company based in Skokie, Illinois. During his tenure at Searle, Rumsfeld led the company's financial turnaround, thereby earning awards as the Outstanding Chief Executive Officer in the Pharmaceutical Industry from the \"Wall Street Transcript\" (1980) and \"Financial World\" (1981). In 1985, Searle was sold to Monsanto Company.\n\nRumsfeld served as chairman and chief executive officer of General Instrument Corporation from 1990 to 1993. A leader in broadband transmission, distribution, and access control technologies for cable, satellite and terrestrial broadcasting applications, the company pioneered the development of the first all-digital high-definition television (HDTV) technology. After taking the company public and returning it to profitability, Rumsfeld returned to private business in late 1993.\n\nFrom January 1997 until being sworn in as the 21st Secretary of Defense in January 2001, Rumsfeld served as chairman of Gilead Sciences, Inc. Gilead Sciences is the developer of Tamiflu (Oseltamivir), which is used in the treatment of bird flu. As a result, Rumsfeld's holdings in the company grew significantly when avian flu became a subject of popular anxiety during his later term as Secretary of Defense. Following standard practice, Rumsfeld recused himself from any decisions involving Gilead, and he directed the Pentagon's General Counsel to issue instructions outlining what he could and could not be involved in if there were an avian flu pandemic and the Pentagon had to respond.\n\nDuring his business career, Rumsfeld continued part-time public service in various posts. In November 1983, Rumsfeld was appointed Special Envoy to the Middle East by President Ronald Reagan, at a turbulent time in modern Middle Eastern history when Iraq was fighting Iran in the Iran–Iraq War. The United States wished for the conflict to end, and Rumsfeld was sent to the Middle East to serve as a mediator on behalf of the President.\n\nWhen Rumsfeld visited Baghdad on December 20, 1983, he met Saddam Hussein at Saddam's palace and had a 90-minute discussion. They largely agreed on opposing Syria's occupation of Lebanon; preventing Syrian and Iranian expansion; and preventing arms sales to Iran. Rumsfeld suggested that if U.S.-Iraq relations could improve the U.S. might support a new oil pipeline across Jordan, which Iraq had opposed but was now willing to reconsider. Rumsfeld also informed Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz that \"Our efforts to assist were inhibited by certain things that made it difficult for us ... citing the use of chemical weapons.\"\n\nRumsfeld wrote in his memoir \"Known and Unknown\" that his meeting with Hussein \"has been the subject of gossip, rumors, and crackpot conspiracy theories for more than a quarter of a century ... Supposedly I had been sent to see Saddam by President Reagan either to negotiate a secret oil deal, to help arm Iraq, or to make Iraq an American client state. The truth is that our encounter was more straightforward and less dramatic.\"\n\nIn addition to taking the position of Middle East envoy, Rumsfeld served as a member of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control (1982–1986); President Reagan's Special Envoy on the Law of the Sea Treaty (1982–1983); a senior adviser to President Reagan's Panel on Strategic Systems (1983–1984); a member of the Joint Advisory Commission on U.S./Japan Relations (1983–1984); a member of the National Commission on the Public Service (1987–1990); a member of the National Economic Commission (1988–1989); a member of the board of visitors of the National Defense University (1988–1992); a member of the FCC's High Definition Television Advisory Committee (1992–1993); a member of the U.S. Trade Deficit Review Commission (1999–2000); a member of the Council on Foreign Relations; and chairman of the U.S. Commission to Assess National Security Space Management and Organization (2000). Among his most noteworthy positions was chairman of the nine-member Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States from January to July 1998. In its findings, the commission concluded that Iraq, Iran, and North Korea could develop intercontinental ballistic missile capabilities in five to ten years and that U.S. intelligence would have little warning before such systems were deployed.\n\nDuring the 1980s, Rumsfeld became a member of the National Academy of Public Administration, and was named a member of the boards of trustees of the Gerald R. Ford Foundation, the Eisenhower Exchange Fellowships, the Hoover Institution at Stanford University and the National Park Foundation. He was also a member of the U.S./Russia Business Forum and chairman of the Congressional Leadership's National Security Advisory Group. Rumsfeld was a member of the Project for the New American Century, a think-tank dedicated to maintaining U.S. primacy. In addition, he was asked to serve the U.S. State Department as a foreign policy consultant from 1990 to 1993. He also sat on European engineering giant Asea Brown Boveri's board from 1990 to 2001, a company which sold two light-water nuclear reactors to the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization for installation in North Korea, as part of the 1994 agreed framework reached under President Bill Clinton. Rumsfeld's office said that he did not \"recall it being brought before the board at any time\" though \"Fortune\" magazine reported that \"board members were informed about this project.\"\n\nDuring the 1976 Republican National Convention, Rumsfeld received one vote for Vice President of the United States, although he did not seek the office, and the nomination was easily won by Ford's choice, Senator Bob Dole. During the 1980 Republican National Convention he also received one vote for vice president. Economist Milton Friedman later noted that he, Friedman, regarded Reagan's pick of Bush as \"the worst decision not only of his campaign but of his presidency,\" and that Rumsfeld was instead his preference. \"Had he been chosen,\" Friedman said, \"I believe he would have succeeded Reagan as president and the sorry Bush-Clinton period would never have occurred.\"\n\nRumsfeld briefly sought the presidential nomination in 1988, but withdrew from the race before primaries began. During the 1996 election season, he initially formed a presidential exploratory committee, but declined to formally enter the race. He was instead named national chairman for Republican nominee Bob Dole's campaign.\n\nRumsfeld was named Secretary of Defense soon after President George W. Bush took office in 2001 despite Rumsfeld's past rivalry with the previous President Bush. Bush's first choice, FedEx founder Fred Smith, was unavailable and Vice President-elect Cheney recommended Rumsfeld for the job.\n\nRumsfeld's second tenure as Secretary of Defense cemented him as the most powerful Pentagon chief since Robert McNamara and one of the most influential Cabinet members in the Bush administration. His tenure would prove to be a pivotal and rocky one which led the United States military into the 21st century. Following the September 11 attacks, Rumsfeld led the military planning and execution of the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan and the subsequent 2003 invasion of Iraq. He pushed hard to send as small a force as soon as possible to both conflicts, a concept codified as the Rumsfeld Doctrine.\n\nThroughout his time as defense secretary, Rumsfeld was noted for his candor and quick wit when giving weekly press conferences or speaking with the press. \"U.S. News & World Report\" called him \"a straight-talking Midwesterner\" who \"routinely has the press corps doubled over in fits of laughter\". By the same token, his leadership was exposed to much criticism through provocative books covering the Iraq conflict, like Bob Woodward's \"State of Denial\", Thomas E. Ricks' \"Fiasco\", and Seymour Hersh's \"Chain of Command\".\n\nThe United States was attacked on September 11, 2001 by al Qaeda terrorists who hijacked commercial airliners and crashed them in coordinated strikes into both towers of the World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan, New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. The fourth plane crashed into a field in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, and its target was likely a prominent building in Washington, D.C., most probably either the Capitol Building or the White House. Within three hours of the start of the first hijacking and two hours after American Airlines Flight 11 struck the World Trade Center, Rumsfeld raised the defense condition signaling of the United States offensive readiness to DEFCON 3, the highest it had been since the Arab-Israeli war in 1973.\n\nOn the afternoon of September 11, Rumsfeld issued rapid orders to his aides to look for evidence of possible Iraqi involvement in regard to what had just occurred, according to notes taken by senior policy official Stephen Cambone. \"Best info fast. Judge whether good enough hit S.H.\"meaning Saddam Hussein\"at same time. Not only UBL\" (Osama bin Laden), Cambone's notes quoted Rumsfeld as saying. \"Need to move swiftlyNear term target needsgo massivesweep it all up. Things related and not.\"\n\nRumsfeld wrote in \"Known and Unknown\", \"Much has been written about the Bush administration's focus on Iraq after 9/11. Commentators have suggested that it was strange or obsessive for the President and his advisers to have raised questions about whether Saddam Hussein was somehow behind the attack. I have never understood the controversy. I had no idea if Iraq was or was not involved, but it would have been irresponsible for any administration not to have asked the question.\"\n\nA memo written by Sec. Rumsfeld dated November 27, 2001 considers an Iraq war. One section of the memo questions \"How start?\", listing multiple possible justifications for a US-Iraq War.\n\nBefore and during the Iraq War, Rumsfeld claimed that Iraq had an active weapons of mass destruction program; no stockpiles were ever found. Bush administration officials also claimed that there was an operational relationship between Al Qaeda and Saddam Hussein. A Pentagon Inspector General report found that Rumsfeld's top policy aide, Douglas J. Feith, \"developed, produced, and then disseminated alternative intelligence assessments on the Iraq and al Qaida relationship, which included some conclusions that were inconsistent with the consensus of the Intelligence Community, to senior decision-makers.\"\n\nAfter the war in Afghanistan was launched, Rumsfeld participated in a meeting in regard to the review of the Department of Defense's Contingency Plan in the event of a war with Iraq. The plan, as it was then conceived, contemplated troop levels of up to 500,000, which Rumsfeld felt was far too many. Gordon and Trainor wrote:\n\nRumsfeld's plan resulted in a lightning invasion that took Baghdad in well under a month with very few American casualties. Many government buildings, plus major museums, electrical generation infrastructure, and even oil equipment were looted and vandalized during the transition from the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime to the establishment of the Coalition Provisional Authority. A violent insurrection began shortly after the military operation started. After the German and French governments voiced opposition to invading Iraq, Rumsfeld labeled these countries as part of \"Old Europe\", implying that countries that supported the war were part of a newer, modern Europe.\n\nAs a result, Rumsfeld stirred controversy as to whether the forces that did invade Iraq were enough in size. In a September 2007 interview with \"The Daily Telegraph\", General Mike Jackson, the head of the British army during the invasion, criticized Rumsfeld's plans for the invasion of Iraq as \"intellectually bankrupt,\" adding that Rumsfeld is \"one of those most responsible for the current situation in Iraq,\" and that he felt that \"the US approach to combating global terrorism is 'inadequate' and too focused on military might rather than nation building and diplomacy.\"\n\nIn 2006, Rumsfeld responded to a question by Brit Hume of Fox News as to whether he pressed General Tommy Franks to lower his request for 400,000 troops for the war:\n\nRumsfeld told Hume that Franks ultimately decided against such a troop level.\nThere was also controversy between Rumsfeld at the Pentagon and the CIA over who had the authority to fire Hellfire missiles from Predator drones. Even though the drones were not ready for deployment until 2002, Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon have argued that \"these quarrels kept the Predator from being used against al Qaeda ... One anonymous individual who was at the center of the action called this episode 'typical' and complained that 'Rumsfeld never missed an opportunity to fail to cooperate. The fact is, the Secretary of Defense is an obstacle. He has helped the terrorists.'\n\nAfter the Iraq invasion, U.S. troops were criticized for not protecting the historical artifacts and treasures located at the National Museum of Iraq. When asked at the time why U.S. troops did not actively seek to stop the lawlessness, Rumsfeld replied, \"Stuff happens ... and it's untidy and freedom's untidy, and free people are free to make mistakes and commit crimes and do bad things. They're also free to live their lives and do wonderful things. And that's what's going to happen here.\" He further commented that, \"The images you are seeing on television you are seeing over, and over, and over, and it's the same picture of some person walking out of some building with a vase, and you see it 20 times, and you think, \"My goodness, were there that many vases?\"\nThroughout his tenure, Rumsfeld sought to remind the American people of the 9/11 attacks and threats against Americans, noting at one time in a 2006 memo to \"[m]ake the American people realize they are surrounded in the world by violent extremists\".\n\nAs Secretary of Defense, Rumsfeld was deliberate in crafting the public message from the Department of Defense. People will \"rally\" to the word \"sacrifice\", Rumsfeld noted after a meeting. \"They are looking for leadership. Sacrifice = Victory.\" In May 2004, Rumsfeld considered whether to redefine the war on terrorism as a fight against \"worldwide insurgency\". He advised aides \"to test what the results could be\" if the war on terrorism were renamed. Rumsfeld also ordered specific public Pentagon attacks on and responses to U.S. newspaper columns that reported the negative aspects of the war.\n\nIn October 2003, Rumsfeld approved a secret Pentagon \"roadmap\" on public relations, calling for \"boundaries\" between information operations abroad and the news media at home. The Roadmap advances a policy according to which as long as the U.S. government does not intentionally target the American public, it does not matter that psychological operations reach the American public.\n\nThe Australia Broadcasting Corporation reported that though Rumsfeld didn't specify a withdrawal date for troops in Iraq, \"He says it would be unrealistic to wait for Iraq to be peaceful before removing US led forces from the country, adding that Iraq had never been peaceful and perfect.\"\n\nIn December 2004, Rumsfeld was heavily criticized for using a signing machine instead of personally signing over 1000 letters of condolence to the families of soldiers killed in action in Iraq and Afghanistan. He promised to personally sign all letters in the future.\n\nThe Department of Defense's preliminary concerns for holding, housing, and interrogating captured prisoners on the battlefield were raised during the military build-up prior to the Iraq War. Because Saddam Hussein's military forces surrendered when faced with military action, many within the DOD, including Rumsfeld and United States Central Command General Tommy Franks, decided it was in the best interest of all to hand these prisoners over to their respective countries. Additionally, it was determined that maintaining a large holding facility was, at the time, unrealistic. Instead, the use of many facilities such as Abu Ghraib would be utilized to house prisoners of interest prior to handing them over, and Rumsfeld defended the Bush administration's decision to detain enemy combatants. Because of this, critics, including members of the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee, would hold Rumsfeld responsible for the ensuing Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal. Rumsfeld himself said: \"These events occurred on my watch as Secretary of Defense. I am accountable for them.\" He offered his resignation to President Bush in the wake of the scandal, but it was not accepted.\n\nIn a memo read by Rumsfeld detailing how Guantanamo interrogators would induce stress in prisoners by forcing them to remain standing in one position for a maximum of four hours, Rumsfeld scrawled a handwritten note on the memo reading: \"I stand for 8–10 hours a day. Why is standing [by prisoners] limited to 4 hours? D.R.\".\n\nVarious organizations, such as Human Rights Watch, have called for investigations of Rumsfeld regarding his involvement in managing the Iraq War and his support of the Bush administration's policies of \"enhanced interrogation techniques\", which are widely regarded as torture. Scholars have argued that Rumsfeld \"might be held criminally responsible if [he] would be prosecuted by the ICC.\" In 2005 the ACLU and Human Rights First filed a lawsuit against Rumsfeld and other top government officials, \"on behalf of eight men who they say were subjected to torture and abuse by U.S. forces under the command of Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld\". In 2005, a suit was filed against Rumsfeld by several human rights organizations for allegedly violating U.S. and international law that prohibits \"torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment\". Donald Vance and Nathan Ertel filed suit against the U.S. government and Rumsfeld on similar grounds, alleging that they were tortured and their rights of \"habeas corpus\" were violated. In 2007, U.S. District Judge Thomas F. Hogan ruled that Rumsfeld could not \"be held personally responsible for actions taken in connection with his government job\". The ACLU tried to revive the case in 2011 with no success.\n\nEight retired generals and admirals called for Rumsfeld to resign in early 2006 in what was called the \"Generals Revolt\", accusing him of \"abysmal\" military planning and lack of strategic competence. Commentator Pat Buchanan reported at the time that \"Washington Post\" columnist David Ignatius, who traveled often to Iraq and supported the war, said the generals \"mirror the views of 75 percent of the officers in the field, and probably more\". Rumsfeld rebuffed these criticisms, stating that \"out of thousands and thousands of admirals and generals, if every time two or three people disagreed we changed the secretary of defense of the United States, it would be like a merry-go-round.\" Bush defended his secretary throughout, and responded by stating that Rumsfeld is \"exactly what is needed\".\nOn November 1, 2006, Bush stated he would stand by Rumsfeld as defense secretary for the length of his term as president. Rumsfeld wrote a resignation letter dated November 6, and, per the stamp on the letter, Bush saw it on Election Day, November 7. In the elections, the House and the Senate shifted to Democratic control. After the elections, on November 8, Bush announced Rumsfeld would resign his position as Secretary of Defense. Many Republicans were unhappy with the delay, believing they would have won more votes if voters had known Rumsfeld was resigning.\n\nBush nominated Robert Gates to succeed Rumsfeld. On December 18, 2006, Rumsfeld's resignation took effect.\n\nIn the months after his resignation, Rumsfeld toured the New York publishing houses in preparation for a potential memoir. After receiving what one industry source labeled \"big bids\", he reached an agreement with the Penguin Group to publish the book under its Sentinel HC imprint.\n\nIn 2007, Rumsfeld established The Rumsfeld Foundation, which focuses on encouraging public service in the United States and supporting the growth of free political and free economic systems abroad. The educational foundation provides fellowships to talented individuals from the private sector who want to serve for some time in government. Rumsfeld personally financed the foundation. As of January 2014, the foundation has sponsored over 90 fellows from Central Asia, provided over $1.2 million in tuition and stipend support for graduate students, awarded over $3 million in microfinance grants, and donated over $2.4 million to charities for veterans affairs.\n\nRumsfeld declined to accept an advance for the publication of his memoir, and has said he is donating all proceeds from the work to veterans groups. His book, entitled \"\", was released on February 8, 2011.\n\nIn conjunction with the publication of \"Known and Unknown\", Rumsfeld established \"The Rumsfeld Papers\", a website with documents \"related to the endnotes\" of the book and his service during the George W. Bush administration; during the months that followed the book's publication, the website was expanded to include over 4,000 documents from his archive. As of June 2011, the topics include his Congressional voting record, the Nixon administration, documents and memos of meetings while he was part of the Ford, Reagan, and George W. Bush administrations, private sector documents, and NATO documents, among others.\n\nRumsfeld was awarded the \"Defender of the Constitution Award\" at the 2011 Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington, D.C., on February 10, 2011.\n\nAfter his retirement from government, Rumsfeld criticized former fellow Cabinet member Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State in his memoir, asserting that she was basically unfit for office. In 2011 she responded, saying that Rumsfeld \"doesn't know what he's talking about. The reader may imagine what can be correct about the conflicted matter.\"\n\nIn February 2011, Rumsfeld endorsed the repeal of the military's \"Don't ask, don't tell\" policy, saying that allowing gays and lesbians to openly serve \"is an idea whose time has come\".\n\nRumsfeld was the subject of the 2013 Errol Morris documentary \"The Unknown Known\", the title a reference to his response to a question at a February 2002 press conference. In the film Rumsfeld \"discusses his career in Washington D.C. from his days as a congressman in the early 1960s to planning the invasion of Iraq in 2003\".\n\nIn January 2016, in partnership with the literary and creative agency Javelin which handled design and development, Rumsfeld released a mobile app game of solitaire called \"Churchill Solitaire\", emulating a variant of the card game as played by Winston Churchill. Rumsfeld and the Churchill family said that profits from the game would be donated to charity.\n\nDuring the four elections during which he ran to represent Illinois's 13th congressional district, Rumsfeld received shares of the popular vote that ranged from 58% (in 1964) to 76% (in 1966). In 1975 and 2001, Rumsfeld was overwhelmingly confirmed by the U.S. Senate after Presidents Gerald Ford and George W. Bush, respectively, appointed him as U.S. Secretary of Defense.\n\nRumsfeld has been awarded 11 honorary degrees. Following his years as CEO, president, and later chairman of G. D. Searle & Company, he was recognized as Outstanding CEO in the pharmaceutical industry by the Wall Street Transcript (1980) and Financial World (1981).\n\nSome of his other awards include:\nBULLET::::- All Navy Wrestling Champion (1956)\nBULLET::::- The Presidential Medal of Freedom (with Distinction) by President Ford (1977)\nBULLET::::- George C. Marshall Medal by the Association of the U.S. Army (1984)\nBULLET::::- Woodrow Wilson Medal by Princeton University (1985)\nBULLET::::- Dwight D. Eisenhower Medal (1993)\nBULLET::::- Lone Sailor Award by the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation (2002)\nBULLET::::- Statesmanship Award by the United States Association of Former Members of Congress (2003)\nBULLET::::- Ronald Reagan Freedom Award (2003)\nBULLET::::- James H. Doolittle Award by the Hudson Institute (2003)\nBULLET::::- Gerald R. Ford Medal presented by President Ford and the Ford Foundation (2004)\nBULLET::::- Distinguished Eagle Scout Award by the Boy Scouts of America\nBULLET::::- Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Poland (2005)\nBULLET::::- Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor (2004) for his appearance on Fahrenheit 9/11\nBULLET::::- Union League of Philadelphia Gold Medal for Citizenship (2006)\nBULLET::::- Claremont Institute Statesmanship Award (2007)\nBULLET::::- Victory of Freedom Award from the Richard Nixon Foundation (2010)\nBULLET::::- Order of Anthony Wayne from Valley Forge Military Academy\nBULLET::::- Special Grand Cordon of the Order of Brilliant Star (2011, Republic of China)\nBULLET::::- National Flag award from Albania's President Bujar Nishani (2013)\nBULLET::::- Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun (2015)\n\nSecretary of State Henry Kissinger described Rumsfeld as \"the most ruthless man\" he knew.\n\nBULLET::::- Center for Security Policy: Longtime associate; winner of the CSP's 1998 \"Keeper of the Flame\" award (5)\nBULLET::::- Hoover Institution: former member, board of trustees\nBULLET::::- Project for the New American Century: Signed PNAC's founding statement of principles as well as two policy letters on Iraq\nBULLET::::- Freedom House: former board member\nBULLET::::- RAND Corporation: former chairman\nBULLET::::- Committee for the Free World: former chairman\nBULLET::::- National Park Foundation: former member\nBULLET::::- Eisenhower Exchange Fellowships, Inc.: former chairman\nBULLET::::- Bohemian Club: member\nBULLET::::- Alfalfa Club: member\nBULLET::::- National Academy of Public Administration: Member\n\nBULLET::::- Secretary of Defense (2001–06)\nBULLET::::- U.S. Commission to Assess National Security Space Management and Organization: chairman (2000)\nBULLET::::- U.S. Trade Deficit Reviews Commission: member (1999–2000)\nBULLET::::- Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States: chairman (1998)\nBULLET::::- National Commission on Public Service: member (1987–1990)\nBULLET::::- National Economic Commission: member (1988–1989)\nBULLET::::- President Reagan's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control: member (1982–1986)\nBULLET::::- U.S. Joint Advisory Commission on U.S./Japan Relations: member (1983–1984)\nBULLET::::- Presidential Envoy to the Middle East, Reagan Administration (1983–1984)\nBULLET::::- Presidential Envoy on the Law of the Sea Treaty, Reagan Administration (1982–1983)\nBULLET::::- Secretary of Defense (1975–77)\nBULLET::::- White House Chief of Staff in Ford administration (1974–75)\nBULLET::::- U.S. Ambassador to NATO (1973–74)\nBULLET::::- U.S. Congress: Representative from Illinois (1962–69)\nBULLET::::- United States Navy: Various posts, including aviator (1954–57); reserves (1957–1975) Retired as a Navy Captain (1989)\n\nBULLET::::- Eastern Air Lines: former director – The annual reports of Eastern Air Lines discloses that Donald Rumsfeld was a member of Eastern Air Lines board of directors.\nBULLET::::- Gilead Sciences: Joined Gilead as a director in 1988, chairman (1997–2001)\nBULLET::::- General Instrument Corporation: chairman and CEO (1990–93)\nBULLET::::- G.D. Searle pharmaceutical company: CEO/chairman/president (1977–1985)\nBULLET::::- Gulfstream Aerospace: former director\nBULLET::::- Tribune Company: former director\nBULLET::::- Metricom, Inc.: former director\nBULLET::::- Sears, Roebuck and Co.: former director\nBULLET::::- ABB AB: former director\nBULLET::::- Kellogg Company: director 1985–199? while Carlos Gutierrez (x Cuba 1960) was president, CEO and chairman of Kellogg until named Secretary of Commerce under Bush from 2005.\nBULLET::::- RAND Corporation: chairman of the board from 1981 to 1986; 1995–1996\nBULLET::::- Amylin Pharmaceuticals: former director\n\nBULLET::::- Princeton University: A.B. (1954)\n\nBULLET::::- Speech given March 3, 1998 in Washington, D.C.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Agathidium rumsfeldi\"\nBULLET::::- Early association with liberal activist Allard Lowenstein\nBULLET::::- There are known knowns\nBULLET::::- \"\" by Donald Rumsfeld (2011)\n\nNotes\nBibliography\nBULLET::::- \"Rumsfeld: A Personal Portrait\" by Midge Decter (Regan Books, 2003)\n\nWorks\nBULLET::::- U.S. Secretary of Defense official transcripts archive\nBULLET::::- Rumsfeld's Rules advice on government, business and life, January 29, 2001\nBULLET::::- Donald Rumsfeld's Project Syndicate op/eds\nBULLET::::- Churchill Solitaire, an iOS and Android adaptation of Churchill's variant of Solitaire\n\nGovernment service\nBULLET::::- White House Biography\nBULLET::::- Department of Defense Biography\nBULLET::::- SENATE ARMED SERVICES COMMITTEE INQUIRY INTO THE TREATMENT OF DETAINEES IN U.S. CUSTODY United States Senate Committee on Armed Services, 2008\n\nDocumentary video\nBULLET::::- Rumsfeld's War PBS Frontline, October 2004\nBULLET::::- The Unknown Known – Interview with Rumsfeld by Academy Award-winning documentarian Errol Morris, December 2013\nBULLET::::- Video clip of Rumsfeld (as special U.S. envoy to Middle East) meeting Hussein\n\nArticles profiling Rumsfeld\n\nBULLET::::- The Life and Times of Donald Rumsfeld, PBS\nBULLET::::- Washington Post – Rumsfeld's War archives 2001–04\nBULLET::::- Rumsfeld revealed, Vivienne Heines. \"Air Force Times\", March 3, 2003\nBULLET::::- Close-Up: Young Rumsfeld, James Mann, The Atlantic Monthly, November 2003\nBULLET::::- The Donald Rumsfeld Library of Quotations, BBC Radio 4\nBULLET::::- Biographer Andrew Cockburn on Rumsfeld at London Frontline Club May 2007.\nBULLET::::- The Don: A Look at Former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, Carol Felsenthal, Chicago magazine.\nBULLET::::- Lunch with the FT: Donald Rumsfeld by Gideon Rachman, Financial Times, February 11, 2011\n"}
{"id": "8630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8630", "title": "Diego Garcia", "text": "Diego Garcia\n\nDiego Garcia is an island of the British Indian Ocean Territory, an overseas territory of the United Kingdom. It is a militarised atoll just south of the equator in the central Indian Ocean, and the largest of 60 small islands comprising the Chagos Archipelago. It was first discovered by Europeans and named by the Portuguese, settled by the French in the 1790s and transferred to British rule after the Napoleonic Wars. It was one of the \"Dependencies\" of the British Colony of Mauritius until the Chagos Islands were detached for inclusion in the newly created British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) in 1965.\n\nIn 1966, the population of the island was 924. These people were employed as contract farm workers on coconut plantations owned by the Chagos-Agalega company. Although it was common for local plantation managers to allow pensioners and the disabled to remain in the islands and continue to receive housing and rations in exchange for light work, children after the age of 12 were required to work. In 1964, only 3 of a population of 963 were unemployed. In April 1967, the BIOT Administration bought out Chagos-Agalega for £600,000, thus becoming the sole property owner in the BIOT. The Crown immediately leased back the properties to Chagos-Agalega but the company terminated the lease at the end of 1967.\n\nBetween 1968 and 1973, the now unemployed farm workers were forcibly removed from Diego Garcia by the UK Government so a joint US/UK military base could be established on the island. Many were deported to Mauritius and the Seychelles, following which the United States built a large naval and military base, which has been in continuous operation since then. , Diego Garcia is the only inhabited island of the BIOT; the population is composed of military personnel and supporting contractors. It is one of two critical US bomber bases in the Asia Pacific region, along with Andersen Air Force Base, Guam, Pacific Ocean.\n\nThe atoll is located east of Tanzania's coast, south-southwest of the southern tip of India (at Kanyakumari), and west-northwest of the west coast of Australia (at Cape Range National Park, Western Australia). Diego Garcia lies at the southernmost tip of the Chagos-Laccadive Ridge, a vast underwater mountain range with peaks consisting of coral reefs, atolls, and islands comprising Lakshadweep, the Maldives, and the Chagos Archipelago. Local time is year-round (DST is not observed).\n\nOn 23 June 2017, the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) voted in favour of referring the territorial dispute between Mauritius and the UK to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in order to clarify the legal status of the Chagos Islands archipelago in the Indian Ocean. The motion was approved by a majority vote with 94 voting for and 15 against.\n\nIn February 2019, the International Court of Justice in The Hague ruled that the United Kingdom must transfer the islands to Mauritius as they were not legally separated from the latter in 1965. The ruling is not legally binding.\n\nIn May 2019, the United Nations General Assembly affirmed the decision of the International Court of Justice and demanded that the United Kingdom withdraw its colonial administration from the Islands and cooperate with Mauritius to facilitate the resettlement of Mauritian nationals in the archipelago.\n\nIn a written statement the U.S. government said that neither the Americans or the British have any plans to discontinue use of the military base on Diego Garcia. The statement said in a footnote:\n\n\"In 2016, there were discussions between the United Kingdom and the United States concerning the continuing importance of the joint base. Neither party gave notice to terminate and the agreement remains in force until 2036\".\n\nAccording to Southern Maldivian oral tradition, traders and fishermen were occasionally lost at sea and got stranded on one of the islands of the Chagos. Eventually, they were rescued and brought back home. However, the different atolls of the Chagos have no individual names in the Maldivian oral tradition.\n\nNothing is known of pre-European contact history of Diego Garcia. Speculations include visits during the Austronesian diaspora around 700 AD, as some say the old Maldivian name for the islands originated from Malagasy. Arabs, who reached Lakshadweep and Maldives around 900 AD, may have visited the Chagos.\n\nThe uninhabited islands are asserted to have been discovered by the Portuguese navigator, explorer, and diplomat Pedro Mascarenhas in 1512, first named as Dom Garcia, in honour of his patron, Dom Garcia de Noronha when he was detached from the Portuguese India Armadas during his voyage of 1512–1513. Another Portuguese expedition with a Spanish explorer of Andalusian origin, Diego García de Moguer, rediscovered the island in 1544 and named it after himself. Garcia de Moguer died the same year on the return trip to Portugal in the Indian Ocean, off the South African coast. The misnomer \"Diego\" could have been made unwittingly by the British ever since, as they copied the Portuguese maps. It is assumed that the island was named after one of its first two discoverers—the one by the name of Garcia, the other with name Diego. Also, a cacography of the saying \"Deo Gracias\" (\"Thank God\") is eligible for the attribution of the atoll. Although the Cantino planisphere (1504) and the Ruysch map (1507) clearly delineate the Maldive Islands, giving them the same names, they do not show any islands to the south which can be identified as the Chagos archipelago.\nThe Sebastian Cabot map (Antwerp 1544) shows a number of islands to the south which may be the Mascarene Islands. The first map which identifies and names \"\"Los Chagos\"\" (in about the right position) is that of Pierre Desceliers (Dieppe 1550), although Diego Garcia is not named. An island called \"Don Garcia\" appears on the \"Theatrum Orbis Terrarum\" of Abraham Ortelius (Antwerp 1570), together with \"Dos Compagnos\", slightly to the north. It may be the case that \"Don Garcia\" was named after Garcia de Noronha, although no evidence exists to support this. The island is also labelled \"Don Garcia\" on Mercator's \"Nova et Aucta Orbis Terrae Descriptio ad Usum Navigatium Emendate\" (Duisburg 1569). However, on the \"Vera Totius Expeditionis Nauticae Description\" of Jodocus Hondius (London 1589), \"Don Garcia\" mysteriously changes its name to \"I. de Dio Gratia\", while the \"I. de Chagues\" appears close by.\n\nThe first map to delineate the island under its present name, Diego Garcia, is the \"World Map\" of Edward Wright (London 1599), possibly as a result of misreading Dio (or simply \"D.\") as Diego, and Gratia as Garcia. The \"Nova Totius Terrarum Orbis Geographica\" of Hendrik Hondius II (Antwerp 1630) repeats Wright's use of the name, which is then proliferated on all subsequent Dutch maps of the period, and to the present day.\n\nDiego Garcia and the rest of the Chagos islands were uninhabited until the late 18th century. In 1778, the French Governor of Mauritius granted Monsieur Dupuit de la Faye the island of Diego Garcia, and evidence exists of temporary French visits to collect coconuts and fish. Several Frenchmen living in \"a dozen huts\" abandoned Diego Garcia when the British East India Company attempted to establish a settlement there in April 1786. The supplies of the 275 settlers were overwhelmed by 250 survivors of the wreck of the British East Indian Ship \"Atlas\" in May, and the colony failed in October. Following the departure of the British, the French colony of Mauritius began marooning lepers on Diego Garcia, and in 1793, the French established a coconut plantation using slave labour, which also exported cordage made from coconut fibre, and sea cucumbers, known as a delicacy in the Orient.\n\nDiego Garcia became a colony of the UK after the Napoleonic Wars as part of the Treaty of Paris (1814), and from 1814 to 1965, it was administered from Mauritius. On Diego Garcia, the main plantations were located at East Point, the main settlement on the eastern rim of the atoll; Minni Minni, north of East Point, and Pointe Marianne, on the western rim, all located on the lagoon side of the atoll rim. The workers lived at these locations, and at villages scattered around the island.\n\nFrom 1881 until 1888, Diego Garcia was the location of two coaling stations for steamships crossing the Indian Ocean.\n\nIn 1882, the French-financed, Mauritian-based Société Huilière de Diego et de Peros (the \"Oilmaking Company of Diego and Peros\"), consolidated all the plantations in the Chagos under its control.\n\nIn 1914, the island was visited by the German light cruiser SMS \"Emden\" halfway through its commerce-raiding cruise during the early months of World War I.\n\nIn 1942, the British opened RAF Station Diego Garcia and established an advanced flying boat unit at the East Point Plantation, staffed and equipped by No 205 and No 240 Squadrons, then stationed on Ceylon. Both Catalina and Sunderland aircraft were flown during the course of World War II in search of Japanese and German submarines and surface raiders. At Cannon Point, two 6-inch naval guns were installed by a Royal Marines detachment. In February 1942, the mission was to protect the small Royal Navy base and Royal Air Force station located on the island from Japanese attack. They were later manned by Mauritian and Indian Coastal Artillery troops. Following the conclusion of hostilities, the station was closed on 30 April 1946.\n\nIn 1962, the Chagos Agalega Company of the British colony of Seychelles purchased the Société Huilière de Diego et Peros and moved company headquarters to Seychelles.\n\nIn the early 1960s, the UK was withdrawing its military presence from the Indian Ocean, not including the airfield at RAF Gan to the north of Diego Garcia in the Maldives (which remained open until 1976), and agreed to permit the United States to establish a naval communication station on one of its island territories there. The United States requested an unpopulated island belonging to the UK to avoid political difficulties with newly independent countries, and ultimately the UK and United States agreed that Diego Garcia was a suitable location.\n\nTo accomplish the UK–US mutual defence strategy, in November 1965, the UK purchased the Chagos Archipelago, which includes Diego Garcia, from the then self-governing colony of Mauritius for £3 million to create the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT), with the intent of ultimately closing the plantations to provide the uninhabited British territory from which the United States would conduct its military activities in the region.\n\nIn April 1966, the British government bought the entire assets of the Chagos Agalega Company in the BIOT for £600,000 and administered them as a government enterprise while awaiting United States funding of the proposed facilities, with an interim objective of paying for the administrative expenses of the new territory. However, the plantations, both under their previous private ownership and under government administration, proved consistently unprofitable due to the introduction of new oils and lubricants in the international marketplace, and the establishment of vast coconut plantations in the East Indies and the Philippines.\n\nOn 30 December 1966, the United States and the UK executed an agreement through an Exchange of Notes which permitted the United States to use the BIOT for defence purposes for 50 years until December 2016, followed by a 20-year extension (to 2036) as long as neither party gave notice of termination in a two-year window (December 2014 – December 2016) and the UK may decide on what additional terms to extend the agreement. No monetary payment was made from the United States to the UK as part of this agreement or any subsequent amendment. Rather, the United Kingdom received a US$14-million discount from the United States on the acquisition of submarine-launched Polaris missiles per a now-declassified addendum to the 1966 agreement.\n\nTo the United States, Diego Garcia was a prime territory for setting up a foreign military base. According to Stuart Barber—a civilian working for the US Navy at the Pentagon—Diego Garcia was located far away from any potential threats, it was low in a native population and it was an island that was not sought after by other countries as it lacked economic interest. To Barber, Diego Garcia and other acquired islands would play a key role in maintaining US dominance. Here Barber designed the strategic island concept, where the US would obtain as many less populated islands as possible for military purposes. According to Barber, this was the only way to ensure security for a foreign base. Diego Garcia is often referred to as \"Fantasy Island\" for its seclusion.\nThe key component in obtaining Diego Garcia was the perceived lack of a native population on the island. Uninhabited until the late 18th century, Diego Garcia had no indigenous population. Its only inhabitants were European overseers who managed the coconut plantations for their absentee landowners and contract workers mostly of African, Indian, and Malay ancestry, known as Chagossians, who had lived and worked on the plantations for several generations. Prior to setting up a military base, the United States government was informed by the British government—which owned the island—that Diego Garcia had a population of hundreds. The eventual number of Chagossians numbered around 1,000.\n\nRegardless of the size of the population, the Chagossians had to be removed from the island before the base could be constructed. In 1968, the first tactics were implemented to decrease the population of Diego Garcia. Those who left the island—either for vacation or medical purposes—were not allowed to return, and those who stayed could obtain only restricted food and medical supplies. This tactic was in hope that those that stayed would leave \"willingly\". One of the tactics used was that of killing Chagossian pets.\n\nIn March 1971, United States Naval construction battalions, (Seabees), arrived on Diego Garcia to begin the construction of the communications station and an airfield. To satisfy the terms of an agreement between the UK and the United States for an uninhabited island, the plantation on Diego Garcia was closed in October of that year. The plantation workers and their families were relocated to the plantations on Peros Bahnos and Salomon atolls to the northwest. The by-then-independent Mauritian government refused to accept the islanders without payment, and in 1974, the UK gave the Mauritian government an additional £650,000 to resettle the islanders. Those who still remained on the island of Diego Garcia between 1971 and 1973 were forced onto cargo ships that were heading to Mauritius and the Seychelles.\n\nBy 1973, construction of the Naval Communications Station (NAVCOMMSTA) was completed. In the early 1970s, setbacks to United States military capabilities in the region including the fall of Saigon, victory of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, the closure of the Peshawar Air Station listening post in Pakistan and Kagnew Station in Eritrea, the \"Mayaguez\" incident, and the build-up of Soviet naval presence in Aden and a Soviet airbase at Berbera, Somalia, caused the United States to request, and the UK to approve, permission to build a fleet anchorage and enlarged airfield on Diego Garcia, and the Seabees doubled the number of workers constructing these facilities.\n\nFollowing the fall of the Shah of Iran and the Iran Hostage Crisis in 1979–1980, the West became concerned with ensuring the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf through the Strait of Hormuz, and the United States received permission for a $400-million expansion of the military facilities on Diego Garcia consisting of two parallel runways, expansive parking aprons for heavy bombers, 20 new anchorages in the lagoon, a deep-water pier, port facilities for the largest naval vessels in the American or British fleet, aircraft hangars, maintenance buildings and an air terminal, a fuel storage area, and billeting and messing facilities for thousands of sailors and support personnel.\n\nOn 1 April 2010, the Chagos Marine Protected Area (MPA) was declared to cover the waters around the Chagos Archipelago. However, Mauritius objected, stating this was contrary to its legal rights, and on 18 March 2015, the Permanent Court of Arbitration ruled that the Chagos Marine Protected Area was illegal under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as Mauritius had legally binding rights to fish in the waters surrounding the Chagos Archipelago, to an eventual return of the Chagos Archipelago, and to the preservation of any minerals or oil discovered in or near the Chagos Archipelago prior to its return.\n\nDiego Garcia had no permanent inhabitants when discovered by the Spanish explorer Diego García de Moguer in the 16th century, then in the service of Portugal, and this remained the case until it was settled as a French colony in 1793.\n\nMost inhabitants of Diego Garcia through the period 1793–1971 were plantation workers, but also included Franco-Mauritian managers, Indo-Mauritian administrators, Mauritian and Seychellois contract employees, and in the late 19th century, Chinese and Somali employees.\n\nA distinct Creole culture called the Ilois, which means \"islanders\" in French Creole, evolved from these workers. The Ilois, now called Chagos Islanders or Chagossians since the late-1990s, were descended primarily from slaves brought to the island from Madagascar by the French between 1793 and 1810, and Malay slaves from the slave market on Pulo Nyas, an island off the northwest coast of Sumatra, from around 1820 until the slave trade ended following the Slavery Abolition Act of 1833. The Ilois also evolved a French-based Creole dialect now called Chagossian Creole.\n\nThroughout their recorded history, the plantations of the Chagos Archipelago had a population of approximately 1,000 individuals, about two-thirds of whom lived on Diego Garcia. A peak population of 1,142 on all islands was recorded in 1953.\n\nThe primary industry throughout the island's colonial period consisted of coconut plantations producing copra and/or coconut oil, until closure of the plantations and relocation of the inhabitants in October 1971. For a brief period in the 1880s, it served as a coaling station for steamships transiting the Indian Ocean from the Suez Canal to Australia.\n\nAll the inhabitants of Diego Garcia were forcibly resettled to other islands in the Chagos Archipelago, Mauritius or Seychelles by 1971 to satisfy the requirements of a UK/United States Exchange of Notes signed in 1966 to depopulate the island when the United States constructed a base upon it. No current agreement exists on how many of the evacuees met the criteria to be an Ilois, and thus be an indigenous person at the time of their removal, but the UK and Mauritian governments agreed in 1972 that 426 families, numbering 1,151 individuals, were due compensation payments as exiled Ilois. The total number of people certified as Ilois by the Mauritian Government's Ilois Trust Fund Board in 1982 was 1,579.\n\nFifteen years after the last expulsion, the Chagossians received a small amount of compensation from the British, totalling $6,000 per person; some Chagossians received nothing. The British expulsion action remains in litigation . Today, Chagossians remain highly impoverished and are living as \"marginalized\" outsiders on the island of Mauritius and the Seychelles.\n\nBetween 1971 and 2001, the only residents on Diego Garcia were UK and United States military personnel and civilian employees of those countries. These included contract employees from the Philippines and Mauritius, including some Ilois. During combat operations from the atoll against Afghanistan (2001–2006) and Iraq (2003–2006), a number of allied militaries were based on the island including Australian, Japanese, and the Republic of Korea. According to David Vine, \"Today, at any given time, 3,000 to 5,000 U.S. troops and civilian support staff live on the island.\" The inhabitants today do not rely on the island and the surrounding waters for sustenance. Although some recreational fishing for consumption is permitted, all other food is shipped in by sea or air.\n\nIn 2004, US Navy recruitment literature described Diego Garcia as being one of the world's best-kept secrets, boasting great recreational facilities, exquisite natural beauty, and outstanding living conditions.\n\nDiego Garcia is the only inhabited island in the British Indian Ocean Territory, an overseas territory of the United Kingdom, usually abbreviated as \"BIOT\". The Government of the BIOT consists of a commissioner appointed by the Queen. The commissioner is assisted by an administrator and small staff, and is based in London and is resident in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.\n\nOriginally colonised by the French, Diego Garcia was ceded, along with the rest of the Chagos Archipelago, to the United Kingdom in the Treaty of Paris (1814) at the conclusion of a portion of the Napoleonic Wars. Diego Garcia and the Chagos Archipelago were administered by the colonial government on the island of Mauritius until 1965, when the UK purchased them from the self-governing colony of Mauritius for £3 million, and declared them to be a separate British Overseas Territory. The BIOT administration was moved to Seychelles following the independence of Mauritius in 1968 until the independence of Seychelles in 1976, and to a desk in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London since.\n\nUK represents the territory internationally. A local government as normally envisioned does not exist. Rather, the administration is represented in the territory by the officer commanding British Forces on Diego Garcia, the \"Brit rep\". Laws and regulations are promulgated by the commissioner and enforced in the BIOT by Brit rep.\n\nOf major concern to the BIOT administration is the relationship with the United States military forces resident on Diego Garcia. An annual meeting called \"The Pol-Mil Talks\" (for \"political-military\") of all concerned is held at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London to resolve pertinent issues. These resolutions are formalised by an \"Exchange of Notes\", or, since 2001, an \"Exchange of Letters\".\n\nNeither the US nor the UK recognises Diego Garcia as being subject to the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty, which lists BIOT as covered by the treaty.<ref name=\"10.1093/jel/eqn034\"></ref> It is not publicly known whether nuclear weapons have ever been stored on the island. Noam Chomsky and Peter Sand claim the US and UK stance is blocking the full implementation of the treaty.\n\nThere are two transnational political issues which affect Diego Garcia and the BIOT, through the British government.\n\nBULLET::::- First, the island nation of Mauritius claims the Chagos Archipelago (which is coterminous with the BIOT), including Diego Garcia. A subsidiary issue is the Mauritian opposition to the UK Government's declaration of 1 April 2010 that the BIOT is a marine protected area with fishing and extractive industry (including oil and gas exploration) prohibited.\nBULLET::::- Second, the issue of compensation and repatriation of the former inhabitants, exiled since 1973, continues in litigation and as of August 2010 had been submitted to the European Court of Human Rights by a group of former residents. Some groups allege that Diego Garcia and its territorial waters out to have been restricted from public access without permission of the BIOT Government since 1971.\n\nIn 2015, U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell's former chief of staff, Lawrence Wilkerson, said Diego Garcia was used by the CIA for \"nefarious activities\". He said that he had heard from three US intelligence sources that Diego Garcia was used as \"a transit site where people were temporarily housed, let us say, and interrogated from time to time\" and, \"What I heard was more along the lines of using it as a transit location when perhaps other places were full or other places were deemed too dangerous or insecure, or unavailable at the moment\".\n\nIn June 2004, the British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw stated that United States authorities had repeatedly assured him that no detainees had passed in transit through Diego Garcia or were disembarked there.\n\nDiego Garcia was rumoured to have been one of the locations of the CIA's black sites in 2005. Khalid Sheikh Mohammed is one of the \"high-value detainees\" suspected to have been held in Diego Garcia. In October 2007, the Foreign Affairs Select Committee of the British Parliament announced that it would launch an investigation of continued allegations of a prison camp on Diego Garcia, which it claimed were twice confirmed by comments made by retired United States Army General Barry McCaffrey. On 31 July 2008, an unnamed former White House official alleged that the United States had imprisoned and interrogated at least one suspect on Diego Garcia during 2002 and possibly 2003.\n\nManfred Nowak, one of five of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture, says that credible evidence exists supporting allegations that ships serving as black sites have used Diego Garcia as a base. The human rights group Reprieve alleges that United States-operated ships moored outside the territorial waters of Diego Garcia were used to incarcerate and torture detainees.\n\nOn 9 December 2014, the United States Senate Intelligence Committee published a 600-page unclassified summary of its 6,700-page secret report on the CIA's abuse of its secret prisoners.\nDavid Jones, writing in the \"Daily Mail\", expressed surprise that Diego Garcia went entirely unmentioned on every page of the unclassified summary, and speculated that pressure from UK security agencies caused the portions of the report that covered CIA prisoner facilities on the island to remain classified.\n\nSeveral groups claim that the military base on Diego Garcia has been used by the United States government for transport of prisoners involved in the controversial extraordinary rendition program, an allegation formally reported to the Council of Europe in June 2007. On 21 February 2008, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband admitted that two United States extraordinary rendition flights refuelled on Diego Garcia in 2002, and was \"very sorry\" that earlier denials were having to be corrected.\n\nAccording to Wikileaks CableGate documents (reference ID \"09LONDON1156\"), in a calculated move planned in 2009, the UK proposed that the BIOT become a \"marine reserve\" with the aim of preventing the former inhabitants from returning to the islands. A summary of the diplomatic cable is as follows:\n\nNo species of plants, birds, amphibians, reptiles, molluscs, crustaceans, or mammals is endemic on Diego Garcia or in the surrounding waters. Several endemic fish and aquatic invertebrates are present, though. All plants, wildlife, and aquatic species are protected to one degree or another. In addition, much of the lagoon waters are protected wetlands as a designated Ramsar site, and large parts of the island are nature preserves.\n\nIn 2004, the UK applied for, and received, Ramsar site wetlands conservation status for the lagoon and other waters of Diego Garcia.\n\nDiego Garcia is the largest land mass in the Chagos Archipelago (which includes Peros Banhos, the Salomon Islands, the Three Brothers, the Egmont Islands, and the Great Chagos Bank), being an atoll occupying approximately , of which is dry land. The continuous portion of the atoll rim stretches from one end to the other, enclosing a lagoon long and up to wide, with a pass opening at the north. Three small islands are located in the pass.\n\nThe island consists of the largest continuous dryland rim of all atolls in the world. The dryland rim varies in width from a few hundred metres to 2.4 km. Typical of coral atolls, it has a maximum elevation on some dunes on the ocean side of the rim of 9 m (30 ft) above mean low water. The rim nearly encloses a lagoon about long and up to wide. The atoll forms a nearly complete rim of land around a lagoon, enclosing 90% of its perimeter, with an opening only in the north. The main island is the largest of about 60 islands which form the Chagos Archipelago. Besides the main island, three small islets are at the mouth of the lagoon: West Island (), Middle Island () and East Island (). A fourth, Anniversary Island, 1 km (1,100 yards) southwest of Middle Island, appears as just a sand bar on satellite images. Both Middle Island and Anniversary Island are part of the Spur Reef complex.\n\nThe total area of the atoll is about . The lagoon area is roughly with depths ranging down to about . The total land area (excluding peripheral reefs) is around . The coral reef surrounding the seaward side of the atoll is generally broad, flat, and shallow around below mean sea level in most locations and varying from in width. This fringing seaward reef shelf comprises an area around . At the outer edge of the reef shelf, the bottom slopes very steeply into deep water, at some locations dropping to more than within of the shore.\n\nIn the lagoon, numerous coral heads present hazards to navigation. The shallow reef shelf surrounding the island on the ocean side offers no ocean-side anchorage. The channel and anchorage areas in the northern half of the lagoon are dredged, along with the pre-1971 ship turning basin. Significant saltwater wetlands called barachois exist in the southern half of the lagoon. These small lagoons off of the main lagoon are filled with seawater at high tide and dry at low tide. Scientific expeditions in 1996 and 2006 described the lagoon and surrounding waters of Diego Garcia, along with the rest of the Chagos Archipelago, as \"exceptionally unpolluted\" and \"pristine\".\n\nDiego Garcia is frequently subject to earthquakes caused by tectonic plate movement along the Carlsberg Ridge located just to the west of the island. One was recorded in 1812; one measuring 7.6 on the Richter Scale hit on 30 November 1983, at 23:46 local time and lasted 72 seconds, resulting in minor damage including wave damage to a 50-m stretch of the southern end of the island, and another on 2 December 2002, an earthquake measuring 4.6 on the Richter scale struck the island at 12:21 am.\n\nIn December 2004, a tsunami generated near Indonesia caused minor shoreline erosion on Barton Point (the northeast point of the atoll of Diego Garcia).\n\nDiego Garcia lies within the influence of the South Equatorial current year-round. The surface currents of the Indian Ocean also have a monsoonal regimen associated with the Asian Monsoonal wind regimen. Sea surface temperatures are in the range of year-round.\n\nDiego Garcia is the above-water rim of a coral atoll composed of Holocene coral rubble and sand to the depth of about , overlaying Pleistocene limestone deposited at the then-sea level on top of a seamount rising about from the floor of the Indian Ocean. The Holocene sediments are porous and completely saturated with sea water. Any rain falling on the above-water rim quickly percolates through the surface sand and encounters the salt water underneath. Diego Garcia is of sufficient width to minimise tidal fluctuations in the aquifer, and the rainfall (in excess of 102.5 inches/260 cm per year on average) is sufficient in amount and periodicity for the fresh water to form a series of convex, freshwater, Ghyben-Herzberg lenses floating on the heavier salt water in the saturated sediments.\n\nThe horizontal structure of each lens is influenced by variations in the type and porosity of the subsurface deposits, which on Diego Garcia are minor. At depth, the lens is globular; near the surface, it generally conforms to the shape of the island. When a Ghyben-Herzberg lens is fully formed, its floating nature will push a freshwater head above mean sea level, and if the island is wide enough, the depth of the lens below mean sea level will be 40 times the height of the water table above sea level. On Diego Garcia, this equates to a maximum depth of 20 m. However, the actual size and depth of each lens is dependent on the width and shape of the island at that point, the permeability of the aquifer, and the equilibrium between recharging rainfall and losses to evaporation to the atmosphere, transpiration by plants, tidal advection, and human use.\n\nIn the plantation period, shallow wells, supplemented by rainwater collected in cisterns, provided sufficient water for the pastoral lifestyle of the small population. On Diego Garcia today, the military base uses over 100 shallow \"horizontal\" wells to produce over 560,000 l per day from the \"Cantonment\" lens on the northwest arm of the island—sufficient water for western-style usage for a population of 3,500. This 3.7 km lens holds an estimated 19 million m of fresh water and has an average daily recharge from rainfall over 10,000 m, of which 40% remains in the lens and 60% is lost through evapotranspiration.\n\nExtracting fresh water from a lens for human consumption requires careful calculation of the sustainable yield of the lens by season because each lens is susceptible to corruption by saltwater intrusion caused by overuse or drought. In addition, overwash by tsunamis and tropical storms has corrupted lenses in the Maldives and several Pacific islands. Vertical wells can cause salt upcoming into the lens, and overextraction will reduce freshwater pressure resulting in lateral intrusion by seawater. Because the porosity of the surface soil results in virtually zero runoff, lenses are easily polluted by fecal waste, burials, and chemical spills. Corruption of a lens can take years to \"flush out\" and reform, depending on the ratio of recharge to losses.\n\nA few natural depressions on the atoll rim capture the abundant rainfall to form areas of freshwater wetlands. Two are of significance to island wildlife and to recharge their respective freshwater lenses. One of these is centred on the northwest point of the atoll; another is found near the Point Marianne Cemetery on the southeast end of the airfield. Other, smaller freshwater wetlands are found along the east side of the runway, and in the vicinity of the receiver antenna field on the northwest arm of the atoll.\n\nAlso, several man-made freshwater ponds resulted from excavations made during construction of the airfield and road on the western half of the atoll rim. These fill from rainfall and from extending into the Ghyben-Herzberg lenses found on this island.\n\nAll precipitation falls as rain, characterised by air mass-type showers. Annual rainfall averages , with the heaviest precipitation from September to April. January is the wettest month with of mean monthly precipitation, and August the driest month, averaging of mean monthly precipitation.\n\nThe surrounding sea surface temperature is the primary climatic control, and temperatures are generally uniform throughout the year, with an average maximum of by day during March and April, and from July to September. Diurnal variation is roughly , falling to the low by night. Humidity is high throughout the year. The almost constant breeze keeps conditions reasonably comfortable.\n\nFrom December through March, winds are generally westerly around . During April and May, winds are light and variable, ultimately backing to an east-southeasterly direction. From June through September, the influence of the Southeast trades is felt, with speeds of 10–15 knots. During October and November, winds again go through a period of light and variable conditions veering to a westerly direction with the onset of summer in the Southern Hemisphere.\n\nThunderstorm activity is generally noticed during the afternoon and evenings during the summer months (December through March) and when the Intertropical Convergence Zone is in the vicinity of the island.\n\nDiego Garcia is at minimum risk from tropical cyclones due to its proximity to the equator where the coriolis parameter required to organise circulation of the upper atmosphere is minimal. Low-intensity storms have hit the island, including one in 1901, which blew over 1,500 coconut trees; one on 16 September 1944, which caused the wreck of a Royal Air Force PBY Catalina; one in September 1990 which demolished the tent city then being constructed for United States Air Force bomber crews during Operation Desert Storm; and one on 22 July 2007, when winds exceeded and over of rain fell in 24 hours.\nThe island was somewhat affected by the tsunami caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. Service personnel on the western arm of the island reported only a minor increase in wave activity. The island was protected to a large degree by its favourable ocean topography. About east of the atoll lies the 650-km-long (400-mile) Chagos Trench, an underwater canyon plunging more than . The depth of the trench and its grade to the atoll's slope and shelf shore makes it more difficult for substantial tsunami waves to build before passing the atoll from the east. In addition, near-shore coral reefs and an algal platform may have dissipated much of the waves' impact. A biological survey conducted in early 2005 indicated erosional effects of the tsunami wave on Diego Garcia and other islands of the Chagos Archipelago. One stretch of shoreline was found to have been breached by the tsunami wave, representing about 10% of the eastern arm. A biological survey by the Chagos Conservation Trust reported that the resulting inundation additionally washed away shoreline shrubs and small to medium-sized coconut palms.\n\nThe first botanical observations of the island were made by Hume in 1883, when the coconut plantations had been in operation for a full century. Subsequent studies and collections during the plantation era were made in 1885, 1905, 1939, and 1967. Thus, very little of the nature of the precontact vegetation is known.\n\nThe 1967 survey, published by the Smithsonian is used as the most authoritative baseline for more recent research. These studies indicate the vegetation of the island may be changing rapidly. For example, J. M. W. Topp collected data annually between 1993 and 2003 and found that on the average three new plant species arrived each year, mainly on Diego Garcia. His research added fully a third more species to Stoddart. Topp and Martin Hamilton of Kew Gardens compiled the most recent checklist of vegetation in 2009.\nIn 1967, Stoddart described the land area of Diego Garcia as having a littoral hedge of \"Scaevola taccada\", while inland, \"Cocos nucifera\" (coconut) was the most dominant tree, covering most of the island. The substory was either managed and park-like, with understory less than 0.5 m in height, or consisted of what he called \"Cocos Bon-Dieu\" – an intermediate story of juvenile trees and a luxuriant ground layer of self-sown seedlings – causing those areas to be relatively impenetrable.\n\nAlso, areas of remnant tropical hardwood forest are at the sites of the plantation-era villages, as well as \"Casuarina equisetifolia\" (iron wood pines) woodlands.\n\nIn 1997, the United States Navy contracted a vegetation survey that identified about 280 species of terrestrial vascular plants on Diego Garcia. None of these was endemic, and another survey in 2005 identified just 36 species as \"native\", meaning arriving without the assistance of humans, and found elsewhere in the world. No terrestrial plant species are of any conservation-related concern at present.\nOf the 36 native vascular plants on Diego Garcia, 12 are trees, five are shrubs, seven are dicotyledon herbs, three are grasses, four are vines, and five are ferns.\n\nThe 12 tree species are: \"Barringtonia asiatica\" (fish-poison tree), \"Calophyllum inophyllum\" (Alexandrian laurel), \"Cocos nucifera\", \"Cordia subcordata\", \"Guettarda speciosa\", \"Intsia bijuga\", \"Hernandia sonora\", \"Morinda citrifolia\", \"Neisosperma oppositifolium\", \"Pisonia grandis\", \"Terminalia catappa\", and \"Heliotropium foertherianum\". Another three tree species are common, and may be native, but they may also have been introduced by humans: \"Casuarina equisetifolia\", \"Hibiscus tiliaceus\", and \"Pipturus argenteus\".\n\nThe five native shrubs are: \"Caesalpinia bonduc\", \"Pemphis acidula\", \"Premna serratifolia\", \"Scaevola taccada\" (often mispronounced \"Scaveola\"), and \"Suriana maritima\".\nAlso, 134 species of plants are classified as \"weedy\" or \"naturalised alien species\", being those unintentionally introduced by man, or intentionally introduced as ornamentals or crop plants which have now \"gone native\", including 32 new species recorded since 1995, indicating a very rapid rate of introduction. The remainder of the species list consists of cultivated food or ornamental species, grown in restricted environments such as a planter's pot.\n\nIn 2004, 10 plant communities were recognized on the atoll rim:\nBULLET::::- \"Calophyllum\" forest, dominated by \"Calophyllum inophyllum\", with trunks that can grow in excess of 2 m in diameter: This forest often contains other species such as \"Hernandia sonora\", \"Cocos nucifera\", and \"Guettarda speciosa\" with a \"Premna obtusifolia\" edge. When found on the beaches, \"Calophyllum\" often extends over the lagoon water and supports nesting red-footed boobies, as does \"Barringtonia asiatica\" found mostly on the eastern arm of the atoll.\nBULLET::::- \"Cocos\" forest, essentially monotypic (\"Cocos bon Dieu\"), with the understory consisting of coconut seedlings\nBULLET::::- \"Cocos-Hernandia\" forest, dominated by two canopy species—\"C. nucifera\" and \"H. sonora\"\nBULLET::::- \"Cocos-Guettarda\" forest, dominated by the canopy species \"C. nucifera\" and \"G. speciosa\": The understory consists of a mix of \"Neisosperma oppositifolium\", with \"Scaevola taccada\" and \"Tournefortia argentea\" on the beach edge.\nBULLET::::- \"Hernandia\" forest, dominated at the canopy level by \"H. sonora\": The most representative areas of this forest type are on the eastern, undeveloped part of the atoll. \"Calophyllum inophyllum\" and \"C. nucifera\" are often present. Understory species in this forest are often \"Morinda citrifolia\", \"Cocos\" seedlings, and \"Asplenium nidus\" (bird's nest fern), and occasionally, \"N. oppositifolium\" and \"G. speciosa\".\nBULLET::::- \"Premna\" shrubland, occurring generally between marshy areas and forested areas: The most conspicuous vegetation is primarily \"P. obtusifolia\", with \"Casuarina equisetifolia\" and \"Scaevola taccada\" on the margins. The dense groundcover consists of species such as \"Fimbristylis cymosa\", \"Ipomoea pes-caprae\" (beach morning glory) and \"Triumfetta procumbens\". \"Premna\" shrubland appears mostly adjacent to the developed areas of the atoll, particularly in the well fields.\nBULLET::::- Littoral scrub lines almost the entire seashore and lagoon shore of the island. It is dominated by \"S. taccada\", but it also contains scattered coconut trees, \"G. speciosa\" and \"Pisonia grandis\". On the seaward side, it also contains \"Tournefortia argentea\" and \"Suriana maritima\". On the lagoon side, it may also contain \"Lepturus repens\", \"Triumfetta procumbens\" and \"Cyperus ligularis\". Large pockets of \"Barringtonia asiatica\" are also on the eastern edge of the lagoon.\nBULLET::::- Maintained areas of grasses and sedges routinely mowed: Aerial photographs of the island clearly display large areas of grasslands and park-like savanna upon which the United States military has constructed large outdoor facilities such as antenna fields and the airport.\nBULLET::::- Mixed native forest, with no dominant canopy species\nBULLET::::- Marshes are divided into three different types: cattail (\"Typha domingensis\"), wetland, and mixed species. Cattail marshes contained almost entirely cattails. These areas are often man-made reservoirs or drainages that have been almost entirely monotypic. Wetlands were based upon vegetation that occurred in the area with fresh water. Mixed-species marshes were highly variable and usually had no standing water.\n\nAll the terrestrial and aquatic fauna of Diego Garcia are protected, with the exception of certain game fish, rats, and cats; hefty fines are levied against violators.\n\nThe island is a haven for several types of crustacean; \"warrior crabs\" (\"Cardisoma carnifex\") overrun the jungle at night. The extremely large coconut crab or robber crab (\"Birgus latro\") is found here in large numbers. Because of the protections provided the species on this atoll, and the isolation of the east rim of the atoll, the species is recorded in greater densities there than anywhere else in its range (339 crabs/ha).\n\nNo mammal species are native on Diego Garcia, with no record of bats. Other than rats (\"Rattus rattus\"), all \"wild\" mammal species are feral descendants of domesticated species. During the plantation era, Diego Garcia was home to large herds of Sicilian donkeys (\"Equus asinus\"), dozens of horses (\"Equus caballus\"), hundreds of dogs (\"Canis familiaris\"), and house cats (\"Felis catus\"). In 1971, the BIOT Commissioner ordered the extermination of feral dogs following the departure of the last plantation workers, and the program continued through 1975, when the last feral dog was observed and shot. Donkeys, which numbered over 400 in 1972, were down to just 20 individuals in 2005. The last horse was observed in 1995, and by 2005, just two cats were thought to have survived an island-wide eradication program.\n\nThe total bird list for the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, consists of 91 species, with large breeding populations of 16 species. Although no birds are endemic, internationally important seabird colonies exist. Diego Garcia's seabird community includes thriving populations of species which are rapidly declining in other parts of the Indian Ocean. Large nesting colonies of brown noddies (\"Anous stolidous\"), bridled terns (\"Sterna anaethetus\"), the lesser noddy (\"Anous tenuirostris\"), red-footed booby (\"Sula sula\") and lesser frigate birds (\"Fregata ariel\"), exist on Diego Garcia.\n\nOther nesting native birds include red-tailed tropicbirds (\"Phaethon rubricauda\"), wedge-tailed shearwaters (\"Puffinus pacificus\"), Audubon's shearwater (\"Puffinus iherminierii\"), black-naped terns (\"Sterna sumatrana\"), white (or fairy) terns (\"Gygis alba\"), striated herons (\"Butorides striatus\"), and white-breasted waterhens (\"Amaurornis phoenicurus\"). The 680-hectare Barton Point Nature Reserve was identified as an Important Bird Area for its large breeding colony of red-footed boobies.\n\nThe island hosts introduced bird species from many regions, including cattle egrets (\"Bubulcus ibis\"), Indian barred ground dove, also called the zebra dove (\"Geopelia striata\"), turtle dove (\"Nesoenas picturata\"), Indian mynah (\"Acridotheres tristis\"), Madagascar fody (\"Foudia madagascariensis\"), and chickens (\"Gallus gallus\").\nCurrently, three lizards and one toad are known to inhabit Diego Garcia, and possibly one snake. All are believed to have been introduced by human activity. The house gecko (\"Hemidactylus frenatus\"), the mourning gecko (\"Lepidodactylus lugubris\"), the garden lizard (an agamid) (\"Calotes versicolor\"), and the cane toad (\"Bufo marinus\"). A viable population of a type of blind snake from the family Typhlopidae may be present, probably the brahminy blind snake (\"Ramphotyphlops braminus\"). This snake feeds on the larvae, eggs, and pupae of ants and termites, and is about the size of a large earthworm.\n\nDiego Garcia provides suitable foraging and nesting habitat for both the hawksbill turtle (\"Eretmochelys imbricata\") and the green turtle (\"Chelonia mydas\"). Juvenile hawksbills are quite common in the lagoon and at Barachois Sylvane (also known as Turtle Cove) in the southern part of the lagoon. Adult hawksbills and greens are common in the surrounding seas and nest regularly on the ocean-side beaches of the atoll. Hawksbills have been observed nesting during June and July, and from November to March. Greens have been observed nesting in every month; the average female lays three clutches per season, each having an average clutch size of 113 eggs. Diurnal nesting is common in both species. An estimated 300–700 hawksbills and 400–800 greens nest in the Chagos.\n\nFour reptiles and six cetaceans are endangered and may or may not be found on or around Diego Garcia:\nHawksbill turtle (\"Eretmocheyls imbricata\") – known; leatherback turtle (\"Dermochelys coriacea\") – possible; green turtle (\"Chelonia mydas\") – known; olive ridley turtle (\"Lepidochelys oliveacea\") – possible; sperm whale (\"Physeter macrocephalus\") – possible; sei whale (\"Balaeonoptera borealis\") – possible;\nfinback whale (\"Balaeonoptera physalus\") – possible; Bryde's whale (\"Balaeonoptera edeni\") – possible; blue whale (\"Balaeonoptera musculus\") – possible; humpback whale (\"Megaptera novaeangliae\") – possible; southern right whale (\"Eubalaena australis\") – possible.\n\nBritish Forces British Indian Ocean Territories (BFBIOT) is the official name for the British Armed Forces deployment at the Permanent Joint Operating Base (PJOB) on Diego Garcia, in the British Indian Ocean Territory. While the naval and airbase facilities on Diego Garcia are leased to the United States, in practice, it operates as a joint UK-US base, with the UK retaining full and continual access. Diego Garcia is strategically located, offering access to East Africa, the Middle East and Southeast Asia. The base serves as a staging area for the buildup or resupply of military forces prior to an operation. There are approximately 40–50 British military personnel posted on Diego Garcia, most of them from Naval Party 1002 (NP1002). NP1002 forms the island's civil administration.\n\nDuring the Cold War era, following the British withdrawal from East of Suez, the United States was keen to establish a military base in the Indian Ocean to counter Soviet influence in the region and protect the sea-lanes for oil transportation from the Middle East. The United States saw the atoll as the \"Malta of the Indian Ocean\" equidistant from all points. The value has been proven many times, with the island providing an \"unsinkable aircraft carrier\" for the United States during the Iranian revolution, the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Operation Desert Fox, Operation Enduring Freedom, and Operation Iraqi Freedom. In the contemporary era, the atoll continues to play a key role in America's approach to the Indian Ocean as a flexible forward hub that can facilitate a range of regional strategies.\n\nThe United States military facilities on Diego Garcia have been known informally as Camp Justice and, after renaming in July 2006, as Camp Thunder Cove. Formally, the base is known as Naval Support Facility Diego Garcia (the US activity) or Permanent Joint Operating Base (PJOB) Diego Garcia (the UK's term).\n\nUnited States military activities in Diego Garcia have caused friction between India and the United States in the past. Various political parties in India repeatedly called for the military base to be dismantled, as they saw the United States naval presence in Diego Garcia as a hindrance to peace in the Indian Ocean. In recent years, relations between India and the United States have improved dramatically. Diego Garcia was the site of several naval exercises between the United States and Indian navies held between 2001 and 2004.\n\nNaval Support Facility Diego Garcia provides Base Operating Services to tenant commands located on the island. The command's mission is \"To provide logistic support to operational forces forward deployed to the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf AORs in support of national policy objectives.\"\n\nBULLET::::- 36 MSG, Pacific Air Force\nBULLET::::- Det 1, 730th Air Mobility Squadron, Air Mobility Command\nBULLET::::- AFSPC Det 1, 21st Space Operations Squadron, an Air Force Satellite Control Network Remote Tracking Station, Air Force Space Command\nBULLET::::- AFSPC Det 2, a GEODSS facility, Air Force Space Command\n\nThe atoll shelters the ships of the United States Marine Pre-positioning Squadron Two. These ships carry equipment and supplies to support a major armed force with tanks, armoured personnel carriers, munitions, fuel, spare parts and even a mobile field hospital. This equipment was used during the Persian Gulf War, when the squadron transported equipment to Saudi Arabia.\n\nThe ship composition of MPSRON TWO is dynamic. During August 2010 it was composed of the following:\n\nBULLET::::- MV \"Capt. Steven L. Bennett\"\nBULLET::::- USNS \"SGT William R. Button\" (T-AK-3012),\nBULLET::::- MV \"SSG Edward A. Carter, Jr.\" (T-AK-4544),\nBULLET::::- MV \"Maj. Bernard F. Fisher\"\nBULLET::::- USNS \"Lawrence H. Gianella\"\nBULLET::::- USNS \"SGT Matej Kocak\" (T-AK-3005),\nBULLET::::- USNS \"1st LT Baldomero Lopez\" (T-AK-3010),\nBULLET::::- MV \"LTC John U. D. Page\"\nBULLET::::- USNS \"GYSGT Fred W. Stockham\"\n\nFive of these vessels carry supplies for the US Marine Corps sufficient to support a Marine Air-Ground Task Force for 30 days: USNS \"Button\", USNS \"Kocak\", USNS \"Lopez\", USNS \"Stockham\", and USNS \"Fisher\".\n\nPrior to 2001, COMPSRON 2 consisted of up to 20 ships, including four Combat Force Ships which provided rapid-response delivery of equipment to ground troops in the United States Army. Three are lighter aboard ships (LASH) which carry barges called lighters that contain Army ammunition to be ferried ashore: MV \"American Cormorant\", SS \"Green Harbour\", (LASH), SS \"Green Valley\", (LASH), MV \"Jeb Stuart\", (LASH). There were logistics vessels to service the rapid delivery requirements of the United States Air Force, United States Navy and Defense Logistics Agency. These included container ships for Air Force munitions, missiles and spare parts; a 500-bed hospital ship, and floating storage and offloading units assigned to Military Sealift Command supporting the Defense Logistics Agency, and an offshore petroleum discharge system (OPDS) tanker. Examples of ships are MV \"Buffalo Soldier\", MV \"Green Ridge\", pre-position tanker USNS \"Henry J. Kaiser\", and tanker USNS Potomac (T-AO-181).\n\nThe United States Air Force operates a High Frequency Global Communications System transceiver site located on the south end of the atoll near the GEODSS station. The transceiver is operated remotely from Joint Base Andrews and locally maintained by NCTS FE personnel.\n\nNaval Computer and Telecommunications Station Far East Detachment Diego Garcia operates a detachment in Diego Garcia. This detachment provides base telephone communications, base network services (Local Network Services Center), pier connectivity services, and an AN/GSC-39C SHF satellite terminal, operates the Hydroacoustic Data Acquisition System, and performs on-site maintenance for the remotely operated Air Force HF-GCS terminal.\n\nNaval Security Group detachment Diego Garcia was disestablished on 30 September 2005. Remaining essential operations were transferred to a contractor. The large AN/AX-16 High Frequency Radio direction finding Circularly Disposed Antenna Array has been demolished, but the four satellite antenna radomes around the site remain .\n\nDiego Garcia may be identified as an ETOPS (Extended Range Twin Engine Operations) emergency landing site (en route alternate) for flight planning purposes of commercial airliners. This allows twin-engine commercial aircraft (such as the Airbus A330, Boeing 767 or Boeing 777) to make theoretical nonstop flights between city pairs such as Perth and Dubai (), Hong Kong and Johannesburg () or Singapore and São Paulo (), all while maintaining a suitable diversion airport within 180 minutes' flying time with one engine inoperable.\n\nThe island was one of 33 emergency landing sites worldwide for the NASA Space Shuttle. None of these facilities was ever used throughout the life of the shuttle program.\n\nAll consumable food and equipment are brought to Diego Garcia by sea or air, and all non-biodegradable waste is shipped off the island as well. From 1971 to 1973, United States Navy LSTs provided this service. Beginning in 1973, civilian ships were contracted to provide these services. From 2004 to 2009, the US-flagged container ship MV \"Baffin Strait\", often referred to as the \"DGAR shuttle,\" delivered 250 containers every month from Singapore to Diego Garcia. The ship delivered \"more than 200,000 tons of cargo to the island each year.\" On the return trip to Singapore, it carried recyclable metals.\n\nIn 2004, TransAtlantic Lines outbid Sealift Incorporated for the transport contract between Singapore and Diego Garcia. The route had previously been serviced by Sealift Inc.'s \"MV Sagamore\", manned by members of American Maritime Officers and Seafarers' International Union. TransAtlantic Lines reportedly won the contract by approximately 10 percent, representing a price difference of about US$2.7 million. The \"Baffin Straits\" charter ran from 10 January 2005, to 30 September 2008, at a daily rate of US$12,550.\n\nBULLET::::- James Horsburgh\nBULLET::::- List of British Army installations\nBULLET::::- Robert Moresby\nBULLET::::- \"Stealing a Nation\"\n\nBULLET::::- Wenban-Smith, N. and Carter, M., \"Chagos: A History, Exploration, Exploitation, Expulsion\" Published by Chagos Conservation Trust, London (2016)\nBULLET::::- Ladwig III, Walter C., Andrew S. Erickson, and Justin D. Mikolay, \"Diego Garcia and American Security in the Indian Ocean,\" in Carnes Lord and Andrew Erickson \"Rebalancing US Forces: Basing and Forward Presence in the Asia Pacific\" Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2014, pp. 131–180.\nBULLET::::- Ladwig III, Walter C.,\nBULLET::::- Urish, Daniel W., \"Coral, Copra, and Concrete: An Illustrated Memoir of Diego Garcia Atoll\" (2015).\nBULLET::::- US Naval Support Facility Diego Garcia \"Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan,\" September 2005.\nBULLET::::- Winchester, Simon, \"Outposts: Journeys to the Surviving Relics of the British Empire\" (2004).\nBULLET::::- Pilger, John, \"Freedom Next Time\" (2007).\n\nBULLET::::- Chagos Islands Indigenous Population Support Internet Site\nBULLET::::- BBC News Exiles lose appeal over benefits 02/11/07\nBULLET::::- The Chagos Conservation Trust\nBULLET::::- The Chagos Environmental Network\nBULLET::::- CIA World Factbook: British Indian Ocean Territory\nBULLET::::- A Black and Disgraceful Site by Jonathan Freedland in \"The New York Review of Books\"\nBULLET::::- Erickson, Andrew S., Walter C. Ladwig III and Justin D. Mikolay,\"Diego Garcia and the United States' Emerging Indian Ocean Strategy,\" \"Asian Security,\" Vol. 6, No. 3 (Autumn 2010), pp. 214–237.\nBULLET::::- Diego Garcia \"Camp Justice\", GlobalSecurity.org\nBULLET::::- Diego Garcia Online: Information for locals of Diego Garcia.\nBULLET::::- \"The Island\" is a jazz opera commissioned and broadcast in the 1960s on radio themed on events in Garcia Diego written by William Russo, words Adrian Mitchell performed by the Russo Orchestra sung by Cleo Lane and Denis Quilley\nBULLET::::- Maritime Prepositioning Ship Squadron Two, Diego Garcia (Official Site)\nBULLET::::- Naval Support Facility, Diego Garcia (Official Site)\nBULLET::::- A Return from Exile in Sight? The Chagossians & their Struggle from the \"Northwestern Journal of International Human Rights\"\nBULLET::::- UK MOD website on Permanent Joint Operating Base Diego Garcia.\nBULLET::::- Diego Garcia Timeline of Diego Garican History, 1770–2008, posted the History Commons\nBULLET::::- US/UK BIOT defence agreements, 1966–1982, US court filing\nBULLET::::- James Rogers and Luis Simón. The Status and Location of the Military Installations of the Member States of the European Union and Their Potential Role for the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). Brussels: European Parliament, 2009. 25 pp.\n"}
{"id": "8631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8631", "title": "Dimmu Borgir", "text": "Dimmu Borgir\n\nDimmu Borgir () is a Norwegian symphonic black metal band from Oslo, Norway, formed in 1993. The name is derived from Dimmuborgir, a volcanic formation in Iceland, the name of which means \"dark cities\" or \"dark castles/fortresses\" in Icelandic, Faroese and Old Norse. The band has been through numerous lineup changes over the years; vocalist Shagrath and rhythm guitarist Silenoz are the only original members who still remain, with lead guitarist Galder being a longstanding member.\n\nDimmu Borgir was founded in 1993 by Shagrath, Silenoz and Tjodalv; the band released an EP in 1994 entitled \"Inn i evighetens mørke\" (\"\"Into Eternal Darkness\"\" in English). This short EP sold out within weeks, and the band followed up with the 1994 full-length album \"For All Tid\" (\"\"For All Time\"\" in English). This album featured vocal contributions by Vicotnik of Ved Buens Ende and Dødheimsgard and Aldrahn of Dødheimsgard and Zyklon-B. The initial line-up consisted of Shagrath playing drums with Tjodalv on guitar and Silenoz contributing lead vocals. This line-up changed before the release of \"Stormblåst\" (\"\"Stormblown\"\" in English) on Cacophonous Records in 1996, an album considered by many to be their finest. It is also the last album which features all lyrics written and sung in Norwegian.\n\nAfter \"Stormblåst\", keyboardist Stian Aarstad left the band due to his obligation to serve in the Norwegian army, thus being unable to participate in the 1996 recording of \"Devil's Path\". That period was also marked by the departure of bassist Brynjard Tristan and the arrival of Nagash. Stian Aarstad returned for the recording of 1997's \"Enthrone Darkness Triumphant\". He had trouble attending rehearsals and was unable to tour. He was then subsequently fired and replaced by Kimberly Goss for their 1997/1998 world tour. \"Enthrone Darkness Triumphant\" was a huge success for the band, and was their first release signed to Nuclear Blast, a German record label. The album was recorded in the Abyss Studios, owned by Hypocrisy's frontman Peter Tägtgren. After the release of \"Enthrone Darkness Triumphant\", the band went on tour with In Flames, Dissection and other bands who were prominent in the scene at the time.\n\nAfter the tour for \"Enthrone Darkness Triumphant\", the band recruited new members Mustis on keyboards and Astennu on lead guitar. Dimmu Borgir's following full-length albums \"Spiritual Black Dimensions\" in 1999 and 2001's \"Puritanical Euphoric Misanthropia\", both met critical acclaim. However, another line-up change occurred between the two albums; Nagash quit and was replaced by new bassist/singer ICS Vortex, and Tjodalv left due to his family commitments, and to form the subsequent band Susperia, only to be replaced with Nicholas Barker of Cradle of Filth. Astennu was fired from his guitar duties as well, and was replaced by Galder. \"\n\nDespite the regular video play on MTV2 and Fuse that their follow-up album would receive, the band stated that they were not \"commercially-oriented,\" and instead, they 'simply wished to spread their message to more people'. In 2003, Dimmu Borgir recorded \"Death Cult Armageddon\". \"Death Cult Armageddon\" was recorded with the Prague Philarmonic Orchestra, conducted by Adam Klemens. All orchestrations were arranged by Gaute Storaas (who had previously worked with Dimmu Borgir on the album \"Puritanical Euphoric Misanthropia\"). In 2004, Dimmu Borgir performed on the mainstage at Ozzfest.\n\nIn 2005, the band did a complete re-recording of the \"Stormblåst\" album, featuring Hellhammer of Mayhem fame as the session drummer. The album also featured a DVD with a live performance from the 2004 Ozzfest tour.\n\nDimmu Borgir's eighth studio album, \"In Sorte Diaboli\", was released on 24 April 2007. A special edition version was released in a boxed case with a DVD, backward-printed lyrics, and a mirror. The album artwork was released on 14 February 2007 on a promotional webpage for the album. This album features once more the drumming of Hellhammer of Mayhem. Blomberg left the band in mid-tour in 2007 because of a neck injury that resulted in limited movement of his right arm. With the release of this album, Dimmu Borgir became the first black metal band with a number one album on the charts in their native country. In October 2008, they released their second live DVD set titled The Invaluable Darkness, which was based on several shows during the world tour supporting 'In Sorte Diaboli'.\n\nIn 2009, members ICS Vortex and Mustis independently announced their departure from Dimmu Borgir. Mustis released a statement claiming his disfavor with the band, stating that he was not properly credited for his writing contributions to the band's music, mentioning possibly taking legal action.\n\nDimmu Borgir soon after confirmed the pair's dismissal from the band, releasing a statement explaining why the two were fired. Shagrath, Silenoz and Galder wrote: \"Funny then, how the new album is half-way finished written already by the rest of us without any of these guys' input, still having all those elements we're known for.\" The band's decision has received a very mixed response from fans.\n\nDimmu Borgir's ninth studio album, \"Abrahadabra\", was released on 24 September 2010 in Germany, 27 September 2010 for the rest of Europe and 12 October 2010 in North America. Silenoz explained that the growing periods of time between albums was because the band had stopped writing music while touring, which was affecting the quality of the music. He described the new album as having an \"eerie and haunting feel to it\", adding that the material is \"epic\", \"primal\", atmospheric and ambient. A promotional image released with the statement showed Shagrath returning to the keyboards. The album features an ensemble orchestra, the \"Kringkastingsorkestret\" (the Norwegian Broadcasting Orchestra), as well as the Schola Cantorum choir, totaling more than 100 musicians and singers.\n\nGaute Storaas, composer of the orchestral arrangements, released a statement on his role in working on the album. \"Their music is epic, thematic and symphonic already from the creation; they are clearly having an orchestral approach to composing. My role in this is sometimes just to transcribe their themes, sometimes to take their ideas, tear them apart and build them back up in ways that are true to the band's intentions. The music must also be both interesting and playable for the musicians, and hopefully, meet the quality standards of the orchestral world.\"\n\nOn 8 July the band confirmed that they had tapped Swedish multi-instrumentalist Snowy Shaw (Therion, Dream Evil) to replace bassist/clean vocalist ICS Vortex on their then-upcoming album, \"Abrahadabra\", and world tour. On 25 August it was announced that Snowy Shaw had left Dimmu Borgir to rejoin Therion. On 17 September 2010 Dimmu Borgir released the song \"Born Treacherous\" from \"Abrahadabra\" on their official Myspace page. Then on 24 September the band announced they would stream \"Abrahadabra\" in its entirety until 7 p.m. EST that evening. The keyboards and bass are currently played by Gerlioz from Apoptygma Berzerk and Cyrus of Susperia respectively, and the clean vocals are sampled.\n\n28 May 2011 saw Dimmu Borgir, for the very first time in the band's career, perform live with a full symphony orchestra and choir in a one-off show with the Norwegian Broadcasting Orchestra and Schola Cantorum Choir (who collaborated on \"Abrahadabra\" the previous year) at the Oslo Spectrum entitled \"Forces of the Northern Night\". This was broadcast live on Norway's main national TV carrier NRK. The setlist for this show consisted of tracks from the band's recent transfiguration \"Abrahadabra\", leading tracks \"Vredysbyrd\" and \"Progenies of the Great Apocalypse\" from \"Death Cult Armageddon\", as well as newly updated versions of tracks from their standard back catalog; \"The Serpentine Offering\", \"Kings of the Carnival Creation\", and \"Mourning Palace\" which were re-orchestrated by Gaute Storaas. The band played a similar show the following year at the Wacken Open Air festival, having yet performed a second live show with a symphony orchestra and choir. This time, they were accompanied by the Czech National Orchestra with the same choir, being the second band in the festival's history to play with a live orchestra and choir (next to German power metal band Rage's 2007 performance). The show was broadcast live on Germany's Kultur TV arts channel. Silenoz has also said in several recent interviews that both live sets have been fully mixed and will be accompanied by a feature-length documentary and bonus material when released. In late 2011-2012 the band went on a special tour for fans in various European countries, including playing in some small, intimate venues celebrating their 1997 album Enthrone Darkness Triumphant by playing the album in its entirety, alongside an additional set of various fan favourite tracks, following a poll to fans directly, asking which of their first 3 albums would they want to see played in full on their next European tour.\n\nThe band originally announced in August 2013 that work had commenced on the band's next album. However, the production and release of the album has faced numerous delays. It will mark the longest ever gap between each studio release. Following various delays, The Oslo and Wacken Orchestra performances, recorded between 2011-2012 were finally released on CD/DVD/Blu-Ray format on 28 April 2017 worldwide as their third live video release titled 'Forces of the Northern Night'. Silenoz recently revealed that the band is in the mixing stage of the follow-up to \"Abrahadabra\". Ten songs will feature on the next album and they have said it has since been completed. On 18 December 2017 it was announced that the first single from the new album will be initially released on a 7-inch vinyl E.P, and will be titled ‘Interdimensional Summit’, and was released on 23 February 2018. The new album was titled \"Eonian\" and was released on 4 May through Nuclear Blast, and marked the band’s first new release of original material in almost 8 years. A second song from the new album, ‘Council of Wolves and Snakes’ was made available for streaming online on 30 March. On 28 May, it was announced that Victor Brandt (Entombed A.D., Firespawn) had officially joined as the band's new bassist.\n\nDimmu Borgir's older releases (since 1994 to 1999) are, according to \"Allmusic\" journalist Bradley Torreano, strongly influenced by Darkthrone, Mayhem, Bathory, Emperor, Celtic Frost, Immortal, Venom, and Iron Maiden. The band became more progressive and symphonic through the years; many black metal purists consider the band's second album, \"Stormblåst\", to be \"the act's last true contribution to black metal.\" \"Enthrone Darkness Triumphant\", Dimmu Borgir's third album, \"distinguished itself in two important areas, firstly forgoing their native language for English and secondly for its dramatic increase in synthesizer content.\" Significant experimentation began with 1999's \"Spiritual Black Dimensions\" (due to the addition of Vortex's clean vocals, and the variety of musical ideas from then-new member Mustis), as well as \"Puritanical Euphoric Misanthropia\" due to addition of influences from composers such as Antonín Dvořák, Enya, Richard Wagner, and Frédéric Chopin. As the music strongly differed from the older, rawer black metal style, Jon \"Metalion\" Kristiansen called \"Spiritual Black Dimensions\" \"a fine case of melodic, over-produced symphonic metal. If you like this melodic style I can't really think of anyone doing it better [...]. No, I wouldn't call this black metal. Read the interview with Funeral Mist for the right definition of black metal.\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"For all tid\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Stormblåst\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Enthrone Darkness Triumphant\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Spiritual Black Dimensions\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Puritanical Euphoric Misanthropia\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Death Cult Armageddon\" (2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Stormblåst MMV\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"In Sorte Diaboli\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Abrahadabra\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"Eonian\" (2018)\n\nCurrent\nBULLET::::- Shagrath – drums , lead vocals , lead guitar\nBULLET::::- Silenoz – rhythm guitar , lead vocals\nBULLET::::- Galder – lead guitar\nBULLET::::- Daray – drums\nBULLET::::- Gerlioz – keyboards, synthesizer\n\nLive musicians\nBULLET::::- Victor Brandt – bass\nFormer\n\nBassists\nBULLET::::- Brynjard Tristan\nBULLET::::- Nagash –\nBULLET::::- ICS Vortex –\nBULLET::::- Secthdamon – session musician\nBULLET::::- Snowy Shaw –\nBULLET::::- Cyrus –\n\nKeyboardists\nBULLET::::- Stian Aarstad –\nBULLET::::- Kimberly Goss –\nBULLET::::- Mustis –\n\nLead guitarists\nBULLET::::- Jens-Petter Sandvik – live\nBULLET::::- Astennu –\n\nDrummers\nBULLET::::- Aggressor – session\nBULLET::::- Nicholas Barker –\nBULLET::::- Reno Kiilerich –\nBULLET::::- Tony Laureano –\nBULLET::::- Hellhammer –\n\nMultinstrumentalist\nBULLET::::- Tjodalv – lead guitar, backing vocals drums, percussion\nTimeline\n"}
{"id": "8632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8632", "title": "Druze", "text": "Druze\n\nThe Druze (; ' or ', plural '; ' plural , \"\") are an Arabic-speaking esoteric ethno-religious group originating in Western Asia who self-identify as \"Al-Muwaḥḥidūn\" (lit., \"The People of Monotheism\"). Jethro of Midian is considered an ancestor of Druze, who revere him as their spiritual founder and chief prophet. It is a monotheistic and Abrahamic religion based on the teachings of Hamza ibn-'Ali ibn-Ahmad and the sixth Fatimid caliph Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, and Greek philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, and Zeno of Citium.\n\nThe Epistles of Wisdom is the foundational text of the Druze faith. The Druze faith incorporates elements of Isma'ilism, a branch of Shia Islam, Gnosticism, Neoplatonism, Pythagoreanism, and other philosophies and beliefs, creating a distinct and secretive theology, based on an esoteric interpretation of scripture, which emphasises the role of the mind and truthfulness. Druze believe in theophany and reincarnation, or the transmigration of the soul. Druze believe that at the end of the cycle of rebirth, which is achieved through successive reincarnations, the soul is united with the Cosmic Mind (\"al-ʿAql al-kullī\").\n\nAlthough dwarfed by other, larger communities, the Druze community played an important role in shaping the history of the Levant, where it continues to play a large political role. As a religious minority in every country in which they are found, they have frequently experienced persecution, except in Lebanon and Israel, where Druze judges, parliamentarians, diplomats, and doctors occupy the highest echelons of society. Even though the faith originally developed out of Ismaili Islam, Druze are not generally considered Muslims, although Al Azhar of Egypt recognizes them as one of the Islamic sects, akin to Shia. Fatimid caliph Ali az-Zahir, whose father al-Hakim is a key figure in the Druze faith, was particularly harsh to Druze, causing the death of many in Antioch, Aleppo, and northern Syria. Persecution flared up during the rule of the Mamluks and Ottomans. Most recently, Druze were targeted by the ISIL and Al-Qaeda whose goal was to remove from Syria and neighboring countries what they saw as non-Islamic influences.\n\nThe Druze faith is one of the major religious groups in the Levant, with between 800,000 and a million adherents. They are found primarily in Syria, Lebanon (where the Druze are considered part of their Muslim population), and Israel, with small communities in Jordan. The oldest and most densely-populated Druze communities exist in Mount Lebanon and in the south of Syria around Jabal al-Druze (literally the \"Mountain of the Druzes\"). The Druze's social customs differ markedly from those of Muslims or Christians, and they are known to form close-knit, cohesive communities which do not fully allow non-Druze in, though they themselves integrate fully in their adopted homelands.\n\nDruze people reside primarily in Syria, Lebanon, Israel and Jordan. The Institute of Druze Studies estimates that 40-50% of Druze live in Syria, 30-40% in Lebanon, 6-7% in Israel, and 1-2% in Jordan. About 2% of the Druze population are also scattered within other countries in the Middle East.\n\nLarge communities of Druze also live outside the Middle East, in Australia, Canada, Europe, Latin America (mainly Venezuela, Colombia and Brazil), the United States, and West Africa. They use the Arabic language and follow a social pattern very similar to those of the other peoples of the Levant (eastern Mediterranean).\n\nThe number of Druze people worldwide is between 800,000 and one million, with the vast majority residing in the Levant.\n\nThe name Druze is derived from the name of Muhammad bin Ismail Nashtakin ad-Darazī (from Persian \"\", \"seamster\") who was an early preacher. Although the Druze consider ad-Darazī a heretic, the name has been used to identify them.\n\nBefore becoming public, the movement was secretive and held closed meetings in what was known as Sessions of Wisdom. During this stage a dispute occurred between ad-Darazi and Hamza bin Ali mainly concerning ad-Darazi's ' (\"exaggeration\"), which refers to the belief that God was incarnated in human beings (especially 'Ali and his descendants, including Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, who was the caliph at the time) and to ad-Darazi naming himself \"The Sword of the Faith\", which led Hamza to write an epistle refuting the need for the sword to spread the faith and several epistles refuting the beliefs of the '.\n\nIn 1016 ad-Darazi and his followers openly proclaimed their beliefs and called people to join them, causing riots in Cairo against the Unitarian movement including Hamza bin Ali and his followers. This led to the suspension of the movement for one year and the expulsion of ad-Darazi and his supporters.\n\nAlthough the Druze religious books describe ad-Darazi as the \"insolent one\" and as the \"calf\" who is narrow-minded and hasty, the name \"Druze\" is still used for identification and for historical reasons. In 1018, ad-Darazi was assassinated for his teachings; some sources claim that he was executed by Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah.\n\nSome authorities see in the name \"Druze\" a descriptive epithet, derived from Arabic ' (\"she who studies\"). Others have speculated that the word comes from the Persian word ' ( \"bliss\") or from Shaykh Hussayn ad-Darazī, who was one of the early converts to the faith. In the early stages of the movement, the word \"Druze\" is rarely mentioned by historians, and in Druze religious texts only the word \"Muwaḥḥidūn\" (\"Unitarian\") appears. The only early Arab historian who mentions the Druze is the eleventh century Christian scholar Yahya of Antioch, who clearly refers to the heretical group created by ad-Darazī, rather than the followers of Hamza ibn 'Alī. As for Western sources, Benjamin of Tudela, the Jewish traveler who passed through Lebanon in or around 1165, was one of the first European writers to refer to the Druzes by name. The word \"\" (\"Druzes\") occurs in an early Hebrew edition of his travels, but it is clear that this is a scribal error. Be that as it may, he described the Druze as \"mountain dwellers, monotheists, who believe in 'soul eternity' and reincarnation\". He also stated that \"they loved the Jews\".\n\nThe Druze faith began as a movement in Ismailism that was opposed to certain religious and philosophical ideologies that were present during that epoch.\n\nThe faith was preached by Hamza ibn 'Alī ibn Ahmad, an Ismaili mystic and scholar from Zozan, Iran. He came to Egypt in 1014 or 1016, and assembled a group of scholars and leaders from across the world to establish the Unitarian movement. The order's meetings were held in the Raydan Mosque, near the Al-Hakim Mosque.\n\nIn 1017, Hamza officially revealed the Druze faith and began to preach the Unitarian doctrine. Hamza gained the support of the Fātimid caliph al-Hakim, who issued a decree promoting religious freedom prior to the declaration of the divine call.\nAl-Hakim became a central figure in the Druze faith even though his own religious position was disputed among scholars. John Esposito states that al-Hakim believed that \"he was not only the divinely appointed religio-political leader, but also the cosmic intellect linking God with creation\", while others like Nissim Dana and Mordechai Nisan state that he is perceived as the manifestation and the reincarnation of God or presumably the image of God.\n\nSome Druze and non-Druze scholars like Samy Swayd and Sami Makarem state that this confusion is due to confusion about the role of the early preacher ad-Darazi, whose teachings the Druze rejected as heretical. These sources assert that al-Hakim rejected ad-Darazi's claims of divinity, and ordered the elimination of his movement while supporting that of Hamza ibn Ali.\n\nAl-Hakim disappeared one night while out on his evening ride – presumably assassinated, perhaps at the behest of his formidable elder sister Sitt al-Mulk. The Druze believe he went into Occultation with Hamza ibn Ali and three other prominent preachers, leaving the care of the \"Unitarian missionary movement\" to a new leader, Al-Muqtana Baha'uddin (also spelled Baha' ad-Din).\n\nAl-Hakim was replaced by his underage son, 'Alī az-Zahir. The Unitarian Druze movement, which existed in the Fatimid Caliphate, acknowledged az-Zahir as the caliph, but followed Hamzah as its Imam. The young caliph's regent, Sitt al-Mulk, ordered the army to destroy the movement in 1021. At the same time, Bahā'a ad-Dīn as-Samuki was assigned the leadership of the Unitarian Movement by Hamza Bin Ali.\n\nFor the next seven years, the Druze faced extreme persecution by the new caliph, al-Zahir, who wanted to eradicate the faith. This was the result of a power struggle inside of the Fatimid empire in which the Druze were viewed with suspicion because of their refusal to recognize the new caliph, Ali az-Zahir, as their Imam. Many spies, mainly the followers of Ad-Darazi, joined the Unitarian movement in order to infiltrate the Druze community. The spies set about agitating trouble and soiling the reputation of the Druze. This resulted in friction with the new caliph who clashed militarily with the Druze community. The clashes ranged from Antioch to Alexandria, where tens of thousands of Druze were slaughtered by the Fatimid army. The largest massacre was at Antioch, where 5,000 Druze religious leaders were killed, followed by that of Aleppo. As a result, the faith went underground, in hope of survival, as those captured were either forced to renounce their faith or be killed. Druze survivors \"were found principally in southern Lebanon and Syria\". In 1038, two years after the death of al-Zahir, the Druze movement was able to resume because the new leadership that replaced him had friendly political ties with at least one prominent Druze leader.\n\nIn 1043, Baha' ad-Din declared that the sect would no longer accept new adherents, and since that time, proselytization has been prohibited.\n\nIt was during the period of Crusader rule in Levant (1099–1291) that the Druze first emerged into the full light of history in the Gharb region of the Chouf Mountains. As powerful warriors serving the Muslim rulers of Damascus against the Crusades, the Druze were given the task of keeping watch over the crusaders in the seaport of Beirut, with the aim of preventing them from making any encroachments inland. Subsequently, the Druze chiefs of the Gharb placed their considerable military experience at the disposal of the Mamluk rulers of Egypt (1250–1516); first, to assist them in putting an end to what remained of Crusader rule in coastal Levant, and later to help them safeguard the Lebanese coast against Crusader retaliation by sea.\n\nIn the early period of the Crusader era, the Druze feudal power was in the hands of two families, the Tanukhs and the Arslans. From their fortresses in the Gharb area (now in Aley District of southern Mount Lebanon Governorate), the Tanukhs led their incursions into the Phoenician coast and finally succeeded in holding Beirut and the marine plain against the Franks. Because of their fierce battles with the Crusaders, the Druzes earned the respect of the Sunni Muslim caliphs and thus gained important political powers. After the middle of the twelfth century, the Ma'an family superseded the Tanukhs in Druze leadership. The origin of the family goes back to a Prince Ma'an who made his appearance in the Lebanon in the days of the 'Abbasid caliph al-Mustarshid (1118–35 CE). The Ma'ans chose for their abode the Chouf District in south-western Lebanon (southern Mount Lebanon Governorate), overlooking the maritime plain between Beirut and Sidon, and made their headquarters in Baaqlin, which is still a leading Druze village. They were invested with feudal authority by Sultan Nur ad-Din and furnished respectable contingents to the Muslim ranks in their struggle against the Crusaders.\n\nHaving cleared the holy land of the Franks, the Mamluk sultans of Egypt turned their attention to the schismatic Muslims of Syria. In 1305, after the issuing of a fatwa by the scholar Ibn Taymiyyah, calling for jihad against all non-Sunni Muslims like the Druze, Alawites, Ismaili, and Twelver Shia Muslims, al-Malik al-Nasir inflicted a disastrous defeat on the Druze at Keserwan, and forced outward compliance on their part to Orthodox Sunni Islam. Later, under the Ottoman, they were severely attacked at Saoufar in 1585, after the Ottomans claimed that they assaulted their caravans near Tripoli. As a result of the Ottoman experience with the rebellious Druze, the word \"Durzi\" in Turkish came, and continues, to mean someone who is the ultimate thug. One influential Islamic sage of that time labeled them as \"infidels\" and argued that, even though they might behave like Muslims on the outside, this is no more than a pretense. He also declared that confiscation of Druze property and even the death sentence would conform to the laws of Islam.\n\nConsequently, the 16th and 17th centuries were to witness a succession of armed Druze rebellions against the Ottomans, countered by repeated Ottoman punitive expeditions against the Chouf, in which the Druze population of the area was severely depleted and many villages destroyed. These military measures, severe as they were, did not succeed in reducing the local Druze to the required degree of subordination. This led the Ottoman government to agree to an arrangement whereby the different nahiyes (districts) of the Chouf would be granted in \"iltizam\" (\"fiscal concession\") to one of the region's amirs, or leading chiefs, leaving the maintenance of law and order and the collection of its taxes in the area in the hands of the appointed amir. This arrangement was to provide the cornerstone for the privileged status which ultimately came to be enjoyed by the whole of Mount Lebanon, Druze and Christian areas alike.\n\nWith the advent of the Ottoman Turks and the conquest of Syria by Sultan Selim I in 1516, the Ma'ans were acknowledged by the new rulers as the feudal lords of southern Lebanon. Druze villages spread and prospered in that region, which under Ma'an leadership so flourished that it acquired the generic term of \"Jabal Bayt-Ma'an\" (the mountain home of the Ma'an) or \"Jabal al-Druze\". The latter title has since been usurped by the Hawran region, which since the middle of the 19th century has proven a haven of refuge to Druze emigrants from Lebanon and has become the headquarters of Druze power.\n\nUnder Fakhr-al-Dīn II (Fakhreddin II), the Druze dominion increased until it included Lebanon-Phoenicia and almost all Syria, extending from the edge of the Antioch plain in the north to Safad in the south, with a part of the Syrian desert dominated by Fakhr-al-Din's castle at Tadmur (Palmyra), the ancient capital of Zenobia. The ruins of this castle still stand on a steep hill overlooking the town. Fakhr-al-Din became too strong for his Turkish sovereign in Constantinople. He went so far in 1608 as to sign a commercial treaty with Duke Ferdinand I of Tuscany containing secret military clauses. The Sultan then sent a force against him, and he was compelled to flee the land and seek refuge in the courts of Tuscany and Naples in 1613 and 1615 respectively.\n\nIn 1618 political changes in the Ottoman sultanate had resulted in the removal of many enemies of Fakhr-al-Din from power, signaling the prince's triumphant return to Lebanon soon afterwards. Through a clever policy of bribery and warfare, he extended his domains to cover all of modern Lebanon, some of Syria and northern Galilee.\n\nIn 1632 Küçük Ahmet Pasha was named Lord of Damascus. Küçük Ahmet Pasha was a rival of Fakhr-al-Din and a friend of the sultan Murad IV, who ordered the pasha and the sultanate's navy to attack Lebanon and depose Fakhr-al-Din.\n\nThis time the prince decided to remain in Lebanon and resist the offensive, but the death of his son Ali in Wadi al-Taym was the beginning of his defeat. He later took refuge in Jezzine's grotto, closely followed by Küçük Ahmet Pasha who eventually caught up with him and his family.\n\nFakhr-al-Din was captured, taken to Istanbul, and imprisoned with two of his sons in the infamous Yedi Kule prison. The Sultan had Fakhr-al-Din and his sons killed on 13 April 1635 in Istanbul, bringing an end to an era in the history of Lebanon, which would not regain its current boundaries until it was proclaimed a mandate state and republic in 1920. One version recounts that the younger son was spared, raised in the harem and went on to become Ottoman Ambassador to India.\n\nFakhr-al-Din II was the first ruler in modern Lebanon to open the doors of his country to foreign Western influences. Under his auspices the French established a khān (hostel) in Sidon, the Florentines a consulate, and Christian missionaries were admitted into the country. Beirut and Sidon, which Fakhr-al-Din II beautified, still bear traces of his benign rule. See the new biography of this Prince, based on original sources, by TJ Gorton: \"Renaissance Emir: a Druze Warlord at the Court of the Medici\" (London, Quartet Books, 2013), for an updated view of his life.\n\nFakhr ad Din II was succeeded in 1635 by his nephew Ahmed Ma'an, who ruled through his death in 1658. (Fakhr ad Din's only surviving son, Husayn, lived the rest of his life as a court official in Constantinople.) Emir Mulhim exercised Iltizam taxation rights in the Shuf, Gharb, Jurd, Matn, and Kisrawan districts of Lebanon. Mulhim's forces battled and defeated those of Mustafa Pasha, Beylerbey of Damascus, in 1642, but he is reported by historians to have been otherwise loyal to Ottoman rule.\n\nFollowing Mulhim's death, his sons Ahmad and Korkmaz entered into a power struggle with other Ottoman-backed Druze leaders. In 1660, the Ottoman Empire moved to reorganize the region, placing the sanjaks (districts) of Sidon-Beirut and Safed in a newly formed province of Sidon, a move seen by local Druze as an attempt to assert control. Contemporary historian Istifan al-Duwayhi reports that Korkmaz was killed in act of treachery by the Beylerbey of Damascus in 1662. Ahmad however emerged victorious in the power struggle among the Druze in 1667, but the Maʿnīs lost control of Safad and retreated to controlling the iltizam of the Shuf mountains and Kisrawan. Ahmad continued as local ruler through his death from natural causes, without heir, in 1697.\n\nDuring the Ottoman–Habsburg War (1683–1699), Ahmad Ma'n collaborated in a rebellion against the Ottomans which extended beyond his death. Iltizam rights in Shuf and Kisrawan passed to the rising Shihab family through female-line inheritance.\n\nAs early as the days of Saladin, and while the Ma'ans were still in complete control over southern Lebanon, the Shihab tribe, originally Hijaz Arabs, but later settled in Ḥawran, advanced from Ḥawran, in 1172, and settled in Wadi al-Taym at the foot of mount Hermon. They soon made an alliance with the Ma'ans and were acknowledged as the Druze chiefs in \"Wadi al-Taym\". At the end of the 17th century (1697) the Shihabs succeeded the Ma'ans in the feudal leadership of Druze southern Lebanon, although they reportedly professed Sunni Islam, they showed sympathy with Druzism, the religion of the majority of their subjects.\n\nThe Shihab leadership continued until the middle of the 19th century and culminated in the illustrious governorship of Amir Bashir Shihab II (1788–1840) who, after Fakhr-al-Din, was the most powerful feudal lord Lebanon produced. Though governor of the Druze Mountain, Bashir was a crypto-Christian, and it was he whose aid Napoleon solicited in 1799 during his campaign against Syria.\n\nHaving consolidated his conquests in Syria (1831–1838), Ibrahim Pasha, son of the viceroy of Egypt, Muhammad Ali Pasha, made the fatal mistake of trying to disarm the Christians and Druzes of the Lebanon and to draft the latter into his army. This was contrary to the principles of the life of independence which these mountaineers had always lived, and resulted in a general uprising against Egyptian rule. The uprising was encouraged, for political reasons, by the British. The Druzes of Wadi al-Taym and Ḥawran, under the leadership of Shibli al-Aryan, distinguished themselves in their stubborn resistance at their inaccessible headquarters, \"al-Laja\", lying southeast of Damascus.\n\nThe conquest of Syria by the Muslim Arabs in the middle of the seventh century introduced into the land two political factions later called the Qaysites and the Yemenites. The Qaysite party represented the Bedouin Arabs who were regarded as inferior by the Yemenites who were earlier and more cultured emigrants into Syria from southern Arabia. Druzes and Christians grouped in political, rather than religious, parties; the party lines in Lebanon obliterated racial and religious lines and the people grouped themselves into one or the other of these two parties regardless of their religious affiliations. The sanguinary feuds between these two factions depleted, in course of time, the manhood of the Lebanon and ended in the decisive battle of Ain Dara in 1711, which resulted in the utter defeat of the Yemenite party. Many Yemenite Druzes thereupon immigrated to the Hawran region, and thus laid the foundation of Druze power there.\n\nIn 1840 social disturbance started between Druze and their Christian Maronite neighbors, who had previously been on friendly terms. This culminated in the civil war of 1860.\n\nAfter the Shehab dynasty converted to Christianity, the Druze community and feudal leaders came under attack from the regime with the collaboration of the Catholic Church, and the Druze lost most of their political and feudal powers. Also, the Druze formed an alliance with Britain and allowed Protestant missionaries to enter Mount Lebanon, creating tension between them and the Catholic Maronites.\n\nThe Maronite-Druze conflict in 1840–60 was an outgrowth of the Maronite Christian independence movement, directed against the Druze, Druze feudalism, and the Ottoman-Turks. The civil war was not therefore a religious war, except in Damascus, where it spread and where the vastly non-Druze population was anti-Christian. The movement culminated with the 1859–60 massacre and defeat of the Christians by the Druzes. The civil war of 1860 cost the Christians some ten thousand lives in Damascus, Zahlé, Deir al-Qamar, Hasbaya, and other towns of Lebanon.\n\nThe European powers then determined to intervene, and authorized the landing in Beirut of a body of French troops under General Beaufort d'Hautpoul, whose inscription can still be seen on the historic rock at the mouth of Nahr al-Kalb. French intervention on behalf of the Maronites did not help the Maronite national movement, since France was restricted in 1860 by Britain, which did not want the Ottoman Empire dismembered. But European intervention pressured the Turks to treat the Maronites more justly. Following the recommendations of the powers, the Ottoman Porte granted Lebanon local autonomy, guaranteed by the powers, under a Christian governor. This autonomy was maintained until World War I.\n\nThe Hauran rebellion was a violent Druze uprising against Ottoman authority in the Syrian province, which erupted in May 1909. The rebellion was led by al-Atrash family, originated in local disputes and Druze unwillingness to pay taxes and conscript into the Ottoman Army. The rebellion ended in brutal suppression of the Druze by General Sami Pasha al-Farouqi, significant depopulation of the Hauran region and execution of the Druze leaders in 1910. In the outcome of the revolt, 2,000 Druze were killed, a similar number wounded, and hundreds of Druze fighters imprisoned. Al-Farouqi also disarmed the population, extracted significant taxes, and launched a census of the region.\n\nIn Lebanon, Syria, Israel, and Jordan, the Druzites have official recognition as a separate religious community with its own religious court system. Druzites are known for their loyalty to the countries they reside in, though they have a strong community feeling, in which they identify themselves as related even across borders of countries.\n\nDespite their practice of blending with dominant groups to avoid persecution, and because the Druze religion does not endorse separatist sentiments, but urges blending with the communities they reside in, the Druze have had a history of resistance to occupying powers, and they have at times enjoyed more freedom than most other groups living in the Levant.\n\nIn Syria, most Druzites live in the Jebel al-Druze, a rugged and mountainous region in the southwest of the country, which is more than 90 percent Druze inhabited; some 120 villages are exclusively so. Other notable communities live in the Harim Mountains, the Damascus suburb of Jaramana, and on the southeast slopes of Mount Hermon. A large Syrian Druze community historically lived in the Golan Heights, but following wars with Israel in 1967 and 1973, many of these Druze fled to other parts of Syria; most of those who remained live in a handful of villages in the disputed zone, while only a few live in the narrow remnant of Quneitra Governorate that is still under effective Syrian control.\nThe Druze always played a far more important role in Syrian politics than its comparatively small population would suggest. With a community of little more than 100,000 in 1949, or roughly three percent of the Syrian population, the Druze of Syria's southwestern mountains constituted a potent force in Syrian politics and played a leading role in the nationalist struggle against the French. Under the military leadership of Sultan Pasha al-Atrash, the Druze provided much of the military force behind the Syrian Revolution of 1925–27. In 1945, Amir Hasan al-Atrash, the paramount political leader of the Jebel al-Druze, led the Druze military units in a successful revolt against the French, making the Jebel al-Druze the first and only region in Syria to liberate itself from French rule without British assistance. At independence the Druze, made confident by their successes, expected that Damascus would reward them for their many sacrifices on the battlefield. They demanded to keep their autonomous administration and many political privileges accorded them by the French and sought generous economic assistance from the newly independent government.\nWhen a local paper in 1945 reported that President Shukri al-Quwatli (1943–49) had called the Druzes a \"dangerous minority\", Sultan Pasha al-Atrash flew into a rage and demanded a public retraction. If it were not forthcoming, he announced, the Druzes would indeed become \"dangerous\", and a force of 4,000 Druze warriors would \"occupy the city of Damascus\". Quwwatli could not dismiss Sultan Pasha's threat. The military balance of power in Syria was tilted in favor of the Druzes, at least until the military build up during the 1948 War in Palestine. One advisor to the Syrian Defense Department warned in 1946 that the Syrian army was \"useless\", and that the Druzes could \"take Damascus and capture the present leaders in a breeze\".\n\nDuring the four years of Adib Shishakli's rule in Syria (December 1949 to February 1954) (on 25 August 1952: Adib al-Shishakli created the Arab Liberation Movement (ALM), a progressive party with pan-Arabist and socialist views), the Druze community was subjected to a heavy attack by the Syrian government. Shishakli believed that among his many opponents in Syria, the Druzes were the most potentially dangerous, and he was determined to crush them. He frequently proclaimed: \"My enemies are like a serpent: The head is the Jebel al-Druze, the stomach Homs, and the tail Aleppo. If I crush the head, the serpent will die.\" Shishakli dispatched 10,000 regular troops to occupy the Jebel al-Druze. Several towns were bombarded with heavy weapons, killing scores of civilians and destroying many houses. According to Druze accounts, Shishakli encouraged neighboring bedouin tribes to plunder the defenseless population and allowed his own troops to run amok.\n\nShishakli launched a brutal campaign to defame the Druzes for their religion and politics. He accused the entire community of treason, at times claiming they were agents of the British and Hashimites, at others that they were fighting for Israel against the Arabs. He even produced a cache of Israeli weapons allegedly discovered in the Jabal. Even more painful for the Druze community was his publication of \"falsified Druze religious texts\" and false testimonials ascribed to leading Druze sheikhs designed to stir up sectarian hatred. This propaganda also was broadcast in the Arab world, mainly Egypt. Shishakli was assassinated in Brazil on 27 September 1964 by a Druze seeking revenge for Shishakli's bombardment of the Jebel al-Druze.\n\nHe forcibly integrated minorities into the national Syrian social structure, his \"Syrianization\" of Alawite and Druze territories had to be accomplished in part using violence, he declared: \"My enemies are like serpent. The head is the Jabal Druze, if I crush the head the serpent will die\" (Seale 1963:132). To this end, al-Shishakli encouraged the stigmatization of minorities. He saw minority demands as tantamount to treason. His increasingly chauvinistic notions of Arab nationalism were predicated on the denial that \"minorities\" existed in Syria.\n\nAfter the Shishakli's military campaign, the Druze community lost much of its political influence, but many Druze military officers played important roles in the Ba'ath government currently ruling Syria.\n\nIn 1967, a community of Druze in the Golan Heights came under Israeli control, today numbering 23,000 (in 2019).\n\nThe Qalb Loze massacre was a reported massacre of Syrian Druze on 10 June 2015 in the village of Qalb Loze in Syria's northwestern Idlib Governorate in which 20-24 Druze were killed. On July 25, 2018, a group of ISIS-affiliated attackers entered the Druze city of As-Suwayda and initiated a series of gunfights and suicide bombings on its streets, killing at least 258 people, the vast majority of them civilians.\n\nThe Druzite community in Lebanon played an important role in the formation of the modern state of Lebanon, and even though they are a minority they play an important role in the Lebanese political scene. Before and during the Lebanese Civil War (1975–90), the Druze were in favor of Pan-Arabism and Palestinian resistance represented by the PLO. Most of the community supported the Progressive Socialist Party formed by their leader Kamal Jumblatt and they fought alongside other leftist and Palestinian parties against the Lebanese Front that was mainly constituted of Christians. After the assassination of Kamal Jumblatt on 16 March 1977, his son Walid Jumblatt took the leadership of the party and played an important role in preserving his father's legacy after winning the Mountain War and sustained the existence of the Druze community during the sectarian bloodshed that lasted until 1990.\n\nIn August 2001, Maronite Catholic Patriarch Nasrallah Boutros Sfeir toured the predominantly Druze Chouf region of Mount Lebanon and visited Mukhtara, the ancestral stronghold of Druze leader Walid Jumblatt. The tumultuous reception that Sfeir received not only signified a historic reconciliation between Maronites and Druze, who fought a bloody war in 1983–1984, but underscored the fact that the banner of Lebanese sovereignty had broad multi-confessional appeal and was a cornerstone for the Cedar Revolution in 2005. Jumblatt's post-2005 position diverged sharply from the tradition of his family. He also accused Damascus of being behind the 1977 assassination of his father, Kamal Jumblatt, expressing for the first time what many knew he privately suspected. The BBC describes Jumblatt as \"the leader of Lebanon's most powerful Druze clan and heir to a leftist political dynasty\". The second largest political party supported by Druze is the Lebanese Democratic Party led by Prince Talal Arslan, the son of Lebanese independence hero Emir Majid Arslan.\n\nThe Druzites form a religious minority in Israel of more than 100,000, mostly residing in the north of the country. In 2004, there were 102,000 Druze living in the country. In 2010, the population of Israeli Druze citizens grew to over 125,000. At the end of 2018, there were 143,000. Most Israeli Druze identify ethnically as Arabs. Today, thousands of Israeli Druze belong to \"Druze Zionist\" movements.\n\nSome scholars maintain that Israel has tried to separate the Druze from other Arab communities, and that the effort has influenced the way Israel's Druze perceive their modern identity.\nIn 1957, the Israeli government designated the Druze a distinct ethnic community at the request of its communal leaders. The Druze are Arabic-speaking citizens of Israel and serve in the Israel Defense Forces, just as most citizens do in Israel. Members of the community have attained top positions in Israeli politics and public service. The number of Druze parliament members usually exceeds their proportion in the Israeli population, and they are integrated within several political parties.\n\nThe Druzites form a religious minority in Jordan of around 32,000, mostly residing in the northwestern part of the country.\n\nThe Druze conception of the deity is declared by them to be one of strict and uncompromising unity. The main Druze doctrine states that God is both transcendent and immanent, in which he is above all attributes, but at the same time, he is present.\n\nIn their desire to maintain a rigid confession of unity, they stripped from God all attributes (\"tanzīh\"). In God, there are no attributes distinct from his essence. He is wise, mighty, and just, not by wisdom, might, and justice, but by his own essence. God is \"the whole of existence\", rather than \"above existence\" or on his throne, which would make him \"limited\". There is neither \"how\", \"when\", nor \"where\" about him; he is incomprehensible.\n\nIn this dogma, they are similar to the semi-philosophical, semi-religious body which flourished under Al-Ma'mun and was known by the name of Mu'tazila and the fraternal order of the Brethren of Purity (\"Ikhwan al-Ṣafa\").\n\nUnlike the \"Mu'tazila\", however, and similar to some branches of Sufism, the Druze believe in the concept of \"Tajalli\" (meaning \"theophany\"). \"Tajalli\" is often misunderstood by scholars and writers and is usually confused with the concept of incarnation.\n\nDruze Sacred texts include the Kitab Al Hikma (Epistles of Wisdom). Other ancient Druze writings include the \"Rasa'il al-Hind (Epistles of India)\" and the previously lost (or hidden) manuscripts such as \"al-Munfarid bi-Dhatihi\" and \"al-Sharia al-Ruhaniyya\" as well as others including didactic and polemic treatises.\n\nReincarnation is a paramount principle in the Druze faith. Reincarnations occur instantly at one's death because there is an eternal duality of the body and the soul and it is impossible for the soul to exist without the body. A human soul will transfer only to a human body, in contrast to the Hindu and Buddhist belief systems, according to which souls can transfer to any living creature. Furthermore, a male Druze can be reincarnated only as another male Druze and a female Druze only as another female Druze. A Druze cannot be reincarnated in the body of a non-Druze. Additionally, souls cannot be divided and the number of souls existing in the universe is finite. The cycle of rebirth is continuous and the only way to escape is through successive reincarnations. When this occurs, the soul is united with the Cosmic Mind and achieves the ultimate happiness.\n\nThe Pact of Time Custodian (\"\") is considered the entrance to the Druze religion, and they believe that all Druze in their past lives have signed this Charter, and Druze believe that this Charter embodies with human souls after death.\nI rely on our Moula Al-Hakim the lonely God, the individual, the eternal, who is out of couples and numbers, (someone) the son of (someone) has approved recognition enjoined on himself and on his soul, in a healthy of his mind and his body, permissibility aversive is obedient and not forced, to repudiate from all creeds, articles and all religions and beliefs on the differences varieties, and he does not know something except obedience of almighty Moulana Al-Hakim, and obedience is worship and that it does not engage in worship anyone ever attended or wait, and that he had handed his soul and his body and his money and all he owns to almighty Maulana Al-Hakim.\nThe Druze also use a similar formula, called al-'ahd, when one is initiated into the ʻUqqāl.\n\nThe prayer-houses of the Druze are called \"khalwa\" or \"khalwat\". The primary sanctuary of the Druze is at Khalwat al-Bayada.\n\nThe Druze believe that many teachings given by prophets, religious leaders and holy books have esoteric meanings preserved for those of intellect, in which some teachings are symbolic and allegorical in nature, and divide the understanding of holy books and teachings into three layers.\n\nThese layers, according to the Druze, are as follows:\nBULLET::::- The obvious or exoteric \"(zahir)\", accessible to anyone who can read or hear;\nBULLET::::- The hidden or esoteric \"(batin)\", accessible to those who are willing to search and learn through the concept of exegesis;\nBULLET::::- And the hidden of the hidden, a concept known as \"anagoge\", inaccessible to all but a few really enlightened individuals who truly understand the nature of the universe.\n\nDruze do not believe that the esoteric meaning abrogates or necessarily abolishes the exoteric one. Hamza bin Ali refutes such claims by stating that if the esoteric interpretation of \"taharah\" (purity) is purity of the heart and soul, it doesn't mean that a person can discard his physical purity, as \"salat\" (prayer) is useless if a person is untruthful in his speech and that the esoteric and exoteric meanings complement each other.\n\nThe Druze follow seven moral precepts or duties that are considered the core of the faith.\nThe Seven Druze precepts are:\nBULLET::::1. Veracity in speech and the truthfulness of the tongue.\nBULLET::::2. Protection and mutual aid to the brethren in faith.\nBULLET::::3. Renunciation of all forms of former worship (specifically, invalid creeds) and false belief.\nBULLET::::4. Repudiation of the devil (Iblis), and all forces of evil (translated from Arabic \"Toghyan\", meaning \"despotism\").\nBULLET::::5. Confession of God's unity.\nBULLET::::6. Acquiescence in God's acts no matter what they be.\nBULLET::::7. Absolute submission and resignation to God's divine will in both secret and public.\n\nComplicating their identity is the custom of \"—concealing or disguising their beliefs when necessary—that they adopted from Ismailism and the esoteric nature of the faith, in which many teachings are kept secretive. This is done in order to keep the religion from those who are not yet prepared to accept the teachings and therefore could misunderstand it, as well as to protect the community when it is in danger. Druzes tend to follow the dominant religion of the country where they reside. Some claim to be Muslim or Christian in order to avoid persecution; some do not. Druze in different states can have radically different lifestyles.\n\nThe Druze allow divorce, although it is discouraged; circumcision is not necessary; they cannot be reborn as non-Druze; those who purify and perfect their soul ascend to the stars upon death; when al-Hakim returns, all faithful Druze will join him in his march from China and on to conquer the world; apostasy is forbidden, usually have religious services on Thursday evenings, and follow Sunni Hanafi law on issues which their own faith has no particular ruling.\n\nThe Druze strictly avoid iconography, but use five colors (\"Five Limits\" ') as a religious symbol: green, red, yellow, blue, and white. Each color pertains to a metaphysical power called ', literally \"a limit\", as in the distinctions that separate humans from animals, or the powers that make human the animalistic body. Each \" is color-coded in the following manner:\nBULLET::::- Green for \" \"the Universal Mind/Intelligence/Nous\",\nBULLET::::- Red for \" \"the Universal Soul/Anima mundi\",\nBULLET::::- Yellow for \" \"the Word/Logos\",\nBULLET::::- Blue for \" \"the Potentiality/Cause/Precedent\", and\nBULLET::::- White for \" \"the Future/Effect/Immanence\".\n\nThe mind generates qualia and gives consciousness. The soul embodies the mind and is responsible for transmigration and the character of oneself. The word which is the atom of language communicates qualia between humans and represents the platonic forms in the sensible world. The ' and ' is the ability to perceive and learn from the past and plan for the future and predict it.\nThe colors can be arranged in vertically descending stripes (as a flag) or a five-pointed star. The stripes are a diagrammatic cut of the spheres in neoplatonic philosophy, while the five-pointed star embodies the golden ratio, phi, as a symbol of temperance and a life of moderation.\n\nHoly places of the Druze are archaeological sites important to the community and associated with religious holidays – the most notable example being Nabi Shu'ayb, dedicated to Jethro, who is a central figure of the Druze religion. Druze make pilgrimages to this site on the holiday of Ziyarat al-Nabi Shu'ayb.\nOne of the most important features of the Druze village having a central role in social life is the '—a house of prayer, retreat and religious unity. The ' may be known as \" in local languages.\n\nThe second type of religious shrine is one associated with the anniversary of a historic event or death of a prophet. If it is a mausoleum the Druze call it \"mazār\" and if it is a shrine they call it \"maqām\". The holy places become more important to the community in times of adversity and calamity. The holy places and shrines of the Druze are scattered in various villages, in places where they are protected and cared for. They are found in Syria, Lebanon and Israel.\n\nThe Druzes do not recognize any religious hierarchy. As such, there is no \"Druze clergy\". Those few initiated in the Druze holy books are called ʿuqqāl, while the \"ignorant\", regular members of the group are called juhhāl.\nGiven the strict religious, intellectual and spiritual requirements, most of the Druzes are not initiated and might be referred to as ' (), literally \"the Ignorant\", but in practice referring to the non-initiated Druzes; however, that term is seldom used by the Druzes. Those are not granted access to the Druze holy literature or allowed to attend the initiated religious meetings of the '. The cohesiveness and frequent inter-community social interaction however makes it in sort that that most Druzes have an idea about their broad ethical requirements and have some sense of what their theology consists of (albeit often flawed).\nThe initiated religious group, which includes both men and women (less than 10% of the population), is called ' ( \"the Knowledgeable Initiates\"). They might or might not dress differently, although most wear a costume that was characteristic of mountain people in previous centuries. Women can opt to wear ', a loose white veil, especially in the presence of other people. They wear ' on their heads to cover their hair and wrap it around their mouths. They wear black shirts and long skirts covering their legs to their ankles. Male ' often grow mustaches, and wear dark Levantine-Turkish traditional dresses, called the ', with white turbans that vary according to the seniority of the '. Traditionally the Druze women have played an important role both socially and religiously inside the community.\n\n' have equal rights to ', but establish a hierarchy of respect based on religious service. The most influential of ' become ', recognized religious leaders, and from this group the spiritual leaders of the Druze are assigned. While the ', which is an official position in Syria, Lebanon, and Israel, is elected by the local community and serves as the head of the Druze religious council, judges from the Druze religious courts are usually elected for this position. Unlike the spiritual leaders, the authority of the ' is limited to the country he is elected in, though in some instances spiritual leaders are elected to this position.\n\nThe Druze believe in the unity of God, and are often known as the \"People of Monotheism\" or simply \"Monotheists\". Their theology has a Neo-Platonic view about how God interacts with the world through emanations and is similar to some gnostic and other esoteric sects. Druze philosophy also shows Sufi influences.\n\nDruze principles focus on honesty, loyalty, filial piety, altruism, patriotic sacrifice, and monotheism. They reject nicotine, alcohol, and other drugs, and often the consumption of pork (to those Uqqāl and not necessarily to be required by the Juhhāl). Druze reject polygamy, believe in reincarnation, and are not obliged to observe most of the religious rituals. The Druze believe that rituals are symbolic and have an individualistic effect on the person, for which reason Druze are free to perform them, or not. The community does celebrate Eid al-Adha, however, considered their most significant holiday.\n\nMate is a popular drink consumed by the Druze brought to the Levant from Syrian migrants from Argentina in the 19th century. Mate is made by steeping dried leaves of yerba mate in hot water and is served with a metal straw (\"bambija\" or \"masassa\") from a gourd (\"finjan/Qar'aa\"). Mate is often the first item served when entering a Druze home. It is a social drink and can be shared between multiple participants. After each drinker, the metal straw is cleaned with a lemon rind. Traditional snacks eaten with mate include raisins, nuts, dried figs, biscuits, and chips.\n\nThe Druze faith extended to many areas in the Middle East, but most of the modern Druze can trace their origin to the \"Wadi al-Taym\" in South Lebanon, which is named after an Arab tribe \"Taymour-Allah (formerly Taymour-Allat) \" which, according to Islamic historian, al-Tabari, first came from Arabia into the valley of the Euphrates where they had been Christianized prior to their migration into the Lebanon. Many of the Druze feudal families whose genealogies have been preserved by the two modern Syrian chroniclers Haydar al-Shihabi and al-Shidyaq seem also to point in the direction of this origin. Arabian tribes emigrated via the Persian Gulf and stopped in Iraq on the route that was later to lead them to Syria. The first feudal Druze family, the Tanukh family, which made for itself a name in fighting the Crusaders, was, according to Haydar al-Shihabi, an Arab tribe from Mesopotamia where it occupied the position of a ruling family and apparently was Christianized.\n\nTravelers like Niebuhr, and scholars like Max von Oppenheim, undoubtedly echoing the popular Druze belief regarding their own origin, have classified them as Arabs. The prevailing idea among the Druzes themselves today is that they are of Arab stock.\n\nThe 1911 edition of Encyclopædia Britannica states that the Druzes are \"a mixture of refugee stocks, in which the Arab largely predominates, grafted on to an original mountain population of Aramaic blood\".\n\nThe Tanukhs must have left Arabia as early as the second or third century AD. The Ma'an tribe, which superseded the Tanukhs and produced the greatest Druze hero, Fakhr-al-Din, had the same traditional origin. The \"Talhuq\" family and \" 'Abd-al-Malik\", who supplied the later Druze leadership, have the same record as the Tanukhs. The Imad family is named for \"al-Imadiyyah\"—the Kurdish town of Amadiya, northeast of Mosul inside Kurdistan, and, like the Jumblatts, is thought to be of Kurdish tribal origin, the Janpulad (\"soul of steel\") are still found east of Adana in Turkey, across the borders from Syria. The leading \"Atrash\" family also can trace its background to the Kurdish tribe, the Hartush/Atrush, found in northern Iraq and southeastern Turkey today. The Arsalan family claims descent from the Hirah Arab kings, but the name \"Arsalan\" (Persian and Turkish for lion) suggests Persian influence, if not origin.\n\nDuring the 18th century, there were two branches of Druze living in Lebanon: the Yemeni Druze, headed by the \"Harmouche\" and \"Alamuddine\" families; and the Kaysi Druze, headed by the Jumblatt and Arslan families. The Harmouche family was banished from Mount Lebanon following the battle of Ain Dara in 1711. The battle was fought between two Druze factions: the Yemeni and the Kaysi. Following their dramatic defeat, the Yemeni faction migrated to Syria in the Jebel-Druze region and its capital, As-Suwayda. However, it has been argued that these two factions were of a political nature, rather than ethnic, and had both Christian and Druze supporters.\n\nAccording to Jewish contemporary literature, the Druze, who were visited and described in 1165 by Benjamin of Tudela, were pictured as descendants of the Itureans, an Ismaelite Arab tribe, which used to reside in the northern parts of the Golan plateau through Hellenistic and Roman periods. The word Druzes, in an early Hebrew edition of his travels, occurs as \"Dogziyin\", but it is clear that this is a scribal error.\n\nArchaeological assessments of the Druze region have also proposed the possibility of Druze descending from Itureans, who had inhabited Mount Lebanon and Golan Heights in late classic antiquity, but their traces fade in the Middle Ages.\n\nIn a 2005 study of ASPM gene variants, Mekel-Bobrov et al. found that the Israeli Druze people of the Mount Carmel region have among the highest rate of the newly evolved ASPM- Haplogroup D, at 52.2% occurrence of the approximately 6,000-year-old allele. While it is not yet known exactly what selective advantage is provided by this gene variant, the Haplogroup D allele is thought to be positively selected in populations and to confer some substantial advantage that has caused its frequency to rapidly increase.\n\nOne small DNA study has shown that Israeli Druze are remarkable for the high frequency (35%) of males who carry the Y-chromosomal haplogroup L (though some Afshar village and the Raqqa Syrians have even more), which is otherwise uncommon in the Mideast (Shen et al. 2004). This haplogroup originates from prehistoric South Asia and has spread from Pakistan into southern Iran. However, studies done on larger samples showed that L-M20 averages 5% in Israeli Druze, 8% in Lebanese Druze, and it was not found in a sample of 59 Syrian Druze.\n\nCruciani in 2007 found E1b1b1a2 (E-V13) [a subclade of E1b1b1a (E-M78)] in high levels (>10% of the male population) in Turkish Cypriot and Druze Arab lineages. Recent genetic clustering analyses of ethnic groups are consistent with the close ancestral relationship between the Druze and Cypriots, and also identified similarity to the general Syrian and Lebanese populations, as well as a variety of Jewish groups (Ashkenazi, Sephardi, Iraqi, and Moroccan) (Behar et al. 2010).\n\nAlso, a new study concluded that the Druze harbor a remarkable diversity of mitochondrial DNA lineages that appear to have separated from each other thousands of years ago. But instead of dispersing throughout the world after their separation, the full range of lineages can still be found within the Druze population.\n\nThe researchers noted that the Druze villages contained a striking range of high frequency and high diversity of the X haplogroup, suggesting that this population provides a glimpse into the past genetic landscape of the Near East at a time when the X haplogroup was more prevalent.\n\nThese findings are consistent with the Druze oral tradition, that claims that the adherents of the faith came from diverse ancestral lineages stretching back tens of thousands of years. The Shroud of Turin analysis shows significant traces of mitochondrial DNA unique to the Druze community.\n\nA 2008 study published on the genetic background of Druze communities in Israel showed highly heterogeneous parental origins. A total of 311 Israeli Druze were sampled: 37 from the Golan Heights, 183 from the Galilee, and 35 from Mount Carmel, as well as 27 Druze immigrants from Syria and 29 from Lebanon. The researchers found the following frequencies of Y-chromosomal haplogroups:\nBULLET::::- Mount Carmel: L 27%, R 27%, J 18%, E 15%, G 12%.\nBULLET::::- Galilee: J 31%, R 20%, E 18%, G 14%, K 11%, Q 4%, L 2%.\nBULLET::::- Golan Heights: J 54%, E 29%, I 8%, G 4%, C 4%.\nBULLET::::- Lebanon: J 31%, E 22%, K 21%, R 14%, L 10%.\nBULLET::::- Syria: J 39%, E 29%, R 14%, G 14%, K 4%.\n\nA 2016 study based on testing samples of Druze in the Syria (region) in comparison with ancient humans (including Anatolian and Armenian), and on Geographic Population Structure (GPS) tool by converting genetic distances into geographic distances, concluded that Druze might hail from the Zagros Mountains and the surroundings of Lake Van in eastern Anatolia, then they later migrated south to settle in the mountainous regions in Syria, Lebanon and Israel.\n\nBULLET::::- IDF Sword Battalion\nBULLET::::- Jaysh al-Muwahhideen\nBULLET::::- Jabal Druze State\nBULLET::::- List of Druze\nBULLET::::- Neoplatonism and Gnosticism\nBULLET::::- Religious syncretism\n\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- Jean-Marc Aractingi, \"Les Druzes et la Franc-maçonnerie\", in \"Les Cahiers de l'Orient\", no. 69, 1er trimestre 2003, Paris: L'Équerre et le Croissant, éditions Les Cahiers de l'Orient\nBULLET::::- Jean-Marc Aractingi, \"Points de convergence dans les rituels et symboles chez les Druzes et chez les francs-maçons\", in \"Les Cahiers\", Jean Scot Erigène, no 8, Franc-maçonnerie et Islamité, Paris: la Grande Loge de France.\nBULLET::::- Pinhas Inabri \"Pan-Arabism versus Pan-Islam – Where Do the Druze Fit?\"- http://jcpa.org/arabism-islam-where-druze-fit/\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Rabih Alameddine \"I, the Divine: A Novel in First Chapters\", Norton (2002). .\nBULLET::::- B. Destani, ed. \"Minorities in the Middle East: Druze Communities 1840–1974\", 4 volumes, Slough: Archive Editions (2006). .\nBULLET::::- R. Scott Kennedy \"The Druze of the Golan: A Case of Non-Violent Resistance\" \"Journal of Palestine Studies\", Vol. 13, No. 2 (Winter, 1984), pp. 48–6.\nBULLET::::- Dr. Anis Obeid: \"The Druze & Their Faith in Tawhid\", Syracuse University Press (July 2006). .\nBULLET::::- Samy Swayd \"The Druzes: An Annotated Bibliography\", Kirkland, Washington: ISES Publications (1998). .\nBULLET::::- Bashar Tarabieh \"Education, Control and Resistance in the Golan Heights\". \"Middle East Report\", No. 194/195, Odds against Peace (May–August 1995), pp. 43–47.\n"}
{"id": "8633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8633", "title": "December 12", "text": "December 12\n\nBULLET::::- 627 – Battle of Nineveh: A Byzantine army under Emperor Heraclius defeats Emperor Khosrau II's Persian forces, commanded by General Rhahzadh.\nBULLET::::- 884 – King Carloman II dies after a hunting accident. He is succeeded by his cousin, emperor Charles the Fat, who for the last time reunites the Frankish Empire.\nBULLET::::- 1098 – First Crusade: Siege of Ma'arrat al-Numan: Crusaders breach the town's walls and massacre about 20,000 inhabitants. After finding themselves with insufficient food, they reportedly resort to cannibalism.\nBULLET::::- 1388 – Maria of Enghien sells the lordship of Argos and Nauplia to the Republic of Venice.\nBULLET::::- 1408 – The Order of the Dragon, a monarchical chivalric order, is created by Sigismund of Luxembourg, then king of Hungary.\nBULLET::::- 1781 – American Revolutionary War: Second Battle of Ushant: A British fleet led by defeats a French fleet.\nBULLET::::- 1787 – Pennsylvania becomes the second state to ratify the United States Constitution, five days after Delaware became the first.\nBULLET::::- 1862 – American Civil War: sinks on the Yazoo River, becoming the first armored ship to be sunk by a controlled mine.\nBULLET::::- 1866 – Oaks explosion: The worst mining disaster in England kills 361 miners and rescuers.\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Joseph H. Rainey of South Carolina becomes the second black U.S. congressman, the first being Hiram Revels.\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Belo Horizonte, the first planned city in Brazil, is founded.\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Guglielmo Marconi receives the first transatlantic radio signal (the letter \"S\" [***] in Morse Code), at Signal Hill in St John's, Newfoundland.\nBULLET::::- 1911 – At the Delhi Durbar, George V is proclaimed emperor of India. He then announces that the seat of government will shift from Calcutta to Delhi, and that the partition of Bengal is annulled.\nBULLET::::- 1915 – President of the Republic of China, Yuan Shikai, announces his intention to reinstate the monarchy and proclaim himself Emperor of China.\nBULLET::::- 1917 – In Nebraska, Father Edward J. Flanagan founds Boys Town as a farm village for wayward boys.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The Flag of Estonia is raised atop the Pikk Hermann for the first time.\nBULLET::::- 1925 – The Majlis of Iran votes to crown Reza Khan as the new Shah of Iran, starting the Pahlavi dynasty.\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Lebensborn Project, a Nazi reproduction program, is founded by Heinrich Himmler.\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Xi'an Incident: The Generalissimo of the Republic of China, Chiang Kai-shek, is kidnapped by Zhang Xueliang.\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Second Sino-Japanese War: USS \"Panay\" incident: Japanese aircraft bomb and sink U.S. gunboat on the Yangtze river in China.\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Winter War: Battle of Tolvajärvi: Finnish forces defeat those of the Soviet Union in their first major victory of the conflict.\nBULLET::::- 1939 – sinks after a collision with off the coast of Scotland with the loss of 124 men.\nBULLET::::- 1940 – World War II: Approximately 70 people are killed in the Marples Hotel, Fitzalan Square, Sheffield, as a result of a German air raid.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – World War II: Fifty-four Japanese A6M Zero fighters raid Batangas Field, Philippines. Jesús Villamor and four Filipino fighter pilots fend them off; César Basa is killed.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – World War II: The United Kingdom declares war on Bulgaria. Hungary and Romania declare war on the United States. India declares war on Japan.\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Adolf Hitler declares the imminent extermination of the Jews at a meeting in the Reich Chancellery.\nBULLET::::- 1942 – World War II: German troops begin Operation Winter Storm, an attempt to relieve encircled Axis forces during the Battle of Stalingrad.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – A fire at an ice plant in Hudson Heights, Manhattan spreads to an adjacent tenement, killing 37 people.\nBULLET::::- 1946 – United Nations Security Council Resolution 13 relating to acceptance of Siam to United Nations is adopted.\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Malayan Emergency: Batang Kali massacre: Fourteen members of the Scots Guards stationed in Malaya allegedly massacre 24 unarmed civilians and set fire to the village.\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Paula Ackerman, the first woman appointed to perform rabbinical functions in the United States, leads the congregation in her first services.\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Beginning of the Irish Republican Army's \"Border Campaign\".\nBULLET::::- 1956 – United Nations Security Council Resolution 121 relating to acceptance of Japan to United Nations is adopted.\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Kenya gains its independence from the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Prime Minister Jomo Kenyatta becomes the first President of the Republic of Kenya.\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Years of Lead: Piazza Fontana bombing: The offices of Banca Nazionale dell'Agricoltura in Piazza Fontana, Milan, are bombed.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Coup d'état of December Twelfth: South Korean Army Major General Chun Doo-hwan orders the arrest of Army Chief of Staff General Jeong Seung-hwa without authorization from President Choi Kyu-ha, alleging involvement in the assassination of ex-President Park Chung-hee.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – President of Pakistan Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq confers \"Nishan-e-Imtiaz\" on Nobel laureate Dr Abdus Salam.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – The unrecognised state of Zimbabwe-Rhodesia returns to British control and resumes using the name Southern Rhodesia.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – The 8.2 Tumaco earthquake shakes Colombia and Ecuador with a maximum Mercalli intensity of IX (\"Violent\"), killing 300–600, and generating a large tsunami.\nBULLET::::- 1983 – The Australian Labor government led by Prime Minister Bob Hawke and Treasurer Paul Keating floats the Australian dollar.\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya becomes the third president of Mauritania after a coup d'état against Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla while the latter is attending a summit.\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Arrow Air Flight 1285, a McDonnell Douglas DC-8, crashes after takeoff in Gander, Newfoundland, killing all 256 people on board, including 236 members of the United States Army's 101st Airborne Division.\nBULLET::::- 1988 – The Clapham Junction rail crash kills thirty-five and injures hundreds after two collisions of three commuter trains—one of the worst train crashes in the United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 1991 – The Russian Federation withdraws from the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR.\nBULLET::::- 2000 – The United States Supreme Court releases its decision in \"Bush v. Gore\".\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Prime Minister of Vietnam Phan Văn Khải announces the decision on upgrading the Phong Nha–Kẻ Bàng nature reserve to a national park, providing information on projects for the conservation and development of the park and revised maps.\nBULLET::::- 2012 – North Korea successfully launches its first satellite, Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 Unit 2, using an Unha-3 carrier rocket.\nBULLET::::- 2015 – The Paris Agreement relating to United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is adopted.\n\nBULLET::::- 1298 – Albert II, Duke of Austria (d. 1358)\nBULLET::::- 1418 – Archduke Albert VI of Austria (d. 1463)\nBULLET::::- 1526 – Álvaro de Bazán, 1st Marquis of Santa Cruz, Spanish admiral (d. 1588)\nBULLET::::- 1574 – Anne of Denmark (d. 1619)\nBULLET::::- 1610 – Basil of Ostrog, Serbian monk and saint (d. 1671)\nBULLET::::- 1685 – Lodovico Giustini, Italian pianist and composer (d. 1743)\nBULLET::::- 1724 – Samuel Hood, 1st Viscount Hood, English admiral and politician (d. 1816)\nBULLET::::- 1731 – Erasmus Darwin, English physician and poet (d. 1802)\nBULLET::::- 1766 – Nikolay Karamzin, Russian poet and historian (d. 1826)\nBULLET::::- 1779 – Madeleine Sophie Barat, French nun and saint, founded the Society of the Sacred Heart (d. 1865)\nBULLET::::- 1786 – William L. Marcy, American lawyer, judge, and politician, 21st United States Secretary of State (d. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Alexander Ypsilantis, Greek-Russian general and politician, Military ruler of Moldavia (d. 1828)\nBULLET::::- 1799 – Karl Bryullov, Russian painter (d. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1805 – Henry Wells, American businessman, co-founded Wells Fargo and American Express (d. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1806 – Stand Watie, American general (d. 1871)\nBULLET::::- 1812 – John Sandfield Macdonald, Canadian lawyer and politician, 1st Premier of Ontario (d. 1872)\nBULLET::::- 1821 – Gustave Flaubert, French novelist (d. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1830 – Joseph Orville Shelby, Confederate general (d. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1842 – Adolf Bötticher, German journalist and historian (d. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Bruce Price, American architect, designed the American Surety Building and Bank of the Metropolis (d. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – William Kissam Vanderbilt, American businessman and horse breeder (d. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 1856 – Henry Moret, French painter (d. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1862 – J. Bruce Ismay, English businessman (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Edvard Munch, Norwegian painter and illustrator (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Paul Elmer More, American journalist, author, and critic (d. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1866 – Alfred Werner, Swiss chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1870 – Walter Benona Sharp, American businessman, co-founded Hughes Tool Company (d. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1875 – Gerd von Rundstedt, German field marshal (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1876 – Alvin Kraenzlein, American hurdler and runner (d. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1881 – Harry Warner, Polish-American businessman, co-founded Warner Bros (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1882 – Ioannis Demestichas, Greek admiral and politician (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Edmond Hogan, Australian politician, 30th Premier of Victoria (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Zinaida Serebriakova, Ukrainian-French painter (d. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – Kurt Atterberg, Swedish composer and engineer (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Milko Kos, Slovenian historian and academic (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1893 – Edward G. Robinson, American actor (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Sammy Davis, Sr., American actor and dancer (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Harald Kaarmann, Estonian footballer (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1903 – Yasujirō Ozu, Japanese director and screenwriter (d. 1963)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Nicolas de Gunzburg, French-American banker and journalist (d. 1981)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Manès Sperber, Austrian-French psychologist and author (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Vasily Grossman, Russian journalist and author (d. 1964)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Roy Douglas, English pianist and composer (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Gustav Ernesaks, Estonian composer and conductor (d. 1993)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Hans Keilson, German-Dutch psychologist, author, and poet (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – Karen Morley, American actress and political activist (d. 2003)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Boun Oum, Laotian politician, 5th Prime Minister of Laos (d. 1980)\nBULLET::::- 1912 – Henry Armstrong, American boxer (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Patrick O'Brian, English author and translator (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Frank Sinatra, American singer, actor, and producer (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – Joe Williams, American singer and pianist (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Olivia Barclay, English astrologer and author (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Dan DeCarlo, American soldier and illustrator (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Josef Doležal, Czech race walker (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Fred Kida, American illustrator (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Christian Dotremont, Belgian painter and poet (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Bob Barker, American game show host and producer\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Bob Dorough, American musician, composer, and producer (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Ed Koch, American lawyer, judge, and politician, 105th Mayor of New York City (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Ted Kennedy, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Dattu Phadkar, Indian cricketer (d. 1985)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Vladimir Shainsky, Ukrainian-Russian pianist and composer (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Ahmad Shamloo, Iranian journalist and poet (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Robert Noyce, American inventor and businessman, co-founded the Intel Corporation (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Chinghiz Aitmatov, Kyrgyzstani diplomat and author (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Lionel Blair, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Helen Frankenthaler, American painter and academic (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Toshiko Akiyoshi, Japanese pianist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1929 – John Osborne, English playwright and screenwriter (d. 1994)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Silvio Santos, Brazilian television host and businessman, founded Sistema Brasileiro de Televisão\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Baya, Algerian artist (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Bob Pettit, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Manu Dibango, Cameroonian saxophonist and vibraphone player\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Christa Stubnick, German sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Miguel de la Madrid, Mexican lawyer and politician, 52nd President of Mexico (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – John Wise, Canadian farmer and politician, 23rd Minister of Agriculture (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Iolanda Balaș, Romanian high jumper and educator (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Denise Coffey, English actress and director\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Michael Jeffery, Australian general and politician, 24th Governor-General of Australia\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Philip Ledger, English pianist, composer, and academic (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Buford Pusser, American police officer (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Connie Francis, American singer and actress\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Terry Kirkman, American singer-songwriter and musician\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Sharad Pawar, Indian politician, Indian Minister of Agriculture\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Dionne Warwick, American singer and television personality\nBULLET::::- 1941 - Nambi Narayanan, ISRO scientist and aerospace engineer\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Morris Sadek, Egyptian-American lawyer and activist\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Brough Scott, English jockey and journalist\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Vassilis Alexakis, Greek-French author and translator\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Dickey Betts, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Sadeq Tabatabaei, Iranian journalist and politician (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Grover Washington, Jr., American singer-songwriter, saxophonist, and producer (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Diana Bracho, Mexican actress\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Jean Doré, Canadian lawyer and politician, 39th Mayor of Montreal (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Cara Duff-MacCormick, Canadian actress\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Rob Tyner, American singer-songwriter and bass player (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Portia Simpson-Miller, Jamaican politician, 7th Prime Minister of Jamaica\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Tony Williams, American drummer, composer, and producer (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Emerson Fittipaldi, Brazilian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Will Alsop, English architect and academic (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Wings Hauser, American actor, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Chris Mullin, English journalist and politician\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Colin Todd, English football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Gopinath Munde, Indian lawyer and politician, 3rd Deputy Chief Minister of Maharashtra (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Bill Nighy, English actor\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Marc Ravalomanana, Malagasy businessman and politician, President of Madagascar\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Pedro Ferriz de Con, Mexican journalist\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Heiner Flassbeck, German economist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Gorman Thomas, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Rajinikanth, Indian actor\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Billy Smith, Canadian ice hockey player, coach, and manager\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Rehman Malik, Pakistani politician, Pakistani Minister of Interior\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Herb Dhaliwal, Indian-Canadian businessman and politician, 3rd Canadian Minister of Natural Resources\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Sarah Douglas, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Cathy Rigby, American gymnast\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Martin Ferguson, Australian lawyer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Bruce Kulick, American guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Rafael Septién, Mexican-American football player\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki, Greek businesswoman\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Eddy Schepers, Belgian cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Stephen Smith, Australian lawyer and politician, 53rd Australian Minister of Defence\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Johan van der Velde, Dutch cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Sheila E., American singer-songwriter, drummer, and actress\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Alexander Crutchfield, American businessman, financier and investor\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Jasper Conran, English fashion designer\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Martina Hellmann, German discus thrower\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Andrey Perlov, Russian race walker\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Tracy Austin, American tennis player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Arturo Barrios, Mexican-American runner\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Peter Bergen, American-English journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Mike Golic, American football player and radio host\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Ulrike Tillmann, German mathematician and academic\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Eduardo Castro Luque, Mexican businessman and politician (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Reeta Chakrabarti, English journalist\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Haywood Jeffires, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Sabu, American wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Will Carling, English rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Royce Gracie, Brazilian-American mixed martial artist and actor\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Ian Paisley, Jr., Northern Irish politician\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Yuzo Koshiro, Japanese composer and producer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – John Randle, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Rory Kennedy, American director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Sašo Udovič, Slovenian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Laurie Williams, Jamaican cricketer (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Sophie Kinsella, English author and educator\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Wilfred Kirochi, Kenyan runner\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Fiona May, English-Italian long jumper\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Michael Möllenbeck, German discus thrower\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Tahir Bilgic, Turkish-Australian comedian and actor\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Jennifer Connelly, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Regina Hall, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Sammy Korir, Kenyan runner\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Nicky Eaden, English footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Craig Field, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Wilson Kipketer, Kenyan-Danish runner\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Georgios Theodoridis, Greek sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Hank Williams III, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Tony Hsieh, American businessman, founded LinkExchange\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Bernard Lagat, Kenyan-American runner\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Nolberto Solano, Peruvian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Mayim Bialik, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Craig Moore, Australian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Dan Hawkins, English guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Brent Johnson, Canadian football player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Yoel Hernández, Cuban hurdler\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Dean Macey, English decathlete and bobsledder\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Colin White, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Gbenga Akinnagbe, American actor and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Shin Seung-hwan, South Korean actor\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Nate Clements, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – John Salmons, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Dejene Berhanu, Ethiopian runner (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Dorin Goian, Romanian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Berkant Göktan, Turkish-German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Jeret Peterson, American skier (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Pedro Ríos, Spanish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Yuvraj Singh, Indian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Stephen Warnock, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Dmitry Tursunov, Russian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Daniel Agger, Danish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Pat Calathes, Greek-American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Giannis Zaradoukas, Greek footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Daddy Birori, Rwandan footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Përparim Hetemaj, Finnish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Nina Kolarič, Slovenian long jumper\nBULLET::::- 1986 – T. J. Ward, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Marte Eberson, Norwegian keyboard player and composer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Isaac John, New Zealand rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Tony Williams, Australian-Tongan rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Nixon Chepseba, Kenyan runner\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Victor Moses, Nigerian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Seungri, South Korean singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Joseph Leilua, Australian-Samoan rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Zeli Ismail, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Otto Warmbier, American student imprisoned in North Korea (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Lucas Hedges, American actor\nBULLET::::- 884 – Carloman II, Frankish king (b. 866)\nBULLET::::- 894 – Guy III, king of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor\nBULLET::::- 948 – Li Song, Chinese official and chancellor\nBULLET::::- 1143 – Kogyo-Daishi, restorer of Shingon Buddhism in Japan (b. 1095)\nBULLET::::- 1204 – Maimonides, Egyptian religious scholar, philosopher and physician (b. 1135)\nBULLET::::- 1212 – Geoffrey, English archbishop and politician, Lord Chancellor of England (b. 1152)\nBULLET::::- 1475 – Joan of Portugal, Queen of Castile (b. 1439)\nBULLET::::- 1476 – Frederick I, Elector Palatine (b. 1425)\nBULLET::::- 1569 – Philip II, Metropolitan of Moscow (b. 1507)\nBULLET::::- 1574 – Selim II, Ottoman Sultan (b. 1524)\nBULLET::::- 1586 – Stephen Báthory, Polish king (b. 1533)\nBULLET::::- 1685 – John Pell, English mathematician and linguist (b. 1610)\nBULLET::::- 1751 – Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke, English philosopher and politician, Secretary at War (b. 1678)\nBULLET::::- 1758 – Françoise de Graffigny, French lettrist (b. 1695)\nBULLET::::- 1766 – Johann Christoph Gottsched, German philosopher, author, and critic (b. 1700)\nBULLET::::- 1782 – Charles Gray, English lawyer and politician (b. 1696)\nBULLET::::- 1789 – John Ponsonby, Irish lawyer and politician (b. 1713)\nBULLET::::- 1790 – Mikhail Shcherbatov, Russian historian and philosopher (b. 1733)\nBULLET::::- 1794 – Meshullam Feivush Heller, Ukrainian author (b. 1742)\nBULLET::::- 1803 – Prince Frederick Adolf of Sweden (b. 1750)\nBULLET::::- 1817 – Tekle Giyorgis I, Ethiopian emperor (b. 1751)\nBULLET::::- 1843 – William I of the Netherlands (b. 1772)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Jacques Viger, Canadian archeologist and politician, 1st Mayor of Montreal (b. 1787)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Robert Browning, English poet and playwright (b. 1812)\nBULLET::::- 1889 – Viktor Bunyakovsky, Ukrainian-Russian mathematician and theorist (b. 1804)\nBULLET::::- 1894 – John Sparrow David Thompson, Canadian lawyer, judge, and politician, 4th Prime Minister of Canada (b. 1845)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Menelik II, Ethiopian emperor (b. 1844)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Henrietta Swan Leavitt, American astronomer and academic (b. 1868)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Raymond Radiguet, French author and poet (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Alexander Parvus, Russian-German theorist and politician (b. 1867)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Jean Richepin, French author, poet, and playwright (b. 1849)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Thorleif Haug, Norwegian skier (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Douglas Fairbanks, Sr., American actor, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1883)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – César Basa, Filipino lieutenant and pilot (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Mildred Bailey, American singer (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Bedřich Hrozný, Czech orientalist and linguist (b. 1879)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Albert Walsh, Canadian lawyer and politician, 1st Lieutenant Governor of Newfoundland (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Yasujirō Ozu, Japanese director and screenwriter (b. 1903)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Maithili Sharan Gupt, Indian poet and playwright (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – William Rootes, 1st Baron Rootes, English businessman, founded Rootes Group (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Karl Ruberl, Austrian-American swimmer (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Tallulah Bankhead, American actress (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Doris Blackburn, Australian politician (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – George Terwilliger, American director and screenwriter (b. 1882)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Yechezkel Kutscher, Israeli philologist and linguist (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – David Sarnoff, Belarusian-American businessman (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Richard Baggallay, English colonel and cricketer (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Jack Cassidy, American actor (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Fay Compton, English actress (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Jean Lesage, Canadian lawyer and politician, 19th Premier of Quebec (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Anne Baxter, American actress (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Ian Stewart, Scottish keyboard player and manager (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Paul Verner, German politician (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Enrique Jorrín, Cuban violinist and composer (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Suzanne Lilar, Belgian author and playwright (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – József Antall, Hungarian historian and politician, 35th Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Stuart Roosa, American colonel, pilot, and astronaut (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Donna J. Stone, American poet and philanthropist (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Vance Packard, American journalist, author, and critic (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Evgenii Landis, Ukrainian-Russian mathematician and academic (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Lawton Chiles, American soldier, lawyer, and politician, 41st Governor of Florida (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Marco Denevi, Argentinian author and screenwriter (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Mo Udall, American captain and politician (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Paul Cadmus, American painter and illustrator (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Joseph Heller, American novelist, short story writer, and playwright(b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – George Montgomery, American actor, stuntman, director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Ndabaningi Sithole, Zimbabwean militant leader, founded Zimbabwe African National Union (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2001 – Ardito Desio, Italian geologist and explorer (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Dee Brown, American historian and author (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Heydar Aliyev, Azerbaijani general and politician, 3rd President of Azerbaijan (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Gangodawila Soma Thero, Sri Lankan monk and educator (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Robert Newmyer, American actor and producer (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Ramanand Sagar, Indian director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Annette Stroyberg, Danish actress (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Gebran Tueni, Lebanese journalist and politician (b. 1957)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Paul Arizin, American basketball player (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Peter Boyle, American actor (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Kenny Davern, American clarinet player and saxophonist (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Raymond P. Shafer, American lawyer and politician, 38th Governor of Pennsylvania (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Alan Shugart, American engineer and businessman, co-founded Seagate Technology (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – François al-Hajj, Lebanese general (b. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Ike Turner, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Avery Dulles, American cardinal and theologian (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Van Johnson, American actor (b. 1916)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Tassos Papadopoulos, Cypriot lawyer and politician, 5th President of Cyprus (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Tom Walkinshaw, Scottish race car driver, founded Tom Walkinshaw Racing (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Joe Allbritton, American banker, publisher, and philanthropist, founded the Allbritton Communications Company (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Nityanand Swami, Indian lawyer and politician, 1st Chief Minister of Uttarakhand (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – David Tait, English rugby player (b. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Tom Laughlin, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Abdul Quader Molla, Bangladeshi journalist and politician (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Leo Sachs, German-Israeli biologist and academic (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Jang Sung-taek, North Korean general and politician (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Audrey Totter, American actress (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Norman Bridwell, American author and illustrator, created \"Clifford the Big Red Dog\" (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Ivor Grattan-Guinness, English mathematician, historian, and academic (b. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Herb Plews, American baseball player (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Yury Shutov, Russian politician (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Luis Bermejo, Spanish illustrator (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Frans Geurtsen, Dutch footballer (b. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Sharad Anantrao Joshi, Indian farmer and politician (b. 1935)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Evelyn S. Lieberman, American politician, White House Deputy Chief of Staff (b. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Shirley Hazzard, Australian-American novelist, short story writer, and essayist (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Ed Lee, American politician and attorney, 43rd Mayor of San Francisco (b. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Pat DiNizio, American singer and songwriter (b. 1955)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Abra of Poitiers\nBULLET::::- Columba of Terryglass\nBULLET::::- Corentin of Quimper\nBULLET::::- Edburga of Minster-in-Thanet\nBULLET::::- Feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe\nBULLET::::- Finnian of Clonard\nBULLET::::- Vicelinus\nBULLET::::- December 12 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- Croatian Air Force Day (Croatia)\nBULLET::::- Feast of Masá'il (\"Questions\"), the first day of the 15th month of the Bahá'í calendar (Bahá'í Faith)\nBULLET::::- Ground Forces Day (Ukraine)\nBULLET::::- Jamhuri Day, celebrates the independence of Kenya from Britain in 1963.\nBULLET::::- Kanji Day (Japan)\nBULLET::::- Neutrality Day (Turkmenistan)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "8637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8637", "title": "Door", "text": "Door\n\nA door is a hinged or otherwise movable barrier that allows ingress and egress into an \"enclosure\". The opening in the wall can be referred to as a \"portal\". A door's essential and primary purpose is to provide security by controlling the portal (doorway). Conventionally, it is a panel that fits into the portal of a building, room, or vehicle. Doors are commonly made of a material suited to the task of which it is to perform. Doors are commonly attached by hinges within the portal but can be moved by other means such as slides or counterbalancing. \n\nThe door may be moved in various ways (at angles away from the portal, by sliding on a plane parallel to the frame, by folding in angles on a parallel plane, or by spinning along an axis at the center of the frame) to allow or prevent ingress or egress. In most cases, a door's interior matches its exterior side. But in other cases (e.g., a vehicle door) the two sides are radically different.\n\nDoors often incorporate locking mechanisms to ensure that only some people can open them. Doors can have devices such as knockers or doorbells by which people outside can announce their presence and summon someone either to open the door for them or give permission to open and enter. Apart from providing access into and out of a space, doors can have the secondary functions of ensuring privacy by preventing unwanted attention from outsiders, of separating areas with different functions, of allowing light to pass into and out of a space, of controlling ventilation or air drafts so that interiors may be more effectively heated or cooled, of dampening noise, and of blocking the spread of fire.\n\nDoors may have aesthetic, symbolic, ritualistic purposes. To be given the key to a door can signify a change in status from outsider to insider. Doors and doorways frequently appear in literature and the arts with metaphorical or allegorical import as a portent of change.\n\nThe earliest in records are those represented in the paintings of some Egyptian tombs, in which they are shown as single or double doors, each in a single piece of wood. Doors were once believed to be the literal doorway to the afterlife, and some doors leading to important places included designs of the afterlife. In Egypt, where the climate is intensely dry, there was no fear of their warping, but in other countries it was necessary to frame them, which according to Vitruvius (iv. 6.) was done with stiles (sea/si) and rails \"(see: Frame and panel)\": the spaces enclosed being filled with panels (tympana) let into grooves made in the stiles and rails. The stiles were the vertical boards, one of which, tenoned or hinged, is known as the hanging stile, the other as the middle or meeting stile. The horizontal cross pieces are the top rail, bottom rail, and middle or intermediate rails. \n\nThe most ancient doors were made of timber, such as those referred to in the Biblical depiction of King Solomon's temple being in olive wood (I Kings vi. 31-35), which were carved and overlaid with gold. The doors dwelt upon in Homer appear to have been cased in silver or brass. Besides olive wood, elm, cedar, oak and cypress were used. A 5,000-year-old door has been found by archaeologists in Switzerland.\n\nAll ancient doors were hung by pivots at the top and bottom of the hanging stile which worked in sockets in the lintel and sill, the latter being always in some hard stone such as basalt or granite. Those found at Nippur by Dr. Hilprecht dating from 2000 BC were in dolerite. The tenons of the gates at Balawat were sheathed with bronze (now in the British Museum). These doors or gates were hung in two leaves, each about wide and high; they were encased with bronze bands or strips, high, covered with repoussé decoration of figures. The wood doors would seem to have been about thick, but the hanging stile was over diameter. Other sheathings of various sizes in bronze have been found, which proves this to have been the universal method adopted to protect the wood pivots. In the Hauran in Syria, where timber is scarce the doors were made in stone, and one measuring by is in the British Museum; the band on the meeting stile shows that it was one of the leaves of a double door. At Kuffeir near Bostra in Syria, Burckhardt found stone doors, high, being the entrance doors of the town. In Etruria many stone doors are referred to by Dennis.\n\nAncient Greek and Roman doors were either single doors, double doors, triple doors, sliding doors or folding doors, in the last case the leaves were hinged and folded back. In Eumachia, is a painting of a door with three leaves. In the tomb of Theron at Agrigentum there is a single four-panel door carved in stone. In the Blundell collection is a bas-relief of a temple with double doors, each leaf with five panels. Among existing examples, the bronze doors in the church of SS. Cosmas and Damiano, in Rome, are important examples of Roman metal work of the best period; they are in two leaves, each with two panels, and are framed in bronze. Those of the Pantheon are similar in design, with narrow horizontal panels in addition, at the top, bottom and middle. Two other bronze doors of the Roman period are in the Lateran Basilica.\n\nThe Greek scholar Heron of Alexandria created the earliest known automatic door in the 1st century AD during the era of Roman Egypt. The first foot-sensor-activated automatic door was made in China during the reign of Emperor Yang of Sui (r. 604–618), who had one installed for his royal library. The first automatic gate operators were later created in 1206 by Arab inventor Al-Jazari.\n\nCopper and its alloys were integral in medieval architecture. The doors of the church of the Nativity at Bethlehem (6th century) are covered with plates of bronze, cut out in patterns. Those of Hagia Sophia at Constantinople, of the 8th and 9th century, are wrought in bronze, and the west doors of the cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle (9th century), of similar manufacture, were probably brought from Constantinople, as also some of those in St. Marks, Venice. The bronze doors on the Aachen Cathedral in Germany date back to about 800 AD. Bronze baptistery doors at the Cathedral of Florence were completed in 1423 by Ghiberti. \"(For more information, see: Copper in architecture).\"\n\nOf the 11th and 12th centuries there are numerous examples of bronze doors, the earliest being one at Hildesheim, Germany (1015). The Hildesheim design affected the concept of Gniezno door in Poland. Of others in South Italy and Sicily, the following are the finest: in Sant Andrea, Amalfi (1060); Salerno (1099); Canosa (1111); Troia, two doors (1119 and 1124); Ravello (1179), by Barisano of Trani, who also made doors for Trani cathedral; and in Monreale and Pisa cathedrals, by Bonano of Pisa. In all these cases the hanging stile had pivots at the top and bottom. The exact period when the hinge was substituted is not quite known, but the change apparently brought about another method of strengthening and decorating doors, viz, with wrought-iron bands of infinite varieties of design. As a rule three bands from which the ornamental work springs constitute the hinges, which have rings outside the hanging stiles fitting on to vertical tenons run into the masonry or wooden frame. There is an early example of the 12th century in Lincoln; in France the metal work of the doors of Notre Dame at Paris is perhaps the most beautiful in execution, but examples are endless throughout France and England.\n\nReturning to Italy, the most celebrated doors are those of the Battistero di San Giovanni (Florence), which together with the door frames are all in bronze, the borders of the latter being perhaps the most remarkable: the modeling of the figures, birds and foliage of the south doorway, by Andrea Pisano (1330), and of the east doorway by Ghiberti (1425–1452), are of great beauty; in the north door (1402–1424) Ghiberti adopted the same scheme of design for the paneling and figure subjects in them as Andrea Pisano, but in the east door the rectangular panels are all filled, with bas-reliefs, in which Scripture subjects are illustrated with innumerable figures, these being probably the gates of Paradise of which Michelangelo speaks.\n\nThe doors of the mosques in Cairo were of two kinds; those which, externally, were cased with sheets of bronze or iron, cut out in decorative patterns, and incised or inlaid, with bosses in relief; and those in wood, which were framed with interlaced designs of the square and diamond, this latter description of work being Coptic in its origin. The doors of the palace at Palermo, which were made by Saracenic workmen for the Normans, are fine examples and in good preservation. A somewhat similar decorative class of door to these latter is found in Verona, where the edges of the stiles and rails are beveled and notched.\n\nIn the Renaissance period the Italian doors are quite simple, their architects trusting more to the doorways for effect; but in France and Germany the contrary is the case, the doors being elaborately carved, especially in the Louis XIV and Louis XV periods, and sometimes with architectural features such as columns and entablatures with pediment and niches, the doorway being in plain masonry. While in Italy the tendency was to give scale by increasing the number of panels, in France the contrary seems to have been the rule; and one of the great doors at Fontainebleau, which is in two leaves, is entirely carried out as if consisting of one great panel only.\n\nThe earliest Renaissance doors in France are those of the cathedral of St. Sauveur at Aix (1503). In the lower panels there are figures . high in Gothic niches, and in the upper panels a double range of niches with figures about . high with canopies over them, all carved in cedar. The south door of Beauvais Cathedral is in some respects the finest in France; the upper panels are carved in high relief with figure subjects and canopies over them. The doors of the church at Gisors (1575) are carved with figures in niches subdivided by classic pilasters superimposed. In St. Maclou at Rouen are three magnificently carved doors; those by Jean Goujon have figures in niches on each side, and others in a group of great beauty in the center. The other doors, probably about forty to fifty years later, are enriched with bas-reliefs, landscapes, figures and elaborate interlaced borders.\n\nNASA's Vehicle Assembly Building at the Kennedy Space Center contains the four largest doors. The Vehicle Assembly Building was originally built for the assembly of the Apollo missions' Saturn vehicles and was then used to support Space Shuttle operations. Each of the four doors are 139 meters (456 feet) high.\n\nThe oldest door in England can be found in Westminster Abbey and dates from 1050. In England in the 17th century the door panels were raised with bolection or projecting moldings, sometimes richly carved, round them; in the 18th century the moldings worked on the stiles and rails were carved with the egg and tongue ornament.\n\nThere are many kinds of doors, with different purposes. The most common type is the single-leaf door, which consists of a single rigid panel that fills the doorway. There are many variations on this basic design, such as the double-leaf door or double door and French windows, which have two adjacent independent panels hinged on each side of the doorway.\nBULLET::::- A half door or Dutch door or stable door is divided in half horizontally. Traditionally the top half can be opened to allow a horse or other animal to be fed, while the bottom half remains closed to keep the animal inside. This style of door has been adapted for homes.\nBULLET::::- Saloon doors are a pair of lightweight swing doors often found in public bars, and especially associated with the American west. Saloon doors, also known as cafe doors, often use bidirectional hinges that close the door regardless of which direction it is opened by incorporating springs. Saloon doors that only extend from knee-level to chest-level are known as batwing doors.\nBULLET::::- A blind door, Gibb door, or jib door has no visible trim or operable components. It is designed to blend with the adjacent wall in all finishes, and visually to be a part of the wall, a disguised door.\nBULLET::::- A French door consists of a frame around one or more transparent or translucent panels (called lights or lites) that may be installed singly, in matching pairs, or even as series. A matching pair of these doors is called a French window, as it resembles a door-height casement window. When a pair of French doors is used as a French window, the application does not generally include a central mullion (as do some casement window pairs), thus allowing a wider unobstructed opening. The frame typically requires a weather strip at floor level and where the doors meet to prevent water ingress. An espagnolette bolt may allow the head and foot of each door to be secured in one movement. The slender window joinery maximizes light into the room and minimizes the visual impact of the doorway joinery when considered externally. The doors of a French window often open outward onto a balcony, porch, or terrace and they may provide an entrance to a garden.\nBULLET::::- A louvred door has fixed or movable wooden fins (often called slats or louvers) which permit open ventilation while preserving privacy and preventing the passage of light to the interior. Being relatively weak structures, they are most commonly used for wardrobes and drying rooms, where security is of less importance than good ventilation, although a very similar structure is commonly used to form window shutters. Double louvred doors were introduced into \"Seagate\", built in Florida in 1929 by Gwendolyn and Powel Crosley, that provided the desired circulation of air with an added degree of privacy in that it is impossible to see through the fins in any direction.\n\nBULLET::::- A composite door is a single leaf door that can be solid or with glass, and is usually filled with high density foam. In the United Kingdom, it is common for composite doors to be certified to BS PAS 23/24 and be compliant with Secured by Design, an official UK police initiative.\n\nBULLET::::- A steel security door is one which is made from strong steel, often for use on vaults and safe rooms to withstand attack. These may also be fitted with wooden outer panels to resemble standard internal and external doors.\nBULLET::::- A flush door is a completely smooth door, having plywood or MDF fixed over a light timber frame, the hollow parts of which are often filled with a cardboard core material. Skins can also be made out of hardboards, the first of which was invented by William H Mason in 1924. Called Masonite, its construction involved pressing and steaming wood chips into boards. Flush doors are most commonly employed in the interior of a dwelling, although slightly more substantial versions are occasionally used as exterior doors, especially within hotels and other buildings containing many independent dwellings.\nBULLET::::- A moulded door has the same structure as that of flush door. The only difference is that the surface material is a moulded skin made of MDF. Skins can also be made out of hardboards.\nBULLET::::- A ledge and brace door often called board and batten doors are made from multiple vertical boards fixed together by two or more horizontal timbers called ledges (or battens)and sometimes kept square by additional diagonal timbers called braces.\nBULLET::::- A wicket door is a pedestrian door built into a much larger door allowing access without requiring the opening of the larger door. Examples might be found on the ceremonial door of a cathedral or in a large vehicle door in a garage or hangar.\nBULLET::::- A bifold door is a unit that has several sections, folding in pairs. Wood is the most common material, and doors may also be metal or glass. Bifolds are most commonly made for closets, but may also be used as units between rooms. Bi-fold doors are essentially now doors that let the outside in. They open in concert; where the panels fold up against one another and are pushed together when opened. The main door panel (often known as the traffic door) is accompanied by a stack of panels that fold very neatly against one another when opened fully, which almost look like room dividers.\nBULLET::::- A sliding glass door, sometimes called an Arcadia door or patio door, is a door made of glass that slides open and sometimes has a screen (a removable metal mesh that covers the door).\nBULLET::::- Australian doors are a pair of plywood swinging doors often found in Australian public houses. These doors are generally red or brown in color and bear a resemblance to the more formal doors found in other British Colonies' public houses.\nBULLET::::- A false door is a wall decoration that looks like a window. In ancient Egyptian architecture, this was a common element in a tomb, the false door representing a gate to the afterlife. They can also be found in the funerary architecture of the desert tribes (e.g., Libyan Ghirza).\nBULLET::::- A doormat (also called door mat) is a mat placed typically in front of or behind a door of a home. This practice originated so that mud and dirt would be less prevalent on floors inside a building.\n\nMost doors are hinged along one side to allow the door to pivot away from the doorway in one direction, but not the other. The axis of rotation is usually vertical. In some cases, such as hinged garage doors, the axis may be horizontal, above the door opening.\n\nDoors can be hinged so that the axis of rotation is not in the plane of the door to reduce the space required on the side to which the door opens. This requires a mechanism so that the axis of rotation is on the side other than that in which the door opens. This is sometimes the case in trains or airplanes, such as for the door to the toilet, which opens inward.\n\nA swing door has special single-action hinges that allow it to open either outwards or inwards, and is usually sprung to keep it closed.\nA selfbolting door has special hinges that permit the panel leaf to move laterally, so that the door itself becomes a giant bolt for better security. The selfbolting door principle can be used both for hinged doors as for rotating doors, as well as up-and-over doors (in the latter case, the bolts are then placed at top and bottom rather than at the sides).\n\nFrench doors are derived from an original French design called the casement door. It is a door with lites where all or some panels would be in a casement door. A French door traditionally has a moulded panel at the bottom of the door. It is called a French window when used in a pair as double-leaved doors with large glass panels in each door leaf, and in which the doors may swing out (typically) as well as in.\n\nA Mead door, developed by S Mead of Leicester, swings both ways. It is susceptible to forced entry due to its design.\n\nA Dutch door or stable door consists of two halves. The top half operates independently from the bottom half. A variant exists in which opening the top part separately is possible, but because the lower part has a lip on the inside, closing the top part, while leaving the lower part open, is not.\n\nA garden door resembles a French window (with lites), but is more secure because only one door is operable. The hinge of the operating door is next to the adjacent fixed door and the latch is located at the wall opening jamb rather than between the two doors or with the use of an espagnolette bolt.\n\nIt is often useful to have doors which slide along tracks, often for space or aesthetic considerations.\n\nA bypass door is a door unit that has two or more sections. The doors can slide in either direction along one axis on parallel overhead tracks, sliding past each other. They are most commonly used in closets, in order to access one side of the closet at a time. The doors in a bypass unit will overlap slightly when viewed from the front, in order not to have a visible gap between them.\n\nDoors which slide inside a wall cavity are called pocket doors. This type of door is used in tight spaces where privacy is also required. The door slab is mounted to roller and a track at the top of the door and slides inside a wall. \n\nSliding glass doors are common in many houses, particularly as an entrance to the backyard. Such doors are also popular for use for the entrances to commercial structures, although they are not counted as fire exit doors. The door that moves is called the \"active leaf\", while the door that remains fixed is called the \"inactive leaf\".\n\nA revolving door has several wings or leaves, generally four, radiating from a central shaft, forming compartments that rotate about a vertical axis. A revolving door allows people to pass in both directions without colliding, and forms an airlock maintaining a seal between inside and out.\n\nA pivot door, instead of hinges, is supported on a bearing some distance away from the edge, so that there is more or less of a gap on the pivot side as well as the opening side. In some cases the pivot is central, creating two equal openings.\n\nA high-speed door is a very fast door some with opening speeds of up to 4 m/s, mainly used in the industrial sector where the speed of a door has an effect on production logistics, temperature and pressure control. high-speed clean room doors are used in pharmaceutical industries for the special curtain and stainless steel frames. They guarantee the tightness of all accesses. The powerful high-speed doors have a smooth surface structure and no protruding edges. Therefore, they can be easily cleaned and depositing of particles is largely excluded. \n\nHigh-speed doors are made to handle a high number of openings, generally more than 200,000 a year. They need to be built with heavy-duty parts and counterbalance systems for speed enhancement and emergency opening function. The door curtain was originally made of PVC, but was later also developed in aluminium and acrylic glass sections. High Speed refrigeration and cold room doors with excellent insulation values was also introduced with the Green and Energy saving requirements.\n\nIn North America, the Door and Access Systems Manufacturing Association (DASMA) defines high-performance doors as non-residential, powered doors, characterized by rolling, folding, sliding or swinging action, that are either high-cycle (minimum 100 cycles/day) or high-speed (minimum 20 inches(508 mm)/second), and two out of three of the following: made-to-order for exact size and custom features, designed to be able to withstand equipment impact (break-away if accidentally hit by vehicle) or designed to sustain heavy usage with minimal maintenance.\n\nAutomatically opening doors are powered open and closed either by electricity, spring, or both. There are several methods by which an automatically opening door is activated:\n\nBULLET::::1. A sensor detects traffic is approaching. Sensors for automatic doors are generally:\nBULLET::::- A pressure sensor – e.g., a floor mat which reacts to the pressure of someone standing on it.\nBULLET::::- An infrared curtain or beam which shines invisible light onto sensors; if someone or something blocks the beam the door is triggered open.\nBULLET::::- A motion sensor which uses low-power microwave radar for the same effect.\nBULLET::::- A remote sensor (e.g. based on infrared or radio waves) can be triggered by a portable remote control, or is installed inside a vehicle. These are popular for garage doors.\nBULLET::::2. A switch is operated manually, perhaps after security checks. This can be a push button switch or a swipe card.\nBULLET::::3. The act of pushing or pulling the door triggers the open and close cycle. These are also known as power-assisted doors.\n\nIn addition to activation sensors automatically opening doors are generally fitted with safety sensors. These are usually an infrared curtain or beam, but can be a pressure mat fitted on the swing side of the door. The purpose of the safety sensor is to prevent the door from colliding with an object in its path by stopping or slowing its motion.A mechanism is set in modern automatic doors to ensure that door will be in open state in case of power failure.\n\nUp-and-over or overhead doors are often used in garages. Instead of hinges it has a mechanism, often counterbalanced or sprung, that allows it to be lifted so that it rests horizontally above the opening. A roller shutter or sectional overhead door is one variant of this type.\n\nA tambour door or roller door is an up-and-over door made of narrow horizontal slats and \"rolls\" up and down by sliding along vertical tracks and is typically found in entertainment centres and cabinets.\n\nInward opening doors are doors that can only be opened (or forced open) from outside a building. Such doors pose a substantial fire risk to occupants of occupied buildings when they are locked. As such doors can only be forced open from the outside, building occupants would be prevented from escaping. In commercial and retail situations manufacturers have included in the design a mechanism that allows an inward opening door to be pushed open outwards in the event of an emergency (which is often a regulatory requirement). This is known as a 'breakaway' feature. Pushing the door outward at its closed position, through a switch mechanism, disconnects power to the latch and allows the door to swing outward. Upon returning the door to the closed position, power is restored.\n\nRebated doors, a term chiefly used in Britain, are double doors having a lip or overlap (i.e. a Rabbet) on the vertical edge(s) where they meet. Fire-rating can be achieved with an applied edge-guard or astragal molding on the meeting stile, in accordance with the American Fire door.\n\nEvolution Door is a trackless door that moves in the same closure level as a sliding door. The system is an invention of the Austrian artist Klemens Torggler. It is a further development of the that normally consists of two rotatable, connected panels which move to each other when opening.\n\nArchitectural doors have numerous general and specialized uses. Doors are generally used to separate interior spaces (closets, rooms, etc.) for convenience, privacy, safety, and security reasons. Doors are also used to secure passages into a building from the exterior, for reasons of climate control and safety.\n\nDoors also are applied in more specialized cases:\nBULLET::::- A Blast-proof door is constructed to allow access to a structure as well as to provide protection from the force of explosions.\nBULLET::::- A garden door is any door that opens to a backyard or garden. This term is often used specifically for French windows, double French doors (with lites instead of panels), in place of a sliding glass door. The term also may refer to what is known as \"patio doors\".\nBULLET::::- A jib door is a concealed door, whose surface reflects the moldings and finishes of the wall. These were used in historic English houses, mainly as servants' doors.\nBULLET::::- A pet door (also known as a cat flap or dog door) is an opening in a door to allow pets to enter and exit without the main door's being opened. It may be simply covered by a rubber flap, or it may be an actual door hinged on the top that the pet can push through. Pet doors may be mounted in a sliding glass door as a new (permanent or temporary) panel. Pet doors may be unidirectional, only allowing pets to exit. Additionally, pet doors may be electronic, only allowing animals with a special electronic tag to enter.\nBULLET::::- A trapdoor is a door that is oriented horizontally in a ceiling or floor, often accessed via a ladder.\nBULLET::::- A water door or water entrance, such as those used in Venice, Italy, is a door leading from a building built on the water, such as a canal, to the water itself where, for example, one may enter or exit a private boat or water taxi.\n\nPanel doors, also called stile and rail doors, are built with frame and panel construction. EN 12519 is describing the terms which are officially used in European Member States. The main parts are listed below:\nBULLET::::- Stiles – Vertical boards that run the full height of a door and compose its right and left edges. The hinges are mounted to the fixed side (known as the \"hanging stile\"), and the handle, lock, bolt or latch are mounted on the swinging side (known as the \"latch stile\").\nBULLET::::- Rails – Horizontal boards at the top, bottom, and optionally in the middle of a door that join the two stiles and split the door into two or more rows of panels. The \"top rail\" and \"bottom rail\" are named for their positions. The bottom rail is also known as \"kick rail\". A middle rail at the height of the bolt is known as the \"lock rail\", other middle rails are commonly known as \"cross rails\".\nBULLET::::- Mullions – Smaller optional vertical boards that run between two rails, and split the door into two or more columns of panels, the term is used sometimes for verticals in doors, but more often (UK and Australia) it refers to verticals in windows.\nBULLET::::- Muntin – Optional vertical members that divide the door into smaller panels.\nBULLET::::- Panels – Large, wider boards used to fill the space between the stiles, rails, and mullions. The panels typically fit into grooves in the other pieces, and help to keep the door rigid. Panels may be flat, or in raised panel designs. Can be glued in or stay as a floating panel.\nBULLET::::- Light – a piece of glass used in place of a panel, essentially giving the door a window.\n\nAlso known as ledges and braced,\nBoard and batten doors are an older design consisting primarily of vertical slats:\nBULLET::::- Planks – Boards wider than 9\" that extend the full height of the door, and are placed side by side filling the door's width.\nBULLET::::- Ledges and braces – Ledges extend horizontally across the door which the boards are affixed to. The ledges hold the planks together. When diagonally they are called braces which prevent the door from skewing. On some doors, especially antique ones, the ledges are replaced with iron bars that are often built into the hinges as extensions of the door-side plates.\n\nAs board and Batten doors\n\nImpact-resistant doors have rounded stile edges to dissipate energy and minimize edge chipping, scratching and denting. The formed edges are often made of an engineered material. Impact-resistant doors excel in high traffic areas such as hospitals, schools, hotels and coastal areas.\n\nThis type consists of a solid timber frame, filled on one face, face with Tongue and Grooved boards. Quite often used externally with the boards on the weather face.\n\nMany modern doors, including most interior doors, are flush doors:\nBULLET::::- Stiles and rails – As above, but usually smaller. They form the outside edges of the door.\nBULLET::::- Core material: Material within the door used simply to fill space, provide rigidity and reduce drumminess.\nBULLET::::- Hollow-core – Often consists of a lattice or honeycomb made of corrugated cardboard, or thin wooden slats. Can also be built with staggered wooden blocks. Hollow-core flush doors are commonly used as interior doors.\nBULLET::::- Lock block – A solid block of wood mounted within a hollow-core flush door near the bolt to provide a solid and stable location for mounting the door's hardware.\nBULLET::::- Stave-core – Consists of wooden slats stacked upon one another in a manner similar to a board and batten door (though the slats are usually thinner) or the wooden-block hollow-core (except that the space is entirely filled).\nBULLET::::- Solid-core – Can consist of low-density particle board or foam used to completely fill the space within the door. Solid-core flush doors (especially foam-core ones) are commonly used as exterior doors because they provide more insulation and strength.\nBULLET::::- Skin – The front and back faces of the door are then covered with wood veneer, thin plywood, sheet metal, fiberglass, or vinyl. The wooden materials are usually layered with the grain alternating direction between layers to prevent warping. Fiberglass and metal-faced doors are sometimes given a layer of cellulose so that they may be stained to look like wood.\n\nBULLET::::- Stiles and rails – As above, but usually smaller. They form the outside edges of the door.\nBULLET::::- Core material: Material within the door used simply to fill space, provide rigidity and reduce druminess.\nBULLET::::- Hollow-core – Often consists of a lattice or honeycomb made of corrugated cardboard, extruded polystyrene foam, or thin wooden slats. Can also be built with staggered wooden blocks. Hollow-core molded doors are commonly used as interior doors.\nBULLET::::- Lock block – A solid block of wood mounted within a hollow-core flush door near the bolt to provide a solid and stable location for mounting the door's hardware.\nBULLET::::- Stave-core – Consists of wooden slats stacked upon one another in a manner similar to a board & batten door (though the slats are usually thinner) or the wooden-block hollow-core (except that the space is entirely filled).\nBULLET::::- Solid-core – Can consist of low-density particle board or foam used to completely fill the space within the door. Solid-core flush doors (especially foam-core ones) are commonly used as exterior doors because they provide more insulation and strength.\nBULLET::::- Skin – The front and back faces of the door are covered with HDF / MDF skins.\n\nDoor swings\n\nFor most of the world, door swings, or handing, are determined while standing on the outside or less secure side of the door while facing the door (i.e., standing on the side requiring a key to open, going from outside to inside, or from public to private).\n\nIt is especially important to get the hand and swing correct on exterior doors, as the transom is usually sloped and sealed to resist water entry, and to properly drain. In some custom millwork (or with some master carpenters), the manufacture or installer will bevel the leading edge (the first edge to meet the jamb as the door is closing) so that the door fits tight without binding. Specifying an incorrect hand or swing will cause the door to bind, not close properly or leak (for exterior doors). Fixing this specification error will be expensive or time consuming. In North America, many doors now come with factory-installed hinges, pre-hung on the jamb and sills.\n\nWhile facing the door from the outside or less secure side, if the hinge is on the right side of the door, the door is \"right handed\"; or if the hinge is on the left, it is \"left handed\". If the door swings toward you, it is \"reverse swing\"; or if the door swings away from you, it is \"Normal swing\".\n\nIn other words,\nBULLET::::- In the United States:\nBULLET::::- Left hand hinge (LHH): Standing outside (or on the less secure side, or on the public side of the door), the hinges are on the left and the door opens in (away from you).\nBULLET::::- Right hand hinge (RHH): Standing outside (or on the less secure side), the hinges are on the right and the door opens in (away from you).\nBULLET::::- Left hand reverse (LHR): Standing outside the house (or on the less secure side), the hinges are on the left, knob on right, on opening the door it swings towards you (i.e. the door swings open towards the outside, or \"outswing\")\nBULLET::::- Right hand reverse (RHR): Standing outside the house (i.e. on the less secure side), the hinges are on the right, knob on left, opening the door by pulling the door towards you (i.e. open swings to the outside, or \"outswing\")\n\nBULLET::::- In Europe:\nOne of the oldest DIN standard applies: DIN 107 \"Building construction; identification of right and left side\" (first 1922-05, current 1974-04) defines that doors are categorized from the side where the door hinges can be seen. If the hinges are on the left, it is a DIN Left door (DIN links, DIN gauche), if the hinges are on the right, it is a DIN Right door (DIN rechts, DIN droite). The DIN Right and DIN Left marking are also used to categorize matching installation material such as mortise locks (referenced in DIN 107). The European Standard DIN EN 12519 \"Windows and pedestrian doors. Terminology\" includes these definitions of orientation.\n\nBULLET::::- In Australia:\nThe \"refrigerator rule\" applies, and a refrigerator door is not opened from the inside. If the hinges are on the right then it is a right hand (or right hung) door. (Australian Standards for Installation of Timber Doorsets, AS 1909–1984 pg 6.)\n\nIn public buildings, exterior doors should open to the outside in order to comply with any fire codes that may be in force in that jurisdiction. If the door opens inward and there is a fire, there can be a crush of people who run for the door and they will not be able to open it.\n\nNew exterior doors are largely defined by the type of materials they are made from: wood, steel, fiberglass, UPVC/vinyl, aluminum, composite, glass (patio doors)...\nWooden doors – including solid wood doors – are a top choice for many homeowners, largely because of the aesthetic qualities of wood. Many wood doors are custom-made, but they have several downsides: their price, their maintenance requirements (regular painting and staining) and their limited insulating value (R-5 to R-6, not including the effects of the glass elements of the doors). Wood doors often have an overhang requirement to maintain a warranty. An overhang is a roof, porch area or awning that helps to protect the door and its finish from UV rays.\n\nSteel doors are another major type of residential front doors; most of them come with a polyurethane or other type of foam insulation core – a critical factor in a building's overall comfort and efficiency. Steel doors mostly in default comes along with frame and lock system, which is a high cost efficiency factor compared to \"Wooden doors\"\n\nMost modern exterior walls are designed to provide thermal insulation and energy efficiency, which can be indicated by the Energy Star label or the Passive House standards. Premium composite (including steel doors with a thick core of polyurethane or other foam), fiberglass and vinyl doors benefit from the materials they are made from, from a thermal perspective.\n\nBut there are very few door models with an R-value close to 10 (which is far less than the R-40 walls or the R-50 ceilings of super-insulated buildings – Passive Solar and Zero Energy Buildings). Typical doors are not thick enough to provide very high levels of energy efficiency.\n\nMany doors may have good R-values at their center, but their overall energy efficiency is reduced because of the presence of glass and reinforcing elements, or because of poor weatherstripping and the way the door is manufactured.\n\nDoor weatherstripping is particularly important for energy efficiency. German-made Passive House doors use multiple weatherstrips, including magnetic strips, to meet higher standards. These weatherstrips are critical to reduce to a minimum energy losses due to air leakage.\n\nThe standard door sizes in the US run along 2\" increments. Customary sizes have a height of 78\" (1981 mm) or 80\" (2032 mm) and a width of 18\" (472 mm), 24\" (610 mm), 26\" (660 mm), 28\" (711 mm), 30\" (762 mm) or 36\" (914 mm). Most residential passage (room to room) doors are 30\" x 80\" (762 mm x 2032 mm).\n\nA standard US residential (exterior) door size is 36\" x 80\" (91 x 203 cm). Interior doors for wheelchair access must also have a minimum width of 3'-0\" (91 cm). Residential interior doors are often somewhat smaller being 6'-8\" high, as are many small stores, offices, and other light commercial buildings. Larger commercial, public buildings and grand homes often use doors of greater height. Older buildings often have smaller doors.\n\nThickness: Most pre-fabricated doors are 1 3/8\" thick (for interior doors) or 1 3/4\" (exterior).\n\nClosets: small spaces such as closets, dressing rooms, half-baths, storage rooms, cellars, etc. often are accessed through doors smaller than passage doors in one or both dimensions but similar in design.\n\nGarages: Garage doors are generally 7'-0\" or 8'-0\" wide for a single-car opening. Two car garage doors (sometimes called double car doors) are a single door 16'-0\". Because of size and weight these doors are usually sectional. That is split into four or five horizontal sections so that they can be raised more easily and don't require a lot of additional space above the door when opening and closing. There are single piece double garage doors found in some older homes. circa 1950's\n\nThe standard DIN doors are defined in DIN 18101 (published 1955-07, 1985-01, 2014-08). The door sizes are also given in the construction standard for wooden door panels (DIN 68706-1). The DIN commission was also responsible for the harmonized European standard DIN EN 14351-1 for exterior doors and DIN EN 14351-2 for interior doors (published 2006-07, 2010-08), which defines the requirements for the CE marking giving standard sizes by examples in the appendix.\n\nThe DIN 18101 standard has a normative size (Nennmaß) slightly larger than the panel size (Türblatt) as the standard derives the panel sizes from the normative size being different single door vs double door and molded vs unmolded doors. The DIN 18101/1985 defines interior single molded doors to have a common panel height of 1985 mm (normativ height 2010 mm) at panel widths of 610 mm, 735 mm, 860 mm, 985 mm, 1110 mm, plus a larger door panel size of 1110 mm x 2110 mm. The newer DIN 18101/2014 drops the definition of just five standard door sizes in favor of a basic raster running along 125 mm increments where the height and width are independent. The panel width may be in the range 485 mm to 1360 mmm, and the height may be in the range of 1610 mm to 2735 mm. The most common interior door is 860 mm x 1985 mm (33.8\" x 78.1\").\n\nWhen framed in wood for snug fitting of a door, the doorway consists of two vertical \"jambs\" on either side, a \"lintel\" or \"head jamb\" at the top, and perhaps a \"threshold\" at the bottom. When a door has more than one movable section, one of the sections may be called a \"leaf\". See door furniture for a discussion of attachments to doors such as door handles, doorknobs, and door knockers.\nBULLET::::- Lintel – A horizontal beam above a door that supports the wall above it. (Also known as a \"header\")\nBULLET::::- Jambs or legs – The vertical posts that form the sides of a door frame, where the hinges are mounted, and with which the bolt interacts.\nBULLET::::- Sill (for exterior doors) – A horizontal sill plate below the door that supports the door frame. Similar to a Window Sill but for a door\nBULLET::::- Threshold (for exterior doors) – A horizontal plate below the door that bridges the crack between the interior floor and the sill.\nBULLET::::- Doorstop – a thin slat built inside the frame to prevent a door from swinging through when closed, an act which might break the hinges.\nBULLET::::- Architrave – The decorative molding that outlines a door frame. (called an Archivolt if the door is arched). Called \"door casing\" or \"brickmold\" in North America.\n\nDoor furniture or hardware refers to any of the items that are attached to a door or a drawer to enhance its functionality or appearance. This includes items such as hinges, handles, door stops, etc.\n\nDoor safety relates to prevention of door-related accidents. Such accidents take place in various forms, and in a number of locations; ranging from car doors to garage doors. Accidents vary in severity and frequency. According to the National Safety Council in the United States, 300,000 injuries are caused by doors every year.\n\nThe types of accidents vary from relatively minor cases where doors cause damage to other objects, such as walls, to serious cases resulting in human injury, particularly to fingers, hands, and feet. A closing door can exert up to 40 tons per square inch of pressure between the hinges. Because of the number of accidents taking place, there has been a surge in the number of lawsuits. Thus organisations may be at risk when car doors or doors within buildings are unprotected.\n\nAccording to the US General Services Administration, discussing child care centres:\nWhenever a door is opened outwards there is a risk that it could strike another person. In many cases this can be avoided by architectural design which favors doors which open inwards into rooms (from the perspective of a common area such as a corridor, the door opens outwards). In cases where this is infeasible, it may be possible to avoid an accident by placing vision panels in the door.\n\nHowever, inward-hinged doors can also escalate an accident by preventing people from escaping the building: people inside the building may press against the doors, and thus prevent the doors from opening. This was partly the case in the Grue Church fire in Norway in 1822.\n\nToday, the exterior doors of most large (especially public) buildings open outward, while interior doors such as doors to individual rooms, offices, suites, etc. open inward, as do many exterior doors of houses, particularly in North America.\n\nDoorstops are simple devices used to prevent a door from coming into contact with another object (typically a wall). Without the door stop damage might be done to the wall. They may either absorb the force of a moving door, or hold the door in place to prevent unintended motion.\n\nThe purpose of door guards (also known as hinge guards, anti-finger trapping devices, or finger guards) is to reduce the number of finger trapping accidents in doors, as doors pose a risk to children especially when closing. Door guards protect fingers in door hinges by covering the gap that is created by opening doors by covering the hinges of doors with a piece of rubber or plastic that wraps from the door frame to the door. There are also door safety products which eject the fingers from the push side of the door as it is being closed.\n\nThere are various levels of door protection. Front door protection a front anti-finger trapping device but leaves the rear hinge pin side of the door unprotected. Full door protection uses front and rear anti-finger trapping devices and ensures the hinge side of a door is fully protected.\nWhich level of protection is appropriate should be determined by a risk assessment of the door.\n\nThere is also handle-side door protection, which prevents the door from slamming shut on the frame, which can cause injury to fingers/hands.\n\nA safety door prevents finger injuries near the hinges without the use of door guards. Rather than cover the danger area, the approach is to change the shape of the door so that an accessible gap does not form in the first place. This is achieved by adding a perfectly circular (\"bull-nose\" shaped) extension to the door, which moves in and out of a cavity as the door opens and closes. This prevents any part of a hand being crushed near the hinges – either inside or outside. These doors have an operating range of slightly over 90 degrees, so their use is limited to where they come into contact with a side wall when fully open (or where they can be prevented from opening too far by a doorstop).\n\nGlass doors pose the risk of unintentional collision if a person believes the door to be open when it is closed, or is unaware there is a door at all. This risk may be particularly pronounced with sliding glass doors because they often have large single panes which are hard to see. To prevent injury from glass doors, stickers or other types of warnings are sometimes placed on the glass surface to make it more visible. For instance, in the UK, Regulation 14 of the Workplace (Health and Safety Regulations) 1992 requires the marking of windows and glass doors to make them conspicuous. Australian Standards: AS1288 and AS2208 require glass doors to be made from laminated, tempered or toughened glass.\n\nSpecial purpose fire doors are often employed in buildings to reduce the overall risk of fire, particularly by preventing the spread of fire and smoke. In cases where they are improperly installed, employed, or tampered with, the risk of fire can be increased. Door closers are sometimes used to ensure fire doors remain closed.\n\nAn additional risk in a fire is that doors may prevent access to emergency services personnel in order to fight the fire, rescue occupants, etc. Door breaching techniques may be required in these situations to gain access.\n\nPanic bars are often used in buildings so that a door locked from the exterior can quickly and easily be opened from the inside in the event of a fire or other emergency.\n\nThere may be an increased risk of trapping hands or fingers in car doors compared to other types of doors, due to the proximity in which the occupant sits. In some car accidents, injury to occupants from the movement of car doors may occur.\n\nBicyclists cycling on public roads fear dooring: collision with an abruptly opened vehicle door. Because cyclists often ride near parked cars along the side of the road they are particularly vulnerable.\n\nDoors which lead from interior, pressurized, sections of an aircraft to exterior or unpressurized areas can pose extreme risk if they are inadvertently opened during flight. This can be mitigated by having doors that open inwardly and are designed to be forced into their door frames by the internal cabin pressure – most cabin doors are of this type. However, an outward opening door is often advantageous for cargo doors to maximise available space, and these need to be secured by hefty locking mechanisms to overcome internal pressure.\n\nA number of accidents have occurred where outward-opening aircraft doors were opened in flight, often accidentally:\nBULLET::::- American Airlines Flight 96 (1972)\nBULLET::::- Turkish Airlines Flight 981 (1974)\nBULLET::::- United Airlines Flight 811 (1989)\n\nBULLET::::- Biometrics\nBULLET::::- Closed-circuit television\nBULLET::::- Coal hole\nBULLET::::- Door security\nBULLET::::- Double margin doors\nBULLET::::- Electronic lock\nBULLET::::- Identity document\nBULLET::::- IP camera\nBULLET::::- Janus, Roman god of doors\nBULLET::::- Keycards\nBULLET::::- Locksmithing\nBULLET::::- Lock picking\nBULLET::::- Logical security\n"}
{"id": "8640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8640", "title": "Database normalization", "text": "Database normalization\n\nDatabase normalization is the process of structuring a relational database in accordance with a series of so-called normal forms in order to reduce data redundancy and improve data integrity. It was first proposed by Edgar F. Codd as part of his relational model.\n\nNormalization entails organizing the columns (attributes) and tables (relations) of a database to ensure that their dependencies are properly enforced by database integrity constraints. It is accomplished by applying some formal rules either by a process of \"synthesis\" (creating a new database design) or \"decomposition\" (improving an existing database design).\n\nA basic objective of the first normal form defined by Codd in 1970 was to permit data to be queried and manipulated using a \"universal data sub-language\" grounded in first-order logic. (SQL is an example of such a data sub-language, albeit one that Codd regarded as seriously flawed.)\n\nThe objectives of normalization beyond 1NF (first normal form) were stated as follows by Codd:\n\nWhen an attempt is made to modify (update, insert into, or delete from) a relation, the following undesirable side-effects may arise in relations that have not been sufficiently normalized:\n\nBULLET::::- Update anomaly. The same information can be expressed on multiple rows; therefore updates to the relation may result in logical inconsistencies. For example, each record in an \"Employees' Skills\" relation might contain an Employee ID, Employee Address, and Skill; thus a change of address for a particular employee may need to be applied to multiple records (one for each skill). If the update is only partially successful – the employee's address is updated on some records but not others – then the relation is left in an inconsistent state. Specifically, the relation provides conflicting answers to the question of what this particular employee's address is. This phenomenon is known as an update anomaly.\nBULLET::::- Insertion anomaly. There are circumstances in which certain facts cannot be recorded at all. For example, each record in a \"Faculty and Their Courses\" relation might contain a Faculty ID, Faculty Name, Faculty Hire Date, and Course Code. Therefore, we can record the details of any faculty member who teaches at least one course, but we cannot record a newly hired faculty member who has not yet been assigned to teach any courses, except by setting the Course Code to null. This phenomenon is known as an insertion anomaly.\nBULLET::::- Deletion anomaly. Under certain circumstances, deletion of data representing certain facts necessitates deletion of data representing completely different facts. The \"Faculty and Their Courses\" relation described in the previous example suffers from this type of anomaly, for if a faculty member temporarily ceases to be assigned to any courses, we must delete the last of the records on which that faculty member appears, effectively also deleting the faculty member, unless we set the Course Code to null. This phenomenon is known as a deletion anomaly.\n\nA fully normalized database allows its structure to be extended to accommodate new types of data without changing existing structure too much. As a result, applications interacting with the database are minimally affected.\n\nNormalized relations, and the relationship between one normalized relation and another, mirror real-world concepts and their interrelationships.\n\nQuerying and manipulating the data within a data structure that is not normalized, such as the following non-1NF representation of customers' credit card transactions, involves more complexity than is really necessary:\n\n! Customer !! Cust. ID !! Transactions\n! Tr. ID !! Date !! Amount\n−87\n12904\n15-Oct-2003\n−50\n\n! Tr. ID !! Date !! Amount\n−21\n\n! Tr. ID !! Date !! Amount\n<br>\nTo each customer corresponds a 'repeating group' of transactions. The automated evaluation of any query relating to customers' transactions, therefore, would broadly involve two stages:\nBULLET::::1. Unpacking one or more customers' groups of transactions allowing the individual transactions in a group to be examined, and\nBULLET::::2. Deriving a query result based on the results of the first stage\n\nFor example, in order to find out the monetary sum of all transactions that occurred in October 2003 for all customers, the system would have to know that it must first unpack the \"Transactions\" group of each customer, then sum the \"Amounts\" of all transactions thus obtained where the \"Date\" of the transaction falls in October 2003.\n\nOne of Codd's important insights was that structural complexity can be reduced. Reduced structural complexity gives users, applications, and DBMSs more power and flexibility to formulate and evaluate the queries. A more normalized equivalent of the structure above might look like this:\n\n! Customer !! Cust. ID\n\n! Cust. ID !! Tr. ID !! Date !! Amount\n\nIn the modified structure, the key is {Cust. ID} in the first relation, {Cust. ID, Tr ID} in the second relation.\n\nNow each row represents an individual credit card transaction, and the DBMS can obtain the answer of interest, simply by finding all rows with a Date falling in October, and summing their Amounts. The data structure places all of the values on an equal footing, exposing each to the DBMS directly, so each can potentially participate directly in queries; whereas in the previous situation some values were embedded in lower-level structures that had to be handled specially. Accordingly, the normalized design lends itself to general-purpose query processing, whereas the unnormalized design does not. The normalized version also allows the user to change the customer name in one place and guards against errors that arise if the customer name is misspelled on some records.\n\nCodd introduced the concept of normalization and what is now known as the first normal form (1NF) in 1970. Codd went on to define the second normal form (2NF) and third normal form (3NF) in 1971, and Codd and Raymond F. Boyce defined the Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF) in 1974.\n\nInformally, a relational database relation is often described as \"normalized\" if it meets third normal form. Most 3NF relations are free of insertion, update, and deletion anomalies.\n\nThe normal forms (from least normalized to most normalized) are:\n\n! scope=\"col\"  UNF<br>\n! scope=\"col\"  1NF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  2NF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  3NF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  EKNF<br>\n! scope=\"col\"  BCNF<br>\n! scope=\"col\"  4NF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  ETNF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  5NF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  DKNF <br>\n! scope=\"col\"  6NF <br>\n\nNormalization is a database design technique, which is used to design a relational database table up to higher normal form. The process is progressive, and a higher level of database normalization cannot be achieved unless the previous levels have been satisfied. \n\nThat means that, having data in unnormalized form (the least normalized) and aiming to achieve the highest level of normalization, the first step would be to ensure compliance to first normal form, the second step would be to ensure second normal form is satisfied, and so forth in order mentioned above, until the data conform to sixth normal form.\n\nHowever, it is worth noting that normal forms beyond 4NF are mainly of academic interest, as the problems they exist to solve rarely appear in practice \n\n\"Please note that the data in the following example were intentionally designed to contradict most of the normal forms. In real life, it's quite possible to be able to skip some of the normalization steps because the table doesn't contain anything contradicting the given normal form. It also commonly occurs that fixing a violation of one normal form also fixes a violation of a higher normal form in the process. Also one table has been chosen for normalization at each step, meaning that at the end of this example process, there might still be some tables not satisfying the highest normal form.\" \n\nLet a database table with the following structure: \n!Title\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Format\n!Price\n!Subject\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!Publisher\n!Publisher Country\n!Publication Type\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nChad Russell\nAmerican\nHardcover\n49.99\nMySQL,\nDatabase,\n\nDesign\n520\nThick\nApress\nUSA\nE-book\n1\nTutorial\nWe assume in this example that each book has only one author.\n\nTo satisfy 1NF, the values in each column of a table must be atomic. In the initial table, Subject contains a set of subject values, meaning it does not comply.\n\nOne way to achieve the 1NF would be to separate the duplicities into multiple columns using repeating groups 'subject':\n!Title\n!Format\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Price\n!Subject 1\n!Subject 2\n!Subject 3\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!Publisher\n!Publisher country\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nHardcover\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n49.99\nMySQL\nDatabase\nDesign\n520\nThick\nApress\nUSA\n1\nTutorial\nAlthough now the table formally complies to the 1NF (is atomic), the problem with this solution is obvious - if a book has more than three subjects, it cannot be added to the database without altering its structure.\n\nTo solve the problem in a more elegant way, it is necessary to identify entities represented in the table and separate them into their own respective tables. In this case, it would result in Book, Subject and Publisher tables: \n+Book\n!Title\n!Format\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Price\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nHardcover\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n49.99\n520\nThick\n1\nTutorial\n\"1\"\n+Subject\n!Subject ID\n!Subject name\n1\nMySQL\n2\nDatabase\n3\nDesign\n\n+Publisher\n!Publisher_ID\n!Name\n!Country\n1\nApress\nUSA\nSimply separating the initial data into multiple tables would break the connection between the data. That means the relationships between the newly introduced tables need to be determined. Notice that the \"Publisher ID\" column in the Book's table is a foreign key realizing many-to-one relation between a book and a publisher.\n\nA book can fit many subjects, as well as a subject may correspond to many books. That means also a many-to-many relationship needs to be defined, achieved by creating a link table: \n\n+Title - Subject\n!Title\n!Subject ID\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n2\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n3\n\nInstead of one table in unnormalized form, there are now 4 tables conforming to the 1NF.\n\nThe \"Book\" table has one candidate key, the compound key {Title , Format}. Consider the following table fragment: \n+Book\n!Title\n!Format\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Price\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nHardcover\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n49.99\n520\nThick\n1\nTutorial\n\"1\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nE-book\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n22.34\n520\nThick\n1\nTutorial\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE-book\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\n13.88\n538\nThick\n2\nPopular science\n\"2\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nPaperback\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\n39.99\n538\nThick\n2\nPopular science\n\"2\"\nAll of the attributes that are not part of the key depend on \"Title\", but only \"Price\" also depends on \"Format\". To conform to 2NF and remove duplicities, every non-key attribute must depend on the whole key, not just part of it. \n\nTo normalize this table, make {Title} the (simple) key so that every non-key attribute depends upon the whole key, and remove \"Price\" into a separate table so that its dependency on \"Format\" can be preserved:\n\n+Book\n!Title\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n520\nThick\n1\nTutorial\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\n538\nThick\n2\nPopular science\n\"2\"\n\n+Format - Prices\n!Title\n!Format\n!Price\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nHardcover\n49.99\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nE-book\n22.34\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE-book\n13.88\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nPaperback\n39.99\nNow, the book table conforms to 2NF.\n\nA table in third normal form (3NF) is a table in 2NF that has no transitive dependencies. Note the book table with more rows (previously omitted for brevity):\n+Book\n!Title\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n520\nThick\n1\nTutorial\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\n538\nThick\n2\nPopular science\n\"2\"\nLearning SQL\nAlan Beaulieu\nAmerican\n338\nSlim\n1\nTutorial\n\"3\"\nSQL Cookbook\nAnthony Molinaro\nAmerican\n636\nThick\n1\nTutorial\n\"3\"\nGenre ID and Genre Name both depend upon the primary key {Title}, but they are not independent of one another. The dependency of, say, Genre Name on the primary key can be deduced from the dependency of Genre Name on Genre ID and of Genre ID on the primary key. Since there are more titles than genres, that dependency introduces redundant data into the Book table which can be eliminated by abstracting the dependency of Genre Name on Genre ID into its own table:\n\n+Book\n!Title\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!\"Genre ID\"\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n520\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\n538\nThick\n\"2\"\n\"2\"\nLearning SQL\nAlan Beaulieu\nAmerican\n338\nSlim\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nSQL Cookbook\nAnthony Molinaro\nAmerican\n636\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\n\n+Book Genres\n!Genre ID\n!Genre Name\n1\nTutorial\n2\nPopular science\nThe Book table is now in third normal form. Although tables in 1NF are by definition normalized, \"normalized\" is commonly used to mean 3NF.\n\nThe elementary key normal form (EKNF) falls strictly between 3NF and BCNF and is not much discussed in the literature. It is intended \"“to capture the salient qualities of both 3NF and BCNF”\" while avoiding the problems of both (namely, that 3NF is “too forgiving” and BCNF is “prone to computational complexity”). Since it is rarely mentioned in literature, it is not included in this example.\n\nA relational schema R is considered to be in Boyce–Codd normal form (BCNF) if, for every one of its dependencies X → Y, one of the following conditions hold true:\nBULLET::::- X → Y is a trivial functional dependency (i.e., Y is a subset of X)\nBULLET::::- X is a superkey for schema R\n\nConsider the table in 3NF from the previous step:\n+Book\n!Title\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!\"Genre ID\"\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nChad Russell\nAmerican\n520\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\n538\nThick\n\"2\"\n\"2\"\nLearning SQL\nAlan Beaulieu\nAmerican\n338\nSlim\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nSQL Cookbook\nAnthony Molinaro\nAmerican\n636\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nThere is a non-trivial dependency violating BCNF - {Author} → {Author Nationality}. Therefore, the table should be decomposed:\n\n+Book\n!Title\n!Author\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!\"Genre ID\"\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nChad Russell\n520\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nE.F.Codd\n538\nThick\n\"2\"\n\"2\"\nLearning SQL\nAlan Beaulieu\n338\nSlim\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nSQL Cookbook\nAnthony Molinaro\n636\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\n\n+Author - Nationality\n!Author\n!Author Nationality\nChad Russell\nAmerican\nE.F.Codd\nBritish\nAlan Beaulieu\nAmerican\nAnthony Molinaro\nAmerican\n\nNow, \"each attribute represents a fact about the key, the whole key, and nothing but the key\". Therefore BCNF has been achieved. \n\nAssume the database is owned by a book retailer franchise that has several franchisees that own shops in different locations. And therefore the retailer decided to add a table that contains data about availability of the books at different locations:\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Book Location\n!Franchisee ID\n!Title\n!Location\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nCalifornia\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nFlorida\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nTexas\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nCalifornia\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nFlorida\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nTexas\n2\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nCalifornia\n2\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nFlorida\n2\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nTexas\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nCalifornia\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nFlorida\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nTexas\n3\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nTexas\nAs this table structure consists of a compound primary key, it doesn't contain any non-key attributes and it's already in BCNF (and therefore also satisfies all the previous normal forms). However, if we assume that all available books are offered in each area, we might notice that the Title is not unambiguously bound to a certain Location and therefore the table doesn't satisfy 4NF.\n\nThat means that, to satisfy the fourth normal form, this table needs to be decomposed as well: \n\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Book\n!Franchisee ID\n!Title\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n2\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n3\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Location\n!Franchisee ID\n!Location\n1\nCalifornia\n1\nFlorida\n1\nTexas\n2\nCalifornia\n2\nFlorida\n2\nTexas\n3\nTexas\nNow, every record is unambiguously identified by a superkey, therefore 4NF is satisfied. \n\nSuppose the franchisees can also order books from different suppliers. Let the relation also be subject to the following constraint:\n\nBULLET::::- If a certain supplier supplies a certain title\nBULLET::::- and the title is supplied to the franchisee\nBULLET::::- and the franchisee is being supplied by the supplier,\nBULLET::::- then the supplier supplies the title to the franchisee.\n\n+Supplier - Book - Franchisee\n!Supplier ID\n!Title\n!Franchisee ID\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n1\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n2\n3\nLearning SQL\n3\nThis table is in 4NF, but the Supplier ID is equal to the join of its projections: { { Supplier ID , Book } , { Book, Franchisee ID } , { Franchisee ID , Supplier ID } }. No component of that join dependency is a superkey (the sole superkey being the entire heading), so the table does not satisfy the ETNF and can be further decomposed: \n\n+Supplier - Book\n!Supplier ID\n!Title\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n3\nLearning SQL\n\n+Book - Franchisee\n!Title\n!Franchisee ID\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n2\nLearning SQL\n3\n\n+Franchisee - Supplier\n!Supplier ID\n!Franchisee ID\n1\n1\n2\n2\n3\n3\nThe decomposition produces ETNF compliance.\n\nTo spot a table not satisfying the 5NF, it is usually necessary to examine the data thoroughly. Suppose the table from 4NF example with a little modification in data and let's examine if it satisfies 5NF:\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Book Location\n!Franchisee ID\n!Title\n!Location\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nCalifornia\n1\nLearning SQL\nCalifornia\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nTexas\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nCalifornia\nIf we decompose this table, we lower redundancies and get the following two tables:\n\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Book \n!Franchisee ID\n!Title\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n1\nLearning SQL\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Location\n!Franchisee ID\n!Location\n1\nCalifornia\n1\nTexas\n2\nCalifornia\nWhat happens if we try to join these tables? The query would return the following data:\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Book - Location JOINed \n!Franchisee ID\n!Title\n!Location\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nCalifornia\n1\nLearning SQL\nCalifornia\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nCalifornia\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nTexas\n1\nLearning SQL\nTexas\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nTexas\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nCalifornia\nApparently, the JOIN returns three more rows than it should - let's try to add another table to clarify the relation. We end up with three separate tables:\n\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Book\n!Franchisee ID\n!Title\n1\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n1\nLearning SQL\n1\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n2\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n+ align=\"top\" Franchisee - Location\n!Franchisee ID\n!Location\n1\nCalifornia\n1\nTexas\n2\nCalifornia\n+ align=\"top\" Location - Book\n!Location\n!Title\nCalifornia\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\nCalifornia\nLearning SQL\nCalifornia\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nTexas\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\nWhat will the JOIN return now? It actually is not possible to join these three tables. That means it wasn't possible to decompose the Franchisee - Book Location without data loss, therefore the table already satisfies 5NF. \n\nC.J. Date has argued that only a database in 5NF is truly \"normalized\".\n\nLet's have a look at the Book table from previous examples and see if it satisfies the Domain Key Normal Form:\n+Book\n!Title\n!Pages\n!Thickness\n!\"Genre ID\"\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n520\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n538\nThick\n\"2\"\n\"2\"\nLearning SQL\n338\nSlim\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nSQL Cookbook\n636\nThick\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nLogically, Thickness is determined by number of pages. That means it depends on Pages which is not a key. Let's set an example convention saying a book up to 350 pages is considered \"slim\" and a book over 350 pages is considered \"thick\". \n\nThis convention is technically a constraint but it is neither a domain constraint nor a key constraint; therefore we cannot rely on domain constraints and key constraints to keep the data integrity. \n\nIn other words - nothing prevents us from putting, for example, \"Thick\" for a book with only 50 pages - and this makes the table violate DKNF.\n\nTo solve this, we can create a table holding enumeration that defines the Thickness and remove that column from the original table:\n\n+Thickness Enum\n!Thickness\n!Min pages\n!Max pages\nSlim\n1\n350\nThick\n351\n999,999,999,999\n\n+Book - Pages - Genre - Publisher\n!Title\n!Pages\n!\"Genre ID\"\n!\"Publisher ID\"\nBeginning MySQL Database Design and Optimization\n520\n\"1\"\n\"1\"\nThe Relational Model for Database Management: Version 2\n538\n\"2\"\n\"2\"\nLearning SQL\n338\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nSQL Cookbook\n636\n\"1\"\n\"3\"\nThat way, the domain integrity violation has been eliminated, and the table is in DKNF.\n\nA simple and intuitive definition of the sixth normal form is that \"\"a table is in 6NF when the row contains the Primary Key, and at most one other attribute\"\". \n\nThat means, for example, the Publishers table designed while creating the 1NF \n+Publisher\n!Publisher_ID\n!Name\n!Country\n1\nApress\nUSA\nneeds to be further decomposed into two tables:\n\n+Publisher\n!Publisher_ID\n!Name\n1\nApress\n\n+Publisher country\n!Publisher_ID\n!Country\n1\nUSA\nSuch normalization to 6NF is mostly used in data warehouses where the benefits outweigh the drawbacks.\n\nBULLET::::- Denormalization\nBULLET::::- Database refactoring\n\nBULLET::::- Date, C. J. (1999), \"An Introduction to Database Systems\" (8th ed.). Addison-Wesley Longman. .\nBULLET::::- Kent, W. (1983) \"A Simple Guide to Five Normal Forms in Relational Database Theory\", Communications of the ACM, vol. 26, pp. 120–125\nBULLET::::- H.-J. Schek, P. Pistor Data Structures for an Integrated Data Base Management and Information Retrieval System\n\nBULLET::::- Database Normalization Basics by Mike Chapple (About.com)\nBULLET::::- Database Normalization Intro, Part 2\nBULLET::::- An Introduction to Database Normalization by Mike Hillyer.\nBULLET::::- A tutorial on the first 3 normal forms by Fred Coulson\nBULLET::::- Description of the database normalization basics by Microsoft\nBULLET::::- Normalization in DBMS by Chaitanya (beginnersbook.com)\nBULLET::::- A Step-by-Step Guide to Database Normalization\nBULLET::::- ETNF – Essential tuple normal form\n"}
{"id": "8641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8641", "title": "Desmothoracid", "text": "Desmothoracid\n\nOrder Desmothoracida, the desmothoracids, are a group of heliozoan protists, usually sessile and found in freshwater environments. The adult is a spherical cell around 10-20 μm in diameter surrounded by a perforated organic lorica, or shell, with many radial pseudopods projecting through the holes to capture food. These are supported by small bundles of microtubules that arise near a point on the nuclear membrane. Unlike other heliozoans, the microtubules are not in any regular geometric array, there does not appear to be a microtubule organizing center, and there is no distinction between the outer and inner cytoplasm.\n\nReproduction takes place by the budding-off of small motile cells, usually with two flagella. Later these are lost, and the pseudopods and lorica are formed. Typically, a single lengthened pseudopod will secrete a hollow stalk that attaches the cell to the substrate. The form of the flagella, the tubular cristae within the mitochondria, and other characters have led to the suggestion that the desmothoracids belong among what is now the Cercozoa. This was later confirmed by genetic studies.\n\nAs of the year 2000, the order Desmothoracida contained five genera with a total of 10 species.\n\nBULLET::::- Order Desmothoracida\nBULLET::::- Family Clathrulinidae\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Clathrulina\" [\"Podosphaera\" ; \"Elaster\" ; \"Eleaster\" ; \"Orbulinella\" ]\nBULLET::::- Species \"Clathrulina elegans\" [\"Clathrulina ovalis\" ; \"Clathrulina cienkowskii ovalis\" ; \"Clathrulina cienkowskii\" ; \"Clathrulina stuhlmanni\" ; \"Podosphaera haeckeliana\" ; \"Elaster greeffi\" ]\nBULLET::::- Species \"Clathrulina smaragdea\" [\"Orbulinella smaragdea\" ; \"Orbulinella salina\" ]\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Hedriocystis\"\nBULLET::::- Species \"Hedriocystis pellucida\"\nBULLET::::- Species \"Hedriocystis minor\"\nBULLET::::- Species \"Hedriocystis zhadani\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Penardiophrys\"\nBULLET::::- Species \"Penardiophrys reticulata\" [\"Hedriocystis reticulata\" ]\nBULLET::::- Species \"Penardiophrys spinifera\" [\"Hedriocystis spinifera\" ]\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Cienkowskya\" [\"Cienkowskia\" ; \"Wagneria\" ; \"Monomastigocystis\" de Saedeleer 1930</small>]\nBULLET::::- Species \"Cienkowskya mereschkovckii\" [\"Wagneria mereschkowskyi\" ]\nBULLET::::- Species \"Cienkowskya brachypous\" [\"Monomastigocystis brachypous\" ; \"Hedriocystis brachypous\" ]\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Actinosphaeridium\" Zacharias 1893 [\"Actinopshaeridium\" (sic)]\nBULLET::::- Species \"Actinosphaeridium pedatus\" [\"Nuclearia caulescens\" ]\n"}
{"id": "8642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8642", "title": "Dalhousie University", "text": "Dalhousie University\n\nDalhousie University (commonly known as Dal) is a public research university in Nova Scotia, Canada, with three campuses in Halifax, a fourth in Bible Hill, and medical teaching facilities in Saint John, New Brunswick. Dalhousie offers more than 4,000 courses, and 180 degree programs in twelve undergraduate, graduate, and professional faculties. The university is a member of the U15, a group of research-intensive universities in Canada.\n\nDalhousie was established as a nonsectarian college in 1818 by the eponymous Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia, George Ramsay, 9th Earl of Dalhousie. The college did not hold its first class until 1838, until then operating sporadically due to financial difficulties. It reopened for a third time in 1863 following a reorganization that brought a change of name to \"The Governors of Dalhousie College and University\". The university formally changed its name to \"Dalhousie University\" in 1997 through the same provincial legislation that merged the institution with the Technical University of Nova Scotia.\n\nThere are currently two student unions that represent student interests at the university: the Dalhousie Student Union and the Dalhousie Association for Graduate Students. Dalhousie's varsity teams, the Tigers, compete in the Atlantic University Sport conference of Canadian Interuniversity Sport. Dalhousie's Faculty of Agriculture varsity teams are called the Dalhousie Rams, and compete in the ACAA and CCAA. Dalhousie is a coeducational university with more than 18,000 students and 130,000 alumni around the world. The university's notable alumni include a Nobel Prize winner, 91 Rhodes Scholars, and a range of other top government officials, academics, and business leaders.\n\nDalhousie was founded as the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia George Ramsay, 9th Earl of Dalhousie desired a non-denominational college in Halifax. Financing largely came from customs duties collected by a previous Lieutenant Governor, John Coape Sherbrooke, during the War of 1812 occupation of Castine, Maine; Sherbrooke invested GBP£7,000 as an initial endowment and reserved £3,000 for the physical construction of the college. The college was established in 1818, though it faltered shortly after as Ramsay left Halifax to serve as the Governor General of British North America. The school was structured upon the principles of the University of Edinburgh, where lectures were open to all, regardless of religion or nationality. The University of Edinburgh was located near Ramsay's home in Scotland.\n\nIn 1821 Dalhousie College was officially incorporated by the Nova Scotia House of Assembly under the 1821 Act of Incorporation. The college did not hold its first class until 1838; operation of the college was intermittent and no degrees were awarded. In 1841 an Act of the Nova Scotia House of Assembly conferred university powers on Dalhousie.\n\nIn 1863 the college opened for a third time and was reorganized by another legislative act, which added \"University\" to the school's name: \"The Governors of Dalhousie College and University\". Dalhousie reopened with six professors and one tutor. When it awarded its first degrees in 1866 the student body consisted of 28 students working toward degrees and 28 occasional students. The first female graduate was Margaret Florence Newcome from Grafton, Nova Scotia, who earned her degree in 1885. Despite the reorganization and an increase in students, money continued to be a problem for the institution. In 1879, amid talks of closure due to the university's dire financial situation, a wealthy New York publisher with Nova Scotian roots, George Munro, began to donate to the university; Munro was brother-in-law to Dalhousie's Board of Governors member John Forrest. Munro is credited with rescuing Dalhousie from closure, and in honour of his contributions Dalhousie observes a university holiday called George Munro Day on the first Friday of each February.\n\nOriginally located at the space now occupied by Halifax City Hall, the college moved in 1886 to Carleton Campus and spread gradually to Studley Campus. Dalhousie grew steadily during the 20th century. From 1889 to 1962 the Halifax Conservatory was affiliated with and awarded degrees through Dalhousie. In 1920 several buildings were destroyed by fire on the campus of the University of King's College in Windsor, Nova Scotia. Through a grant from the Carnegie Foundation, King's College relocated to Halifax and entered into a partnership with Dalhousie that continues to this day.\n\nDalhousie expanded on April 1, 1997 when provincial legislation mandated an amalgamation with the nearby Technical University of Nova Scotia. This merger saw reorganization of faculties and departments to create the Faculty of Engineering, Faculty of Computer Science and the Faculty of Architecture and Planning. From 1997 to 2000, the Technical University of Nova Scotia operated as a constituent college of Dalhousie called Dalhousie Polytechnic of Nova Scotia (DalTech) until the collegiate system was dissolved. The legislation that merged the two schools also formally changed the name of the institution to its present form, Dalhousie University. On 1 September 2012 the Nova Scotia Agricultural College merged into Dalhousie to form a new Faculty of Agriculture, located in Bible Hill, Nova Scotia.\n\nDalhousie has three campuses within the Halifax Peninsula and a fourth, the Agricultural Campus, in Bible Hill, Nova Scotia.\n\nStudley Campus in Halifax serves as the primary campus; it houses the majority of the university's academic buildings such as faculties, athletic facilities, and the university's Student Union Building. The campus is largely surrounded by residential neighbourhoods.\n\nRobie Street divides it from the adjacent Carleton Campus, which houses the faculties of dentistry, medicine, and other health profession departments. The campus is adjacent to two large teaching hospitals affiliated with the school: the IWK Health Centre and the Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre.\n\nSexton Campus in Downtown Halifax hosts the engineering, architecture and planning faculties. Sexton Campus served as the campus of the Technical University of Nova Scotia prior to amalgamation. The Agricultural Campus in Bible Hill, a suburban community of Truro, served as the campus for the Nova Scotia Agricultural College prior to its merger with Dalhousie in 2011. The university presently operates the largest academic library system in Atlantic Canada, and hosts the headquarters for the Ocean Tracking Network.\n\nThe buildings at Dalhousie vary in age from Hart House, which was completed in 1864, to the Collaborative Health Education Building, completed in 2015. The original building of Dalhousie University was completed in 1824 on Halifax's Grand Parade. It was demolished in 1885 when the university outgrew the premises, and the City of Halifax sought possession of the entire Grand Parade. Halifax City Hall presently occupies the site of the original Dalhousie College.\n\nThe university has five libraries. The largest, Killam Memorial Library, opened in 1971. It is the largest academic library in Atlantic Canada with over one million books and 40,000 journals. \n\nThe library's collection largely serves the faculties of arts and social sciences, sciences, management, and computer science. The W. K. Kellogg Health Science Library provides services largely for the faculties of dentistry, medicine, and other health professions. The Sexton Design & Technology Library is located within Sexton Campus. Its collection largely serves those in the faculties of engineering, architecture and planning, and houses the university's rare books collection. The Sir James Dunn Law Library holds the university's collection of common law materials, legal periodicals, as well as books on international law, health law, and environmental law. MacRae Library is located at the university's Agricultural Campus, and has the largest collection of agricultural resource material in Atlantic Canada. The Dalhousie University Archives houses official records of, or relating to, or people/activities connected with Dalhousie University and its founding institutions. The archives also houses material related to theatre, business and labour in Nova Scotia. The collection consists of manuscripts, texts, photographs, audio-visual material, microfilm, music, and artifacts.\n\nThe biology department operates the Thomas McCulloch Museum in Pictou, Nova Scotia. The most notable of the museum's exhibits include its preserved birds collection. Other collections include its Lorenzen ceramic mushrooms, its coral and shell collection, and its butterfly and insect collection. The museum's namesake Thomas McCulloch was a Scottish Presbyterian minister who served as Dalhousie's first president and created the Audubon mounted bird collection which is now housed at the museum.\n\nThe Dalhousie Art Gallery is both a public gallery and an academic support unit housed since 1971 on the lowest level of the Dalhousie Arts Centre. Admission is free of charge. It is host to a permanent collection of over 1000 works. Some of the outdoor sculptures around the campus are part of this collection, such as the distinctive \"Marine Venus\" which has sat in the median of University Avenue since 1969. A notable exhibition from the Dalhousie Art Gallery includes \"Archives of the Future\" (March – April 2016) exploring the relationship between art creation and commerce with work by artists Zachary Gough, Dawn Georg, Sharlene Bamboat, Katie Vida and Dana Claxton.\n\nThe university has ten student residences throughout its Halifax campuses: Gerard Hall, Howe Hall, LeMarchant Place, Mini Rez, O'Brien Hall, Residence Houses, Risley Hall, Shirreff Hall, Glengary Apartments, and Graduate House. The largest, Howe Hall in Studley Campus, houses 716 students during the academic year. Howe Hall's most recent addition to the residence is called Fountain. It is the only residence in Howe Hall to have a sink in every room. The university also operates three residences in its Agricultural Campus: Chapman House, Fraser House, and Truman House. The largest residence in the Agricultural Campus is Chapman House, housing 125 students during the academic year. The residences are represented by a Residence Council responsible for resident concerns, providing entertainment services, organizing events, and upholding rules and regulations.\n\nThe Student Union Building serves as the main student activity centre. Completed in 1968, it is located in the Studley Campus. The Student Union building hosts a number of student societies and organization offices, most notably the Dalhousie Student Union. The building houses five restaurants, both independently owned and international franchises such as Tim Hortons.\n\nDalhousie University is actively involved in sustainability issues and has received a number of sustainability awards and recognition for academic programs, university operations, and research. In 2018, Dalhousie received a GOLD rating from AASHE STARS (Version 2.1). In 2009, the university signed the University and College Presidents' Climate Change Statement of Action for Canada to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. Dalhousie is also a signatory of UNEP's International Declaration on Cleaner Production. In 1999, the university signed the Talloires Declaration, which committed Dalhousie and other higher education institutions to developing, creating, supporting, and maintaining sustainability.\n\nIn 2008, the College of Sustainability, the Office of Sustainability, and the Dalhousie Student Union Sustainability Office were formed. During 2008, the President's Advisory Council on Sustainability was also created. The council meets quarterly to discuss pan-university sustainability issues[48]. Dalhousie's international award-winning College of Sustainability offers an undergraduate Major in Environment, Sustainability and Society (ESS) integrating with seven bachelor's degrees and forty subjects across five faculties. The College of Sustainability offers a virtual and a physical space for the intersection of interdisciplinary collaboration, conversation, and teaching with a core of cross-appointed Dalhousie faculty members joined by visiting fellows, distinguished guest lecturers, community leaders, and environmental advocates. In addition, the Sustainability Leadership Certificate program offers students the opportunity to participate in an engaged exploration of personal and group leadership and empowers their sense of personal agency to address environmental and social change.\n\nThe Office of Sustainability spearheads a number of campus sustainability plans and policies including the Climate Change Plan, Natural Environment Plan, and Green Building policy. A number of initiatives have been developed and implemented with campus partners including numerous energy and water retrofits, residence Eco-Olympics competition, an Employee Sustainability Leadership Program, and an Employee Bus Pass. The Dalhousie Student Union Sustainability Office promotes awareness and behaviour change. DSUSO hosts \"Green Week,\" the \"Green Gala\" and the \"Greenie Awards\" to celebrate campus accomplishments on sustainability. A number of student societies are also active in sustainability issues from on-campus gardening and food security to environmental law.\n\nUniversity governance is conducted through the Board of Governors and the Senate, both of which were given much of their present power in the Unofficial Consolidation of an Act for the Regulation and Support of Dalhousie College in Chapter 24 of the Acts of 1863. This statute replaced ones from 1820, 1823, 1838, 1841 and 1848, and has since been supplemented 11 times, most recently in 1995. The Board is responsible for conduct, management, and control of the university and of its property, revenues, business, and affairs. Board members, known as Governors of the Board, include the university's chancellor, president, and 25 other members. Members include people from within the university community such as four approved representatives from Dalhousie Student Union, and those in the surrounding community, such as the Mayor of Halifax. The Senate is responsible for the university's academics, including standards for admission and qualifications for degrees, diplomas, and certificates. The Senate consists of 73 positions granted to the various faculty representatives, academic administrators, and student representatives.\n\nThe president acts as the chief executive officer and is responsible to the Board of Governors and to the Senate for the supervision of administrative and academic works. Richard Florizone is the 11th president of the university, and has served since 2013. Thomas McCulloch served as the first president when the office was created in 1838. John Forrest was the longest-serving president, holding the office from 1885 to 1911.\n\nUniversity of King's College is a post-secondary institution in Halifax affiliated with Dalhousie. The institution's campus is located adjacent to Dalhousie's Studley campus. Established in 1789, it was the first post-secondary institution in English Canada and the oldest English-speaking Commonwealth university outside the United Kingdom. The University of King's College was formerly an independent institution located in Windsor, Nova Scotia, until 1920, when a fire ravaged its campus. To continue operation, the University of King's College accepted a generous grant from the Carnegie Foundation, although the terms of the grant required that it move to Halifax and enter into association with Dalhousie. Under the agreement, King's agreed to pay the salaries of a number of Dalhousie professors, who in turn were to help in the management and academic life of the college. \n\nStudents at King's have access to all of the amenities Dalhousie, and academic programs at King's would fold into the College of Arts and Sciences at Dalhousie according to the agreement. Presently, students of both institutions are allowed to switch between the two throughout their enrolment. In spite of the shared academic programs and facilities, the University of King's College maintains its own scholarships, bursaries, athletics programs, and student residences.\n\nThe university completed the 2017–18 year with revenues of $697.354 million and expenses of $664.274 million, yielding a surplus of $33.08 million. The largest source of revenue for the university was provincial operational grants, followed by tuition fees. The total endowment revenue reported in fiscal 2017-2018 was $481.372 million.\n\nDalhousie is a publicly funded research university, and a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada, as well as the U15, a group of Canadian research-intensive universities. , there were 18,220 students enrolled at the university and 3,700 courses in over 190 degree programs. Dalhousie offers more than 3,700 courses and 190 degree programs in twelve undergraduate, graduate, and professional faculties. The requirements for admission differ between students from Nova Scotia, students from other provinces in Canada, and international students due to lack of uniformity in marking schemes. The requirements for admission also differ depending on the program. In 2011, the secondary school average for incoming first-year undergraduate students was 85 percent.\n\nCanadian students may apply for financial aid such as the Nova Scotia Student Assistance Program and Canada Student Loans and Grants through the federal and provincial governments. Financial aid may also be provided in the form of loans, grants, bursaries, scholarships, fellowships, debt reduction, interest relief, and work programs.\n\nThe 2019 Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked Dalhousie University 201–300 in the world and 10–12 in Canada. The 2020 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 280th in the world, and eleventh in Canada. The 2020 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed Dalhousie 251–300 in the world. In the 2020 \"U.S. News & World Report Best Global University Ranking\", the university placed 322nd in the world, and 14th in Canada. In terms of national rankings, \"Maclean's\" ranked Dalhousie eighth in their 2020 Medical Doctoral university rankings. Dalhousie was ranked in spite of having opted out — along with several other universities in Canada — of participating in Maclean's graduate survey since 2006.\n\nDalhousie also placed in a number of rankings that evaluated the employment prospects of its graduates. In the Times Higher Education's 2018 global employability ranking, Dalhousie placed 200-250 in the world, tied for eighth in Canada. In QS's 2019 graduate employability ranking, the university ranked 301-500 in the world, or 9–17 in Canada.\n\nDalhousie University is a member of the U15, a group that represents 15 Canadian research universities. In 2018, Research Infosource ranked Dalhousie as 15th on their list for top 50 research universities in Canada, with a sponsored research income (external sources of funding) of $150.038 million in 2017. In the same year, Dalhousie's faculty averaged a sponsored research income of $130,000, while its graduate students averaged a sponsored research income of $44,600. In 2003 and 2004, \"The Scientist\" placed Dalhousie among the top five places in the world outside the United States for postdoctoral work and conducting scientific research. In 2007 Dalhousie topped the list of \"The Scientist\"'s \"Best Places to Work in Academia\". The annual list divides research and academic institutions into American and international lists; Dalhousie University ranked first in the international category. According to a survey conducted by \"The Scientist\", Dalhousie was the best non-commercial scientific institute in which to work in Canada.\n\nDalhousie's research performance has been noted several bibliometric university rankings, which uses citation analysis to evaluates the impact a university has on academic publications. In 2019, the Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities ranked Dalhousie 301st in the world, tied for 12th in Canada with the University of Manitoba; whereas the University Ranking by Academic Performance 2018–19 rankings placed the university 302nd in the world, and 13th in Canada.\n\nMarine research at Dalhousie has become a large focus of the university, with many of the university's faculty members involved in some form of marine research. Notably, Dalhousie is the headquarters of the Ocean Tracking Network, a research effort using implanted acoustic transmitters to study fish migration patterns. Dalhousie houses a number of marine research pools, a wet laboratory, and a benthic flume, which are collectively known as the Aquatron laboratory. Dalhousie is one of the founding members of the Halifax Marine Research Institute, founded on 2 June 2011. The institute, which is a partnership between a number of private industries, government, and post-secondary institutions, was designed to help increase the scale, quality, internationalization and impact of marine research in the region. In 2011, the university, along with WWF-Canada, created the Conservation Legacy For Oceans, which aimed at providing scholarships, funding, curriculum development, and work placements for students and academics dedicated to marine research, law, management, and policy making.\n\nMany of Dalhousie's faculties and departments focus on marine research. The Faculty of Engineering operates the Ocean Research Centre Atlantic, which is dedicated to research and tests in naval and off-shore engineering. Schulich School of Law also operates the Marine & Environmental Law Institute, which carries out research and conducts consultancy activities for governmental and non-governmental organizations. The school's Department of Political Science similarly operates the Centre for Foreign Policy Studies, which is primarily concerned with the fields of Canadian and American foreign, security, and defence policy, including maritime security policy.\n\nThe student body of Dalhousie is currently represented by two student unions; the Dalhousie Student Union, which represents the general student population, and the Dalhousie Association for Graduate Students, which represents the interests of graduate students specifically. Dalhousie Student Union began as the Dalhousie Student Government in 1863, and was renamed the University Student Council before taking its present name. The student union recognizes more than 100 student organizations and societies. The organizations and clubs accredited at Dalhousie cover a wide range of interests including academics, culture, religion, social issues, and recreation. Accredited extracurricular organizations at the university fall under the jurisdiction of the Dalhousie Student Union, and must conform to its by-laws. As of 2011, there were three sororities (Omega Pi, Iota Beta Chi, and Alpha Gamma Delta) and three fraternities (Phi Delta Theta, Sigma Chi, and Phi Kappa Pi). They operate as non-accredited organizations and are not recognized by the Dalhousie Student Union.\n\nThe university's student population operates a number of media outlets. The main student newspaper, \"The Dalhousie Gazette\", claims to be the oldest student-run newspaper in North America. It is published Thursdays, and is distributed to over 100 locations around the Halifax area. The newspaper's offices are in the Student Union building. Dalhousie's student population runs a radio station which began as a radio club in 1964, and began to broadcast and operate as CKDU in 1975; it began FM frequency broadcasting in 1985. CKDU acquired its present frequency 88.1 in 2006 alongside an upgrading of its transmitting power.\n\nIn addition to the efforts made by the Dalhousie Student Union (DSU) Council, Dalhousie students have created and participated in over 320 clubs/societies. The Management Society, for example, is a group of students in the Faculty of Management who group together to enhance the experience of students in that faculty by hosting events, providing assistance and giving back. Until July 25, 2016, Dalhousie offered a website named \"Tiger Society\" which listed all current clubs and societies that were available for students to join. Through this website, students could request to join a society. Dalhousie also holds a Society Fair at the beginning of each fall and winter semester, in which all societies are given the opportunity to display their purpose/efforts and recruit new members. Student societies partake in a range of activities from simple gatherings, study groups, bake sales, intramural sports teams, to organizing larger scale fundraising events.\n\nDalhousie's sports teams are called the Tigers. The Tigers varsity teams participate in the Atlantic University Sport (AUS) of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS). There are teams for basketball, hockey, soccer, swimming, track and field, cross country running, and volleyball. The Tigers garnered a number of championships in the first decade of the 20th century, winning 63 AUS championships and 2 CIS championships. More than 2,500 students participate in competitive clubs, intramural sport leagues, and tournaments. Opportunities are offered at multiple skill levels across a variety of sports. Dalhousie has six competitive sports clubs and 17 recreational clubs. Dalhousie's Agricultural Campus operates its own varsity team, called the Dalhousie Rams. The Rams varsity team participates in the Atlantic Collegiate Athletic Association, a member of the Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association. The Rams varsity teams include badminton, basketball, rugby, soccer, volleyball, and woodsmen.\n\nDalhousie has a number of athletic facilities open to varsity teams and students. Dalplex is the largest main fitness and recreational facility. It houses a large fieldhouse, an Olympic-sized swimming pool, an indoor running track, weight rooms, courts and other facilities. Wickwire Field, with a seating capacity of up to 1,200, is the university's main outdoor field and is host to the varsity football, soccer, field hockey, lacrosse and rugby teams. Other sporting facilities include the Studley Gymnasium, and the Sexton Gymnasium and field. The Memorial Arena, home to the varsity hockey team, was demolished in 2012. The school is working to build a new arena jointly with nearby Saint Mary's University, whose facility is also aging. The Agricultural Campus has one athletic facility, the Langille Athletic Centre.\n\nAs of 2010, through the efforts of alumni and devoted volunteers, the Dalhousie Football Club was reinstated. Playing in the Atlantic Football League (AFL), the team operates on donations and registration from its players. The team plays its home games at Wickwire Field. Additionally, the university boasts the first quidditch team in Atlantic Canada. As of 2014, the Dalhousie Tigers Quidditch varsity club is the top-ranked team in the area and, though still developing, is showing great promise for regional and national bids in the future.\n\nThe Dalhousie seal is based on the heraldic achievement of the Clan Ramsay of Scotland, of which founder George Ramsay was clan head. The heraldic achievement consists of five parts: shield, coronet, crest, supporters, and motto. One major difference between the Ramsay coat of arms and the university seal is that the Ramsay seal features a griffin and greyhound, and the Dalhousie seal has two dragons supporting the eagle-adorned shield. Initially, the Ramsay coat of arms was used to identify Dalhousie, but the seal has evolved with the amalgamations the university has undergone. The seal was originally silver-coloured, but in 1950, the university's Board of Governors changed it to gold to match the university's colours, gold and black. These colours were adopted in 1887, after the rugby team led the debate about college colours for football jerseys. The shield and eagle of Dalhousie's seal have been used as the logo since 1987, with the present incarnation in use since 2003, which includes the tagline \"inspiring minds\".\n\nThe university motto translates from Latin as \"pray and work\"; it adopted in 1870 from the Earl of Dalhousie's motto to replace the university's original one, which the administration believed did not convey confidence. The original motto was , which translates as \"Perhaps\", and first appeared in the first \"Dalhousie Gazette\" of 1869. It was from Virgil's epic poem \"Aeneid\", Book 1, line 203, , which translates as \"Perhaps the time may come when these difficulties will be sweet to remember\".\n\nA number of songs are commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement, convocation, and athletic contests, including \"Carmina Dalhousiana\", written in Halifax in 1882. The Dalhousie University songbook was compiled by Charles B. Weikel in 1904.\n\nDalhousie graduates have found success in a variety of fields, serving as heads of a diverse array of public and private institutions. Dalhousie University has over 130,000 alumni. Throughout Dalhousie's history, faculty, alumni, and former students have played prominent roles in many fields, and include 91 Rhodes Scholars.\n\nDalhousie has also educated Nobel laureates. Astrophysicist and Dalhousie alumni Arthur B. McDonald (BSc 1964, MSc 1965) received the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physics for identifying neutrino change identities and mass. McDonald was also previously awarded the Herzberg Prize and the Benjamin Franklin Prize in physics. Other notable graduates of Dalhousie includes Donald O. Hebb, who helped advance the field of neuropsychology, Kathryn D. Sullivan, the first American woman to walk in space and Jeff Dahn, one of the world's foremost researchers in lithium battery chemistry and aging.\nNotable politicians who have attended Dalhousie include three Prime Ministers of Canada, R. B. Bennett, Joe Clark, and Brian Mulroney. Eight graduates have served as Lieutenant Governors: John Crosbie, Myra Freeman, Clarence Gosse, John Keiller MacKay, Henry Poole MacKeen, John Robert Nicholson, Fabian O'Dea, and Albert Walsh. Twelve graduates have served as provincial premiers: Allan Blakeney, John Buchanan, Alex Campbell, Amor De Cosmos, Darrell Dexter, Joe Ghiz, John Hamm, Angus Lewis Macdonald, Russell MacLellan, Gerald Regan, Robert Stanfield, Clyde Wells, and Danny Williams. The first woman appointed to the Supreme Court of Canada, Bertha Wilson, was a graduate from Dalhousie Law School.\n\nOther notable alumni from the Dalhousie include Lucy Maud Montgomery, an author that wrote a series of novels, including \"Anne of Green Gables\". Prominent business leaders who studied at Dalhousie include Jamie Baillie, former CEO of Credit Union Atlantic, Graham Day, former CEO of British Shipbuilders, Sean Durfy, former CEO of WestJet, and Charles Peter McColough, former president and CEO of Xerox.\n\nBULLET::::- Dalhousie Arts Centre\nBULLET::::- Fenwick Place\nBULLET::::- Fraternities and sororities at Dalhousie University\n\nBibliography\n\n"}
{"id": "8643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8643", "title": "Molecular diffusion", "text": "Molecular diffusion\n\nMolecular diffusion, often simply called diffusion, is the thermal motion of all (liquid or gas) particles at temperatures above absolute zero. The rate of this movement is a function of temperature, viscosity of the fluid and the size (mass) of the particles. Diffusion explains the net flux of molecules from a region of higher concentration to one of lower concentration. Once the concentrations are equal the molecules continue to move, but since there is no concentration gradient the process of molecular diffusion has ceased and is instead governed by the process of self-diffusion, originating from the random motion of the molecules. The result of diffusion is a gradual mixing of material such that the distribution of molecules is uniform. Since the molecules are still in motion, but an equilibrium has been established, the end result of molecular diffusion is called a \"dynamic equilibrium\". In a phase with uniform temperature, absent external net forces acting on the particles, the diffusion process will eventually result in complete mixing.\n\nConsider two systems; S and S at the same temperature and capable of exchanging particles. If there is a change in the potential energy of a system; for example μ>μ (μ is Chemical potential) an energy flow will occur from S to S, because nature always prefers low energy and maximum entropy.\n\nMolecular diffusion is typically described mathematically using Fick's laws of diffusion.\n\nDiffusion is of fundamental importance in many disciplines of physics, chemistry, and biology. Some example applications of diffusion:\nBULLET::::- Sintering to produce solid materials (powder metallurgy, production of ceramics)\nBULLET::::- Chemical reactor design\nBULLET::::- Catalyst design in chemical industry\nBULLET::::- Steel can be diffused (e.g., with carbon or nitrogen) to modify its properties\nBULLET::::- Doping during production of semiconductors.\n\nDiffusion is part of the transport phenomena. Of mass transport mechanisms, molecular diffusion is known as a slower one.\n\nIn cell biology, diffusion is a main form of transport for necessary materials such as amino acids within cells. Diffusion of solvents, such as water, through a semipermeable membrane is classified as osmosis.\n\nMetabolism and respiration rely in part upon diffusion in addition to bulk or active processes. For example, in the alveoli of mammalian lungs, due to differences in partial pressures across the alveolar-capillary membrane, oxygen diffuses into the blood and carbon dioxide diffuses out. Lungs contain a large surface area to facilitate this gas exchange process.\n\nFundamentally, two types of diffusion are distinguished:\nBULLET::::- \"Tracer diffusion\" and \"Self-diffusion\", which is a spontaneous mixing of molecules taking place in the absence of concentration (or chemical potential) gradient. This type of diffusion can be followed using isotopic tracers, hence the name. The tracer diffusion is usually assumed to be identical to self-diffusion (assuming no significant isotopic effect). This diffusion can take place under equilibrium. An excellent method for the measurement of self-diffusion coefficients is pulsed field gradient (PFG) NMR, where no isotopic tracers are needed. In a so-called NMR spin echo experiment this technique uses the nuclear spin precession phase, allowing to distinguish chemically and physically completely identical species e.g. in the liquid phase, as for example water molecules within liquid water. The self-diffusion coefficient of water has been experimentally determined with high accuracy and thus serves often as a reference value for measurements on other liquids. The self-diffusion coefficient of neat water is: 2.299·10 m²·s at 25 °C and 1.261·10 m²·s at 4 °C.\nBULLET::::- \"Chemical diffusion\" occurs in a presence of concentration (or chemical potential) gradient and it results in net transport of mass. This is the process described by the diffusion equation. This diffusion is always a non-equilibrium process, increases the system entropy, and brings the system closer to equilibrium.\n\nThe diffusion coefficients for these two types of diffusion are generally different because the diffusion coefficient for chemical diffusion is binary and it includes the effects due to the correlation of the movement of the different diffusing species.\n\nBecause chemical diffusion is a net transport process, the system in which it takes place is not an equilibrium system (i.e. it is not at rest yet). Many results in classical thermodynamics are not easily applied to non-equilibrium systems. However, there sometimes occur so-called quasi-steady states, where the diffusion process does not change in time, where classical results may locally apply. As the name suggests, this process is a not a true equilibrium since the system is still evolving.\n\nNon-equilibrium fluid systems can be successfully modeled with Landau-Lifshitz fluctuating hydrodynamics. In this theoretical framework, diffusion is due to fluctuations whose dimensions range from the molecular scale to the macroscopic scale.\n\nChemical diffusion increases the entropy of a system, i.e. diffusion is a spontaneous and irreversible process. Particles can spread out by diffusion, but will not spontaneously re-order themselves (absent changes to the system, assuming no creation of new chemical bonds, and absent external forces acting on the particle).\n\n\"Collective diffusion\" is the diffusion of a large number of particles, most often within a solvent.\n\nContrary to brownian motion, which is the diffusion of a single particle, interactions between particles may have to be considered, unless the particles form an ideal mix with their solvent (ideal mix conditions correspond to the case where the interactions between the solvent and particles are identical to the interactions between particles and the interactions between solvent molecules; in this case, the particles do not interact when inside the solvent).\n\nIn case of an ideal mix, the particle diffusion equation holds true and the diffusion coefficient \"D\" the speed of diffusion in the particle diffusion equation is independent of particle concentration. In other cases, resulting interactions between particles within the solvent will account for the following effects:\nBULLET::::- the diffusion coefficient \"D\" in the particle diffusion equation becomes dependent of concentration. For an attractive interaction between particles, the diffusion coefficient tends to decrease as concentration increases. For a repulsive interaction between particles, the diffusion coefficient tends to increase as concentration increases.\nBULLET::::- In the case of an attractive interaction between particles, particles exhibit a tendency to coalesce and form clusters if their concentration lies above a certain threshold. This is equivalent to a precipitation chemical reaction (and if the considered diffusing particles are chemical molecules in solution, then it is a precipitation).\n\nTransport of material in stagnant fluid or across streamlines of a fluid in a laminar flow occurs by molecular diffusion. Two adjacent compartments separated by a partition, containing pure gases A or B may be envisaged. Random movement of all molecules occurs so that after a period molecules are found remote from their original positions. If the partition is removed, some molecules of A move towards the region occupied by B, their number depends on the number of molecules at the region considered. Concurrently, molecules of B diffuse toward regimens formerly occupied by pure A.\nFinally, complete mixing occurs. Before this point in time, a gradual variation in the concentration of A occurs along an axis, designated x, which joins the original compartments. This variation, expressed mathematically as -dC/dx, where C is the concentration of A. The negative sign arises because the concentration of A decreases as the distance x increases. Similarly, the variation in the concentration of gas B is -dC/dx. The rate of diffusion of A, N, depend on concentration gradient and the average velocity with which the molecules of A moves in the x direction. This relationship is expressed by Fick's Law\n\nwhere D is the Diffusivity of A through B, proportional to the average (squared?) molecular velocity and, therefore dependent on the temperature and pressure of gases. The rate of Diffusion N,is usually expressed as the number of moles diffusing across unit area in unit time. As with the basic equation of heat transfer, this indicates that the rate of force is directly proportional to the driving force, which is the concentration gradient.\nThis basic equation applies to a number of situations. Restricting discussion exclusively to steady state conditions, in which neither dC/dx or dC/dx change with time, equimolecular counterdiffusion is considered first.\n\nIf no bulk flow occurs in an element of length dx, the rates of diffusion of two ideal gases (of similar molar volume) A and B must be equal and opposite, that is formula_2.\nThe partial pressure of A changes by dP over the distance dx. Similarly, the partial pressure of B changes dP. As there is no difference in total pressure across the element (no bulk flow), we have\n\nFor an ideal gas the partial pressure is related to the molar concentration by the relation\n\nwhere n is the number of moles of gas \"A\" in a volume \"V\". As the molar concentration \"C\" is equal to \"n/ V\" therefore\nConsequently, for gas A,\n\nwhere D is the diffusivity of A in B. Similarly,\n\nConsidering that dP/dx=-dP/dx, it therefore proves that D=D=D. If the partial pressure of A at x is P and x is P, integration of above equation,\n\nA similar equation may be derived for the counterdiffusion of gas B.\n\nBULLET::::- Some pictures that display diffusion and osmosis\nBULLET::::- An animation describing diffusion.\nBULLET::::- A tutorial on the theory behind and solution of the Diffusion Equation.\nBULLET::::- NetLogo Simulation Model for Educational Use (Java Applet)\nBULLET::::- Short movie on brownian motion (includes calculation of the diffusion coefficient)\nBULLET::::- A basic introduction to the classical theory of volume diffusion (with figures and animations)\nBULLET::::- Diffusion on the nanoscale (with figures and animations)\n"}
{"id": "8645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8645", "title": "Declension", "text": "Declension\n\nIn linguistics, declension is the changing of the form of a word, generally to express its syntactic function in the sentence, by way of some inflection. The inflectional change of verbs is called conjugation.\n\nDeclensions may apply to nouns, pronouns, adjectives, adverbs, and articles to indicate number (e.g. singular, dual, plural), case (e.g. nominative case, accusative case, genitive case, dative case), gender (e.g. masculine, neuter, feminine), and a number of other grammatical categories. \n\nDeclension occurs in many of the world's languages. Declension is an important aspect of language families like American (such as Quechuan), Indo-European (German, Slavic, Sanskrit, Latin), Bantu (Zulu, Kikuyu), Semitic (Modern Standard Arabic), Finno-Ugric (Hungarian, Finnish, Estonian), Turkic (Turkish).\n\nOld English was an inflectional language, but largely abandoned inflectional changes as it evolved into Modern English. Though traditionally classified as synthetic, Modern English has moved towards an analytic language.\n\nIt is agreed that Ancient Greeks had a \"vague\" idea of the forms of a noun in their language. A fragment of Anacreon seems to confirm this idea. Nevertheless, it cannot be concluded that the Ancient Greeks actually knew what the cases were. The Stoics developed many basic notions that today are the rudiments of linguistics. The idea of grammatical cases is also traced back to the Stoics, but it's still not completely clear what the Stoics exactly meant with their notion of cases.\n\nIn Modern English, the system of declensions is very simple compared to some other languages, so much so that the term \"declension\" is rarely applied to English in practice. Most nouns in English have distinct singular and plural forms and have distinct plain and possessive forms. Plurality is most commonly shown by the affix \"-s\" (or \"-es\"), whereas possession is always shown by the clitic \"-'s\" (or by just the apostrophe for most plural forms ending in \"s\") attached to the noun. Consider, for example, the forms of the noun \"girl\":\n\nMost speakers pronounce all of the forms other than the singular plain form (\"girl\") exactly the same (though the elided possessive-indicating \"s\" of the plural possessive may be realised as [z] in some speakers' pronunciations, being separated from the plural-indicating \"s\" normally by a central vowel such as [ɨ̞]). By contrast, a few nouns are slightly more complex in their forms. For example:\n\nIn that example, all four forms are pronounced in a distinct manner.\n\nThere can be other derivations from nouns that are not usually considered declensions. For example, the proper noun \"Britain\" has the associated descriptive adjective \"British\" and the demonym \"Briton\". Though these words are clearly related and are generally considered cognates, they are not specifically treated as forms of the same word and thus not declensions.\n\nPronouns in English have even more complex declensions. For example:\n\nWhereas nouns do not distinguish between the subjective (nominative) and objective (oblique) cases, some pronouns do; that is, they decline to reflect their relationship to a verb or preposition, or case. Consider the difference between \"he\" (subjective) and \"him\" (objective), as in \"He saw it\" and \"It saw him\"; similarly, consider \"who\", which is subjective, and the objective \"whom\" (although it is increasingly common to use \"who\" for both).\n\nThe one situation where gender is still clearly part of the English language is in the pronouns for the third person singular. Consider the following:\n\nThe distinguishing of neuter for persons and non-persons is somewhat peculiar to English. This has existed since the 14th century. However, the use of the so-called \"singular they\" is often restricted to specific contexts, depending on the dialect or the speaker. It is most typically used to refer to a single person of unknown gender (e.g., \"someone left their jacket behind\"). Its use has expanded in recent years due to increasing social recognition of persons who do not identify themselves as male or female. Note that the \"singular they\" still uses plural verb forms, reflecting its origins.\n\nFor nouns, in general, gender is not declined in Modern English, or at best one could argue there are isolated situations certain nouns may be modified to reflect gender, though not in a systematic fashion. Loan words from other languages, particularly Latin and the Romance languages, often preserve their gender-specific forms in English, e.g. \"alumnus\" (masculine singular) and \"alumna\" (feminine singular). Similarly, names borrowed from other languages show comparable distinctions: \"Andrew\" and \"Andrea\", \"Paul\" and \"Paula\", etc. Additionally, suffixes such as \"-ess\", \"-ette\", and \"-er\" are sometimes applied to create overtly gendered versions of nouns, with marking for feminine being much more common than marking for masculine. Many nouns can actually function as members of two genders or even all three, and the gender classes of English nouns are usually determined by their agreement with pronouns, rather than marking on the nouns themselves.\n\nMost adjectives are not declined. However, when used as nouns rather than adjectives, they do decline (e.g., \"I'll take the reds\", meaning \"I'll take the red ones\" or as shorthand for \"I'll take the red wines\"). Also, the demonstrative determiners \"this\" and \"that\" are declined for number, as \"these\" and \"those\". Some adjectives borrowed from other languages are, or can be, declined for gender, at least in writing: \"blond\" (male) and \"blonde\" (female). Adjectives are not declined for case in Modern English, though they were in Old English. The article is never regarded as declined in Modern English, although formally, the words \"that\" and possibly \"she\" correspond to forms of the predecessor of \"the\" (\"sē\" m., \"þæt\" n., \"sēo\" f.) as it was declined in Old English.\n\nJust as verbs in Latin are conjugated to indicate grammatical information, Latin nouns and adjectives that modify them are declined to signal their roles in sentences. There are five important cases for Latin nouns: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, and ablative. Since the vocative case usually takes the same form as the nominative, it is seldom spelt out in grammar books. Yet another case, the locative, is limited to a small number of words.\n\nThe usual basic functions of these cases are as follows:\nBULLET::::- Nominative case indicates the subject.\nBULLET::::- Genitive case indicates possession and can be translated with ‘of’.\nBULLET::::- Dative case marks the indirect object and can be translated with ‘to’ or ‘for’.\nBULLET::::- Accusative case marks the direct object.\nBULLET::::- Ablative case is used to modify verbs and can be translated as ‘by’, ‘with’, ‘from’, etc.\nBULLET::::- Vocative case is used to address a person or thing.\n\nThe genitive, dative, accusative, and ablative also have important functions to indicate the object of a preposition.\n\nGiven below is the declension paradigm of Latin \"puer\" ‘boy’ and \"puella\" ‘girl’:\n! Case !! Singular !! Plural !! Singular !! Plural\n\nFrom the provided examples we can see how cases work:\n\nBULLET::::- \"liber puerī\" → the book of the boy (\"puerī\" boy=genitive)\nBULLET::::- \"puer puellae rosam dat\" → the boy gives the girl a rose (\"puer\" boy=nominative; \"puellae\" girl=dative; \"rosam\" rose=accusative; \"dat\" give=third person singular present)\n\nSanskrit, another Indo-European language, has eight cases: nominative, vocative, accusative, genitive, dative, ablative, locative and instrumental. Some do not count vocative as a separate case, despite it having a distinctive ending in the singular, but consider it as a different use of the nominative.\n\nSanskrit grammatical cases have been analyzed extensively. The grammarian Pāṇini identified six semantic roles or \"karaka\", which correspond closely to the eight cases:\nBULLET::::- agent (\"kartṛ\", related to the nominative)\nBULLET::::- patient (\"karman\", related to the accusative)\nBULLET::::- means (\"karaṇa\", related to the instrumental)\nBULLET::::- recipient (\"sampradāna\", related to the dative)\nBULLET::::- source (\"apādāna\", related to the ablative)\nBULLET::::- locus (\"adhikaraṇa\", related to the locative)\nBULLET::::- address (\"sambodhana\", related to the vocative)\nFor example, consider the following sentence:\nfrom the tree  a leaf  to the ground  falls\n}\"a leaf falls from the tree to the ground\"\n\nHere \"leaf\" is the agent, \"tree\" is the source, and \"ground\" is the locus. The endings \"-aṁ\", \"-at\", \"-āu\" mark the cases associated with these meanings.\n\nBULLET::::- Arabic ʾIʿrab\nBULLET::::- Basque declension\nBULLET::::- Czech declension\nBULLET::::- Dutch declension system\nBULLET::::- Finnish language noun cases\nBULLET::::- German declension\nBULLET::::- Greek declension\nBULLET::::- Icelandic declension\nBULLET::::- Irish declension\nBULLET::::- Latin declension\nBULLET::::- Latvian declension\nBULLET::::- Lithuanian declension\nBULLET::::- Middle English declension\nBULLET::::- Polish declension\nBULLET::::- Russian declension\nBULLET::::- Slovak declension\nBULLET::::- Slovene declension\nBULLET::::- Ukrainian declension\n\nBULLET::::- First declension\nBULLET::::- Second declension\nBULLET::::- Third declension\n\nBULLET::::- Grammatical conjugation\nBULLET::::- Grammatical case\nBULLET::::- Strong inflection\nBULLET::::- Weak inflection\n\nBULLET::::- The Status of Morphological Case in the Icelandic Lexicon by Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson. Discussion of whether cases convey any inherent syntactic or semantic meaning.\nBULLET::::- Optimal Case: The Distribution of Case in German and Icelandic by Dieter Wunderlich\n\nBULLET::::- Declension\nBULLET::::- Base, Stem, Root\nBULLET::::- Defective Paradigm\nBULLET::::- Strong Verb\nBULLET::::- Inflection Phrase (IP), INFL, AGR, Tense\nBULLET::::- Lexicalist Hypothesis\nBULLET::::- classical Greek declension\n"}
{"id": "8648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8648", "title": "Daffynition", "text": "Daffynition\n\nA daffynition (a portmanteau blend of \"daffy\" and \"definition\") is a pun format involving the reinterpretation of an existing word, on the basis that it sounds like another word (or group of words). They are similar to transpositional puns, but often much less complex and easier to create. For example, \"a hangover is the wrath of grapes\" is a play on the title of the book \"The Grapes of Wrath\". A subclass of daffynition is the goofinition which relies strictly on literal associations and correct spellings, such as \"lobster = a weak tennis player\". This play on words is similar to Cockney Rhyming Slang.\n\nUnder the name Uxbridge English Dictionary making up daffynitions is a popular game on the BBC Radio 4 comedy quiz show \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue.\n\nBULLET::::- A set of dentures. (a-pair-of-teeth)\nBULLET::::- What a bullfighter tries to do. (avoid-a-bull)\nBULLET::::- too much to pay for corn ([a]-buck-an-ear)\nBULLET::::- to kill Piers Morgan\nBULLET::::- A fashionably dressed big cat (dandy-lion)\nBULLET::::- Possessing only ten teeth. (deca-dent)\nBULLET::::- Where people wait for buses. (the-bus-station)\nBULLET::::- live long (die-late)\nBULLET::::- Teenagers in the world's largest continent. (youth-in-Asia)\nBULLET::::- Consumption of an expensive meal. (fortune-ate)\nBULLET::::- A flaming goblin. (imp-alight)\nBULLET::::- where one places dirty dishes (in-the-sink)\nBULLET::::- how geese fly (in-formation)\nBULLET::::- Italian suppositories. (in-you-end-os)\nBULLET::::- Fallen off the Isle of Wight ferry. (in-Solent)\nBULLET::::- Me not on time. (I-(am)-so-late)\nBULLET::::- A foot. (leg-end)\nBULLET::::- A French tramp. (hobo)\nBULLET::::- Two doctors. (pair-of-docs) or where one ties two boats. (Pair of docks)\nBULLET::::- Too far to see. (past-your-eyes)\nBULLET::::- In favour of youth. (pro-teen)\nBULLET::::- A gentlemanly goose. (proper-gander)\nBULLET::::- What trees do in Spring. (re-leaf)\nBULLET::::- A South African or New Zealand graveyard. (cemetery)\n\nBULLET::::- Sniglet\nBULLET::::- The Meaning of Liff\nBULLET::::- The Devil's Dictionary\n\nBULLET::::- The Odford English Dictionary (Daffynitions)\nBULLET::::- Fuller's Dictionary of Daffynitions\n"}
{"id": "8649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8649", "title": "List of football clubs in the Netherlands", "text": "List of football clubs in the Netherlands\n\nThe Dutch Football League is organized by the Royal Dutch Football Association (KNVB, Koninklijke Nederlandse Voetbalbond).The most successful teams are Ajax (34), PSV (23) and Feyenoord (15). Important teams of the past are HVV (10 titles), Sparta Rotterdam (6 titles) and Willem II (3 titles).\n\nThe annual match that marks the beginning of the season is called the Johan Cruijff Schaal (Johan Cruyff Shield). Contenders are the champions and the cup winners of the previous season.\n\n! Club\n! Location\n! Venue\n! Capacity\n! Manager\n\nBULLET::::- Koninklijke HFC\nBULLET::::- RAP (of Amsterdam) were the first official champions of the Netherlands in 1899. The club however became a Cricket club in 1916 following a total of 5 national football titles.\nBULLET::::- Fortuna 54 (of Geleen) and Sittardia (of Sittard) merged to form Fortuna Sittard in 1968.\nBULLET::::- Blauw Wit, DWS and De Volewijckers merged to form FC Amsterdam in 1972, which ceased to exist in 1982.\nBULLET::::- PEC and the Zwolsche Boys merged to form PEC Zwolle in 1971, which became FC Zwolle in 1990.\nBULLET::::- Sportclub Enschede and the Enschedese Boys merged to form FC Twente in 1965.\nBULLET::::- DOS, Elinkwijk and Velox merged to form FC Utrecht in 1970.\nBULLET::::- GVAV became FC Groningen in 1971.\nBULLET::::- Alkmaar 54 and FC Zaanstreek merged to form AZ in 1967.\nBULLET::::- Roda Sport and Rapid JC merged to form Roda JC in 1962.\nBULLET::::- BVC Rotterdam and BVC Flamingos merged to form Scheveningen Holland Sport in 1954, which merged with ADO in 1971 to form FC Den Haag, which became ADO Den Haag in 1996.\nBULLET::::- SVV and Dordrecht '90 merged to form SVV/Dordrecht '90 in 1991. The club has since been renamed FC Dordrecht.\nBULLET::::- VC Vlissingen (from Flushing) became a professional club in 1990, changed its name to VCV Zeeland a year later, and became an amateur club again in 1992.\nBULLET::::- FC Wageningen (founded in 1911) won the Dutch cup in 1939 and 1948, joined the Dutch professional league when it was formed in 1954, and remained professional until the club went bankrupt in 1992.\nBULLET::::- HVC of Amersfoort was formed in 1905, joined the league in 1954, was renamed to SC Amersfoort in 1973 and went bankrupt in 1982.\nBULLET::::- Fortuna Vlaardingen (formed in 1904) joined the professional league in 1955, was renamed to FC Vlaardingen in 1974 and went bankrupt in 1981.\nBULLET::::- HFC Haarlem (formed in 1889) joined the professional league in 1954 and remained professional until the club went bankrupt in 2010.\nBULLET::::- RBC Roosendaal (formed in 1927) joined the professional league in 1955 till 1971 and 1983 and remained professional until the club went bankrupt in 2011.\nBULLET::::- AGOVV Apeldoorn (formed in 1913) joined the professional league in 1954 till 1971, but returned on 1 July 2003 until the club went bankrupt in 2013.\nBULLET::::- SC Veendam (formed in 1894) joined the professional league in 1954, but went bankrupt in 2013.\nBULLET::::- Zwart-Wit '28 won the national amateur championship in 1971 and the national cup for women in 2000. Went bankrupt in 2004.\n\nBULLET::::- Eerste Divisie\nBULLET::::- Eredivisie\nBULLET::::- List of football stadiums in the Netherlands\n\nBULLET::::- Midfield Dynamo's list of the Dutch football league's 'Big 3' and 'Best of the Rest' of the other clubs, midfielddynamo.com\nBULLET::::- Orange Football Blog - Weekly summaries from the Eredivisie and other articles, nlplanet.com\nBULLET::::- Official Eredivisie site\nBULLET::::- Official Eerste Divisie website\nBULLET::::- League321.com - Club stats records.\n"}
{"id": "8650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8650", "title": "Dragon 32/64", "text": "Dragon 32/64\n\nThe Dragon 32 and Dragon 64 are home computers that were built in the 1980s. The Dragons are very similar to the TRS-80 Color Computer, and were produced for the European market by Dragon Data, Ltd., in Port Talbot, Wales, and for the US market by Tano of New Orleans, Louisiana. The model numbers reflect the primary difference between the two machines, which have 32 and 64 kilobytes (32,768 and 65,536 bytes) of RAM, respectively.\n\nDuring the home computer boom of the early 1980s, Dragon Data entered the market in August 1982 with the Dragon 32; the Dragon 64 followed a year later. The computers sold well initially and attracted the interest of independent software developers including Microdeal. A companion magazine, \"Dragon User\", began publication shortly after the microcomputer's launch.\n\nDespite this initial success the Dragon computers suffered two major limits. The graphics capabilities were more limited than the competition, such as the ZX Spectrum and BBC Micro; this was significant for the games market and restricted the appeal of the Dragon.\n\nAdditionally as a cost cutting/memory saving measure only upper case character set was available. Although it was possible for applications to implement a mixed-case display using graphics modes, less sophisticated applications had to make do with just upper case, restricting the system's appeal to the educational market.\n\nAs a result of its limitations, a significant part of the market for home computers was missed and the Dragon was not a commercial success. Dragon Data collapsed in June 1984. \nIt was acquired by the Spanish company Eurohard S.A., which filed for bankruptcy in 1987. \n\nIn the United States it was possible to purchase the Tano Dragon new in box until early 2017 from California Digital, a retailer that purchased the remaining stock.\n\nThe Dragon is built around the Motorola MC6809E processor running at 0.89 MHz. It was an advanced 8-bit CPU design, with limited 16-bit capabilities.\n\nIt was possible to increase the speed of the computer by using POKE 65495,0 which accelerates the ROM-resident BASIC interpreter, but temporarily disables correct functioning of the cassette/printer ports. Manufacturing variances mean that not all Dragons are able to function at this higher speed, and use of this POKE can cause some units to crash or be unstable, though with no permanent damage. POKE 65494,0 returns the speed to normal. POKE 65497,0 pushes the speed yet higher but the display is lost until a slower speed is restored.\n\nThe Dragon used the SN74LS783/MC6883 Synchronous Address Multiplexer (SAM) and the MC6847 Video Display Generator (VDG). I/O was provided by two MC6821 Peripheral Interface Adapters (PIAs). Many Dragon 32s were upgraded by their owners to 64 kB of memory. A few were further expanded to 128 kB, 256 kB, or 512 kB, with home-built memory controllers/memory management units (MMUs).\n\nA broad range of peripherals exist for the Dragon 32/64, and there are add-ons such as the Dragon's Claw which give the Dragons a port hardware compatible with the BBC Micro's user port, though separate software drivers for connected devices need to be developed. Although neither machine has a built-in disk operating system (cassette tapes being the standard storage mechanism commonly used for machines of the time), DragonDOS was supplied as part of the disk controller interface from Dragon Data Ltd. The versatile external ports, including the standard RS-232 on the 64, also allows hobbyists to attach a diverse range of equipment.\n\nThe computer featured a composite monitor port as an alternative to the TV RF output which can be used to connect the Dragon 32 to most modern TVs to deliver a much better picture.\n\nThe Dragon uses analogue joysticks, unlike most systems of the time which used simpler and cheaper digital systems. Other uses for the joystick ports include light pens.\n\nTony Clarke and Richard Wadman established the specifications for the Dragon.\n\nThe units had a robust motherboard in a spacious case, reminiscent of the BBC Micro, and so were more tolerant of home-modification than some of their contemporaries, which often had their components crammed into the smallest possible space.\n\nThe Dragon's main display mode is 'black on green' text (actually the black was a deeper, muddier green). The only graphics possible in this mode are quarter-tile block based.\n\nIt also has a selection of five high resolution modes, named PMODEs 0-4, which alternate monochrome and four-colour in successively higher resolutions, culminating in the black and white 256×192 PMODE 4. Each mode has two possible colour palettes. Unfortunately, these are rather garish and cause the system to fare poorly in visual comparisons with other home computers of the time. It is also impossible to use standard printing commands to print text on the graphical modes, causing software development difficulties.\n\nFull colour scanline based 64×192 \"semi-graphics\" modes are also possible, though their imbalanced resolution and programming difficulty (they are not accessible via BASIC) meant they were not often utilised.\n\nFirst to market was a complete disk operating system, produced by Premier Microsystems located near Croydon. The system was sold as the \"Delta\" disk operating system, there was a proposal for Dragon to market this as an addon. Dragon did not enter such an agreement and produced the DragonDOS system. The two systems were incompatible.\n\nDelta's lead in availability ensured that software was released in the format, whilst Dragon's \"official\" status ensured it too gained software published in its format. This lead to confusion and frustration with customers finding they had either purchased a version incompatible with their setup, or that the software was only available for the competing standard.\n\nThe Dragon comes with a Microsoft BASIC interpreter in 16 KB of ROM.\nThe BASIC appears to be near identical to Tandy Color Computer's Extended Basic with few changes for the Dragon system.\n\nIn common with home computers of the time, the entire operating software was included on a ROM chip, hence the system starts instantly when powered up. \n\nSome software providers also produced compilers for BASIC, and other languages, to produce binary (or \"machine\") code which would run many times faster and make better use of the small system RAM. Towards the end of its life, Dragon Data produced an assembler/disassembler/editor suite called \"Dream\".\n\nIn addition to the DragonDOS disk operating system, the Dragon 32/64 is capable of running several others, including FLEX, and even OS-9 which brought UNIX-like multitasking to the platform. Memory-expanded and MMU-equipped Dragons are able to run OS-9 Level 2.\n\nInitially, the Dragon was reasonably well supported by the major UK software companies with versions of popular games from other systems being ported to the Dragon. Examples of top selling games available for the Dragon include \"Arcadia\" (Imagine), \"Chuckie Egg\" (A&F), \"Manic Miner\" and sequel \"Jet Set Willy\" (Software Projects), \"Hunchback\" (Ocean) and \"Football Manager\" (Addictive). There were also companies that concentrated on the Dragon such as Microdeal. Their character Cuthbert appeared in several games on the Dragon with \"Cuthbert Goes Walkabout\" also being converted for Atari 8-bit and Commodore 64 systems.\n\nDue to the limited graphics modes of the Dragon, converted games had a distinctive appearance with colour games being usually played on a green or white background (rather than the more common black on other systems) or games with high definition graphics having to run in black and white.\n\nWhen the system was discontinued, support from software companies also effectively ended. However, Microdeal continued supporting the Dragon until January 1988. Some of their final games developed for the Dragon in 1987 such as \"Tanglewood\" and \"Airball\" were also converted for 16-bit machines such as the Atari ST and Amiga.\n\nBoth the Dragon and the TRS-80 Color Computer are based on a Motorola data sheet design for the MC6883 SAM (MMU) chip for memory management and peripheral control.\n\nThe systems are sufficiently similar that a significant fraction of the compiled software produced for one machine will run on the other. Software running via the built-in Basic interpreters also has a high level of compatibility, but only after they are re-tokenized, which can be achieved fairly easily by transferring via cassette tape with appropriate options.\n\nIt is possible to permanently convert a Color Computer into a Dragon by swapping the original Color Computer ROM and rewiring the keyboard cable.\n\nThe Dragon has additional circuitry to make the MC6847 VDG compatible with European 625-line television standards, rather than the US 525-line NTSC standard, and a Centronics parallel printer port not present on the TRS-80. Some models were manufactured with NTSC video for the US and Canadian markets.\n\nAside from the amount of RAM, the 64 also has a functional RS-232 serial port which was not included on the 32. A minor difference between the two Dragon models is the outer case colour; the Dragon 32 is beige and the 64 is light grey. Besides the case, branding and the Dragon 64's serial port, the two machines look the same. The Dragon 32 is upgradable to Dragon 64. In some cases, buyers of the Dragon 32, found that they actually have a Dragon 64 unit.\n\n\"BYTE\" wrote in January 1983 that the Dragon 32 \"offers more feature for the money than most of its [British] competitors\", but \"there's nothing exceptional about it\". The review described it as a redesigned, less-expensive Color Computer with 32K RAM and better keyboard.\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\n\nBULLET::::- Vander Reyden, John (1983). \"Dragon 32 programmer's reference guide\". Beam Software/Melbourne House. .\nBULLET::::- Smeed, D.; Sommerville, I. (1983). \"Inside the Dragon\". Addison-Wesley.\n\nBULLET::::- The Dragon 32/64 Computers – at website www.6809.org.uk\nBULLET::::- The Dragon Archive – An archive of everything related to the Dragon 32/64 and its clones and prototypes\nBULLET::::- Dragon 32 Universe (Archived since April 25th, 2019) – A primarily games-based archive of Dragon 32 games, reviews and instructions\nBULLET::::- A Slayed Beast - History of the Dragon Computer at dragon-archive-online.co.uk.\nBULLET::::- The International Dragon Users Group – The Yahoo! group for Dragon Users\nBULLET::::- Manuals of Dragon 32, Dragon 64 and DragonDOS (DOS 437 character set) at www.museo8bits.es\nBULLET::::- Dragon Update - National Users Group Magazine Library at the Centre for Computing History\nBULLET::::- The Dragon 32/64 Inlay Artwork Archive at dragon32.co.uk - Archive of Dragon 32/64 inlay artwork\n"}
{"id": "8651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8651", "title": "Dark matter", "text": "Dark matter\n\nDark matter is a form of matter thought to account for approximately 85% of the matter in the universe and about a quarter of its total energy density. Its presence is implied in a variety of astrophysical observations, including gravitational effects which cannot be explained by accepted theories of gravity unless more matter is present than can be seen. For this reason, most experts think that dark matter is abundant in the universe and that it has had a strong influence on its structure and evolution. Dark matter is called dark because it does not appear to interact with observable electromagnetic radiation, such as light, and so it is undetectable by existing astronomical instruments. \n\nPrimary evidence for dark matter comes from calculations showing that many galaxies would fly apart, or that they would not have formed or would not move as they do, if they did not contain a large amount of unseen matter. Other lines of evidence include observations in gravitational lensing and in the cosmic microwave background, along with astronomical observations of the observable universe's current structure, the formation and evolution of galaxies, mass location during galactic collisions, and the motion of galaxies within galaxy clusters. In the standard Lambda-CDM model of cosmology, the total mass–energy of the universe contains 5% ordinary matter and energy, 27% dark matter and 68% of an unknown form of energy known as dark energy. Thus, dark matter constitutes 85% of total mass, while dark energy plus dark matter constitute 95% of total mass–energy content.\n\nBecause dark matter has not yet been observed directly, if it exists, it must barely interact with ordinary baryonic matter and radiation, except through gravity. Most dark matter is thought to be non-baryonic in nature; it may be composed of some as-yet undiscovered subatomic particles. The primary candidate for dark matter is some new kind of elementary particle that has not yet been discovered, in particular, weakly-interacting massive particles (WIMPs). Many experiments to directly detect and study dark matter particles are being actively undertaken, but none have yet succeeded. Dark matter is classified as \"cold\", \"warm\", or \"hot\" according to its velocity (more precisely, its free streaming length). Current models favor a cold dark matter scenario, in which structures emerge by gradual accumulation of particles.\n\nAlthough the existence of dark matter is generally accepted by the scientific community, some astrophysicists, intrigued by certain observations which do not fit the dark matter theory, argue for various modifications of the standard laws of general relativity, such as modified Newtonian dynamics, tensor–vector–scalar gravity, or entropic gravity. These models attempt to account for all observations without invoking supplemental non-baryonic matter.\n\nThe hypothesis of dark matter has an elaborate history. In a talk given in 1884, Lord Kelvin estimated the number of dark bodies in the Milky Way from the observed velocity dispersion of the stars orbiting around the center of the galaxy. By using these measurements, he estimated the mass of the galaxy, which he determined is different from the mass of visible stars. Lord Kelvin thus concluded \"many of our stars, perhaps a great majority of them, may be dark bodies\". In 1906 Henri Poincaré in \"The Milky Way and Theory of Gases\" used \"dark matter\", or \"matière obscure\" in French, in discussing Kelvin's work.\n\nThe first to suggest the existence of dark matter, using stellar velocities, was Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn in 1922. Fellow Dutchman and radio astronomy pioneer Jan Oort also hypothesized the existence of dark matter in 1932. Oort was studying stellar motions in the local galactic neighborhood and found the mass in the galactic plane must be greater than what was observed, but this measurement was later determined to be erroneous.\n\nIn 1933, Swiss astrophysicist Fritz Zwicky, who studied galaxy clusters while working at the California Institute of Technology, made a similar inference. Zwicky applied the virial theorem to the Coma Cluster and obtained evidence of unseen mass he called \"dunkle Materie\" ('dark matter'). Zwicky estimated its mass based on the motions of galaxies near its edge and compared that to an estimate based on its brightness and number of galaxies. He estimated the cluster had about 400 times more mass than was visually observable. The gravity effect of the visible galaxies was far too small for such fast orbits, thus mass must be hidden from view. Based on these conclusions, Zwicky inferred some unseen matter provided the mass and associated gravitation attraction to hold the cluster together. Zwicky's estimates were off by more than an order of magnitude, mainly due to an obsolete value of the Hubble constant; the same calculation today shows a smaller fraction, using greater values for luminous mass. Nonetheless, Zwicky did correctly conclude from his calculation the bulk of the matter was dark.\n\nFurther indications the mass-to-light ratio was not unity came from measurements of galaxy rotation curves. In 1939, Horace W. Babcock reported the rotation curve for the Andromeda nebula (known now as the Andromeda Galaxy), which suggested the mass-to-luminosity ratio increases radially. He attributed it to either light absorption within the galaxy or modified dynamics in the outer portions of the spiral and not to the missing matter he had uncovered. Following Babcock's 1939 report of unexpectedly rapid rotation in the outskirts of the Andromeda galaxy and a mass-to-light ratio of 50; in 1940 Jan Oort discovered and wrote about the large non-visible halo of NGC 3115.\n\nVera Rubin, Kent Ford, and Ken Freeman's work in the 1960s and 1970s, provided further strong evidence, also using galaxy rotation curves. Rubin and Ford worked with a new spectrograph to measure the velocity curve of edge-on spiral galaxies with greater accuracy. This result was confirmed in 1978. An influential paper presented Rubin and Ford's results in 1980. They showed most galaxies must contain about six times as much dark as visible mass; thus, by around 1980 the apparent need for dark matter was widely recognized as a major unsolved problem in astronomy.\n\nAt the same time Rubin and Ford were exploring optical rotation curves, radio astronomers were making use of new radio telescopes to map the 21 cm line of atomic hydrogen in nearby galaxies. The radial distribution of interstellar atomic hydrogen (H-I) often extends to much larger galactic radii than those accessible by optical studies, extending the sampling of rotation curves – and thus of the total mass distribution – to a new dynamical regime. Early mapping of Andromeda with the 300 foot telescope at Green Bank and the 250 foot dish at Jodrell Bank already showed the H-I rotation curve did not trace the expected Keplerian decline. As more sensitive receivers became available, Morton Roberts and Robert Whitehurst were able to trace the rotational velocity of Andromeda to 30 kpc, much beyond the optical measurements. Illustrating the advantage of tracing the gas disk at large radii, Figure 16 of that paper combines the optical data (the cluster of points at radii of less than 15 kpc with a single point further out) with the H-I data between 20–30 kpc, exhibiting the flatness of the outer galaxy rotation curve; the solid curve peaking at the center is the optical surface density, while the other curve shows the cumulative mass, still rising linearly at the outermost measurement. In parallel, the use of interferometric arrays for extragalactic H-I spectroscopy was being developed. In 1972, David Rogstad and Seth Shostak published H-I rotation curves of five spirals mapped with the Owens Valley interferometer; the rotation curves of all five were very flat, suggesting very large values of mass-to-light ratio in the outer parts of their extended H-I disks.\n\nA stream of observations in the 1980s supported the presence of dark matter, including gravitational lensing of background objects by galaxy clusters, the temperature distribution of hot gas in galaxies and clusters, and the pattern of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background. According to consensus among cosmologists, dark matter is composed primarily of a not yet characterized type of subatomic particle. The search for this particle, by a variety of means, is one of the major efforts in particle physics.\n\nIn standard cosmology, matter is anything whose energy density scales with the inverse cube of the scale factor, i.e., This is in contrast to radiation, which scales as the inverse fourth power of the scale factor and a cosmological constant, which is independent of \"a\". These scalings can be understood intuitively: For an ordinary particle in a cubical box, doubling the length of the sides of the box decreases the density (and hence energy density) by a factor of 8 (= 2). For radiation, the energy density decreases by a factor of 16 (= 2), because any act whose effect increases the scale factor must also cause a proportional redshift. A cosmological constant, as an intrinsic property of space, has a constant energy density regardless of the volume under consideration.\n\nIn principle, \"dark matter\" means all components of the universe which are not visible but still obey In practice, the term \"dark matter\" is often used to mean only the non-baryonic component of dark matter, i.e., excluding \"missing baryons.\" Context will usually indicate which meaning is intended.\n\nThe arms of spiral galaxies rotate around the galactic center. The luminous mass density of a spiral galaxy decreases as one goes from the center to the outskirts. If luminous mass were all the matter, then we can model the galaxy as a point mass in the centre and test masses orbiting around it, similar to the Solar System. From Kepler's Second Law, it is expected that the rotation velocities will decrease with distance from the center, similar to the Solar System. This is not observed. Instead, the galaxy rotation curve remains flat as distance from the center increases.\n\nIf Kepler's laws are correct, then the obvious way to resolve this discrepancy is to conclude the mass distribution in spiral galaxies is not similar to that of the Solar System. In particular, there is a lot of non-luminous matter (dark matter) in the outskirts of the galaxy.\n\nStars in bound systems must obey the virial theorem. The theorem, together with the measured velocity distribution, can be used to measure the mass distribution in a bound system, such as elliptical galaxies or globular clusters. With some exceptions, velocity dispersion estimates of elliptical galaxies do not match the predicted velocity dispersion from the observed mass distribution, even assuming complicated distributions of stellar orbits.\n\nAs with galaxy rotation curves, the obvious way to resolve the discrepancy is to postulate the existence of non-luminous matter.\n\nGalaxy clusters are particularly important for dark matter studies since their masses can be estimated in three independent ways:\nBULLET::::- From the scatter in radial velocities of the galaxies within clusters\nBULLET::::- From X-rays emitted by hot gas in the clusters. From the X-ray energy spectrum and flux, the gas temperature and density can be estimated, hence giving the pressure; assuming pressure and gravity balance determines the cluster's mass profile.\nBULLET::::- Gravitational lensing (usually of more distant galaxies) can measure cluster masses without relying on observations of dynamics (e.g., velocity).\n\nGenerally, these three methods are in reasonable agreement dark matter outweighs visible matter by approximately 5 to 1.\n\nOne of the consequences of general relativity is massive objects (such as a cluster of galaxies) lying between a more distant source (such as a quasar) and an observer should act as a lens to bend the light from this source. The more massive an object, the more lensing is observed.\n\nStrong lensing is the observed distortion of background galaxies into arcs when their light passes through such a gravitational lens. It has been observed around many distant clusters including Abell 1689. By measuring the distortion geometry, the mass of the intervening cluster can be obtained. In the dozens of cases where this has been done, the mass-to-light ratios obtained correspond to the dynamical dark matter measurements of clusters. Lensing can lead to multiple copies of an image. By analyzing the distribution of multiple image copies, scientists have been able to deduce and map the distribution of dark matter around the MACS J0416.1-2403 galaxy cluster.\n\nWeak gravitational lensing investigates minute distortions of galaxies, using statistical analyses from vast galaxy surveys. By examining the apparent shear deformation of the adjacent background galaxies, the mean distribution of dark matter can be characterized. The mass-to-light ratios correspond to dark matter densities predicted by other large-scale structure measurements. Dark matter does not bend light itself; mass (in this case the mass of the dark matter) bends spacetime. Light follows the curvature of spacetime, resulting in the lensing effect.\n\nAlthough both dark matter and ordinary matter are matter, they do not behave in the same way. In particular, in the early universe, ordinary matter was ionized and interacted strongly with radiation via Thomson scattering. Dark matter does not interact directly with radiation, but it does affect the CMB by its gravitational potential (mainly on large scales), and by its effects on the density and velocity of ordinary matter. Ordinary and dark matter perturbations, therefore, evolve differently with time and leave different imprints on the cosmic microwave background (CMB).\n\nThe cosmic microwave background is very close to a perfect blackbody but contains very small temperature anisotropies of a few parts in 100,000. A sky map of anisotropies can be decomposed into an angular power spectrum, which is observed to contain a series of acoustic peaks at near-equal spacing but different heights.\nThe series of peaks can be predicted for any assumed set of cosmological parameters by modern computer codes such as CMBFast and CAMB, and matching theory to data, therefore, constrains cosmological parameters. The first peak mostly shows the density of baryonic matter, while the third peak relates mostly to the density of dark matter, measuring the density of matter and the density of atoms.\n\nThe CMB anisotropy was first discovered by COBE in 1992, though this had too coarse resolution to detect the acoustic peaks.\nAfter the discovery of the first acoustic peak by the balloon-borne BOOMERanG experiment in 2000, the power spectrum was precisely observed by WMAP in 2003–2012, and even more precisely by the Planck spacecraft in 2013–2015. The results support the Lambda-CDM model.\n\nThe observed CMB angular power spectrum provides powerful evidence in support of dark matter, as its precise structure is well fitted by the Lambda-CDM model, but difficult to reproduce with any competing model such as modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND).\n\nStructure formation refers to the period after the Big Bang when density perturbations collapsed to form stars, galaxies, and clusters. Prior to structure formation, the Friedmann solutions to general relativity describe a homogeneous universe. Later, small anisotropies gradually grew and condensed the homogeneous universe into stars, galaxies and larger structures. Ordinary matter is affected by radiation, which is the dominant element of the universe at very early times. As a result, its density perturbations are washed out and unable to condense into structure. If there were only ordinary matter in the universe, there would not have been enough time for density perturbations to grow into the galaxies and clusters currently seen.\n\nDark matter provides a solution to this problem because it is unaffected by radiation. Therefore, its density perturbations can grow first. The resulting gravitational potential acts as an attractive potential well for ordinary matter collapsing later, speeding up the structure formation process.\n\nIf dark matter does not exist, then the next most likely explanation must be general relativity – the prevailing theory of gravity – is incorrect and should be modified. The Bullet Cluster, the result of a recent collision of two galaxy clusters, provides a challenge for modified gravity theories because its apparent center of mass is far displaced from the baryonic center of mass. Standard dark matter models can easily explain this observation, but modified gravity has a much harder time, especially since the observational evidence is model-independent.\n\nType Ia supernovae can be used as standard candles to measure extragalactic distances, which can in turn be used to measure how fast the universe has expanded in the past. Data indicates the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate, the cause of which is usually ascribed to dark energy. Since observations indicate the universe is almost flat, it is expected the total energy density of everything in the universe should sum to 1 (). The measured dark energy density is ; the observed ordinary (baryonic) matter energy density is and the energy density of radiation is negligible. This leaves a missing which nonetheless behaves like matter (see technical definition section above) dark matter.\n\nBaryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) are fluctuations in the density of the visible baryonic matter (normal matter) of the universe on large scales. These are predicted to arise in the Lambda-CDM model due to acoustic oscillations in the photon-baryon fluid of the early universe, and can be observed in the cosmic microwave background angular power spectrum. BAOs set up a preferred length scale for baryons. As the dark matter and baryons clumped together after recombination, the effect is much weaker in the galaxy distribution in the nearby universe, but is detectable as a subtle (≈1 percent) preference for pairs of galaxies to be separated by 147 Mpc, compared to those separated by 130–160 Mpc. This feature was predicted theoretically in the 1990s and then discovered in 2005, in two large galaxy redshift surveys, the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey. Combining the CMB observations with BAO measurements from galaxy redshift surveys provides a precise estimate of the Hubble constant and the average matter density in the Universe. The results support the Lambda-CDM model.\n\nLarge galaxy redshift surveys may be used to make a three-dimensional map of the galaxy distribution. These maps are slightly distorted because distances are estimated from observed redshifts; the redshift contains a contribution from the galaxy's so-called peculiar velocity in addition to the dominant Hubble expansion term. On average, superclusters are expanding more slowly than the cosmic mean due to their gravity, while voids are expanding faster than average. In a redshift map, galaxies in front of a supercluster have excess radial velocities towards it and have redshifts slightly higher than their distance would imply, while galaxies behind the supercluster have redshifts slightly low for their distance. This effect causes superclusters to appear squashed in the radial direction, and likewise voids are stretched. Their angular positions are unaffected. This effect is not detectable for any one structure since the true shape is not known, but can be measured by averaging over many structures. It was predicted quantitatively by Nick Kaiser in 1987, and first decisively measured in 2001 by the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey. Results are in agreement with the Lambda-CDM model.\n\nIn astronomical spectroscopy, the Lyman-alpha forest is the sum of the absorption lines arising from the Lyman-alpha transition of neutral hydrogen in the spectra of distant galaxies and quasars. Lyman-alpha forest observations can also constrain cosmological models. These constraints agree with those obtained from WMAP data.\n\nThere are various hypotheses about what dark matter could consist of, as set out in the table below.\n\n! colspan=2  Some dark matter hypotheses\nsimplified models\n\nDark matter can refer to any substance which interacts predominantly via gravity with visible matter (e.g., stars and planets). Hence in principle it need not be composed of a new type of fundamental particle but could, at least in part, be made up of standard baryonic matter, such as protons or neutrons. However, for the reasons outlined below, most scientists think the dark matter is dominated by a non-baryonic component, which is likely composed of a currently unknown fundamental particle (or similar exotic state).\n\nBaryons (protons and neutrons) make up ordinary stars and planets. However, baryonic matter also encompasses less common non-primordial black holes, neutron stars, faint old white dwarfs and brown dwarfs, collectively known as massive compact halo objects (MACHOs), which can be hard to detect.\n\nHowever, multiple lines of evidence suggest the majority of dark matter is not made of baryons:\nBULLET::::- Sufficient diffuse, baryonic gas or dust would be visible when backlit by stars.\nBULLET::::- The theory of Big Bang nucleosynthesis predicts the observed abundance of the chemical elements. If there are more baryons, then there should also be more helium, lithium and heavier elements synthesized during the Big Bang. Agreement with observed abundances requires that baryonic matter makes up between 4–5% of the universe's critical density. In contrast, large-scale structure and other observations indicate that the total matter density is about 30% of the critical density.\nBULLET::::- Astronomical searches for gravitational microlensing in the Milky Way found at most only a small fraction of the dark matter may be in dark, compact, conventional objects (MACHOs, etc.); the excluded range of object masses is from half the Earth's mass up to 30 solar masses, which covers nearly all the plausible candidates.\nBULLET::::- Detailed analysis of the small irregularities (anisotropies) in the cosmic microwave background. Observations by WMAP and Planck indicate that around five-sixths of the total matter is in a form that interacts significantly with ordinary matter or photons only through gravitational effects.\n\nCandidates for non-baryonic dark matter are hypothetical particles such as axions, sterile neutrinos, weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs), gravitationally-interacting massive particles (GIMPs), supersymmetric particles, or primordial black holes. The three neutrino types already observed are indeed abundant, and dark, and matter, but because their individual masses – however uncertain they may be – are almost certainly too tiny, they can only supply a small fraction of dark matter, due to limits derived from large-scale structure and high-redshift galaxies.\n\nUnlike baryonic matter, nonbaryonic matter did not contribute to the formation of the elements in the early universe (Big Bang nucleosynthesis) and so its presence is revealed only via its gravitational effects, or weak lensing. In addition, if the particles of which it is composed are supersymmetric, they can undergo annihilation interactions with themselves, possibly resulting in observable by-products such as gamma rays and neutrinos (indirect detection).\n\nIf dark matter is composed of weakly-interacting particles, an obvious question is whether it can form objects equivalent to planets, stars, or black holes. Historically, the answer has been it cannot, because of two factors:\nBULLET::::- It lacks an efficient means to lose energy: Ordinary matter forms dense objects because it has numerous ways to lose energy. Losing energy would be essential for object formation, because a particle that gains energy during compaction or falling \"inward\" under gravity, and cannot lose it any other way, will heat up and increase velocity and momentum. Dark matter appears to lack means to lose energy, simply because it is not capable of interacting strongly in other ways except through gravity. The virial theorem suggests that such a particle would not stay bound to the gradually forming object – as the object began to form and compact, the dark matter particles within it would speed up and tend to escape.\nBULLET::::- It lacks a range of interactions needed to form structures: Ordinary matter interacts in many different ways. This allows the matter to form more complex structures. For example, stars form through gravity, but the particles within them interact and can emit energy in the form of neutrinos and electromagnetic radiation through fusion when they become energetic enough. Protons and neutrons can bind via the strong interaction and then form atoms with electrons largely through electromagnetic interaction. But there is no evidence that dark matter is capable of such a wide variety of interactions, since it seems to only interact through gravity (and possibly through some means no stronger than the weak interaction, although until dark matter is better understood, this is only hopeful speculation).\n\nIn 2015–2017 the idea dense dark matter was composed of primordial black holes, made a comeback following results of gravitation wave measurements which detected the merger of intermediate mass black holes. Black holes with about 30 solar masses are not predicted to form by either stellar collapse (typically less than 15 solar masses) or by the merger of black holes in galactic centers (millions or billions of solar masses). It was proposed the intermediate mass black holes causing the detected merger formed in the hot dense early phase of the universe due to denser regions collapsing. However this was later ruled out by a survey of about a thousand supernova which detected no gravitational lensing events, although about 8 would be expected if intermediate mass primordial black holes accounted for the majority of dark matter.\n\nThe possibility atom-sized primordial black holes account for a significant fraction of dark matter was ruled out by measurements of positron and electron fluxes outside the suns heliosphere by the Voyager 1 spacecraft. Tiny black holes are theorized to emit Hawking radiation. However the detected fluxes were too low and did not have the expected energy spectrum suggesting tiny primordial black holes are not widespread enough to account for dark matter. None-the-less research and theories proposing dense dark matter accounts for dark matter continue as of 2018, including approaches to dark matter cooling, and the question remains unsettled. In 2019, the lack of microlensing effects in the observation of Andromeda suggests tiny black holes do not exist.\n\nDark matter can be divided into \"cold\", \"warm\", and \"hot\" categories. These categories refer to velocity rather than an actual temperature, indicating how far corresponding objects moved due to random motions in the early universe, before they slowed due to cosmic expansion – this is an important distance called the \"free streaming length\" (FSL). Primordial density fluctuations smaller than this length get washed out as particles spread from overdense to underdense regions, while larger fluctuations are unaffected; therefore this length sets a minimum scale for later structure formation.\n\nThe categories are set with respect to the size of a protogalaxy (an object that later evolves into a dwarf galaxy): Dark matter particles are classified as cold, warm, or hot according to their FSL; much smaller (cold), similar to (warm), or much larger (hot) than a protogalaxy. Mixtures of the above are also possible: a theory of mixed dark matter was popular in the mid-1990s, but was rejected following the discovery of dark energy.\n\nCold dark matter leads to a bottom-up formation of structure with galaxies forming first and galaxy clusters at a latter stage, while hot dark matter would result in a top-down formation scenario with large matter aggregations forming early, later fragmenting into separate galaxies; the latter is excluded by high-redshift galaxy observations.\n\nThese categories also correspond to fluctuation spectrum effects and the interval following the Big Bang at which each type became non-relativistic. Davis \"et al.\" wrote in 1985:\n\nAnother approximate dividing line is warm dark matter became non-relativistic when the universe was approximately 1 year old and 1 millionth of its present size and in the radiation-dominated era (photons and neutrinos), with a photon temperature 2.7 million Kelvins. Standard physical cosmology gives the particle horizon size as 2 \"c t\" (speed of light multiplied by time) in the radiation-dominated era, thus 2 light-years. A region of this size would expand to 2 million light-years today (absent structure formation). The actual FSL is approximately 5 times the above length, since it continues to grow slowly as particle velocities decrease inversely with the scale factor after they become non-relativistic. In this example the FSL would correspond to 10 million light-years, or 3 megaparsecs, today, around the size containing an average large galaxy.\n\nThe 2.7 million K photon temperature gives a typical photon energy of 250 electron-volts, thereby setting a typical mass scale for warm dark matter: particles much more massive than this, such as GeV–TeV mass WIMPs, would become non-relativistic much earlier than one year after the Big Bang and thus have FSLs much smaller than a protogalaxy, making them cold. Conversely, much lighter particles, such as neutrinos with masses of only a few eV, have FSLs much larger than a protogalaxy, thus qualifying them as hot.\n\nCold dark matter offers the simplest explanation for most cosmological observations. It is dark matter composed of constituents with an FSL much smaller than a protogalaxy. This is the focus for dark matter research, as hot dark matter does not seem capable of supporting galaxy or galaxy cluster formation, and most particle candidates slowed early.\n\nThe constituents of cold dark matter are unknown. Possibilities range from large objects like MACHOs (such as black holes and Preon stars) or RAMBOs (such as clusters of brown dwarfs), to new particles such as WIMPs and axions.\n\nStudies of Big Bang nucleosynthesis and gravitational lensing convinced most cosmologists that MACHOs cannot make up more than a small fraction of dark matter. According to A. Peter: \"... the only \"really plausible\" dark-matter candidates are new particles.\"\n\nThe 1997 DAMA/NaI experiment and its successor DAMA/LIBRA in 2013, claimed to directly detect dark matter particles passing through the Earth, but many researchers remain skeptical, as negative results from similar experiments seem incompatible with the DAMA results.\n\nMany supersymmetric models offer dark matter candidates in the form of the WIMPy Lightest Supersymmetric Particle (LSP). Separately, heavy sterile neutrinos exist in non-supersymmetric extensions to the standard model which explain the small neutrino mass through the seesaw mechanism.\n\nWarm dark matter comprises particles with an FSL comparable to the size of a protogalaxy. Predictions based on warm dark matter are similar to those for cold dark matter on large scales, but with less small-scale density perturbations. This reduces the predicted abundance of dwarf galaxies and may lead to lower density of dark matter in the central parts of large galaxies. Some researchers consider this a better fit to observations. A challenge for this model is the lack of particle candidates with the required mass ≈ 300 eV to 3000 eV.\n\nNo known particles can be categorized as warm dark matter. A postulated candidate is the sterile neutrino: A heavier, slower form of neutrino that does not interact through the weak force, unlike other neutrinos. Some modified gravity theories, such as scalar–tensor–vector gravity, require \"warm\" dark matter to make their equations work.\n\nHot dark matter consists of particles whose FSL is much larger than the size of a protogalaxy. The neutrino qualifies as such particle. They were discovered independently, long before the hunt for dark matter: they were postulated in 1930, and detected in 1956. Neutrinos' mass is less than 10 that of an electron. Neutrinos interact with normal matter only via gravity and the weak force, making them difficult to detect (the weak force only works over a small distance, thus a neutrino triggers a weak force event only if it hits a nucleus head-on). This makes them 'weakly interacting light particles' (WILPs), as opposed to WIMPs.\n\nThe three known flavours of neutrinos are the \"electron\", \"muon\", and \"tau\". Their masses are slightly different. Neutrinos oscillate among the flavours as they move. It is hard to determine an exact upper bound on the collective average mass of the three neutrinos (or for any of the three individually). For example, if the average neutrino mass were over 50 eV/c (less than 10 of the mass of an electron), the universe would collapse. CMB data and other methods indicate that their average mass probably does not exceed 0.3 eV/c. Thus, observed neutrinos cannot explain dark matter.\n\nBecause galaxy-size density fluctuations get washed out by free-streaming, hot dark matter implies the first objects that can form are huge supercluster-size pancakes, which then fragment into galaxies. Deep-field observations show instead that galaxies formed first, followed by clusters and superclusters as galaxies clump together.\n\nIf dark matter is made up of sub-atomic particles, then millions, possibly billions, of such particles must pass through every square centimeter of the Earth each second. Many experiments aim to test this hypothesis. Although WIMPs are popular search candidates, the Axion Dark Matter Experiment (ADMX) searches for axions. Another candidate is heavy hidden sector particles which only interact with ordinary matter via gravity.\n\nThese experiments can be divided into two classes: direct detection experiments, which search for the scattering of dark matter particles off atomic nuclei within a detector; and indirect detection, which look for the products of dark matter particle annihilations or decays.\n\nDirect detection experiments aim to observe low-energy recoils (typically a few keVs) of nuclei induced by interactions with particles of dark matter, which (in theory) are passing through the Earth. After such a recoil the nucleus will emit energy in the form of scintillation light or phonons, as they pass through sensitive detection apparatus. To do this effectively, it is crucial to maintain a low background, and so such experiments operate deep underground to reduce the interference from cosmic rays. Examples of underground laboratories with direct detection experiments include the Stawell mine, the Soudan mine, the SNOLAB underground laboratory at Sudbury, the Gran Sasso National Laboratory, the Canfranc Underground Laboratory, the Boulby Underground Laboratory, the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory and the China Jinping Underground Laboratory.\n\nThese experiments mostly use either cryogenic or noble liquid detector technologies. Cryogenic detectors operating at temperatures below 100 mK, detect the heat produced when a particle hits an atom in a crystal absorber such as germanium. Noble liquid detectors detect scintillation produced by a particle collision in liquid xenon or argon. Cryogenic detector experiments include: CDMS, CRESST, EDELWEISS, EURECA. Noble liquid experiments include ZEPLIN, XENON, DEAP, ArDM, WARP, DarkSide, PandaX, and LUX, the Large Underground Xenon experiment. Both of these techniques focus strongly on their ability to distinguish background particles (which predominantly scatter off electrons) from dark matter particles (that scatter off nuclei). Other experiments include SIMPLE and PICASSO.\n\nCurrently there has been no well-established claim of dark matter detection from a direct detection experiment, leading instead to strong upper limits on the mass and interaction cross section with nucleons of such dark matter particles. The DAMA/NaI and more recent DAMA/LIBRA experimental collaborations have detected an annual modulation in the rate of events in their detectors, which they claim is due to dark matter. This results from the expectation that as the Earth orbits the Sun, the velocity of the detector relative to the dark matter halo will vary by a small amount. This claim is so far unconfirmed and in contradiction with negative results from other experiments such as LUX, SuperCDMS and XENON100.\n\nA special case of direct detection experiments covers those with directional sensitivity. This is a search strategy based on the motion of the Solar System around the Galactic Center. A low-pressure time projection chamber makes it possible to access information on recoiling tracks and constrain WIMP-nucleus kinematics. WIMPs coming from the direction in which the Sun travels (approximately towards Cygnus) may then be separated from background, which should be isotropic. Directional dark matter experiments include DMTPC, DRIFT, Newage and MIMAC.\n\nIndirect detection experiments search for the products of the self-annihilation or decay of dark matter particles in outer space. For example, in regions of high dark matter density (e.g., the centre of our galaxy) two dark matter particles could annihilate to produce gamma rays or Standard Model particle-antiparticle pairs. Alternatively, if the dark matter particle is unstable, it could decay into Standard Model (or other) particles. These processes could be detected indirectly through an excess of gamma rays, antiprotons or positrons emanating from high density regions in our galaxy or others. A major difficulty inherent in such searches is that various astrophysical sources can mimic the signal expected from dark matter, and so multiple signals are likely required for a conclusive discovery.\n\nA few of the dark matter particles passing through the Sun or Earth may scatter off atoms and lose energy. Thus dark matter may accumulate at the center of these bodies, increasing the chance of collision/annihilation. This could produce a distinctive signal in the form of high-energy neutrinos. Such a signal would be strong indirect proof of WIMP dark matter. High-energy neutrino telescopes such as AMANDA, IceCube and ANTARES are searching for this signal.\nThe detection by LIGO in September 2015 of gravitational waves, opens the possibility of observing dark matter in a new way, particularly if it is in the form of primordial black holes.\n\nMany experimental searches have been undertaken to look for such emission from dark matter annihilation or decay, examples of which follow.\nThe Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope observed more gamma rays in 2008 than expected from the Milky Way, but scientists concluded this was most likely due to incorrect estimation of the telescope's sensitivity.\n\nThe Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope is searching for similar gamma rays. In April 2012, an analysis of previously available data from its Large Area Telescope instrument produced statistical evidence of a 130 GeV signal in the gamma radiation coming from the center of the Milky Way. WIMP annihilation was seen as the most probable explanation.\n\nAt higher energies, ground-based gamma-ray telescopes have set limits on the annihilation of dark matter in dwarf spheroidal galaxies and in clusters of galaxies.\n\nThe PAMELA experiment (launched in 2006) detected excess positrons. They could be from dark matter annihilation or from pulsars. No excess antiprotons were observed.\n\nIn 2013 results from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer on the International Space Station indicated excess high-energy cosmic rays which could be due to dark matter annihilation.\n\nAn alternative approach to the detection of dark matter particles in nature is to produce them in a laboratory. Experiments with the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) may be able to detect dark matter particles produced in collisions of the LHC proton beams. Because a dark matter particle should have negligible interactions with normal visible matter, it may be detected indirectly as (large amounts of) missing energy and momentum that escape the detectors, provided other (non-negligible) collision products are detected. Constraints on dark matter also exist from the LEP experiment using a similar principle, but probing the interaction of dark matter particles with electrons rather than quarks. Any discovery from collider searches must be corroborated by discoveries in the indirect or direct detection sectors to prove that the particle discovered is, in fact, dark matter.\n\nBecause dark matter remains to be conclusively identified, many other hypotheses have emerged aiming to explain the observational phenomena that dark matter was conceived to explain. The most common method is to modify general relativity. General relativity is well-tested on solar system scales, but its validity on galactic or cosmological scales has not been well proven. A suitable modification to general relativity can conceivably eliminate the need for dark matter. The best-known theories of this class are MOND and its relativistic generalization tensor-vector-scalar gravity (TeVeS), f(R) gravity, negative mass dark fluid, and entropic gravity. Alternative theories abound.\n\nA problem with alternative hypotheses is observational evidence for dark matter comes from so many independent approaches (see the \"observational evidence\" section above). Explaining any individual observation is possible but explaining all of them is very difficult. Nonetheless, there have been some scattered successes for alternative hypotheses, such as a 2016 test of gravitational lensing in entropic gravity.\n\nThe prevailing opinion among most astrophysicists is while modifications to general relativity can conceivably explain part of the observational evidence, there is probably enough data to conclude there must be some form of dark matter.\n\nIn philosophy of science, dark matter is an example of an auxiliary hypothesis, an ad hoc postulate added to a theory in response to observations which falsify it. It has been argued the dark matter hypothesis is a conventionalist hypothesis, that is, a hypothesis which adds no empirical content and hence is unfalsifiable in the sense defined by Karl Popper.\n\nMention of dark matter is made in works of fiction. In such cases, it is usually attributed extraordinary physical or magical properties. Such descriptions are often inconsistent with the hypothesized properties of dark matter in physics and cosmology.\nBULLET::::- Related theories\nBULLET::::- Density wave theory – A theory waves of compressed gas, which move slower than the galaxy, maintain galaxy's structure\nBULLET::::- Experiments\nBULLET::::- , a search apparatus\nBULLET::::- , large underground dark matter detector\nBULLET::::- , a space mission\nBULLET::::- , a research program\nBULLET::::- , astrophysical simulations\nBULLET::::- , a particle accelerator research infrastructure\n\nBULLET::::- Dark matter candidates\nBULLET::::- Other\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8653", "title": "Ducati Motor Holding S.p.A.", "text": "Ducati Motor Holding S.p.A.\n\nDucati Motor Holding S.p.A. () is the motorcycle-manufacturing division of Italian company Ducati, headquartered in Bologna, Italy. The company is owned by German automotive manufacturer Audi through its Italian subsidiary Lamborghini, which is in turn owned by the Volkswagen Group.\n\nIn 1926 \"Antonio Cavalieri Ducat\"i and his three sons, \"Adriano, Marcello, and Bruno Cavalieri Ducati\" founded \"Società Scientifica Radio Brevetti Ducati\" in Bologna to produce vacuum tubes, condensers and other radio components. In 1935 they had become successful enough to enable construction of a new factory in the Borgo Panigale area of the city. Production was maintained during World War II, despite the Ducati factory being a repeated target of Allied bombing.\nMeanwhile, at the small Turinese firm SIATA (\"Societa Italiana per Applicazioni Tecniche Auto-Aviatorie\"), Aldo Farinelli began developing a small pushrod engine for mounting on bicycles. Barely a month after the official liberation of Italy in 1944, SIATA announced its intention to sell this engine, called the \"Cucciolo\" (Italian for \"puppy,\" in reference to the distinctive exhaust sound) to the public. The first Cucciolos were available alone, to be mounted on standard bicycles, by the buyer; however, businessmen soon bought the little engines in quantity, and offered complete motorized-bicycle units for sale.\n\nIn 1950, after more than 200,000 Cucciolos had been sold, in collaboration with SIATA, the Ducati firm finally offered its own Cucciolo-based motorcycle. This first Ducati motorcycle was a 48 cc bike weighing , with a top speed of , and had a giving just under . Ducati soon dropped the Cucciolo name in favor of \"55M\" and \"65TL\".\nWhen the market moved toward larger motorcycles, Ducati management decided to respond, making an impression at an early-1952 Milan show, introducing their 65TS cycle and Cruiser (a four-stroke motor scooter). Despite being described as the most interesting new machine at the 1952 show, the Cruiser was not a great success, and only a few thousand were made over a two-year period before the model ceased production.\n\nIn 1953, management split the company into two separate entities, Ducati Meccanica SpA and Ducati Elettronica, in acknowledgment of its diverging motorcycle and electronics product lines. Dr. Giuseppe Montano took over as head of Ducati Meccanica SpA and the Borgo Panigale factory was modernized with government assistance. By 1954, Ducati Meccanica SpA had increased production to 120 bikes a day.\n\nIn the 1960s, Ducati earned its place in motorcycling history by producing the fastest 250 cc road bike then available, the Mach 1. In the 1970s Ducati began producing large-displacement V-twin motorcycles and in 1973, released a V-twin with the trademarked desmodromic valve design. In 1985, Cagiva bought Ducati and planned to rebadge Ducati motorcycles with the \"Cagiva\" name. By the time the purchase was completed, Cagiva kept the \"Ducati\" name on its motorcycles. Eleven years later, in 1996, Cagiva accepted the offer from Texas Pacific Group and sold a 51% stake in the company for US$325 million; then, in 1998, Texas Pacific Group bought most of the remaining 49% to become the sole owner of Ducati. In 1999, TPG issued an initial public offering of Ducati stock and renamed the company \"Ducati Motor Holding SpA\". TPG sold over 65% of its shares in Ducati, leaving TPG the majority shareholder. In December 2005, Ducati returned to Italian ownership with the sale of Texas Pacific's stake (minus one share) to Investindustrial Holdings, the investment fund of Carlo and Andrea Bonomi.\n\nIn April 2012, Volkswagen Group's Audi subsidiary announced its intention to buy Ducati for € (US$). Volkswagen chairman Ferdinand Piëch, a motorcycle enthusiast, had long coveted Ducati, and had regretted that he passed up an opportunity to buy the company from the Italian government in 1984. Analysts doubted a tiny motorcycle maker would have a meaningful effect on a company the size of Volkswagen, commenting that the acquisition has \"a trophy feel to it,\" and, \"is driven by VW's passion for nameplates rather than industrial or financial logic\". Italian luxury car brand Lamborghini was strengthened under VW ownership. AUDI AG's Automobili Lamborghini S.p.A. subsidiary acquired 100 percent of the shares of Ducati Motor Holding S.p.A. on 19 July 2012 for € (US$).\n\nSince 1926, Ducati has been owned by a number of groups and companies.\nBULLET::::- 1926–1950 – Ducati family\nBULLET::::- 1950–1967 – Government Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI) management\nBULLET::::- 1967–1978 – Government EFIM management (control over day-to-day factory operations)\nBULLET::::- 1967–1973 – Headed By Giuseppe Montano\nBULLET::::- 1973–1978 – Headed by Cristiano de Eccher\nBULLET::::- 1978–1985 – VM Group\nBULLET::::- 1985–1996 – Cagiva Group\nBULLET::::- 1996–2005 – Texas-Pacific Group (US-based) ownership and going public\nBULLET::::- Headed by CEO Federico Minoli, 1996–2001; returning for 2003–2007\nBULLET::::- 2005–2008 – Investindustrial Holdings S.p.A.\nBULLET::::- 2008–2012 – Performance Motorcycles S.p.A.\nBULLET::::- 19 July 2012 – present – Automobili Lamborghini S.p.A.\n\nDucati is best known for high-performance motorcycles characterized by large-capacity four-stroke, 90° V-twin engines, with a desmodromic valve design. Ducati refers to this configuration as L-twin because one cylinder is vertical while the other is horizontal, making it look like a letter \"L\". Modern Ducatis remain among the dominant performance motorcycles available today partly because of the desmodromic valve design, which is nearing its 50th year of use. Desmodromic valves are closed with a separate, dedicated cam lobe and lifter instead of the conventional valve springs used in most internal combustion engines in consumer vehicles. This allows the cams to have a more radical profile, thus opening and closing the valves more quickly without the risk of valve-float, which causes a loss of power that is likely when using a \"passive\" closing mechanism under the same conditions.\n\nWhile most other manufacturers use wet clutches (with the spinning parts bathed in oil) Ducati previously used multiplate dry clutches in many of their motorcycles. The dry clutch eliminates the power loss from oil viscosity drag on the engine, even though the engagement may not be as smooth as the oil-bath versions, but the clutch plates can wear more rapidly. Ducati has converted to wet clutches across their current product lines.\n\nDucati also extensively uses a trellis frame, although Ducati's MotoGP project broke with this tradition by introducing a revolutionary carbon fibre frame for the Ducati Desmosedici GP9.\n\nThe chief designer of most Ducati motorcycles in the 1950s was Fabio Taglioni (1920–2001). His designs ranged from the small single-cylinder machines that were successful in the Italian 'street races' to the large-capacity twins of the 1980s. Ducati introduced the Pantah in 1979; its engine was updated in the 1990s in the Ducati SuperSport (SS) series. All modern Ducati engines are derivatives of the Pantah, which uses a toothed belt to actuate the engine's valves. Taglioni used the Cavallino Rampante (identified with the Ferrari brand) on his Ducati motorbikes, Taglioni chose this emblem of courage and daring as a sign of respect and admiration for Francesco Baracca, a heroic World War I fighter pilot who died during an air raid in 1918.\n\nIn 1973, Ducati commemorated its 1972 win at the Imola 200 with the production model green frame Ducati 750 SuperSport.\n\nDucati also targeted the offroad market with the two-stroke Regolarità 125, building 3,486 models from 1975 to 1979, but the bike was not successful.\n\nIn 1975, the company introduced the 860 GT, designed by noted car stylist Giorgetto Giugiaro. Its angular lines were unique, but raised handlebars made for an uncomfortable seating position at high speeds and also caused steering issues. The 860GT's angular styling was a sales disaster, and it was hurriedly re-designed for the 1976 season with a more rounded fuel tank. \n\nIn 1975 Ducati offered hand-built production racers, the 'square case' 750SS and later 900SS models, built in limited numbers. Sales of the 900SS proved so strong, and sales of the 860GT/GTE/GTS so weak, that production of the 900SS was ramped up, and it became Ducati's #1 selling model.\n\nDucati's liquid-cooled, multi-valve V-twins, made from 1985 on, are known as \"Desmoquattro\" (\"desmodromic valve four\"). These include the 851, 916 and 996, 999 and a few predecessors and derivatives.\n\nThe Ducati Paso was introduced in 1986 with the Paso 750, followed in 1989 with the Paso 906. The final version came in 1991 with the 907IE (Iniezione Elettronica), now without the name \"Paso\". The design was from the hand of Massimo Tamburini, who also designed the Ducati 916 and MV Agusta F4. The Paso was a typical \"you love it, you hate it\" bike. However, at that time it looked like that all-enclosed bodywork would be the future for all motorcycles. The Paso design was copied for the Moto Morini Dart 400 and 125. Together with Tamburini's Bimota DB1, they were enormously influential in terms of styling.\n\nIn 1993, Miguel Angel Galluzzi introduced the Ducati Monster, a naked bike with exposed trellis and engine. Today the Monster accounts for almost half of the company's worldwide sales. The Monster has undergone the most changes of any motorcycle that Ducati has ever produced.\n\nIn 1993, Pierre Terblanche, Massimo Bordi and Claudio Domenicali designed the Ducati Supermono. A 550 cc single-cylinder lightweight \"Catalog Racer\". Only 67 were built between 1993 and 1997.\n\nIn 1994, the company introduced the Ducati 916 model designed by Massimo Tamburini, a water-cooled version that allowed for higher output levels and a striking new bodywork that had aggressive lines, an underseat exhaust, and a single-sided swingarm. Ducati has since ceased production of the 916, supplanting it (and its progeny, the 748, 996 and 998) with the 749 and 999.\n\nIn 2006, the retro-styled Ducati PaulSmart 1000 LE was released, which shared styling cues with the 1973 750 SuperSport (itself a production replica of Paul Smart's 1972 race winning 750 Imola Desmo), as one of a SportClassic series representing the 750 GT, 750 Sport, and 750 SuperSport Ducati motorcycles.\nBULLET::::- Monster: 620, 695, 696, 750, 796, 900, S2R, S4R\nBULLET::::- Street fighter S\nBULLET::::- ST2, ST3, ST4\nBULLET::::- Paul Smart 1000LE and SportClassic variants\nBULLET::::- SuperSport 750, 900, 1000\nBULLET::::- 748, 749, 848\nBULLET::::- 996, 998, 999, 1098, 1098S, 1098R, 1198\nBULLET::::- Desmosedici RR\n\nBULLET::::- Monster\nBULLET::::- 797\nBULLET::::- 821\nBULLET::::- 821 Stealth\nBULLET::::- 1200\nBULLET::::- 1200 S\nBULLET::::- 1200 R\nBULLET::::- Multistrada\nBULLET::::- 950\nBULLET::::- 950 S\nBULLET::::- Ducati Multistrada 1260\nBULLET::::- Ducati Multistrada 1260 S\nBULLET::::- Ducati Multistrada 1260S Pikes Peak\nBULLET::::- 1260 Enduro\nBULLET::::- Diavel\nBULLET::::- Diavel 1260\nBULLET::::- Diavel 1260 S\nBULLET::::- XDiavel\nBULLET::::- XDiavel S\n\nBULLET::::- Superbike\nBULLET::::- 959 Panigale\nBULLET::::- Panigale 959 Corse\nBULLET::::- Panigale V4\nBULLET::::- Panigale V4S\nBULLET::::- Panigale V4S Speciale\nBULLET::::- Panigale V4S Corse\nBULLET::::- Panigale V4R\n\nBULLET::::- Supersport\nBULLET::::- Supersport\nBULLET::::- Supersport S\nBULLET::::- Hypermotard\nBULLET::::- Hypermotard 950\nBULLET::::- Hypermotard 950 SP\n\nBULLET::::- Scrambler\nBULLET::::- Sixty2\nBULLET::::- Icon\nBULLET::::- Classic\nBULLET::::- Full Throttle\nBULLET::::- Cafe Racer\nBULLET::::- Desert Sled\nBULLET::::- 1100\n\nBULLET::::- Desmodue: Desmodromic two-valve, air-cooled, L-Twin, 60° included valve angle (Scrambler, Monster 659, 797)\nBULLET::::- Testastretta 11°: Desmo four-valve, liquid-cooled, L-Twin, 11° valve overlap angle (Supersport/Supersport S, Hypermotard/Hyperstrada 939, Multistrada 950, Monster 821)\nBULLET::::- Testastretta 11° DS: Desmo four-valve, liquid-cooled, L-Twin, 11° valve overlap angle, dual ignition (Monster 1200, Diavel)\nBULLET::::- Testastretta 11° DVT: Desmo four-valve, liquid-cooled, L-Twin, variable valve timing, dual ignition (Multistrada 1200 DVT, XDiavel)\nBULLET::::- Superquadro: Desmo four-valve, liquid cooled, L-Twin, (Panigale 959 & 1299)\nBULLET::::- Desmosedici Stradale: Desmo four-valve, liquid cooled, 90° V4 with a displacement of 1,103 cm³ and counter-rotating crankshaft (214-226 hp) (Panigale V4/S/S Corse/Speciale)\nBULLET::::- Desmosedici Stradale R: Desmo four-valve, liquid cooled, 90° V4 with a displacement of 998 cm³ and counter-rotating crankshaft (221-234 hp) (Panigale V4R)\n\nBULLET::::- Desmodue Evoluzione: Desmo two-valve, air-cooled (Hypermotard 1100 Evo, Monster 1100 Evo)\nBULLET::::- Desmodue DS: Desmo two-valve, air-cooled, 56° included valve angle, dual ignition (Hypermotard 1100, Multistrada 1000/1100, Monster 1100, Monster S2R 1000, SportClassic GT 1000, SuperSport 1000)\nBULLET::::- Desmodue LC: Desmo two-valve, liquid-cooled (ST2)\nBULLET::::- Desmotre DS: Desmo three-valve, liquid-cooled, 40° included valve angle, dual ignition (ST3)\nBULLET::::- Desmoquattro: Desmo four-valve, liquid-cooled, 40° included valve angle, (851, 888, 916, 996, 748, Monster S4, Monster S4R, ST4, ST4s)\nBULLET::::- Testastretta: Desmo four-valve, liquid-cooled, 25° included valve angle, (996R, 998, 999, 749, Monster S4R Testastretta)\nBULLET::::- Testastretta Evoluzione: Desmo four-valve, liquid-cooled, 24.3° included valve angle, 41° valve overlap angle (848, 1098/1198, Streetfighter 1098)\n\nDucati has produced several styles of motorcycle engines, including varying the number of cylinders, type of valve actuation and fuel delivery. Ducati is best known for its V-twin engine, called an L-twin by the company, which is the powerplant in the majority of Ducati-marqued motorcycles.\nDucati has also manufactured engines with one, two, three or four cylinders; operated by pull rod valves and push rod valves; single, double and triple overhead camshafts; two-stroke and even at one stage manufactured small diesel engines, many of which were used to power boats, generators, garden machinery and emergency pumps (for example, for fire fighting). The engines were the IS series from air-cooled and the larger twin DM series water- and air-cooled. The engines have been found in all parts of the globe. Wisconsin Diesel even assembled and \"badge engineered\" the engines in the USA. They have also produced outboard motors for marine use. Currently, Ducati makes no other engines except for its motorcycles.\n\nOn current Ducati motors, except for the Desmosedici and 1199 Panigale, the valves are actuated by a standard valve cam shaft which is rotated by a timing belt driven by the motor directly. The teeth on the belt keep the camshaft drive pulleys indexed. On older Ducati motors, prior to 1986, drive was by solid shaft that transferred to the camshaft through bevel-cut gears. This method of valve actuation was used on many of Ducati's older single-cylinder motorcycles — the shaft tube is visible on the outside of the cylinder.\n\nDucati is also famous for using the desmodromic valve system championed by engineer and designer Fabio Taglioni, though the firm has also used engines that use valve springs to close their valves. In the early days, Ducati reserved the desmodromic valve heads for its higher performance bikes and its race bikes. These valves do not suffer from valve float at high engine speeds, thus a desmodromic engine is capable of far higher revolutions than a similarly configured engine with traditional spring-valve heads.\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Ducati produced a wide range of small two-stroke bikes, mainly sub-100 cc capacities. Large quantities of some models were exported to the United States.\n\nDucati has produced the following motorcycle engine types:\nBULLET::::- Single-cylinder,\nBULLET::::- pullrod actuated, 48 cc and 65 cc (Cucciolo)\nBULLET::::- pushrod actuated, 98 and 125 cc\nBULLET::::- two-stroke, 50, 80, 90, 100, 125 cc\nBULLET::::- bevel actuated, spring valved: 98 cc, 100 cc, 125 cc, 160 cc, 175 cc, 200 cc, 239 cc, 250 cc, 350 cc, 450 cc\nBULLET::::- bevel actuated, desmodromic valved : 125 cc, 239 cc, 250 cc, 350 cc and 450 cc\nBULLET::::- belt actuated, desmodromic valved : 549/572 cc Supermono, only 65 made.\nBULLET::::- Two-cylinder,\nBULLET::::- bevel actuated, spring valved (V-twin): 750 cc, 860 cc\nBULLET::::- bevel actuated, desmo valved (V-twin): 750 cc, 860 cc, 900 cc, 973 cc (Mille)\nBULLET::::- bevel actuated, desmo valved (parallel twin): 125 cc,\nBULLET::::- chain actuated, spring valved (parallel twin): 350 cc, 500 cc (GTL)\nBULLET::::- chain actuated, desmo valved (parallel twin): 500 cc (500SD)\nBULLET::::- belt actuated, desmo valved (V-twin): Almost all motors since 1986.\nBULLET::::- Four-cylinder,\nBULLET::::- gear actuated, desmo valved (V4): Prototype Desmosedici, and Low volume Production Desmosedici RR, 1,500 made\nBULLET::::- pushrod actuated, spring valved (V4): Prototype Apollo, only two made.\n\nA key part of Ducati's marketing strategy since the 1990s has been fostering a distinct community identity in connection with branding efforts including online communities and local, regional and national Ducati enthusiast clubs. There are more than 400 Ducati clubs worldwide and 20,000 registered users of the Ducati Owners Club web site and 17,000 subscribers to the racing web site. Enthusiasts and riders are informally referred to in the motorcycling community as Ducatista (singular) or Ducatisti (plural).\n\nIn North America there are several Ducati enthusiasts organizations with varying degrees of factory sponsorship, such as the Bay Area Desmo Owners Club (BADOC) located in and around the city of San Francisco, CA. Ducati Riders of Illinois (DRILL) located in Chicago, IL. DESMO, the Ducati Enthusiast Sport Motorcycle Organization, is a North American group affiliated with the factory Desmo Owners Club. Some groups are focused on vintage Ducatis while several are based primarily or entirely on email discussion lists or web forums.\n\nDucati has a wide range of accessories, lifestyle products and co-branded merchandise bearing their logos and designs. The company has a licensing agreement with Tumi Inc., launching a collection of eight co-branded luggage pieces in 2006, sold through both of the brands' retail outlets.\n\nDucati's history with motorsport began with speed records on Cucciolo motorized bicycle factory racers in 1951, followed in 1954 with bringing in Fabio Taglioni to found a road-racing program with the 100 Gran Sport. , Ducati was still pursuing the \"win on Sunday, sell on Monday\" business model and spending 10% of company revenues, €, on its racing business.\n\nDucati rejoined Grand Prix motorcycle racing in , after a 30-year absence. On 23 September 2007, Casey Stoner clinched his and Ducati's first Grand Prix World Championship.\n\nWhen Ducati re-joined MotoGP in , MotoGP had changed its rules to allow four-stroke 990 cc engines to race. At the time Ducati was the fastest bike. In , MotoGP reduced the engine size to \"\", and Ducati continued to be the fastest with a bike that was markedly quicker than its rivals as was displayed by Casey Stoner on tracks with long straights.\n\nFor , Ducati Marlboro Team campaigned their Desmosedici GP9 with former World Champions Casey Stoner and Nicky Hayden. Ducati also supplied customer bikes to Pramac Racing, with Mika Kallio and Niccolò Canepa riding for the team in 2009.\n\nNine-time world champion Valentino Rossi rode for Ducati Corse for the and seasons.\nRossi returned to the Yamaha team for the 2013 season.\n\nFor , Ducati Marlboro Team raced with Nicky Hayden and the Italian rider Andrea Dovizioso. In 2014 Cal Crutchlow teamed up with Dovizioso for the season, and he left at the end of the year.\n\nIn , Ducati Marlboro Team, under the control of the new race team director Gigi Dall'Igna and the new Desmosedici GP15, raced with two Italian riders: Andrea Dovizioso and Andrea Iannone. Dovizioso and Iannone returned for another season in with Michele Pirro as official tester. As well as this, Casey Stoner also tested Ducati machinery during the season.\n\nIn , Ducati Marlboro Team rider Andrea Dovizioso raced with his new teammate Jorge Lorenzo, who joined the Ducati team from Yamaha Factory Racing with a two seasons contract. In 2019, Danilo Petrucci has joined Dovizioso on the factory team.\n\n!Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\n\nThe company has won 14 riders world championships and 17 manufacturers world championships, competing since the series' inception in 1988. At the end of 2015, Ducati has amassed 318 wins, more than any other manufacturer involved in the championship.\n\n! Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\n\n! Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\n\n! Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\nDucati has also won the manufacturers' championship for years 2008–2009, 2011 and 2016.\n\nDucati has won the British Superbike Championship ten times.\n! Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\n\nIn the AMA Superbike Championship, Ducati has had its share of success, with Doug Polen winning the title in 1993 and Troy Corser the following year in 1994. Ducati has entered a bike in every AMA Superbike season since 1986, but withdrew from the series after the 2006 season.\n\n! Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\nDucati had an important place in early Superbike racing history in the United States and vice versa: In 1977, \"Cycle\" magazine editors Cook Neilson and Phil Schilling took a Ducati 750SS to first place at Daytona in the second-ever season of AMA Superbike racing. \"Neilson retired from racing at the end of the year, but the bike he and Schilling built — nicknamed Old Blue for its blue livery — became a legend,\" says Richard Backus from Motorcycle Classics: \"How big a legend? Big enough for Ducati to team with Italian specialty builder NCR to craft a limited-edition update, New Blue, based on the 2007 Sport 1000S, and big enough to inspire the crew at the Barber Vintage Motorsports Museum (see Barber Motorsports Park), arguably one of the most important motorcycle museums in the world, to commission Ducati specialist Rich Lambrechts to craft a bolt-by-bolt replica for its collection. The finished bike's name? Deja Blue.\"\n\n! Year\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\n\nDucati's first ever world title was the 1978 TT Formula 1 World Championship, achieved thanks to Mike Hailwood's victory at the Isle of Man TT. Between 1981 and 1984 Tony Rutter won four TT Formula 2 World Championships riding Ducati bikes.\n\n! Year\n! Class\n! Champion\n! Motorcycle\n\nBULLET::::- List of Italian companies\nBULLET::::- List of motorcycle manufacturers\n"}
{"id": "8654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8654", "title": "Data General Nova", "text": "Data General Nova\n\nThe Data General Nova is a series of 16-bit minicomputers released by the American company Data General. The Nova family was very popular in the 1970s and ultimately sold tens of thousands of examples.\n\nThe first model, called simply the \"Nova\", was released in 1969. The Nova was packaged into a single rack mount case and had enough power to do most simple computing tasks. The Nova became popular in science laboratories around the world. It was followed the next year by the SuperNOVA, which ran much faster, on the order of four times.\n\nIntroduced during a period of rapid progress in integrated circuit (IC, or \"chip\") design, the line went through several upgrades over the next five years, introducing the 800 and 1200, the Nova 2, Nova 3, and ultimately the Nova 4. A single-chip implementation was also introduced as the microNOVA in 1977, but did not see widespread use as the market moved to new microprocessor designs. Fairchild Semiconductor also introduced a microprocessor version of the Nova in 1977, the Fairchild 9440, but it also saw limited use in the market.\n\nThe Nova line was succeeded by the Data General Eclipse, which was similar in most ways but added virtual memory support and other features required by modern operating systems. A 32-bit upgrade of the Eclipse resulted in the Eclipse MV series of the 1980s.\n\nEdson de Castro was the Product Manager of the pioneering Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-8, a 12-bit computer generally considered by most to be the first true minicomputer. He also led design of the upgraded PDP-8/I, which used early integrated circuits in place of individual transistors.\n\nDuring the PDP-8/I process, de Castro had been visiting circuit board manufacturers who were making rapid strides in the complexity of the boards they could assemble. de Castro concluded that the 8/I could be produced using fully-automated assembly on large boards, which would have been impossible only a year earlier. Others within DEC had become used to the smaller boards used in earlier machines and were concerned about tracking down problems when there were many components on a single board. For the 8/I, the decision was made to stay with small boards, using the new \"flip-chip\" packaging for a modest improvement in density.\n\nDuring the period when the PDP-8 was being developed, the introduction of ASCII and its major update in 1967 led to a new generation of designs with word lengths that were multiples of 8 bits rather than multiples of 6 bits as in most previous designs. This led to mid-range designs working at 16-bit word lengths instead of DEC's current 12- and 18-bit lineups. de Castro was convinced that it was possible to improve upon the PDP-8 by building a 16-bit minicomputer CPU on a single 15-inch square board.\n\nIn 1967, de Castro began a new design effort known as \"PDP-X\" which included several advanced features. Among these was a single underlying design that could be used to build 8-, 16- and 32-bit platforms. This progressed to the point of producing several detailed architecture documents. Ken Olsen was not supportive of this project, feeling it did not offer sufficient advantages over the 12-bit PDP-8 and the 18-bit PDP-9. It was eventually canceled in the spring of 1968.\n\nCancelation of the PDP-X prompted de Castro to consider leaving DEC to build a system on his own. He was not alone; in late 1967 a group of like-minded engineers formed to consider such a machine. The group included Pat Green, a divisional manager, Richard Sogge, another hardware engineer, and a software engineer, Henry Burkhardt II. In contrast to the PDP-X, the new effort focussed on a single machine that could be brought to market quickly, as de Castro felt the PDP-X concept was far too ambitious for a small startup company.\n\nDiscussing it with the others at DEC, the initial concept led to an 8-bit machine which would be less costly to implement. At this time the group began talking with Herbert Richman, a salesman for Fairchild Semiconductor who knew the others through his contacts with DEC. Richman pointed out that the machine's internal word length didn't have to be the same as its external presentation; one could have a 16-bit machine that used a 4-bit arithmetic logic unit (ALU), for instance. This could be cheaply implemented with a single modern IC.\n\nThis approach significantly reduced the complexity and cost of the main logic and is responsible for the Nova's low selling cost. The new design used a simple load/store architecture which would reemerge in the RISC designs in the 1980s. As the complexity of a flip-flop was being rapidly reduced as they were implemented in chips, they offset the lack of addressing modes of the load/store design by adding four general-purpose accumulators, instead of the single register that would be found in similar low-cost offerings.\n\nIn keeping with the original packaging concept of the 8/I, the Nova was based on two printed circuit boards, one for the CPU and another for various support systems. The boards were designed so they could be connected together using a printed circuit backplane, with minimal manual wiring, allowing all the boards to be built in an automated fashion. This greatly reduced costs over 8/I, which consisted of many smaller boards that had to be wired together at the backplane. The larger-board construction also made the Nova more reliable, which made it especially attractive for industrial or lab settings. Fairchild Semiconductor provided the medium-scale integration (MSI) chips used throughout the system.\n\nLate in 1967, Richman introduced the group to New York-based lawyer Fred Adler, who began canvassing various funding sources for seed capital. By 1968, Adler had arranged a major funding deal with a consortium of venture capital funds from the Boston area, who agreed to provide an initial $400,000 investment with a second $400,000 available for production ramp-up. de Castro, Burkhart and Sogge quit DEC and started Data General (DG) on 15 April 1968. Green did not join them, considering the venture too risky, and Richman did not join until the product was up and running later in the year.\n\nWork on the first system took about nine months, and the first sales efforts started that November. They had a bit of luck because the Fall Joint Computer Conference had been delayed until December that year, so they were able to bring a working unit to the Moscone Center where they ran a version of Spacewar!. DG officially released the Nova in 1969 at a base price of US$3,995, advertising it as \"the best small computer in the world.\" The basic model was not very useful out of the box, and adding RAM in the form of core memory typically brought the price up to $7,995.\n\nThe first sale was to a university in Texas, with the team hand-building an example which shipped out in February. However, this was in the midst of a strike in the airline industry and the machine never arrived. They sent a second example, which did arrive as the strike had ended, and in May the original one was finally delivered as well.\n\nThe system was successful from the start, with the 100th being sold after six months, and the 500th after 15 months. Sales accelerated as newer versions were introduced, and by 1975 the company had annual sales of $100 million.\n\nKen Olsen had publically predicted that DG would fail, but with the release of the Nova it was clear that was not going to happen. By this time a number of other companies were talking about introducing 16-bit designs as well. Olsen decided these presented a threat to their 18-bit line as well as 12-bit, and began a new 16-bit design effort. This emerged in 1970 as the PDP-11, a much more complex design that was as different from the PDP-X as the Nova was. The two designs competed heavily in the market.\n\nRumors of the new system from DEC reached DG shortly after the Nova began shipping. In the spring of 1970 they hired a new designer, Larry Seligman, to leapfrog any possible machine in the making. Two major changes had taken place since the Nova was designed; one was that ICs continued to improve and offer higher densities, and another was that Intel was aggressively talking up semiconductor-based memories, promising 1000 bits on a single chip and running at much higher speeds than core.\n\nSeligman's new design took advantage of both of these improvements. To start, the new ICs allowed the ALU to be expanded to a full 16-bit width, making the new design four times as fast at math as the original. In addition, a new smaller core memory was used that improved the cycle time from the original's 1,200 ns to 800 ns, offering a further improvement gain. Performance could be further improved by replacing the core with read-only memory; lacking core's read/write cycle, this could be accessed at 300 ns for a dramatic performance boost.\n\nThe resulting machine, known as the SuperNOVA, was released in 1970. Although the initial models still used core, the entire design was based on the premise that faster semiconductor memories would become available and the platform could make full use of them. This was introduced later the same year as theSuperNOVA SC, featuring semiconductor (SC) memory. The much higher performance memory allowed the CPU, which was synchronous with memory, to be further increased in speed to run at a 300 ns cycle time (3.3 MHz). This made it the fastest available minicomputer for many years. However, the new memory was also very expensive and ran hot, so it was not widely used.\n\nWhile Seligman was working on the SuperNOVA, the company received a letter from Ron Gruner stating \"I've read about your\nproduct, I've read your ads, and I'm going to work for you. And I'm going to be at your offices in a week\nto talk to you about that.\" He was hired on the spot.\n\nBy this point, the company had decided it needed a new version of their low-cost platform to take advantage of the changes in the market, and a new concept emerged where a single machine could be swapped out in the field by the customer if they needed to move from the low-cost to high-performance system. Gruner was put in charge of the low-cost machine while Seligman designed a matching high-performance version.\n\nGruner's low-cost model launched in 1970 as the Nova 1200, the 1200 referring to the use of the original Nova's 1,200 ns core memory. It also used the original 4-bit ALU, and was thus essentially a repackaged Nova. Seligman's repackaged SuperNOVA was released in 1971 as the Nova 800, resulting in the somewhat confusing naming where the lower-numbered model has higher performance. Both models were offered in a variety of cases, the 1200 with seven slots, the 1210 with four and the 1220 with fourteen.\n\nBy this time the PDP-11 was finally shipping. It offered a much richer instruction set architecture than the deliberately simple one in the Nova. Continuing improvement in IC designs, and especially their price/performance ratio, was eroding the value of the original simplified instructions. Seligman was put in charge of designing a new machine that would be compatible with the Nova while offering a much richer environment for those who wanted it. This concept shipped as the Data General Eclipse series, which offered the ability to add additional circuity to tailor the instruction set for scientific or data processing workloads. The Eclipse was successful in competing with the PDP-11 at the higher end of the market.\n\nAround the same time, rumors of a new 32-bit machine from DEC began to surface. DG decided they had to have a similar product, and Gruner was put in charge of what became the Fountainhead Project. Given the scope of the project, they agreed that the entire effort should be handled off-site, and Gruner selected a location at Research Triangle Park in North Carolina. This design became very complex and was ultimately canceled years later.\n\nWhile these efforts were underway, work on the Nova line continued.\n\nThe 840, first offered in 1973, also included a new paged memory system allowing for addresses of up to 17-bits. An index offset the base address into the larger 128 kWord memory. Actually installing this much memory required considerable space; the 840 shipped in a large 14-slot case.\n\nThe next version was the Nova 2, with the first versions shipping in 1973. The Nova 2 was essentially a simplified version of the earlier machines as increasing chip densities allowed the CPU to be reduced in size. While the SuperNOVA used three 15×15\" boards to implement the CPU and its memory, the Nova 2 fitted all of this onto a single board. ROM was used to store the boot code, which was then copied into core when the \"program load\" switch was flipped. Versions were available with four, seven and ten slots. Further improvements in core led to the 2/10 and 2/4, referring to their cycle times in milliseconds.\n\nThe Nova 3 of 1975 added two more registers, used to control access to a built-in stack. The processor was also re-implemented using TTL components, further increasing the performance of the system. The Nova 3 was offered in four-slot (the Nova 3/4) and twelve-slot (the Nova 3/12) versions.\n\nIt appears that Data General originally intended the Nova 3 to be the last of its line, planning to replace the Nova with the later Eclipse machines. However, continued demand led to a Nova 4 machine, this time based on four AMD 2901 bit-slice ALUs. This machine was designed from the start to be both the Nova 4 and the Eclipse S/140, with different microcode for each. A floating-point co-processor was also available, taking up a separate slot. An additional option allowed for memory mapping, allowing programs to access up to 128 kWords of memory using bank switching. Unlike the earlier machines, the Nova 4 did not include a front panel console and instead relied on the terminal to emulate a console when needed.\n\nThere were three different versions of the Nova 4, the Nova 4/C, the Nova 4/S and the Nova 4/X. The Nova 4/C was a single-board implementation that included all of the memory (16 or 32 kWords). The Nova 4/S and 4/X used separate memory boards. The Nova 4/X had the on-board memory management unit (MMU) enabled to allow up to 128 kWords of memory to be used (the MMU was also installed in the Nova 4/S, but was disabled by firmware). Both the 4/S and the 4/X included a “prefetcher” to increase performance by fetching up to two instructions from memory before they were needed.\n\nData General also produced a series of single-chip implementations of the Nova processor as the microNOVA. Changes to the bus architecture limited speed dramatically, to the point where it was about one-half the speed of the original Nova. The original microNOVA with the “mN601” processor shipped in 1977. It was followed by the microNOVA MP/100 in 1979, which reduced the CPU to a single VLSI chip, the mN602. A larger version was also offered as the microNOVA MP/200, shipping the same year.\n\nThe microNOVA was later re-packaged in a PC-style case with two floppy disks as the Enterprise. Enterprise shipped in 1981, running RDOS, but the introduction of the IBM PC the same year made most other machines disappear under the radar.\n\nThe Nova influenced the design of both the Xerox Alto (1973) and Apple I (1976) computers, and its architecture was the basis for the Computervision CGP (Computervision Graphics Processor) series. Its external design has been reported to be the direct inspiration for the front panel of the MITS Altair (1975) microcomputer.\n\nData General followed up on the success of the original Nova with a series of faster designs. The Eclipse family of systems was later introduced with an extended upwardly compatible instruction set, and the MV-series further extended the Eclipse into a 32-bit architecture to compete with the DEC VAX. The development of the MV-series was documented in Tracy Kidder’s popular 1981 book, \"The Soul of a New Machine\". Data General itself would later evolve into a vendor of Intel processor-based servers and storage arrays, eventually being purchased by EMC.\n\nstyle=\"text-align:center\" Data General Nova registers\n\ncolspan=\"17\"  Accumulator registers \ncolspan=\"17\"  Index registers \ncolspan=\"17\"  Program counter \ncolspan=\"17\"  Status register\n\nThe Nova, unlike the PDP-8, was a load-store architecture. It had four 16-bit accumulator registers, of which two (2 and 3) could be used as index registers. There was a 15-bit program counter and a single-bit carry register. As with the PDP-8, current + zero page addressing was central. There was no stack register, but later Eclipse designs would utilize a dedicated hardware memory address for this function.\n\nThe earliest models of the Nova processed math serially in 4-bit packets, using a single 74181 bitslice ALU. A year after its introduction this design was improved to include a full 16-bit parallel math unit using four 74181s, this design being referred to as the SuperNova. Future versions of the system added a stack unit and hardware multiply/divide.\n\nThe Nova 4 / Eclipse S/140 was based on four AMD 2901 bit-slice ALUs, with microcode in read-only memory, and was the first Nova designed for DRAM main memory only, without provision for magnetic core memory.\n\nThe first models were available with 8K words of magnetic core memory as an option, one that practically everyone had to buy, bringing the system cost up to $7,995.\n\nThis core memory board was organized in planar fashion as four groups of four banks, each bank carrying two sets of core in a 64 by 64 matrix; thus there were 64 x 64 = 4096 bits per set, x 2 sets giving 8,192 bits, x 4 banks giving 32,768 bits, x 4 groups giving a total of 131,072 bits, and this divided by the machine word size of 16 bits gave 8,192 Words of memory.\n\nThe core on this 8K Word memory board occupied a centrally located 'board-on-a-board' 5.25\" wide by 6.125\" high and was covered by a protective plate. It was surrounded by the necessary support driver read-write-rewrite circuitry. All of the core and the corresponding support electronics fit onto a single standard 15 x board. Up to 32K of such core RAM could be supported in one external expansion box. Semiconductor ROM was already available at the time, and RAM-less systems (i.e. with ROM only) became popular in many industrial settings. The original Nova machines ran at approximately 200 kHz, but its SuperNova was designed to run at up to 3 MHz when used with special semiconductor main memory.\n\nThe standardized backplane and I/O signals created a simple, efficient I/O design that made interfacing programmed I/O and Data Channel devices to the Nova simple compared to competing machines. In addition to its dedicated I/O bus structure, the Nova backplane had wire wrap pins that could be used for non-standard connectors or other special purposes.\n\nThe instruction format could be broadly categorized into one of three functions: <nowiki>1) register-to-register manipulation, 2) memory reference, and 3)</nowiki> input/output. Each instruction was contained in one word. The register-to-register manipulation was almost RISC-like in its bit-efficiency; and an instruction that manipulated register data could also perform tests, shifts and even elect to discard the result. Hardware options included an integer multiply and divide unit, a floating-point unit (single and double precision), and memory management.\nThe earliest Nova came with a BASIC interpreter on paper tape. As the product grew, Data General developed many languages for the Nova computers, running under a range of consistent operating systems. FORTRAN IV, ALGOL, Extended BASIC, Data General Business Basic, Interactive COBOL, and several assemblers were available from Data General. Third party vendors and the user community expanded the offerings with Forth, Lisp, BCPL, C, Algol, and other proprietary versions of COBOL and BASIC.\n\nThe machine instructions implemented below are the common set implemented by all of the Nova series processors. Specific models often implemented additional instructions, and some instructions were provided by optional hardware.\n\nAll arithmetic instructions operated between accumulators. For operations requiring two operands, one was taken from the source accumulator, and one from the destination accumulator, and the result was deposited in the destination accumulator. For single-operand operations, the operand was taken from the source register and the result replaced the destination register. For all single-operand opcodes, it was permissible for the source and destination accumulators to be the same, and the operation functioned as expected.\n\nAll arithmetic instructions included a \"no-load\" bit which, when set, suppressed the transfer of the result to the destination register; this was used in conjunction with the test options to perform a test without losing the existing contents of the destination register. In assembly language, adding a '#' to the opcode set the no-load bit.\n\nThe CPU contained a single-bit register called the carry bit, which after an arithmetic operation would contain the carry out of the most significant bit. The carry bit could be set to a desired value prior to performing the operation using a two-bit field in the instruction. The bit could be set, cleared, or complemented prior to performing the instruction. In assembly language, these options were specified by adding a letter to the opcode: 'O' — set the carry bit; 'Z' — clear the carry bit, 'C' — complement the carry bit, nothing — leave the carry bit alone. If the no-load bit was also specified, the specified carry value would be used for the computation, but the actual carry register would remain unaltered.\n\nAll arithmetic instructions included a two-bit field which could be used to specify a shift option, which would be applied to the result before it was loaded into the destination register. A single-bit left or right shift could be specified, or the two bytes of the result could be swapped. Shifts were 17-bit circular, with the carry bit \"to the left\" of the most significant bit. In other words, when a left shift was performed, the most significant bit of the result was shifted into the carry bit, and the previous contents of the carry bit were shifted into the least significant bit of the result. Byte swaps did not effect the carry bit. In assembly language, these options were specified by adding a letter to the opcode: 'L' — shift left; 'R' — shift right, 'S' — swap bytes; nothing — do not perform a shift or swap.\n\nAll arithmetic instructions included a three-bit field that could specify a test which was to be applied to the result of the operation. If the test evaluated to true, the next instruction in line was skipped. In assembly language, the test option was specified as a third operand to the instruction. The available tests were:\nBULLET::::- SZR — skip on zero result\nBULLET::::- SNR — skip on nonzero result\nBULLET::::- SZC — skip on zero carry\nBULLET::::- SNC — skip on nonzero carry\nBULLET::::- SBN — skip if both carry and result are nonzero\nBULLET::::- SEZ — skip if either carry or result, or both, is zero\nBULLET::::- SKP — always skip\nBULLET::::- nothing — never skip\n\nThe actual arithmetic instructions were:\nBULLET::::- MOV — move the contents of the source accumulator to the destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- COM — move the bitwise complement of the source accumulator to the destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- ADD — add source accumulator to destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- ADC — take the bitwise complement of the source accumulator and add it to the destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- NEG — move the negative of the source accumulator to the destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- SUB — subtract the contents source accumulator from the destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- INC — add 1 to the contents of the source accumulator and move to the destination accumulator\nBULLET::::- AND — perform the bitwise AND of the two accumulators and place the result in the destination accumulator\n\nAn example arithmetic instructions, with all options utilized, is:\n\nADDZR# 0,2,SNC\n\nThis decoded as: clear the carry bit; add the contents of AC2 (accumulator 2) to AC0; circularly shift the result one bit to the right; test the result to see if the carry bit is set and skip the next instruction if so. Discard the result after performing the test. In effect, this adds two numbers and tests to see if the result is odd or even.\n\nThe Nova instruction set contained a pair of instructions that transferred memory contents to accumulators and vice versa, two transfer-of-control instructions, and two instructions that tested the contents of a memory location. All memory reference instructions contained an eight-bit address field, and a two-bit field that specified the mode of memory addressing. The four modes were:\nBULLET::::- Mode 0 — absolute addressing. The contents of the address field of the instruction is zero-filled on the left and used as the target address.\nBULLET::::- Mode 1 — relative addressing. The contents of the address field of the instruction is sign extended to the left and added to the current value of the program counter (which, by the time the instruction executes, points to the next instruction). The result is used as the target address.\nBULLET::::- Mode 2 — indexed addressing. The contents of the address field of the instruction is sign extended to the left and added to the current value of accumulator 2. The result is used as the target address.\nBULLET::::- Mode 3 — indexed addressing. The contents of the address field of the instruction is sign extended to the left and added to the current value of accumulator 3. The result is used as the target address.\n\nObviously, mode 0 was only capable of addressing the first 256 memory words, given the eight-bit address field. This portion of memory was referred to as \"page zero\". Page zero memory words were considered precious to Nova assembly language programmers because of the small number available; only page zero locations could be addressed from anywhere in the program without resorting to indexed addressing, which required tying up accumulator 2 or 3 to use as an index register. In assembly language, a \".ZREL\" directive caused the assembler to place the instructions and data words that followed it in page zero; an \".NREL\" directive placed the following instructions and data words in \"normal\" memory. Later Nova models added instructions with extended addressing fields, which overcame this difficulty (at a performance penalty).\n\nThe assembler computed relative offsets for mode 1 automatically, although it was also possible to write it explicitly in the source. If a memory reference instruction referenced a memory address in .NREL space but no mode specifier, mode 1 was assumed and the assembler calculated the offset between the current instruction and the referenced location, and placed this in the instruction's address field (provided that the resulting value fit into the 8-bit field).\n\nThe two load and store instructions were:\nBULLET::::- LDA — load the contents of a memory location into the specified accumulator.\nBULLET::::- STA — store the contents of the specified accumulator into a memory location.\nBoth of these instructions included an \"indirect\" bit. If this bit was set (done in assembly language by adding a '@' to the opcode), the contents of the target address were assumed to be a memory address itself, and that address would be referenced to do the load or store.\n\nThe two transfer-of-control instructions were:\nBULLET::::- JMP — transfers control to the specified memory location\nBULLET::::- JSR (\"jump subroutine\") — Does the same as the JMP instruction, but additionally loads the return address (the instruction following the JSR instruction in line) into accumulator 3 before jumping.\nAs in the case of the load and store instructions, the jump instructions contained an indirect bit, which likewise was specified in assembly using the '@' character. In the case of an indirect jump, the processor retrieved the contents of the target location, and used the value as the memory address to jump to. However, unlike the load and store instructions, if the indirect address had the most significant bit set, it would perform a further cycle of indirection. On the Nova series processors prior to the Nova 3, there was no limit on the number of indirection cycles; an indirect address that referenced itself would result in an infinite indirect addressing loop, with the instruction never completing. (This could be alarming to users, since when in this condition, pressing the STOP switch on the front panel did nothing. It was necessary to reset the machine to break the loop.)\n\nThe two memory test instructions were:\nBULLET::::- ISZ — increment the memory location, and skip the next instruction if the result is zero.\nBULLET::::- DSZ — decrement the memory location, and skip the next instruction if the result is zero.\nAs in the case of the load and store instructions, there was an indirect bit that would perform a single level of indirect addressing. These instructions were odd in that, on the Novas with magnetic core memory, the instruction was executed within the memory board itself. As was common at the time, the memory boards contained a \"write-back\" circuit to solve the destructive-read problem inherent to magnetic core memory. But the write-back mechanism also contained a mini arithmetic unit, which the processor used for several purposes. For the ISZ and DSZ instructions, the increment or decrement occurred between the memory location being read and the write-back; the CPU simply waited to be told if the result was zero or nonzero. These instructions were useful because they allowed a memory location to be used as a loop counter without tying up an accumulator, but they were slower than performing the equivalent arithmetic instructions.\n\nSome examples of memory reference instructions:\n\nLDA 1,COUNT\n\nTransfers the contents of the memory location labeled COUNT into accumulator 1. Assuming that COUNT is in .NREL space, this instruction is equivalent to: LDA 1,1,(COUNT-(.+1))\nwhere '.' represents the location of the LDA instruction.\n\nJSR@ 0,17\n\nJump indirect to the memory address specified by the contents of location 17, in page zero space, and deposit the return address in accumulator 3. This was the standard method for making an RDOS system call on early Nova models; the assembly language mnemonic \".SYSTM\" translated to this.\n\nJMP 3,0\n\nJump to the memory location whose address is contained in accumulator 3. This was a common means of returning from a function or subroutine call, since the JSR instruction left the return address in accumulator 3.\n\nSTA 0,3,-1\n\nStore the contents of accumulator 0 in the location that is one less than the address contained in accumulator 3.\n\nDSZ COUNT\n\nDecrement the value in the location labeled COUNT, and skip the next instruction if the result is zero. As in the case above, if COUNT is assumed to be in .NREL space, this is equivalent to: DSZ 1,(COUNT-(.+1))\n\nThe Novas implemented a channelized model for interfacing to I/O devices. In the model, each I/O device was expected to implement two flags, referred to as \"Busy\" and \"Done\", and three data and control registers, referred to as A, B, and C. I/O instructions were available to read and write the registers, and to send one of three signals to the device, referred to as \"start\", \"clear\", and \"pulse\". In general, sending a start signal initiated an I/O operation that had been set up by loading values into the A/B/C registers. The clear signal halted an I/O operation and cleared any resulting interrupt. The pulse signal was used to initiate ancillary operations on complex subsystems, such as seek operations on disk drives. Polled devices usually moved data directly between the device and the A register. DMA devices generally used the A register to specify the memory address, the B register to specify the number of words to be transferred, and the C register for control flags. Channel 63 referred to the CPU itself and was used for various special functions.\n\nEach I/O instruction contained a six-bit channel number field, a four-bit to specify which register to read or write, and a two-bit field to specify which signal was to be sent. In assembly language, the signal was specified by adding a letter to the opcode: 'S' for start, 'C' for clear, 'P' for pulse, and nothing for no signal. The opcodes were:\nBULLET::::- DIA — move the contents of the device's A register to the specified accumulator\nBULLET::::- DOA — send the contents of the specified accumulator to the A register of the device on the specified channel\nBULLET::::- DIB — move the contents of the device's B register to the specified accumulator\nBULLET::::- DOB — send the contents of the specified accumulator to the B register of the device on the specified channel\nBULLET::::- DIC — move the contents of the device's C register to the specified accumulator\nBULLET::::- DOC — send the contents of the specified accumulator to the C register of the device on the specified channel\nBULLET::::- NIO — \"no I/O\", a misnomer. The instruction was used to send a signal to a device without doing a register transfer.\n\nIn addition, four instructions were available to test the status of a device:\nBULLET::::- SKPBN — skip the next instruction if the device's busy flag is set\nBULLET::::- SKPBZ — skip the next instruction if the device's busy flag is clear\nBULLET::::- SKPDN — skip the next instruction if the device's done flag is set\nBULLET::::- SKPDZ — skip the next instruction if the device's done flag is clear\n\nStarting a device caused it to set its busy flag. When the requested operation was completed, conventionally the device cleared its busy flag and set its done flag; most devices had their interrupt request mechanism wired to the done flag, so setting the done flag caused an interrupt (if interrupts were enabled and the device wasn't masked).\n\nThese instructions performed various CPU control and status functions. All of them were actually shorthand mnemonics for I/O instructions on channel 63, the CPU's self-referential I/O channel.\nBULLET::::- INTA — interrupt acknowledge. Transferred the channel number of the interrupting device to the specified accumulator.\nBULLET::::- INTDS — disabled all interrupts\nBULLET::::- INTEN — enabled all interrupts\nBULLET::::- IORST — I/O reset. Sent a reset signal on the I/O bus, which stopped all I/O, disabled interrupts and cleared all pending interrupts.\nBULLET::::- MSKO — mask out. Used the contents of the specified accumulator to set up the interrupt mask. How the mask was interpreted was up to the implementation of each I/O device. Some devices could not be masked.\nBULLET::::- READS — transferred the contents of the 16 front panel data switches to the specified accumulator.\nBULLET::::- HALT — stopped the CPU. Once halted, the CPU could be made to start again only by manual intervention at the front panel.\n\nFrom the hardware standpoint, the interrupt mechanism was relatively simple, but also less flexible, than current CPU architectures. The backplane supported a single interrupt request line, which all devices capable of interrupting connected to. When a device needed to request an interrupt, it raised this line. The CPU took the interrupt as soon as it completed the current instruction. As stated above, a device was expected to raise its \"done\" I/O flag when it requested an interrupt, and the convention was that the device would clear its interrupt request when the CPU executed a I/O clear instruction on the device's channel number.\n\nThe CPU expected the operating system to place the address of its interrupt service routine into memory address 1. When a device interrupted, the CPU did an indirect jump through address 1, placing the return address into memory address 0, and disabling further interrupts. The interrupt handler would then perform an INTA instruction to discover the channel number of the interrupting device. This worked by raising an \"acknowledge\" signal on the backplane. The acknowledge signal was wired in a daisy-chain format across the backplane, such that it looped through each board on the bus. Any device requesting an interrupt was expected to block the further propagation of the acknowledge signal down the bus, so that if two or more devices had pending interrupts simultaneously, only the first one would see the acknowledge signal. That device then responded by placing its channel number on the data lines on the bus. This meant that, in the case of simultaneous interrupt requests, the device that had priority was determined by which one was physically closest to the CPU in the card cage.\n\nAfter the interrupt had been processed and the service routine had sent the device an I/O clear, it resumed normal processing by enabling interrupts and then returning via an indirect jump through memory address 0. In order to prevent a pending interrupt from interrupting immediately before the return jump (which would cause the return address to be overwritten), the INTEN instruction had a one-instruction-cycle delay. When it was executed, interrupts would not be enabled until after the following instruction, which was expected to be the JMP@ 0 instruction, was executed.\n\nThe operating system's interrupt service routine then typically performed an indexed jump using the received channel number, to jump to the specific interrupt handling routine for the device. There were a few devices, notably the CPU's power-failure detection circuit, which did not respond to the INTA instruction. If the INTA returned a result of zero, the interrupt service routine had to poll all of the non-INTA-responding devices using the SKPDZ/SKPDN instructions to see which one interrupted.\n\nThe operating system could somewhat manage the ordering of interrupts by setting an interrupt mask using the MSKO instruction. This was intended to allow the operating system to determine which devices were permitted to interrupt at a given time. When this instruction was issued, a 16-bit interrupt mask was transmitted to all devices on the backplane. It was up to the device to decide what the mask actually meant to it; by convention, a device that was masked out was not supposed to raise the interrupt line, but the CPU had no means of enforcing this. Most devices that were maskable allowed the mask bit to be selected via a jumper on the board. There were devices that ignored the mask altogether.\n\nOn the systems having magnetic core memory (which retained its contents without power), recovery from a power failure was possible. A power failure detection circuit in the CPU issued an interrupt when loss of the main power coming into the computer was detected; from this point, the CPU had a short amount of time until a capacitor in the power supply lost its charge and the power to the CPU failed. This was enough time to stop I/O in progress, by issuing an IORST instruction, and then save the contents of the four accumulators and the carry bit to memory. When the power returned, if the CPU's front panel key switch was in the LOCK position, the CPU would start and perform an indirect jump through memory address 2. This was expected to be the address of an operating system service routine that would reload the accumulators and carry bit, and then resume normal processing. It was up to the service routine to figure out how to restart I/O operations that were aborted by the power failure.\n\nAs was the convention of the day, most Nova models provided a front panel console to control and monitor CPU functions. Models prior to the Nova 3 all relied on a canonical front panel layout, as shown in the Nova 840 panel photo above. The layout contained a keyed power switch, two rows of address and data display lamps, a row of data entry switches, and a row of function switches that activated various CPU functions when pressed. The address lamps always displayed the current value of the program counter, in binary. The data lamps displayed various values depending on which CPU function was active at the moment. To the left of the leftmost data lamp, an additional lamp displayed the current value of the carry bit. On most models the lamps were incandescent lamps which were soldered to the panel board; replacing burned-out lamps was a bane of existence for Data General field service engineers.\n\nEach of the data switches controlled the value of one bit in a 16-bit value, and per Data General convention, they were numbered 0-15 from left to right. The data switches provided input to the CPU for various functions, and could also be read by a running program using the READS assembly language instruction. To reduce panel clutter and save money, the function switches were implemented as two-way momentary switches. When a function switch lever was lifted, it triggered the function whose name was printed above the switch on the panel; when the lever was pressed down, it activated the function whose name appeared below the switch. The switch lever returned to a neutral position when released.\n\nReferencing the Nova 840 photo, the first four switches from the left performed the EXAMINE and DEPOSIT functions for the four accumulators. Pressing EXAMINE on one of these caused the current value of the accumulator to be displayed in binary by the data lamps. Pressing DEPOSIT transferred the binary value represented by the current settings of the data switches to the accumulator.\n\nGoing to the right, the next switch was the RESET/STOP switch. Pressing STOP caused the CPU to halt after completing the current instruction. Pressing RESET caused the CPU to halt immediately, cleared a number of CPU internal registers, and sent an I/O reset signal to all connected devices. The switch to the right of that was the START/CONTINUE switch. Pressing CONTINUE caused the CPU to resume executing at the instruction currently pointed at by the program counter. Pressing START transferred the value currently set in data switches 1-15 to the program counter, and then began executing from there.\n\nThe next two switches provided read and write access to memory from the front panel. Pressing EXAMINE transferred the value set in data switches 1-15 to the program counter, fetched the value in the corresponding memory location, and displayed its value in the data lamps. Pressing EXAMINE NEXT incremented the program counter and then performed an examine operation on that memory location, allowing the user to step through a series of memory locations. Pressing DEPOSIT wrote the value contained in the data switches to the memory location pointed at by the program counter. Pressing DEPOSIT NEXT first incremented the program counter and then deposited to the pointed-to memory location.\n\nThe INST STEP function caused the CPU to execute one instruction, at the current program counter location, and then halt. Since the program counter would be incremented as part of the instruction execution, this allowed the user to single-step through a program. MEMORY STEP, a misnomer, caused the CPU to run through a single clock cycle and halt. This was of little use to users and was generally only used by field service personnel for diagnostics.\n\nPROGRAM LOAD was the mechanism usually used to boot a Nova. When this switch was triggered, it caused the 32-word boot ROM to be mapped over the first 32 words of memory, set the program counter to 0, and started the CPU. The boot ROM contained code that would read 256 words (512) bytes of code from a selected I/O device into memory and then transfer control to the read-in code. The data switches 8-15 were used to tell the boot ROM which I/O channel to boot from. If switch 0 was off, the boot ROM would assume the device was a polled device (e.g., the paper tape reader) and run a polled input loop until 512 bytes had been read. If switch 0 was on, the boot room assumed the device was a DMA-capable device and it initiated a DMA data transfer. The boot ROM was not smart enough to position the device prior to initiating the transfer. This was a problem when rebooting after a crash; if the boot device was a disk drive, its heads had likely been left on a random cylinder. They had to be repositioned to cylinder 0, where RDOS wrote the first-level boot block, in order for the boot sequence to work. Conventionally this was done by cycling the drive through its load sequence, but users who got frustrated with the wait time (up to 5 minutes depending on the drive model) learned how to input from the front panel a drive \"recalibrate\" I/O code and single-step the CPU through it, an operation that took an experienced user only a few seconds.\n\nThe power switch was a 3-way keyed switch with positions marked OFF, ON, and LOCK. In the OFF position all power was removed from the CPU. Turning the key to ON applied power to the CPU. However, unlike current CPUs, the CPU did not start automatically when power was applied; the user had to use PROGRAM LOAD or some other method to start the CPU and initiate the boot sequence. Turning the switch to LOCK disabled the front panel function switches; by turning the switch to LOCK and removing the key, the user could render the CPU resistant to tampering. On systems with magnetic core memory, the LOCK position also enabled the auto power failure recovery function. The key could be removed in the OFF or LOCK positions.\n\nThe Nova 1200 executed core memory access instructions (LDA and STA) in 2.55 microseconds (μs). Use of read-only memory saved 0.4 μs. Accumulator instructions (ADD, SUB, COM, NEG, etc.) took 1.55 μs, MUL 2.55 μs, DIV 3.75 μs, ISZ 3.15-4.5 μs. On the later Eclipse MV/6000, LDA and STA took 0.44 μs, ADD, etc. took 0.33 μs, MUL 2.2 μs, DIV 3.19 μs, ISZ 1.32 μs, FAD 5.17 μs, FMMD 11.66 μs.\n\nThis is a minimal programming example in Nova assembly language. It is designed to run under RDOS and prints the string “Hello, world.” on the console.\nBasic models of the Nova came without built-in hardware multiply and divide capability, to keep prices competitive. The following routine multiplies two 16-bit words to produce a 16-bit word result (overflow is ignored). It demonstrates combined use of ALU op, shift, and test (skip). Note that when this routine is called by jsr, AC3 holds the return address. This is used by the return instruction jmp 0,3. An idiomatic way to clear an accumulator is sub 0,0. Other single instructions can be arranged to load a specific set of useful constants (e.g. -2, -1, or +1).\nThe following routine prints the value of AC1 as a 16 digit binary number, on the RDOS console. It reveals further quirks of the Nova instruction set. For instance, there is no instruction to load an arbitrary “immediate” value into an accumulator (although memory reference instructions do encode such a value to form an effective address). Accumulators must generally be loaded from initialized memory locations (e.g. n16). Other contemporary machines such as the PDP-11, and practically all modern architectures, allow for immediate loads, although many such as ARM restrict the range of values that can be loaded immediately.\n\nBecause the RDOS .systm call macro implements a jsr, AC3 is overwritten by the return address for the .pchar function. Therefore, a temporary location is needed to preserve the return address of the caller of this function. For a recursive or otherwise re-entrant routine, a stack, hardware if available, software if not, must be used instead. The return instruction becomes jmp @ retrn which exploits the Nova's indirect addressing mode to load the return PC.\n\nThe constant definitions at the end show two assembler features: the assembler radix is octal by default (20 = sixteen), and character constants could be encoded as e.g. \"0.\n\nNova assembly language programs can be run under Bob Supnik’s SIMH emulator, in RDOS. Of the above examples, only \"Hello, world\" is a complete program. It includes the necessary directives for a successful assembly and generation of a runnable program.\n\nStepwise instructions\n\nStart the Nova emulation and boot RDOS following th e instructions under “Nova and Eclipse RDOS” in the file src/simh_swre.txt of the simh distribution. After booting, RDOS’ command prompt, R, should appear on the screen.\n\nBULLET::::- Before the first assembly on a newly setup RDOS system, the macro assembler’s default symbol definitions need to be configured using the following command: codice_1\nBULLET::::- Create the assembly source file under RDOS: codice_2 (the xfer command will accept input at the console and copy it to a disk file named test.sr; after entering the command, copy and paste (or type in) a complete assembly language program, and finish with control-Z).\nBULLET::::- Next, run the macro assembler on test.sr to create the object file test.rb: codice_3 (the /l [slash-ell] option enables the listing file test.ls, which can be copied to the console using the command codice_4).\nBULLET::::- The relocatable loader, rldr, takes the object file and creates the executable test.sv : codice_5\nBULLET::::- To run the program, type codice_6\n\nBefore going further with serious experimentation, it can be convenient to check one’s programs at the PC using a suitable cross-assembler, such as the portable PDP-8/DG Nova cross-assembler listed in the External links section, before attempting execution in the RDOS environment.\n\nRDOS hints\n\nBULLET::::- To have a directory listing of all files with the base name test, type codice_7 (note the hyphen, RDOS’ wildcard character)\nBULLET::::- Delete files with codice_8 (this might be needed because xfer won’t replace an existing file)\nBULLET::::- A running program can usually be interrupted with Control-A\nBULLET::::- To exit RDOS, type codice_9\nBULLET::::- Quit simh at its prompt with codice_10\n\nThe Canadian Broadcasting Corporation in Montreal used the Nova 1200 for channel play-out automation up until the late 80's. It was then replaced with refurbished Nova 4 units and these were in use until the mid 90's.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Bob Supnik’s SimH project – Includes a basic Nova emulator in a user-modifiable package\nBULLET::::- The portable C compiler includes a NOVA target.\nBULLET::::- Novas Are Forever (SimuLogic’s) website – Attempts to archive everything DG plus provide free and commercial products\nBULLET::::- A portable PDP-8 and DG Nova cross-assembler\nBULLET::::- Carl Friend’s Minicomputer Museum – Describes the Nova instruction set in detail\n"}
{"id": "8659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8659", "title": "Protestant Church in the Netherlands", "text": "Protestant Church in the Netherlands\n\nThe Protestant Church in the Netherlands (, abbreviated PKN) is the largest Protestant denomination in the Netherlands, being both Reformed (Calvinist) and Lutheran.\n\nIt was founded on 1 May 2004 as the merger of the vast majority of Dutch Reformed Church, the vast majority of the Reformed Churches in the Netherlands and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The merger was the culmination of an organizational process started in 1961. Several orthodox Reformed and liberal churches did not merge into the new church.\n\nThe Protestant Church in the Netherlands (PKN) forms the second largest Christian denomination after the Roman Catholic Church, with approximately 1.6 million members as per the church official statistics or some 9.1% of the population in 2016. It is the traditional faith of the Dutch Royal Family – a remnant of historical dominance of the Dutch Reformed Church, the main predecessor of the Protestant Church.\n\nThe doctrine of the Protestant Church in the Netherlands is expressed in its creeds. In addition to holding the Apostles', the Nicene and the Athanasian Creeds of the universal church, it also holds to the confessions of its predecessor bodies. From the Lutheran tradition are the unaltered Augsburg Confession and Luther's Catechism. From the Reformed, the Heidelberg and Genevan Catechisms along with the Belgic Confession with the Canons of Dordt. The Church also acknowledges the Theological Declaration of Barmen and the Leuenberg Agreement. Ordination of women and blessings of same-sex marriages are allowed.\n\nThe PKN contains both liberal and conservative movements; although the liberal Remonstrants left talks when they could not agree with the unaltered adoption of the Canons of Dordt. Local congregations have far-reaching powers concerning \"controversial\" matters (such as admittance to holy communion or whether women are admitted as members of the congregation's consistory).\n\nThe polity of the Protestant Church in the Netherlands is a hybrid of presbyterian and congregationalist church governance. Church governance is organised along local, regional, and national lines. At the local level is the congregation. An individual congregation is led by a church council made of the minister along with elders and deacons elected by the congregation. At the regional level were 75 classical assemblies whose members are chosen by the church councils. As of 1st May 2018, these 75 classical assemblies are reorganised into 11 larger ones. At the national level is the General Synod which directs areas of common interest, such as theological education, ministry training and ecumenical co-operation.\n\nThe PKN has four different types of congregations:\nBULLET::::1. Protestant congregations: local congregations from different church bodies that have merged\nBULLET::::2. Dutch Reformed congregations\nBULLET::::3. Reformed congregations (congregations of the former Reformed Churches in the Netherlands)\nBULLET::::4. Lutheran congregations (congregations of the former Evangelical-Lutheran Church)\n\nLutherans are a minority (about 1 percent) of the PKN's membership. To ensure that Lutherans are represented in the Church, the Lutheran congregations have their own synod. The Lutheran Synod also has representatives in the General Synod.\n\nThe Protestant Church in the Netherlands issues yearly reports regarding its membership and finances.\n\nIts make-up by former affiliation of its congregations was as follows in 2017:\n\n+ style=\"font-size:100%\" Members of the Protestant Church in the Netherlands by type of congregation (2017)\n! Former affiliation of the congregation\n! colspan=\"100\"% of members in the Protestant Church in the Netherlands\nalign=right \nalign=right \nalign=right \nalign=right \n\nTrend shows that since 2011 identification with former denominations has been falling in favor of simply identifying as \"Protestant\".\n\nSecularization, or the decline in religiosity, first became noticeable after 1960 in the Protestant rural areas of Friesland and Groningen. Then, it spread to Amsterdam, Rotterdam and the other large cities in the west. Finally the Catholic southern areas showed religious declines. A countervailing trend is produced by a religious revival in the Protestant Bible Belt, and the growth of Muslims and Hindu communities resulting from immigration and high birth rates.\nResearch in 2007 concluded that 42% of the members of the PKN were non-theists. Furthermore, in the PKN and several other smaller denominations of the Netherlands, one in six clergy were either agnostic or atheist. A minister of the PKN, Klaas Hendrikse once described God as \"a word for experience, or human experience\" and said that Jesus may have never existed.\n\nOnly those congregations belonging to the former Reformed Churches in the Netherlands have the legal right to secede from the PKN without losing its property and church during a transition period of 10 years. Seven congregations have so far decided to form the Continued Reformed Churches in the Netherlands. Two congregations have joined one of the other smaller Reformed churches in the Netherlands. Some minorities within congregations that joined the PKN decided to leave the church and associated themselves individually with one of the other Reformed churches.\n\nSome congregations and members in the Dutch Reformed Church did not agree with the merger and have separated. They have organized themselves in the Restored Reformed Church. Estimations of their membership vary from 35,000 up to 70,000 people in about 120 local congregations. They disagree with the pluralism of the merged church which maintains, as they see it, contradicting Reformed and Lutheran confessions. This group also considers same-sex marriages and female clergy unbiblical.\n\nIn a meeting of eight Jewish and eight Protestant Dutch leaders in Israel in May 2011, a statement of cooperation was issued, indicating, for the most part, that the Protestant Church recognizes the issues involved with the Palestinian Christians and that this is sometimes at odds with support for the State of Israel, but standing up for the rights of the Palestinians does not detract from the emphasis on the safety of the State of Israel and vice versa.\n\nBULLET::::- Bible Belt (Netherlands)\nBULLET::::- History of religion in the Netherlands\nBULLET::::- United and uniting churches\nBULLET::::- Religion in the Netherlands\n\nBULLET::::- (in Dutch)\n"}
{"id": "8660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8660", "title": "Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)", "text": "Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)\n\nThe Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) is a Mainline Protestant Christian denomination in the United States and Canada. The denomination started with the Restoration Movement during the Second Great Awakening, first existing as a loose association of churches working towards Christian unity during the 19th century, then slowly forming quasi-denominational structures through missionary societies, regional associations, and an international convention. In 1968, the Disciples of Christ officially adopted a denominational structure at which time a group of churches left to remain nondenominational.\n\nIt is often referred to as The Christian Church, The Disciples of Christ, The Disciples, or the D.O.C. The Christian Church was a charter participant in the formation of the World Council of Churches (WCC) and of the Federal Council of Churches (now the National Council of Churches), and it continues to be engaged in ecumenical conversations.\n\nThe Disciples' local churches are congregationally governed. In 2008 there were 679,563 members in 3,714 congregations in North America. By 2015, this number had declined to a baptized membership of 497,423 in 3,267 congregations, of whom about 306,905 were active members, while roughly 177,141 people attended Sunday services each week. In 2018, the denomination reported 380,248 members with 124,437 people in average worship attendance.\n\nThe name \"Disciples of Christ\" is shared by three other groups: the Churches of Christ, the Independent Christian churches and churches of Christ, and the Christian Congregation. They emerged from the same roots. The Stone-Campbell movement began as two separate threads, each without knowledge of the other, during the Second Great Awakening in the early 19th century. The first of these two groups, led by Barton W. Stone began at Cane Ridge, Bourbon County, Kentucky. The group called themselves simply \"Christians\". The second, began in western Pennsylvania and Virginia (now West Virginia), led by Thomas Campbell and his son, Alexander Campbell. Because the founders wanted to abandon all denominational labels, they used the biblical names for the followers of Jesus that they found in the Bible.\n\nIn 1801, the Cane Ridge Revival in Kentucky planted the seed for a movement in Kentucky and the Ohio River Valley to disassociate from denominationalism. In 1803 Stone and others withdrew from the Kentucky Presbytery and formed the Springfield Presbytery. The defining event of the Stone wing of the movement was the publication of the \"Last Will and Testament of the Springfield Presbytery\", at Cane Ridge, Kentucky, in 1804. \"The Last Will\" is a brief document in which Stone and five others announced their withdrawal from Presbyterianism and their intention to be solely part of the body of Christ. The writers appealed for the unity of all who follow Jesus, suggested the value of congregational self-governance, and lifted the Bible as the source for understanding the will of God. They denounced the divisive use of the Westminster Confession of Faith.\n\nSoon, they adopted the name \"Christian\" to identify their group. Thus, the remnants of the Springfield Presbytery became the Christian Church. It is estimated that the Christian Church numbered about 12,000 by 1830.\n\nIndependently of Stone, the Campbell wing of the movement was launched when Thomas Campbell published the \"Declaration and Address of the Christian Association of Washington,\" (Pennsylvania) in 1809. The Presbyterian Synod had suspended his ministerial credentials. In \"The Declaration and Address\" he set forth some of his convictions about the church of Jesus Christ, as he organized the Christian Association of Washington, not as a church but as an association of persons seeking to grow in faith. On May 4, 1811, however, the Christian Association constituted itself as a congregationally governed church. With the building it then constructed at Brush Run, it became known as Brush Run Church.\n\nWhen their study of the New Testament led the reformers to begin to practice baptism by immersion, the nearby Redstone Baptist Association invited Brush Run Church to join with them for the purpose of fellowship. The reformers agreed provided that they would be \"allowed to preach and to teach whatever they learned from the Scriptures.\"\n\nThus began a sojourn for the reformers among the Baptists within the Redstone Baptist Association (1815–1824). While the reformers and the Baptists shared the same beliefs in baptism by immersion and congregational polity, it was soon clear that the reformers were not traditional Baptists. Within the Redstone Association, the differences became intolerable to some of the Baptist leaders, when Alexander Campbell began publishing a journal, \"The Christian Baptist,\" promoting reform. Campbell anticipated the conflict and moved his membership to a congregation of the Mahoning Baptist Association in 1824.\nIn 1827, the Mahoning Association appointed reformer Walter Scott as an Evangelist. Through Scott's efforts, the Mahoning Association grew rapidly. In 1828, Thomas Campbell visited several of the congregations formed by Scott and heard him preach. The elder Campbell realized that Scott was bringing an important new dimension to the movement with his approach to evangelism.\n\nSeveral Baptist associations began disassociating congregations that refused to subscribe to the Philadelphia Confession. The Mahoning Association came under attack. In 1830, the Mahoning Baptist Association disbanded. Alexander ceased publication of \"The Christian Baptist\". In January 1831, he began publication of the \"Millennial Harbinger\".\n\nThe two groups united at High Street Meeting House, Lexington, Kentucky, with a handshake between Barton W. Stone and \"Raccoon\" John Smith, on Saturday, December 31, 1831. Smith had been chosen, by those present, to speak on behalf of the followers of the Campbells. While contemporaneous accounts are clear that the handshake took place on Saturday, some historians have changed the date of the merger to Sunday, January 1, 1832. The 1832 date has become generally accepted. The actual difference is about 20 hours.\n\nTwo representatives of those assembled were appointed to carry the news of the union to all the churches: John Rogers, for the Christians and \"Raccoon\" John Smith for the reformers. Despite some challenges, the merger succeeded.\n\nWith the merger, there was the challenge of what to call the new movement. Clearly, finding a Biblical, non-sectarian name was important. Stone wanted to continue to use the name \"Christians.\" Alexander Campbell insisted upon \"Disciples of Christ\". Walter Scott and Thomas Campbell sided with Stone, but the younger Campbell had strong reasons and would not yield. As a result, both names were used. The confusion over names has been present ever since. Prior to the 1906 separation, congregations would typically be named \"Disciples of Christ,\" \"Christian Church,\" and \"Church of Christ.\" However, there are different practices by each. More than the name separates each church. For example, the \"Independent Christian Church\" will not accept a woman as a minister while some of the \"Disciples of Christ\" congregations will. These different congregations (Disciples of Christ, Church of Christ, and Independent Church) share many of the same beliefs and practices but there are, in fact, some differences.\n\nIn 1849, the first National Convention was held at Cincinnati, Ohio. Alexander Campbell had concerns that holding conventions would lead the movement into divisive denominationalism. He did not attend the gathering. Among its actions, the convention elected Alexander Campbell its President and created the American Christian Missionary Society (ACMS).\n\nThe formation of a missionary society set the stage for further \"co-operative\" efforts. By the end of the century, the Foreign Christian Missionary Society and the Christian Women's Board of Missions were also engaged in missionary activities. Forming the ACMS did not reflect a consensus of the entire movement. Sponsorship of missionary activities became a divisive issue. In the succeeding decades, for some congregations and their leaders, co-operative work through missionary societies and the adoption of instrumental music in church worship was straying too far from their conception of the early church. After the American Civil War, the schism grew. While there was no disagreement over the need for evangelism, many believed that missionary societies were not authorized by scripture and would compromise the autonomy of local congregations. This became one important factor leading to the separation of the Churches of Christ from the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).\n\nFrom the beginning of the movement, the free exchange of ideas among the people was fostered by the journals published by its leaders. Alexander Campbell published \"The Christian Baptist\" and \"The Millennial Harbinger\". Barton W. Stone published \"The Christian Messenger\". In a respectful way, both men routinely published the contributions of others whose positions were radically different from their own.\n\nFollowing Campbell's death in 1866, journals continued to keep the discussion and conversation alive. Between 1870 and 1900, two journals emerged as the most prominent. The \"Christian Standard\" was edited and published by Isaac Errett of Cincinnati. \"The Christian Evangelist\" was edited and published by J. H. Garrison from St. Louis. The two men enjoyed a friendly rivalry, and kept the dialog going within the movement. A third journal became part of the conversation with the publication in 1884 of \"The Christian Oracle\", later to become \"The Christian Century\", with an interdenominational appeal. In 1914, Garrison's Christian Publishing company was purchased by R. A. Long, who then established a non-profit corporation, \"The Christian Board of Publication\" as the Brotherhood publishing house.\n\nIn 1906, the U.S. Religious Census listed Churches of Christ for the first time as a group which was separate and distinct from the Disciples of Christ. However, the division had been growing for years, with published reports as early as 1883. The most obvious distinction between the two groups was the Churches of Christ rejecting the use of musical instruments in worship. The controversy over musical instruments began in 1860, when some congregations introduced organs, traditionally associated with wealthier, denominational churches. More basic were the underlying approaches to Biblical interpretation. The Churches of Christ permitted only those practices found in accounts of New Testament worship. They could find no New Testament documentation of the use of instrumental music in worship. The Disciples, by contrast, considered permissible any practices that the New Testament did not expressly forbid.\n\nAfter the division, Disciples churches used \"Christian Church\" as the dominant designation for congregations. While music and the approach to missionary work were the most visible issues, there were also some deeper ones. The process that led to the separation had begun prior to the American Civil War.\n\nFollowing the 1906 separation by the Churches of Christ, additional controversies arose. Should missionary efforts be cooperative or should they be independently sponsored by congregations? Should new methods of Biblical analysis, developed in the late 19th century, be embraced in the study and interpretation of the Bible? The \"cooperative\" churches were generally more likely to adopt the new biblical study methods.\n\nDuring the first half of the 20th century, these opposing factions among the Christian Churches coexisted but with growing discomfort and tension. Among the cooperative churches, the three Missionary Societies merged into the United Christian Missionary Society in 1920. Human service ministries grew through the National Benevolent Association and provided assistance to orphans, the elderly and the disabled.\nBy mid century, the cooperative Christian Churches and the independent Christian Churches were following different paths.\n\nFollowing World War II, it became obvious that the organizations that had been developed in previous decades no longer effectively met the needs of the postwar era. After a number of discussions throughout the 1950s, the 1960 International Convention of Christian Churches adopted a process to \"restructure\" the entire organization. The Commission on Restructure, chaired by Granville T. Walker, held its first meeting on October 30 & November 1, 1962. In 1968, the International Convention of Christian Churches (Disciples of Christ) adopted the commission's proposed \"Provisional Design of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).\" Soon the Provisional Design became \"The Design.\"\n\nUnder the design, all churches in the 1968 yearbook of Christian Churches (Disciples of Christ) were automatically recognized as part of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). In the years that followed, many of the Independent Christian Church Congregations requested formal withdrawal from the yearbook. Many of those congregations became part of the Christian churches and churches of Christ.\n\nAs an integral part of worship in most Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) congregations members celebrate Lord's Supper weekly. Most congregations also sing hymns, read from the Old and New Testaments of Christian Scripture, hear the word of God proclaimed through sermon or other medium and extend an invitation to become Christ's Disciples. As a congregational church, each congregation determines the nature of its worship, study, Christian service, and witness to the world. Through the observance of communion, individuals are invited to acknowledge their faults and sins, to remember the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, to remember their baptism, and to give thanks for God's redeeming love. The Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) believes that it is in the local congregations where people come, find, and know God as they gather in Christ's name. Because Disciples believe that the invitation to the table comes from Jesus Christ, communion is open to all who confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, regardless of their denominational affiliation.\nFor most Disciples, communion is understood as the symbolic presence of Jesus within the gathered community. Most Disciple congregations practice believer's baptism in the form of immersion, believing it to be the form used in the New Testament. The experiences of yielding to Christ in being buried with him in the waters of baptism and rising to a new life, have profound meaning for the church.\n\"In essentials, Unity; In non-essentials, Liberty; and in all things, Charity.\"\nFor modern disciples the one essential is the acceptance of Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior, and obedience to him in baptism. There is no requirement to give assent to any other statement of belief or creed. Nor is there any \"official\" interpretation of the Bible. Hierarchical doctrine was traditionally rejected by Disciples as human-made and divisive, and subsequently, freedom of belief and scriptural interpretation allows many Disciples to question or even deny beliefs common in doctrinal churches such as the Incarnation, the Trinity, and the Atonement. Beyond the essential commitment to follow Jesus, there is a tremendous freedom of belief and interpretation. As the basic teachings of Jesus are studied and applied to life, there is the freedom to interpret Jesus' teaching in different ways. As would be expected from such an approach, there is a wide diversity among Disciples in what individuals and congregations believe. It is not uncommon to find individuals who seemingly hold diametrically opposed beliefs within the same congregation affirming one another's journeys of faith as sisters and brothers in Christ.\n\nMembers and seekers are encouraged to take being disciples seriously, meaning that they are student followers of Jesus. Often the best teaching comes in the form, \"I'll tell you what I think, but read the Bible for yourself, and then study and pray about it. Decide in what ways God is calling you to be a follower of Jesus.\"\n\nModern Disciples reject the use of creeds as \"tests of faith,\" that is, as required beliefs, necessary to be accepted as a follower of Jesus. Although Disciples respect the great creeds of the church as informative affirmations of faith, they are never seen as binding. Since the adoption of The Design of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), in 1968, Disciples have celebrated a sense of unity in reading the preamble to the Design publicly. It is as a meaningful affirmation of faith, not binding upon any member. It was originally intended to remind readers that this Church seeks God through Jesus Christ, even when it adopts a design for its business affairs.\n\n\"...the church of Christ upon earth is essentially, intentionally, and constitutionally one;consisting of all those in every place that profess their faith in Christ and obedience to him in all things...\"\n\nThe Disciples celebrate their oneness with all who seek God through Jesus Christ, throughout time and regardless of location. That oneness is symbolized in the open invitation to communion for all who have professed faith in Christ without regard to church affiliation.\n\nIn local communities, congregations share with churches of other denominations in joint worship and in community Christian service. Ecumenical cooperation and collaboration with other Christian Communions has long been practiced, by the Regions.\n\nAt the General Church level, the Council on Christian Unity coordinates the ecumenical activities of the church. The Disciples continues to relate to the National Council of Churches, of which it was a founding member. It shares in the dialog and in the theological endeavors of the World Council of Churches. The Disciples has been a full participant in the Consultation on Church Union since it began in the sixties. It continues to support those ongoing conversations which have taken on the title Churches Uniting in Christ. The goal of these endeavors is not the merger into some \"Super Church\", but rather to discover ways to celebrate and proclaim the unity and oneness that is Christ's gift to his church.\n\nIn 2011, the denomination stated that \"Disciples do not have a formal policy on same-sex marriage. Different congregations have the autonomy to discern on issues such as this one\". In 2013, the Disciples of Christ voted in favor of a resolution affirming all members regardless of sexual orientation. After same-sex marriage was legalized in the US, the denomination reiterated that it leaves \"all decisions of policy on same-sex marriage to local congregations\".\n\nThe Disciples Alliance Q, an association of LGTBQ+ members, certifies congregations as \"Open and Affirming\" to show that they are accepting of all gender identities and sexual orientations. The process includes congregational workshops, information provided by the Alliance about what Open and Affirming means, and public witness to Open and Affirming ministries.\n\nThe Disciples believe in the priesthood of all believers, in that all people baptized are called to minister to others with diverse spiritual gifts. The Disciples view their Order of Ministry as a specific subset of all believers who are called with spiritual gifts specifically suited for pastoral ministry. Congregations use different terms to refer to persons in the Order of Ministry including Pastor and Reverend but most call them Ministers, including the denomination's governing documents.\n\nCongregations sponsor members seeking ordination or commissioning as a Minister, and Regional Ministries organize committees to oversee the process. Ordination can be achieved by obtaining a Master of Divinity from a theological institution, which does not have to be an institution associated with the Disciples. Ordination can also be achieved through an \"Apprentice\" track which has candidates shadow ordained ministers. Finally, Ministers can be Commissioned, a shorter process for seminary students and those seeking short-term ministry in a Region. Regional requirements for ministry vary. Ordination is made official through a service which includes members of the church, clergy, and Regional Minister laying their hands on the candidate as the ordaining act. Ecumenical representatives are often included to emphasize the Disciples' desire for Christian unity.\n\nDisciples recognize the ordinations of the United Church of Christ as do they for Disciples.\n\nA General Commission on the Order of Ministry exists to interpret and review definitions of ministry, give oversight to Regions and congregations, provide other support, and maintain the standing of Regional Ministers and Ministers of General (National) Ministries.\n\nCongregations of the Disciples are self-governing in the tradition of congregational polity. They call their own Ministers, select their own leadership, own their own property, and manage their own affairs.\n\nIn Disciples congregations, the priesthood of all believers finds its expression in worship and Christian service. Typically, lay persons who have been elected and ordained as Elders preside with the church's Ministers in the celebration of the sacrament of Holy Communion. The Elders and Ministers provide spiritual oversight and care for members in partnership with one another.\n\nThe Regional Churches of the Christian Church provide resources for leadership development and opportunities for Christian fellowship beyond the local congregation. They have taken responsibility for the nurture and support of those individuals seeking to discern God's call to service as ordained or licensed ministers. Typically, they organize summer camping experiences for children and youth.\n\nRegional churches assist congregations who are seeking ministers and ministers who are seeking congregations. Regional leadership is available on request to assist congregations that face conflict. Though they have no authority to direct the life of any congregation, the Regional Churches are analogous to the middle judicatories of other denominations.\n\nThe Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) at the \"General Church\" level consists of a number of self-governing agencies, which focus upon specific Christian witnesses to the world that have emerged in the dialog within the movement since before the first convention in 1849. Typically, these ministries have a scope that is larger than Regional Ministries, and often have a global perspective. The church agencies report to the General Assembly, which meets biennially in odd-numbered years. The General Minister and President (GMP) is the designated leader for the General Church, but does not have the administrative authority to direct any of the general church agencies other than \"The Office of General Minister and President.\" The GMP has influence that derives from the respect of the church much as the pastor of a local church leads a local congregation.\n\nThe General Ministries are:\nBULLET::::- Office of the General Minister and President\nBULLET::::- Christian Board of Publication/Chalice Press\nBULLET::::- Christian Church Foundation\nBULLET::::- Church Extension\nBULLET::::- Council on Christian Unity\nBULLET::::- Disciples of Christ Historical Society\nBULLET::::- Disciples Home Missions\nBULLET::::- Division of Overseas Ministries/Global Ministries\nBULLET::::- Higher Education and Leadership Ministries\nBULLET::::- National Benevolent Association\nBULLET::::- Pension Fund\n\nOne highly popular and respected General Agency program is the \"Week of Compassion,\" named for the special offering to fund the program when it began in the 1950s. The Week of Compassion is the disaster relief and Third World development agency. It works closely with Church World Service and church related organizations in countries around the world where disasters strike, providing emergency aid.\n\nThe General Church has challenged the entire denomination to work for a 2020 Vision for the first two decades of the 21st Century. Together the denomination is well on the way to achieving its four foci:\nBULLET::::- Seeking racial justice, which it describes as becoming a pro-reconciling/anti-racist church.\nBULLET::::- Forming 1,000 new congregations across the United States and Canada by 2020.\nBULLET::::- Seeking God's transformation of 1,000 existing Congregations in ways that will renew their witness.\nBULLET::::- Working to nurture leadership for newly formed and transformed congregations.\n\nThe relationship between the congregations, regions and the general church are detailed in \"The Design of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)\".\n\nAt the 2005 General Assembly, over 3,000 delegates voted nearly unanimously to elect the Sharon E. Watkins as General Minister and President of the denomination. Watkins was the first woman to be elected as the presiding minister of a mainline Protestant denomination.\n\nThe logo of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) is a red chalice with a white St. Andrew's Cross. The chalice represents the centrality of Communion to the life of the church. The cross of Saint Andrew is a reminder of the ministry of each person and the importance of evangelism, and recalls the denomination's Scottish Presbyterian ancestry.\n\nAfter the 1968 General Assembly, the Administrative Committee charged a sub-committee with the task of proposing a symbol for the church. Hundreds of designs were submitted, but none seemed right. By November the Deputy General Minister and President, William Howland, suggested that the committee's staff consultant and chairperson agree on a specific proposal and bring it back to the committee: that meant Robert L. Friedly of the Office of Interpretation and Ronald E. Osborn.\n\nOn January 20, 1970, the two men sat down for lunch. With a red felt-tip pen, Osborn began to scrawl a Saint Andrew's cross circumscribed inside a chalice on his placemat.\n\nImmediately, Friedly dispatched the crude drawing to Bruce Tilsley, a commercial artist and member of Central Christian Church of Denver, with the plea that he prepare an artistic version of the ideas. Tilsley responded with two or three sketches, from which was selected the now-familiar red chalice. Use of the proposed symbol became so prevalent that there was little debate when official adoption was considered at the 1971 General Assembly.\n\nThe chalice is a registered trademark of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). Congregations and ministries of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) are free to use the chalice in publications, web sites and other media. Organizations not affiliated with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) are asked to obtain permission.\n\nBecause most congregations call themselves \"Christian Churches,\" the chalice has become a simple way to identify Disciples of Christ Churches through signage, letterhead, and other forms of publicity.\n\nThe Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) has experienced a significant loss of membership since the middle of the 20th century. Membership peaked in 1958 at just under 2 million. In 1993, membership dropped below 1 million. In 2009, the denomination reported 658,869 members in 3,691 congregations. As of 2010, the five states with the highest adherence rates were Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, Kentucky and Oklahoma. The states with the largest absolute number of adherents were Missouri, Texas, Indiana, Kentucky and Ohio.\n\nFrom the very beginnings of the movement, Disciples have founded institutions of higher learning. Alexander Campbell taught young leaders and founded Bethany College. The movement established similar schools, especially in the years following the American Civil War.\n\nBecause intellectual and religious freedom are important values for the Disciples of Christ, the colleges, universities, and seminaries founded by its congregations do not seek to indoctrinate students or faculty with a sectarian point of view.\n\nIn the 21st century, the relationship between the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) and its affiliated universities is the purview of Higher Education and Leadership Ministries (HELM), an agency of the General Church.\n\nBULLET::::- Barton College – Wilson, North Carolina\nBULLET::::- Bethany College – Bethany, West Virginia\nBULLET::::- Chapman University – Orange, California\nBULLET::::- Columbia College – Columbia, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Culver-Stockton College – Canton, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Drury University – Springfield, Missouri\nBULLET::::- Eureka College – Eureka, Illinois\nBULLET::::- Hiram College – Hiram, Ohio\nBULLET::::- Jarvis Christian College – Hawkins, Texas\nBULLET::::- University of Lynchburg – Lynchburg, Virginia\nBULLET::::- Midway University – Midway, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Texas Christian University – Fort Worth, Texas\nBULLET::::- Transylvania University – Lexington, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- William Woods University – Fulton, Missouri\n\nBULLET::::- Brite Divinity School – Fort Worth, Texas\nBULLET::::- Christian Theological Seminary – Indianapolis, Indiana\nBULLET::::- Lexington Theological Seminary – Lexington, Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Phillips Theological Seminary – Tulsa, Oklahoma\nBULLET::::- Disciples Divinity House of the University of Chicago — Chicago, Illinois\nBULLET::::- Disciples Divinity House at Vanderbilt University — Nashville, Tennessee\nBULLET::::- Disciples Seminary Foundation – Claremont, California\nBULLET::::- Evangelical Seminary of Puerto Rico – San Juan, Puerto Rico\nBULLET::::- Pacific School of Religion – Berkeley, California\n\nThe Disciples of Christ maintains ecumenical relations with the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity. It is also affiliated with other ecumenical organizations such as Churches Uniting in Christ, Christian Churches Together, the National Council of Churches and the World Council of Churches. It maintains Ordained Ministerial Partner Standing with the United Church of Christ, which means that clergy ordained in the Disciples of Christ may also serve in the United Church of Christ.\n\nBULLET::::- Jesse Moren Bader, evangelist\nBULLET::::- William Barber II, Disciples pastor and President of North Carolina NAACP\nBULLET::::- Steve Beshear, former Governor of Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Edgar Cayce, American mysticist March 1877 – January 1945\nBULLET::::- Fred Craddock, professor and preacher\nBULLET::::- Russell Errett, former Congressman (R) from Pennsylvania's 22nd Congressional District.\nBULLET::::- J. William Fulbright, U.S. Senator from Arkansas\nBULLET::::- James A. Garfield, 20th President of the United States, ordained Disciples minister, Principal (President) of Western Reserve Eclectic Institute (now named Hiram College) in Hiram, Ohio, attorney admitted to the Ohio Bar.\nBULLET::::- David Lloyd George, former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who delivered open-air sermons on temperance\nBULLET::::- Murry Hammond and Grey DeLisle, singers\nBULLET::::- Dean Hess, US Air Force Pilot\nBULLET::::- Ben Hogan, professional golfer, tied for fourth all-time with nine career professional major championships\nBULLET::::- Lyndon Baines Johnson, 36th President of the United States\nBULLET::::- Jim Jones, the cult leader was ordained as a Disciple minister before the denomination was organized in 1968; at that time requirements for ordination varied greatly in different regions and congregations. Two investigations were undertaken in 1974 and 1977 by the denomination that did not find any wrongdoings. No rules or precedent existed for the Disciples for removing ministers, and the Disciples responded to the Jonestown mass killings with significant changes for ministerial ethics and the process to remove ministers from the list of ordained.\nBULLET::::- Marinda Lemert (1811–1891), religious writer who argued for the ordination of women\nBULLET::::- Ken Lucas, former Congressman (D) from Kentucky's 4th Congressional District.\nBULLET::::- Crit Luallen, former Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Frances McDormand, Actress; winner of the Triple Crown of Acting\nBULLET::::- James Clark McReynolds, United States Supreme Court Justice (1914–1941)\nBULLET::::- John Muir, Scottish founder of the environmental movement. Raised in the church, but later left it.\nBULLET::::- Susan Pamerleau, Republican sheriff of Bexar County, Texas, since 2013, the seventh most populous city in the United States\nBULLET::::- Francis Gary Powers, American CIA U-2 spy plane pilot shot down while flying a reconnaissance mission in Soviet Union airspace.\nBULLET::::- Betsy Price, Mayor of Fort Worth, Texas (2011–present), the 16th most populous city in the United States\nBULLET::::- Ronald Reagan, 40th President of the United States, baptized into the Disciples as a youth, and graduated from the Disciples' Eureka College, but a member of Bel Air Presbyterian Church in his later years. He married Nancy at The Little Brown Church in Studio City, California, a Disciples Church.\nBULLET::::- Susanna Carson Rijnhart, Tibetan explorer, missionary\nBULLET::::- Gene Robinson, raised in a Disciples church, but now a retired bishop in the Episcopal Church in the United States of America\nBULLET::::- Colonel Harlan Sanders, founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken\nBULLET::::- Tom Selleck, actor\nBULLET::::- John Ben Shepperd, Texas Attorney General (1953–1957)\nBULLET::::- Ike Skelton, congressman from Missouri's 4th Congressional District\nBULLET::::- John Stamos, actor\nBULLET::::- John Tanner, congressman from Tennessee's 8th Congressional District\nBULLET::::- Preston Taylor, African American minister, businessperson and philanthropist; founder of the National Christian Missionary Convention\nBULLET::::- William Thomas Jr., actor\nBULLET::::- Marion Tinsley, considered the all-time greatest human Checkers player\nBULLET::::- Jessie Trout, Canadian missionary in Japan, author, Japanese-American internment camp worker, co-founder of the Christian Women's Fellowship (1950) and the International Christian Women's Fellowship (1953)\nBULLET::::- Lew Wallace, author and Civil War general; his membership in the Disciples is somewhat uncertain, but his stepmother, Zerelda G. Wallace, was a founding member of Central Christian in Indianapolis and active in the WCTU, with her portrait still in the Indiana Statehouse. Wallace himself, though, claimed no denominational filliation\nBULLET::::- Roger Williams (U.S. politician), Congressman representing Texas' 25th District in the U.S. House of Representatives. Former Secretary of State of Texas (2004–2007)\nBULLET::::- John Wooden, legendary UCLA basketball coach, raised in a Disciple Church in Martinsville, Indiana\n\nBULLET::::- International Christian Churches\nBULLET::::- DisciplesWorld\nBULLET::::- Restoration Movement\nBULLET::::- First Christian Church\nBULLET::::- National City Christian Church\nBULLET::::- Christianity\nBULLET::::- The Churches of Christ and Christian churches and churches of Christ, which separated from the Disciples in 1906 and 1968, respectively.\nBULLET::::- World Convention of Churches of Christ\n\nBULLET::::- Campbell, Thomas (1809). The Declaration and Address\nBULLET::::- Challen, James (editor), \"Biographical Sketch of Alexander Campbell\", Ladies' Christian Annual, March, 1857 (Volume VI, No. 3), Philadelphia: James Challen, Publisher. Pages 81–90.Online Edition\nBULLET::::- Corey, Stephen (1953). \"Fifty Years of Attack and Controversy\" St. Louis, MO: Committee on the publication of the Corey manuscript\nBULLET::::- Davis, M. M. (1915). \"How the Disciples Began and Grew, A Short History of the Christian Church\", Cincinnati: The Standard Publishing Company\nBULLET::::- Garrison, Winfred Earnest and DeGroot, Alfred T. (1948). \"The Disciples of Christ, A History\", St Louis, Missouri: The Bethany Press\nBULLET::::- MARSHALL, ROBERT; DUNLAVY, JOHN; M'NEMAR, RICHARD; STONE, B. W.; THOMPSON, JOHN; and PURVIANCE, DAVID (1804). \"The Last Will and Testament of the Springfield Presbytery\"\nBULLET::::- McAlister, Lester G. and Tucker, William E. (1975), Journey in Faith: A History of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) - St. Louis, Chalice Press,\nBULLET::::- Watkins, Sharon E. (publisher) (2006). \"Yearbook & Directory of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) - 2006\", Indianapolis: The Office of The General Minister and President\nBULLET::::- Williams, D. Newell (2008). \"The Christian Church (Disciples of Christ): A Reformed North American Mainstream Moderate Denomination\", presentation given during the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) Consultation on \"Becoming a Multicultural and Inclusive Church,\" March 27, 2008. Retrieved January 4, 2010.\n\nBULLET::::- Butchart, Reuben. \"The Disciples of Christ in Canada Since 1930\"... in series, \"Canadian Headquarters' Publications\". Toronto, Ont.: Churches of Christ (Disciples), 1949. xv, 674 p.\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\nBULLET::::- \"DisciplesWorld\", a church periodical\nBULLET::::- One Hundredth Anniversary of the Disciples of Christ in 1909\nBULLET::::- Disciples of Christ Historical Society\nBULLET::::- Profile of Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) on the Association of Religion Data Archives website\n"}
{"id": "8662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8662", "title": "David Rice Atchison", "text": "David Rice Atchison\n\nDavid Rice Atchison (August 11, 1807January 26, 1886) was a mid-19th century Democratic United States Senator from Missouri. He served as President pro tempore of the United States Senate for six years. Atchison served as a major general in the Missouri State Militia in 1838 during Missouri's Mormon War and as a Confederate brigadier general during the American Civil War under Major General Sterling Price in the Missouri Home Guard. He is best known for the claim that for 24 hours—Sunday, March 4, 1849 through noon on Monday—he may have been Acting President of the United States. This belief, however, is dismissed by nearly all historians, scholars, and biographers.\n\nAtchison, owner of many slaves and a plantation, was a prominent pro-slavery activist and Border Ruffian leader, deeply involved with violence against abolitionists and other free-staters during the \"Bleeding Kansas\" events.\n\nAtchison was born to William Atchison in Frogtown (later Kirklevington), which is now part of Lexington, Kentucky. He was educated at Transylvania University in Lexington, where his classmates included five future Democratic senators (Solomon Downs of Louisiana, Jesse Bright of Indiana, George Wallace Jones of Iowa, Edward Hannegan of Indiana, and Jefferson Davis of Mississippi). Atchison was admitted to the Kentucky bar in 1829.\n\nIn 1830 he moved to Liberty in Clay County in western Missouri, and set up practice there, where he also farmed. Atchison's law practice flourished, and his best-known client was Latter Day Saint Movement founder Joseph Smith. Atchison represented Smith in land disputes with non-Mormon settlers in Caldwell County and Daviess County.\n\nAlexander William Doniphan joined Atchison's law practice in Liberty in May 1833. The two became fast friends and spent many leisure time hours playing cards, going to the horse races, hunting, fishing, attending social functions and political events. Atchison, already a member of the Liberty Blues, a volunteer militia in Missouri, got Doniphan to join.\n\nAtchison was elected to the Missouri House of Representatives in 1834. He worked hard for the Platte Purchase, which extended the northwestern boundary of Missouri to the Missouri River in 1837.\n\nWhen the earlier disputes broke out into the so-called Mormon War of 1838, Atchison was appointed a major general in the state militia and took part in suppression of the violence by both sides.\n\nIn 1838 he was re-elected to the Missouri State House of Representatives. Three years later, he was appointed a circuit court judge for the six-county area of the Platte Purchase. In 1843 he was named a county commissioner in Platte County, where he then lived.\n\nIn October 1843, Atchison was appointed to the U.S. Senate to fill the vacancy left by the death of Lewis F. Linn. He thus became the first senator from western Missouri. At age 36, he was the youngest senator from Missouri up to that time. Later in 1843, Atchison was appointed to serve the remainder of Linn's term and was re-elected in 1849.\n\nAtchison was very popular with his fellow Senate Democrats. When the Democrats took control of the Senate in December 1845, they chose Atchison as President pro tempore, placing him third in succession for the Presidency, and also giving him the duty of presiding over the Senate when the Vice President was absent. He was then only 38 years old and had served in the Senate just two years. In 1849 Atchison stepped down as President pro tempore in favor of William R. King. King in turn yielded the office back to Atchison in December 1852, since King had been elected Vice President of the United States. Atchison continued as President pro tempore until December 1854.\n\nAs a Senator, Atchison was a fervent advocate of slavery and territorial expansion. He supported the annexation of Texas and the U.S.-Mexican War. Atchison and Missouri's other Senator, the venerable Thomas Hart Benton, became rivals and finally enemies, though both were Democrats. Benton declared himself to be against slavery in 1849, and in 1851 Atchison allied with the Whigs to defeat Benton for re-election.\n\nBenton, intending to challenge Atchison in 1854, began to agitate for territorial organization of the area west of Missouri (now the states of Kansas and Nebraska) so it could be opened to settlement. To counter this, Atchison proposed that the area be organized \"and\" that the section of the Missouri Compromise banning slavery there be repealed in favor of popular sovereignty, under which the settlers in each territory would decide themselves whether slavery would be allowed.\n\nAt Atchison's request, Senator Stephen Douglas of Illinois introduced the Kansas–Nebraska Act, which embodied this idea, in November 1853. The Act became law in May 1854, establishing the Territories of Kansas and Nebraska.\n\nBoth Douglas and Atchison had assumed that Nebraska would be settled by Free-State men from Iowa and Illinois, and Kansas by pro-slavery Missourians and other Southerners, thus preserving the numerical balance between free states and slave states. In 1854 Atchison helped found the town of Atchison, Kansas, as a pro-slavery settlement. The town (and county) were named for him.\n\nIn fact, while Southerners welcomed the opportunity to settle Kansas, very few actually chose to do so. Instead, most free-soilers preferred Kansas. Furthermore, anti-slavery activists throughout the North came to view Kansas as a battleground and formed societies to encourage free-soil settlers to go to Kansas and ensure that both Kansas and Nebraska would become free states.\n\nIt appeared as if the Kansas Territorial legislature to be elected in March 1855 would be controlled by free-soilers and ban slavery. This was viewed as a breach of faith by Atchison and his supporters. An angry Atchison called on pro-slavery Missourians to uphold slavery by force and \"to kill every God-damned abolitionist in the district\" if necessary. He recruited an immense mob of heavily armed Missourians, the infamous \"Border Ruffians\". On the election day, March 30, 1855, Atchison led 5,000 Border Ruffians into Kansas. They seized control of all polling places at gunpoint, cast tens of thousands of fraudulent votes for pro-slavery candidates, and elected a pro-slavery legislature.\n\nThe outrage was nonetheless accepted by the Federal government. When Territorial Governor Andrew Reeder objected, he was fired by President Pierce.\n\nDespite this show of force, far more free-soilers than pro-slavery settlers migrated to Kansas. There were continual raids and ambushes by both sides in \"Bleeding Kansas\". But in spite of the best efforts of Atchison and the Ruffians, Kansas did reject slavery and finally became a free state in 1861.\n\nCharles Sumner, in the epic \"Crimes Against Kansas\" speech on May 19, 1856, exposed Atchison's role in the invasion, tortures, and killings in Kansas. Speaking in the flamboyant style he and others used, lacing his prose with references to Roman history, Sumner compared Atchison to Roman Senator Catiline, who betrayed his country in a plot to overthrow the existing order. For two days, Sumner listed crime, after crime, in detail, complete with documentation by newspapers and letters of the time, showing the tortures and violence by Atchison and his men.\n\nTwo days later, Atchison gave his own speech, totally unaware as yet that he was exposed on Senate floor in such a fashion. Atchison's speech was to the Texas men he just met, hired and paid for, Atchison reveals in his speech, by \"authorities in Washington\". They are about to invade Lawrence Kansas. Atchison makes the men promise to kill and \"draw blood,\" and boasts of his flag, which was red in color for \"Southern Rights\" and the color of blood. They would press \"to blood\" the spread of slavery into Kansas. He revealed in this speech that the immediate goal of the invasion was to stop the newspaper in Lawrence from publishing anti-slavery material. Atchison's men had made it a crime to publish anti-slavery newspapers in Kansas.\n\nAtchison made it clear the men are to kill and draw blood, told the men they will be \"well paid,\" and encouraged them to plunder from the homes that they invaded. That was after the hundreds of dozens of tortures and killings that Sumner had detailed in his Crimes Against Kansas speech. In other words, things were about to get much worse since Atchison had his hired men from Texas.\n\nAtchison's Senate term expired on March 3, 1855. He sought election to another term, but the Democrats in the Missouri legislature were split between him and Benton, while the Whig minority put forward their own man. No Senator was elected until January 1857, when James S. Green was chosen.\n\nWhen the First Transcontinental Railroad was proposed in the 1850s, Atchison called for it to be built along the central route (from St. Louis through Missouri, Kansas, and Utah), rather than the southern route (from New Orleans through Texas and New Mexico). Naturally, his suggested route went through Atchison.\n\nAtchison and A. W. Doniphan would fall out over the politics preceding the Civil War and on which direction Missouri should proceed. Atchison favored secession, while Doniphan was torn and would remain for the most part non-committal. Privately Doniphan favored the Union, but found it hard to go against his friends and associates.\n\nDuring the secession crisis in Missouri at the beginning of the American Civil War, Atchison sided with Missouri's pro-Confederate governor, Claiborne Jackson. He accepted an appointment as a major general in the Missouri State Guard. Atchison actively recruited State Guardsmen in northern Missouri and served with Missouri State Guard commander General Sterling Price in the summer campaign of 1861. In September 1861, Atchison led 3,500 State Guard recruits across the Missouri River to reinforce Price, and defeated Union troops that tried to block his force in the Battle of Liberty.\n\nAtchison continued to serve through the end of 1861. In March 1862, Union forces in the Trans-Mississippi theater won a decisive victory at Pea Ridge in Arkansas and secured Union control of Missouri. Atchison then resigned from the army over reported strategy arguments with Price and moved to Texas for the duration of the Civil War. After the war he retired to his farm near Gower, and was noted to deny many of his pro-slavery public statements made prior to the Civil War. In addition, his retirement cottage outside of Plattsburg, Missouri burned to the ground before his death in 1886. This included the complete loss of his library containing books, documents, and letters which documented his role in the Mormon War, Indian affairs, pro-slavery activities, Civil War activities, and other legislation covering his career as a lawyer, senator, and soldier.\n\nInauguration Day—March 4—fell on a Sunday in 1849, and so President-elect Zachary Taylor did not take the presidential oath of office until the next day. Even so, the term of the outgoing president, James K. Polk, ended at noon on March 4. On March 2, outgoing vice president George M. Dallas relinquished his position as President of the Senate, at which time Atchison was elected President pro tempore. In 1849, according to the Presidential Succession Act of 1792, the Senate president pro tempore immediately followed the vice president in presidential line of succession. As Dallas's term also ended at noon on the 4th, and as neither Taylor nor Vice President-elect Millard Fillmore had been sworn-in to office on that day, it was claimed by some of Atchison's friends and colleagues that on March 4–5, 1849, Atchison was Acting President of the United States.\n\nHistorians, constitutional scholars and biographers all dismiss the claim. They point out that Atchison's Senate term had ended on March 3. When the Senate of the new Congress convened on March 5 to allow new senators and the new vice president to take the oath of office, the secretary of the Senate called members to order, as the Senate had no president pro tempore. Furthermore, the Constitution doesn't require the President-elect to take the oath of office to hold the office, just to execute the powers. Also, as Atchison never swore the presidential oath either, he could not have acted as President. Most historians and scholars assert that as soon as the outgoing President's term expires, the President-elect automatically assumes the office; although some claim instead that the office is vacant until the taking of the oath.\n\nIn September 1872, Atchison, who never himself claimed that he was technically president, told a reporter for the \"Plattsburg Lever\":\n\nAtchison died on January 26, 1886, at his home near Gower, Missouri at the age of 78. He was buried at Greenlawn Cemetery in Plattsburg, Missouri. His grave marker reads \"President of the United States for One Day.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Atchison, Kansas county seat of Atchison County, Kansas\nBULLET::::- Atchison County, Missouri\nBULLET::::- USS \"Atchison County\" (LST-60) ship\nBULLET::::- In 1991, Atchison was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians, and a bronze bust depicting him is on permanent display in the rotunda of the Missouri State Capitol.\nBULLET::::- Atchison County Historical Museum in Atchison, Kansas includes a museum exhibit devoted to Atchison.\nBULLET::::- A historical marker designating the approximate site of Atchison's birth is located along Highway 1974 in the Landsdowne neighborhood of Lexington, Kentucky.\n\nBULLET::::- List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)\nBULLET::::- List of United States Senators from Missouri\n\nBULLET::::- David Rice Atchinson: On Being President For A Day - Original Letters Shapell Manuscript Foundation\nBULLET::::- Urban Legends: President for a Day\nBULLET::::- Another view of the President for a Day claim\nBULLET::::- Useless Information: David Rice Atchison\nBULLET::::- U.S. Senate Historical Minute Essay\n"}
{"id": "8663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8663", "title": "Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit", "text": "Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit\n\nDaniel Gabriel Fahrenheit FRS (; ; 24 May 1686 – 16 September 1736) was a physicist, inventor, and scientific instrument maker. Fahrenheit was born in Danzig (now Gdańsk, Poland), then a predominantly German-speaking Hanseatic city in the Pomeranian Voivodeship of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, but lived most of his life in the Dutch Republic (1701–1736) and was one of the notable figures in the Golden Age of Dutch science and technology.\n\nA pioneer of exact thermometry, he helped lay the foundations for the era of precision thermometry by inventing the mercury-in-glass thermometer (first practical, accurate thermometer) and Fahrenheit scale (first standardized temperature scale to be widely used). In other words, Fahrenheit's inventions ushered in the first revolution in the history of thermometry (branch of physics concerned with methods of temperature measurement). From the early 1710s until the beginnings of the electronic era, mercury-in-glass thermometers were among the most reliable and accurate thermometers ever invented.\n\nFahrenheit was born in Danzig, then in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, but lived most of his life in the Dutch Republic. The Fahrenheits were a German Hanse merchant family who had lived in several Hanseatic cities. Fahrenheit's great-grandfather had lived in Rostock, and research suggests that the Fahrenheit family originated in Hildesheim. Daniel's grandfather moved from Kneiphof in Königsberg (present-day Kaliningrad) to Danzig and settled there as a merchant in 1650. His son, Daniel Fahrenheit (the father of Daniel Gabriel), married Concordia Schumann, daughter of a well-known Danzig business family. Daniel was the eldest of the five Fahrenheit children (two sons, three daughters) who survived childhood. His sister, Virginia Elisabeth Fahrenheit, married Benjamin Krüger and was the mother of Benjamin Ephraim Krüger, a clergyman and playwright.\n\nDaniel Gabriel began training as a merchant in Amsterdam after his parents died on 14 August 1701 from eating poisonous mushrooms. However, Fahrenheit's interest in natural science led him to begin studies and experimentation in that field. From 1717, he traveled to Berlin, Halle, Leipzig, Dresden, Copenhagen, and also to his hometown, where his brother still lived. During that time, Fahrenheit met or was in contact with Ole Rømer, Christian Wolff, and Gottfried Leibniz. In 1717, Fahrenheit settled in The Hague as a glassblower, making barometers, altimeters, and thermometers. From 1718 onwards, he lectured in chemistry in Amsterdam. He visited England in 1724 and was the same year elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. From August 1736 Fahrenheit stayed in the house of Johannes Frisleven at Plein square in The Hague, in connection with an application for a patent at the States of Holland and West Friesland. At the beginning of September he became ill and on the 7th his health had deteriorated to such an extent that he had notary Willem Ruijsbroek come to draw up his will. On the 11th the notary came by again to make some changes. Five days after that Fahrenheit died at the age of fifty. Four days later he received a fourth-class funeral, which meant that he was destitute, in the Kloosterkerk in The Hague. (the Cloister or Monestary Church)\n\nAccording to Fahrenheit's 1724 article, he determined his scale by reference to three fixed points of temperature. The lowest temperature was achieved by preparing a frigorific mixture of ice, water, and a salt (\"ammonium chloride or even sea salt\"), and waiting for the eutectic system to reach equilibrium temperature. The thermometer then was placed into the mixture and the liquid in the thermometer allowed to descend to its lowest point. The thermometer's reading there was taken as 0 °F. The second reference point was selected as the reading of the thermometer when it was placed in still water when ice was just forming on the surface. This was assigned as 32 °F. The third calibration point, taken as 96 °F, was selected as the thermometer's reading when the instrument was placed under the arm or in the mouth.\n\nFahrenheit came up with the idea that Mercury boils around 300 degrees on this temperature scale. Work by others showed that water boils about 180 degrees above its freezing point. The Fahrenheit scale later was redefined to make the freezing-to-boiling interval exactly 180 degrees, a convenient value as 180 is a highly composite number, meaning that it is evenly divisible into many fractions. It is because of the scale's redefinition that normal body temperature today is taken as 98.6 degrees, whereas it was 96 degrees on Fahrenheit's original scale.\n\nThe Fahrenheit scale was the primary temperature standard for climatic, industrial and medical purposes in English-speaking countries until the 1970s, nowadays replaced by the Celsius scale long used in the rest of the world.\n\nBULLET::::- Fahrenheit hydrometer\nBULLET::::- List of German inventors and discoverers\nBULLET::::- People from Gdańsk (Danzig)\n\nBULLET::::- (Latin)\nBULLET::::- (Czech)\nBULLET::::- (Russian)\n\nBULLET::::- Letter from Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (scan) to Carl Linnaeus, 7 May 1736 n.s.,\nBULLET::::- Fahrenheit's papers in the Royal Society Publishing\n"}
{"id": "8664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8664", "title": "Freescale DragonBall", "text": "Freescale DragonBall\n\nMotorola/Freescale Semiconductor's DragonBall, or MC68328, is a microcontroller design based on the famous 68000 core, but implemented as an all-in-one low-power system for handheld computer use. It is supported by μClinux. It was designed by Motorola in Hong Kong and released in 1995.\n\nThe DragonBall's major design win was in numerous devices running the Palm OS platform. However, from Palm OS 5 onwards their use was superseded by ARM-based processors from Texas Instruments and Intel. \n\nThe processor is capable of speeds of up to 16.58 MHz and can run up to 2.7 MIPS (million instructions per second), for the base 68328 and DragonBall EZ (MC68EZ328) model. It was extended to 33 MHz, 5.4 MIPS for the DragonBall VZ (MC68VZ328) model, and 66 MHz, 10.8 MIPS for the DragonBall Super VZ (MC68SZ328).\n\nIt is a 32-bit processor with 32-bit internal and external address bus (24-bit external address bus for EZ and VZ variants) and 32-bit data bus. It has many built-in functions, like a color and grayscale display controller, PC speaker sound, serial port with UART and IRDA support, UART bootstrap, real time clock, is able to directly access DRAM, Flash ROM, mask ROM, and has built-in support for touch screens.\n\nThe more recent DragonBall MX series microcontrollers, later renamed the Freescale i.MX (MC9328MX/MCIMX) series, are intended for similar application to the earlier DragonBall devices but are based on an ARM processor core instead of a 68000 core.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dragon Ball\"\nBULLET::::- \"Dragon Ball Z\"\n"}
{"id": "8667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8667", "title": "Double-slit experiment", "text": "Double-slit experiment\n\nIn modern physics, the double-slit experiment is a demonstration that light and matter can display characteristics of both classically defined waves and particles; moreover, it displays the fundamentally probabilistic nature of quantum mechanical phenomena. The experiment was first performed with light by Thomas Young in 1801. In 1927, Davisson and Germer demonstrated that electrons show the same behavior, which was later extended to atoms and molecules.\n\nThomas Young's experiment with light was part of classical physics well before quantum mechanics, and the concept of wave-particle duality. He believed it demonstrated that the wave theory of light was correct, and his experiment is sometimes referred to as Young's experiment or Young's slits.\n\nThe experiment belongs to a general class of \"double path\" experiments, in which a wave is split into two separate waves that later combine into a single wave. Changes in the path lengths of both waves result in a phase shift, creating an interference pattern. Another version is the Mach–Zehnder interferometer, which splits the beam with a mirror. In the basic version of this experiment, a coherent light source, such as a laser beam, illuminates a plate pierced by two parallel slits, and the light passing through the slits is observed on a screen behind the plate. The wave nature of light causes the light waves passing through the two slits to interfere, producing bright and dark bands on the screen – a result that would not be expected if light consisted of classical particles. However, the light is always found to be absorbed at the screen at discrete points, as individual particles (not waves); the interference pattern appears via the varying density of these particle hits on the screen. Furthermore, versions of the experiment that include detectors at the slits find that each detected photon passes through one slit (as would a classical particle), and not through both slits (as would a wave). However, such experiments demonstrate that particles do not form the interference pattern if one detects which slit they pass through. These results demonstrate the principle of wave–particle duality.\n\nOther atomic-scale entities, such as electrons, are found to exhibit the same behavior when fired towards a double slit. Additionally, the detection of individual discrete impacts is observed to be inherently probabilistic, which is inexplicable using classical mechanics.\n\nThe experiment can be done with entities much larger than electrons and photons, although it becomes more difficult as size increases. The largest entities for which the double-slit experiment has been performed were molecules that each comprised 810 atoms (whose total mass was over 10,000 atomic mass units).\n\nThe double-slit experiment (and its variations) has become a classic thought experiment, for its clarity in expressing the central puzzles of quantum mechanics. Because it demonstrates the fundamental limitation of the ability of the observer to predict experimental results, Richard Feynman called it \"a phenomenon which is impossible […] to explain in any classical way, and which has in it the heart of quantum mechanics. In reality, it contains the only mystery [of quantum mechanics].\"\n\nIf light consisted strictly of ordinary or classical particles, and these particles were fired in a straight line through a slit and allowed to strike a screen on the other side, we would expect to see a pattern corresponding to the size and shape of the slit. However, when this \"single-slit experiment\" is actually performed, the pattern on the screen is a diffraction pattern in which the light is spread out. The smaller the slit, the greater the angle of spread. The top portion of the image shows the central portion of the pattern formed when a red laser illuminates a slit and, if one looks carefully, two faint side bands. More bands can be seen with a more highly refined apparatus. Diffraction explains the pattern as being the result of the interference of light waves from the slit.\n\nIf one illuminates two parallel slits, the light from the two slits again interferes. Here the interference is a more pronounced pattern with a series of alternating light and dark bands. The width of the bands is a property of the frequency of the illuminating light. (See the bottom photograph to the right.) When Thomas Young (1773–1829) first demonstrated this phenomenon, it indicated that light consists of waves, as the distribution of brightness can be explained by the alternately additive and subtractive interference of wavefronts. Young's experiment, performed in the early 1800s, played a vital part in the acceptance of the wave theory of light, vanquishing the corpuscular theory of light proposed by Isaac Newton, which had been the accepted model of light propagation in the 17th and 18th centuries. However, the later discovery of the photoelectric effect demonstrated that under different circumstances, light can behave as if it is composed of discrete particles. These seemingly contradictory discoveries made it necessary to go beyond classical physics and take the quantum nature of light into account.\n\nFeynman was fond of saying that all of quantum mechanics can be gleaned from carefully thinking through the implications of this single experiment. He also proposed (as a thought experiment) that if detectors were placed before each slit, the interference pattern would disappear.\n\nThe Englert–Greenberger duality relation provides a detailed treatment of the mathematics of double-slit interference in the context of quantum mechanics.\n\nA low-intensity double-slit experiment was first performed by G. I. Taylor in 1909, by reducing the level of incident light until photon emission/absorption events were mostly non-overlapping.\n\nA double-slit experiment was not performed with anything other than light until 1961, when Claus Jönsson of the University of Tübingen performed it with electron beams. In 1974, the Italian physicists Pier Giorgio Merli, Gian Franco Missiroli, and Giulio Pozzi repeated the experiment using single electrons and biprism (instead of slits), showing that each electron interferes with itself as predicted by quantum theory. In 2002, the single-electron version of the experiment was voted \"the most beautiful experiment\" by readers of \"Physics World.\"\n\nIn 2012, Stefano Frabboni and co-workers eventually performed the double-slit experiment with electrons and real slits, following the original scheme proposed by Feynman. They sent single electrons onto nanofabricated slits (about 100 nm wide) and, by collecting the transmitted electrons with a single-electron detector, they could show the build-up of a double-slit interference pattern.\n\nIn 2019, single particle interference was demonstrated for Antimatter by Marco Giammarchi and coworkers.\n\nAn important version of this experiment involves single particles (or waves—for consistency, they are called particles here). Sending particles through a double-slit apparatus one at a time results in single particles appearing on the screen, as expected. Remarkably, however, an interference pattern emerges when these particles are allowed to build up one by one (see the adjacent image). This demonstrates the wave–particle duality, which states that all matter exhibits both wave and particle properties: the particle is measured as a single pulse at a single position, while the wave describes the probability of absorbing the particle at a specific place on the screen. This phenomenon has been shown to occur with photons, electrons, atoms and even some molecules, including buckyballs. So experiments with electrons add confirmatory evidence to the view that electrons, protons, neutrons, and even larger entities that are ordinarily called particles nevertheless have their own wave nature and even a wavelength (related to their momentum).\n\nThe probability of detection is the square of the amplitude of the wave and can be calculated with classical waves (see below). The particles do not arrive at the screen in a predictable order, so knowing where all the previous particles appeared on the screen and in what order tells nothing about where a future particle will be detected. If there is a cancellation of waves at some point, that does not mean that a particle disappears; it will appear somewhere else. Ever since the origination of quantum mechanics, some theorists have searched for ways to incorporate additional determinants or \"hidden variables\" that, were they to become known, would account for the location of each individual impact with the target.\n\nMore complicated systems that involve two or more particles in superposition are not amenable to the above explanation.\n\nA well-known thought experiment predicts that if particle detectors are positioned at the slits, showing through which slit a photon goes, the interference pattern will disappear. This which-way experiment illustrates the complementarity principle that photons can behave as either particles or waves, but cannot be observed as both at the same time.\nDespite the importance of this thought experiment in the history of quantum mechanics (for example, see the discussion on ), technically feasible realizations of this experiment were not proposed until the 1970s. (Naive implementations of the textbook \"gedanken\" experiment are not possible because photons cannot be detected without absorbing the photon.) Currently, multiple experiments have been performed illustrating various aspects of complementarity.\n\nAn experiment performed in 1987 produced results that demonstrated that information could be obtained regarding which path a particle had taken without destroying the interference altogether. This showed the effect of measurements that disturbed the particles in transit to a lesser degree and thereby influenced the interference pattern only to a comparable extent. In other words, if one does not insist that the method used to determine which slit each photon passes through be completely reliable, one can still detect a (degraded) interference pattern.\n\nWheeler's delayed choice experiments demonstrate that extracting \"which path\" information after a particle passes through the slits can seem to retroactively alter its previous behavior at the slits.\n\nQuantum eraser experiments demonstrate that wave behavior can be restored by erasing or otherwise making permanently unavailable the \"which path\" information.\n\nA simple do-it-at-home illustration of the quantum eraser phenomenon was given in an article in \"Scientific American\". If one sets polarizers before each slit with their axes orthogonal to each other, the interference pattern will be eliminated. The polarizers can be considered as introducing which-path information to each beam. Introducing a third polarizer in front of the detector with an axis of 45° relative to the other polarizers \"erases\" this information, allowing the interference pattern to reappear. This can also be accounted for by considering the light to be a classical wave, and also when using circular polarizers and single photons. Implementations of the polarizers using entangled photon pairs have no classical explanation.\n\nIn a highly publicized experiment in 2012, researchers claimed to have identified the path each particle had taken without any adverse effects at all on the interference pattern generated by the particles. In order to do this, they used a setup such that particles coming to the screen were not from a point-like source, but from a source with two intensity maxima. However, commentators such as Svensson have pointed out that there is in fact no conflict between the weak measurements performed in this variant of the double-slit experiment and the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Weak measurement followed by post-selection did not allow simultaneous position and momentum measurements for each individual particle, but rather allowed measurement of the average trajectory of the particles that arrived at different positions. In other words, the experimenters were creating a statistical map of the full trajectory landscape.\n\nIn 1967, Pfleegor and Mandel demonstrated two-source interference using two separate lasers as light sources.\n\nIt was shown experimentally in 1972 that in a double-slit system where only one slit was open at any time, interference was nonetheless observed provided the path difference was such that the detected photon could have come from either slit. The experimental conditions were such that the photon density in the system was much less than unity.\n\nIn 1999, the double-slit experiment was successfully performed with buckyball molecules (each of which comprises 60 carbon atoms). A buckyball is large enough (diameter about 0.7 nm, nearly half a million times larger than a proton) to be seen under an electron microscope.\n\nIn 2005, E. R. Eliel presented an experimental and theoretical study of the optical transmission of a thin metal screen perforated by two subwavelength slits, separated by many optical wavelengths. The total intensity of the far-field double-slit pattern is shown to be reduced or enhanced as a function of the wavelength of the incident light beam.\n\nIn 2012, researchers at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln performed the double-slit experiment with electrons as described by Richard Feynman, using new instruments that allowed control of the transmission of the two slits and the monitoring of single-electron detection events. Electrons were fired by an electron gun and passed through one or two slits of 62 nm wide × 4 μm tall.\n\nIn 2013, the double-slit experiment was successfully performed with molecules that each comprised 810 atoms (whose total mass was over 10,000 atomic mass units).\n\nHydrodynamic analogs have been developed that can recreate various aspects of quantum mechanical systems, including single-particle interference through a double-slit. A silicone oil droplet, bouncing along the surface of a liquid, self-propels via resonant interactions with its own wave field. The droplet gently sloshes the liquid with every bounce. At the same time, ripples from past bounces affect its course. The droplet's interaction with its own ripples, which form what is known as a pilot wave, causes it to exhibit behaviors previously thought to be peculiar to elementary particles – including behaviors customarily taken as evidence that elementary particles are spread through space like waves, without any specific location, until they are measured.\n\nBehaviors mimicked via this hydrodynamic pilot-wave system include quantum single particle diffraction, tunneling, quantized orbits, orbital level splitting, spin, and multimodal statistics. It is also possible to infer uncertainty relations and exclusion principles. Videos are available illustrating various features of this system. (See the External links.)\n\nHowever, more complicated systems that involve two or more particles in superposition are not amenable to such a simple, classically intuitive explanation. Accordingly, no hydrodynamic analog of entanglement has been developed. Nevertheless, optical analogs are possible.\n\nMuch of the behaviour of light can be modelled using classical wave theory. The Huygens–Fresnel principle is one such model; it states that each point on a wavefront generates a secondary wavelet, and that the disturbance at any subsequent point can be found by summing the contributions of the individual wavelets at that point. This summation needs to take into account the phase as well as the amplitude of the individual wavelets. Only the intensity of a light field can be measured—this is proportional to the square of the amplitude.\n\nIn the double-slit experiment, the two slits are illuminated by a single laser beam. If the width of the slits is small enough (less than the wavelength of the laser light), the slits diffract the light into cylindrical waves. These two cylindrical wavefronts are superimposed, and the amplitude, and therefore the intensity, at any point in the combined wavefronts depends on both the magnitude and the phase of the two wavefronts. The difference in phase between the two waves is determined by the difference in the distance travelled by the two waves.\n\nIf the viewing distance is large compared with the separation of the slits (the far field), the phase difference can be found using the geometry shown in the figure below right. The path difference between two waves travelling at an angle is given by:\n\nWhere d is the distance between the two slits. When the two waves are in phase, i.e. the path difference is equal to an integral number of wavelengths, the summed amplitude, and therefore the summed intensity is maximum, and when they are in anti-phase, i.e. the path difference is equal to half a wavelength, one and a half wavelengths, etc., then the two waves cancel and the summed intensity is zero. This effect is known as interference. The interference fringe maxima occur at angles\n\nwhere λ is the wavelength of the light. The angular spacing of the fringes, , is given by\n\nThe spacing of the fringes at a distance from the slits is given by\n\nFor example, if two slits are separated by 0.5 mm (), and are illuminated with a 0.6μm wavelength laser (), then at a distance of 1m (), the spacing of the fringes will be 1.2 mm.\n\nIf the width of the slits is greater than the wavelength, the Fraunhofer diffraction equation gives the intensity of the diffracted light as:\n\nWhere the sinc function is defined as sinc(\"x\") = sin(\"x\")/\"x\" for \"x\" ≠ 0, and sinc(0) = 1.\n\nThis is illustrated in the figure above, where the first pattern is the diffraction pattern of a single slit, given by the function in this equation, and the second figure shows the combined intensity of the light diffracted from the two slits, where the function represent the fine structure, and the coarser structure represents diffraction by the individual slits as described by the function.\n\nSimilar calculations for the near field can be done using the Fresnel diffraction equation. As the plane of observation gets closer to the plane in which the slits are located, the diffraction patterns associated with each slit decrease in size, so that the area in which interference occurs is reduced, and may vanish altogether when there is no overlap in the two diffracted patterns.\n\nLike the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment, the double-slit experiment is often used to highlight the differences and similarities between the various interpretations of quantum mechanics.\n\nThe Copenhagen interpretation, put forth by some of the pioneers in the field of quantum mechanics, asserts that it is undesirable to posit anything that goes beyond the mathematical formulae and the kinds of physical apparatus and reactions that enable us to gain some knowledge of what goes on at the atomic scale. One of the mathematical constructs that enables experimenters to predict very accurately certain experimental results is sometimes called a probability wave. In its mathematical form it is analogous to the description of a physical wave, but its \"crests\" and \"troughs\" indicate levels of probability for the occurrence of certain phenomena (e.g., a spark of light at a certain point on a detector screen) that can be observed in the macro world of ordinary human experience.\n\nThe probability \"wave\" can be said to \"pass through space\" because the probability values that one can compute from its mathematical representation are dependent on time. One cannot speak of the location of any particle such as a photon between the time it is emitted and the time it is detected simply because in order to say that something is located somewhere at a certain time one has to detect it. The requirement for the eventual appearance of an interference pattern is that particles be emitted, and that there be a screen with at least two distinct paths for the particle to take from the emitter to the detection screen. Experiments observe nothing whatsoever between the time of emission of the particle and its arrival at the detection screen. If a ray tracing is next made as if a light wave (as understood in classical physics) is wide enough to take both paths, then that ray tracing will accurately predict the appearance of maxima and minima on the detector screen when many particles pass through the apparatus and gradually \"paint\" the expected interference pattern.\n\nThe Copenhagen interpretation is similar to the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics provided by Feynman. The path integral formulation replaces the classical notion of a single, unique trajectory for a system, with a sum over all possible trajectories. The trajectories are added together by using functional integration.\n\nEach path is considered equally likely, and thus contributes the same amount. However, the phase of this contribution at any given point along the path is determined by the action along the path:\n\nAll these contributions are then added together, and the magnitude of the final result is squared, to get the probability distribution for the position of a particle:\n\nAs is always the case when calculating probability, the results must then be normalized by imposing:\n\nTo summarize, the probability distribution of the outcome is the normalized square of the norm of the superposition, over all paths from the point of origin to the final point, of waves propagating proportionally to the action along each path. The differences in the cumulative action along the different paths (and thus the relative phases of the contributions) produces the interference pattern observed by the double-slit experiment. Feynman stressed that his formulation is merely a mathematical description, not an attempt to describe a real process that we can measure.\n\nAccording to the relational interpretation of quantum mechanics, first proposed by Carlo Rovelli, observations such as those in the double-slit experiment result specifically from the interaction between the observer (measuring device) and the object being observed (physically interacted with), not any absolute property possessed by the object. In the case of an electron, if it is initially \"observed\" at a particular slit, then the observer–particle (photon–electron) interaction includes information about the electron's position. This partially constrains the particle's eventual location at the screen. If it is \"observed\" (measured with a photon) not at a particular slit but rather at the screen, then there is no \"which path\" information as part of the interaction, so the electron's \"observed\" position on the screen is determined strictly by its probability function. This makes the resulting pattern on the screen the same as if each individual electron had passed through both slits. It has also been suggested that space and distance themselves are relational, and that an electron can appear to be in \"two places at once\"—for example, at both slits—because its spatial relations to particular points on the screen remain identical from both slit locations.\n\nPhysicist David Deutsch argues in his book \"The Fabric of Reality\" that the double-slit experiment is evidence for the many-worlds interpretation. However, since every interpretation of quantum mechanics is empirically indistinguishable, some scientists are skeptical of this claim.\n\nAn alternative to the standard understanding of quantum mechanics, De Broglie–Bohm theory states that particles have precise locations at all times, and that their velocities are influenced by the wave-function. So while a single particle will travel through one particular slit in the double-slit experiment, the so-called \"pilot wave\" that influences it will travel through both. The two slit de Broglie-Bohm trajectories were first calculated by Chris Dewdney whilst working with Chris Philippidis and Basil Hiley at Birkbeck College (London). The de Broglie-Bohm theory produces the same statistical results as standard quantum mechanics, but dispenses with many of its conceptual difficulties.\n\nBULLET::::- Complementarity (physics)\nBULLET::::- Delayed choice quantum eraser\nBULLET::::- Dual-polarization interferometry\nBULLET::::- Elitzur–Vaidman bomb tester\nBULLET::::- N-slit interferometer\nBULLET::::- Photon polarization\nBULLET::::- Quantum coherence\nBULLET::::- Schrödinger's cat\nBULLET::::- Young's interference experiment\nBULLET::::- Measurement problem\n\nBULLET::::- Huygens and interference\n\nBULLET::::- Website with the movie and other information from the first single electron experiment by Merli, Missiroli, and Pozzi.\nBULLET::::- Movie showing single electron events build up to form an interference pattern in double-slit experiments. Several versions with and without narration (File size = 3.6 to 10.4 MB) (Movie Length = 1m 8s)\nBULLET::::- Freeview video 'Electron Waves Unveil the Microcosmos' A Royal Institution Discourse by Akira Tonomura provided by the Vega Science Trust\nBULLET::::- Hitachi website that provides background on Tonomura video and link to the video\n\nBULLET::::- \"Single-particle interference observed for macroscopic objects\"\nBULLET::::- Pilot-Wave Hydrodynamics: Supplemental Video\nBULLET::::- \"Through the Wormhole\": Yves Couder . Explains Wave/Particle Duality via Silicon Droplets\n\nBULLET::::- Java demonstration of Young's double slit interference\nBULLET::::- A simulation that runs in Mathematica Player, in which the number of quantum particles, the frequency of the particles, and the slit separation can be independently varied\n"}
{"id": "8668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8668", "title": "Dan Bricklin", "text": "Dan Bricklin\n\nDaniel Singer \"Dan\" Bricklin (born on July 16, 1951), often referred to as “the father of the Spreadsheet,” is the American co-creator, with Bob Frankston, of the VisiCalc spreadsheet program. He also founded Software Garden, Inc., of which he is currently president, and Trellix Corporation. He currently serves as the chief technology officer of Alpha Software.\n\nHis book, \"Bricklin on Technology\", was published by Wiley in May 2009.\n\nBricklin was born in a Jewish family in Philadelphia, where he attended Akiba Hebrew Academy during his high school years. He began his college career as a mathematics major, but soon switched to computer science. He earned a Bachelor of Science in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1973, where he was a resident of Bexley Hall.\n\nUpon graduating from MIT, Bricklin worked for Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) where he was part of the team that worked on WPS-8 until 1976, when he began working for FasFax, a cash register manufacturer. In 1977 he returned to education, and was awarded a Master of Business Administration from Harvard University in 1979.\n\nWhile a student at Harvard Business School, Bricklin co-developed VisiCalc in 1979, making it the first electronic spreadsheet readily available for home and office use. It ran on an Apple II computer, and was considered a fourth generation software program. VisiCalc is widely credited for fueling the rapid growth of the personal computer industry. Instead of doing financial projections with manually calculated spreadsheets, and having to recalculate with every single cell in the sheet, VisiCalc allowed the user to change any cell, and have the entire sheet automatically recalculated. This could turn 20 hours of work into 15 minutes and allowed for more creativity.\n\nIn 1979, Bricklin and Frankston founded Software Arts, Inc., and began selling VisiCalc, via a separate company named VisiCorp. Along with co-founder Bob Frankston, he started writing versions of the program for the Tandy TRS-80, Commodore PET and the Atari 800. Soon after its launch, VisiCalc became a fast seller at $100.\n\nSoftware Arts also published TK/Solver and \"and \"Spotlight\",\"a desktop organizer for the I.B.M. Personal Computer.\"\n\nBricklin was awarded the Grace Murray Hopper Award in 1981 for VisiCalc. Bricklin could not patent VisiCalc, since software programs were not eligible for patent protection at the time.\n\nBricklin was chairman of Software Arts until 1985, the year that Software Arts was acquired by Lotus. He left and founded Software Garden.\n\nDan Bricklin founded Software Garden, a small consulting firm and developer of software applications, in 1985. The company's focus was to produce and market “Dan Bricklin's Demo Program”. The program allowed users to create demonstrations of their programs before they were even written, and was also used to create tutorials for Windows-based programs. Other versions released soon after included demo-it!. He remained the president of the company until he co-founded Slate Corporation in 1990. In 1992, he became the vice president of Phoenix-based Slate corporation, and developed \"At Hand\", a pen-based spreadsheet. When Slate closed in 1994, Bricklin returned to Software Garden.\n\nHis \"\"Dan Bricklin's Overall Viewer\"\" (described by \"The New York Times\" as \"a visual way to display information in Windows-based software\") was released in November 1994.\n\nIn 1995 Bricklin founded Trellix Corporation, named for \"Trellix Site Builder\".\n\nTrellix was bought by Interland (now Web.com) in 2003, and Bricklin became Interland's chief technology officer until early 2004.\n\nBricklin continues to serve as president of Software Garden, a small company that develops and markets software tools he creates, as well as providing speaking and consulting services.\n\nHe has released Note Taker HD, an application that integrates handwritten notes on the Apple iPad tablet.\n\nHe is also developing wikiCalc, a collaborative, basic spreadsheet running on the Web.\n\nHe is currently the chief technology officer of Alpha Software in Burlington, Massachusetts, a company that creates tools to easily develop cross-platform mobile business applications.\n\nIn 1994, Bricklin was inducted as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery. He is a founding trustee of the Massachusetts Technology Leadership Council and has served on the boards of the Software Publishers Association and the Boston Computer Society. He was also elected to be a member of the National Academy of Engineering.\n\nIn 1981, Bricklin was given a Grace Murray Hopper Award for VisiCalc.\n\nIn 1996, Bricklin was awarded by the IEEE Computer Society with the Computer Entrepreneur Award for pioneering the development and commercialization of the spreadsheet and the profound changes it fostered in business and industry.\n\nIn 2003, Bricklin was given the Wharton Infosys Business Transformation Award for being a technology change leader. He was recognized for having used information technology in an industry-transforming way. He has received an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from Newbury College.\n\nIn 2004, he was made a Fellow of the Computer History Museum \"for advancing the utility of personal computers by developing the VisiCalc electronic spreadsheet.\"\n\nBricklin:\nBULLET::::- appeared in the 1996 documentary Triumph of the Nerds, as well as the 2005 documentary , in both cases discussing the development of VisiCalc.\nBULLET::::- introduced the term \"friend-to-friend networking\" on August 11, 2000.\nBULLET::::- also introduced the term cornucopia of the commons about the same time.\n\nBULLET::::- Dan Bricklin interview on lowendmac.com\nBULLET::::- Bricklin.com\nBULLET::::- Trellix\nBULLET::::- Software Garden\nBULLET::::- I'm working on a new product called wikiCalc, from Dan Bricklin's weblog on November 9, 2005, introducing wikiCalc\nBULLET::::- This page has a link to Dan's interview conducted by Robert Cringely\nBULLET::::- Bricklin On Technology book\nBULLET::::- TED Talk – \"Dan Bricklin: Meet the inventor of the electronic spreadsheet\"\nBULLET::::- TEDx Talk – \"A Problem That Changed The World  Dan Bricklin  TEDxBeaconStreet\"\n"}
{"id": "8674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8674", "title": "Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications", "text": "Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications\n\nDigital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (Digital European Cordless Telecommunications), usually known by the acronym DECT, is a standard primarily used for creating cordless telephone systems. It originated in Europe, where it is the universal standard, replacing earlier cordless phone standards, such as 900 MHz CT1 and CT2.\n\nBeyond Europe, it has been adopted by Australia, and most countries in Asia and South America. North American adoption was delayed by United States radio frequency regulations. This forced development of a variation of DECT, called DECT 6.0, using a slightly different frequency range which makes these units incompatible with systems intended for use in other areas, even from the same manufacturer. DECT has almost universally replaced other standards in most countries where it is used, with the exception of North America.\n\nDECT was originally intended for fast roaming between networked base stations and the first DECT product was Net wireless LAN. However, its most popular application is single-cell cordless phones connected to traditional analog telephone, primarily in home and small office systems, though gateways with multi-cell DECT and/or DECT repeaters are also available in many private branch exchange (PBX) systems for medium and large businesses produced by Panasonic, Mitel, Gigaset, Snom, BT Business, Spectralink, and RTX Telecom. DECT can also be used for purposes other than cordless phones, such as baby monitors and industrial sensors. The ULE Alliance's DECT ULE and its \"HAN FUN\" protocol are variants tailored for home security, automation, and the internet of things (IoT).\n\nThe DECT standard includes the generic access profile (GAP), a common interoperability profile for simple telephone capabilities, which most manufacturers implement. GAP-conformance enables DECT handsets and bases from different manufacturers to interoperate at the most basic level of functionality, that of making and receiving calls.\n\n\"New Generation DECT\" (NG-DECT) standard, marketed as CAT-iq by the DECT Forum, provides a common set of advanced capabilities for handsets and base stations. CAT-iq allows interchangeability across IP-DECT base stations and handsets from different manufacturers, while maintaining backward-compatibility with GAP equipment. It also requires mandatory support for wideband audio.\n\nThe DECT standard was developed by ETSI in several phases, the first of which took place between 1988 and 1992 when the first round of standards were published. These were the ETS 300-175 series in nine parts defining the air interface, and ETS 300-176 defining how the units should be type approved. A technical report, ETR-178, was also published to explain the standard. Subsequent standards were developed and published by ETSI to cover interoperability profiles and standards for testing.\n\nNamed \"Digital European Cordless Telephone\" at its launch by CEPT in November 1987; its name was soon changed to \"Digital European Cordless Telecommunications\", following a suggestion by Enrico Tosato of Italy, to reflect its broader range of application including data services. In 1995, due to its more global usage, the name was changed from \"European\" to \"Enhanced\". DECT is recognized by the ITU as fulfilling the IMT-2000 requirements and thus qualifies as a 3G system. Within the IMT-2000 group of technologies, DECT is referred to as \"IMT-2000 Frequency Time\" (IMT-FT).\n\nDECT was developed by ETSI but has since been adopted by many countries all over the World. The original DECT frequency band (1880–1900 MHz) is used in all countries in Europe. Outside Europe, it is used in most of Asia, Australia and South America. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission in 2005 changed channelization and licensing costs in a nearby band (1920–1930 MHz, or 1.9 GHz), known as Unlicensed Personal Communications Services (UPCS), allowing DECT devices to be sold in the U.S. with only minimal changes. These channels are reserved exclusively for voice communication applications and therefore are less likely to experience interference from other wireless devices such as baby monitors and wireless networks.\n\nThe New Generation DECT (NG-DECT) standard was first published in 2007; it was developed by ETSI with guidance from the Home Gateway Initiative through the DECT Forum to support IP-DECT functions in home gateway/IP-PBX equipment. The ETSI TS 102 527 series comes in five parts and covers wideband audio and mandatory interoperability features between handsets and base stations. They were preceded by an explanatory technical report, ETSI TR 102 570. The DECT Forum maintains the CAT-iq trademark and certification program; CAT-iq wideband voice profile 1.0 and interoperability profiles 2.0/2.1 are based on the relevant parts of ETSI TS 102 527.\n\nThe DECT Ultra Low Energy (DECT ULE) standard was announced in January 2011 and the first commercial products were launched later that year by Dialog Semiconductor. The standard was created to enable home automation, security, healthcare and energy monitoring applications that are battery powered. Like DECT, DECT ULE standard uses the 1.9 GHz band, and so suffers less interference than Zigbee, Bluetooth, or Wi-Fi from microwave ovens, which all operate in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz ISM band. DECT ULE uses a simple star network topology, so many devices in the home are connected to a single control unit.\n\nFuture revisions of the standard (tentatively termed DECT-2020) are expected to include high reliability low-latency DECT ULE for industry machine-to-machine application, high bitrate ultra reliable low latency protocols for professional wireless audio applications using point-to-point or multicast communications, high-throughput QAM-256 modulation; a long term evolution to OFDM (downlink) and OFDMA/SC-FDMA (uplink) modulation with a downlink rate of 1Gbit/s (tentatively termed DECT-5G) is being researched by the ETSI DECT committee. The effort aims to adopt the updated DECT protocols into the upcoming IMT-2020 standard, which defines Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications (URLLC), Massive Machine Type Communications (MMTC), and enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB) services.\n\nOpenD is an open-source framework designed to provide a complete software implementation of DECT ULE protocols on reference hardware from Dialog Semiconductor and DSP Group; the project is maintained by the DECT forum.\n\nThe DECT standard originally envisaged three major areas of application:\nBULLET::::- Domestic cordless telephony, using a single base station to connect one or more handsets to the public telecommunications network.\nBULLET::::- Enterprise premises cordless PABXs and wireless LANs, using many base stations for coverage. Calls continue as users move between different coverage cells, through a mechanism called handover. Calls can be both within the system and to the public telecommunications network.\nBULLET::::- Public access, using large numbers of base stations to provide high capacity building or urban area coverage as part of a public telecommunications network.\n\nOf these, the domestic application (cordless home telephones) has been extremely successful. The enterprise PABX market had some success, and all the major PABX vendors have offered DECT access options. The public access application did not succeed, since public cellular networks rapidly out-competed DECT by coupling their ubiquitous coverage with large increases in capacity and continuously falling costs. There has been only one major installation of DECT for public access: in early 1998 Telecom Italia launched a wide-area DECT network known as \"Fido\" after much regulatory delay, covering major cities in Italy. The service was promoted for only a few months and, having peaked at 142,000 subscribers, was shut down in 2001.\n\nDECT has been used for wireless local loop as a substitute for copper pairs in the \"last mile\" in countries such as India and South Africa. By using directional antennas and sacrificing some traffic capacity, cell coverage could extend to over . One example is the corDECT standard.\n\nThe first data application for DECT was Net wireless LAN system by Olivetti, launched in 1993 and discontinued in 1995. A precursor to Wi-Fi, Net was a micro-cellular data-only network with fast roaming between base stations and 520 kbit/s transmission rates.\n\nData applications such as electronic cash terminals, traffic lights, and remote door openers also exist, but have been eclipsed by Wi-Fi, 3G and 4G which compete with DECT for both voice and data.\n\nDECT 6.0 is a North American marketing term for DECT devices manufactured for the United States and Canada operating at 1.9 GHz. The \"6.0\" does not equate to a spectrum band; it was decided the term DECT 1.9 might have confused customers who equate larger numbers (such as the 2.4 and 5.8 in existing 2.4 GHz and 5.8 GHz cordless telephones) with later products. The term was coined by the DECT USA Working Group / Siemens ICM.\n\nIn North America, DECT suffers from deficiencies in comparison to DECT elsewhere, since the UPCS band (1920–1930 MHz) is not free from heavy interference. Bandwidth is half as wide as that used in Europe (1880–1900 MHz), the 4 mW average transmission power reduces range compared to the 10 mW permitted in Europe, and the commonplace lack of GAP compatibility among US vendors binds customers to a single vendor.\n\nBefore 1.9 GHz band was approved by the FCC in 2005, DECT could only operate in unlicensed Region 2\n2.4 GHz and 900 MHz ISM bands; some users of Uniden WDECT 2.4 GHz phones reported interoperability issues with Wi-Fi equipment.\n\nNorth-American products may not be used in Europe, Sri Lanka and Africa, as they cause and suffer from interference with the European, Sri Lankan and South African cellular networks. Use of such products is prohibited by European Telecommunications Authorities, Telecommunications Regulatory Commission of Sri Lanka and the Independent Communication Authority of South Africa. European DECT products may not be used in the United States and Canada, as they likewise cause and suffer from interference with American and Canadian cellular networks, and use is prohibited by the Federal Communications Commission and Industry Canada.\n\nDECT 8.0 HD is a marketing designation for North American DECT devices certified with CAT-iq 2.0 \"Multi Line\" profile.\n\nCordless Advanced Technology—internet and quality (CAT-iq) is a certification program maintained by the DECT Forum. It is based on \"New Generation DECT\" (NG-DECT) series of standards from ETSI.\n\nNG-DECT/CAT-iq contains features that expand the generic GAP profile with mandatory support for high quality wideband voice, enhanced security, calling party identification, multiple lines, parallel calls, and similar functions to facilitate VoIP calls through SIP and H.323 protocols.\n\nThere are several CAT-iq profiles which define supported voice features:\nBULLET::::- CAT-iq 1.0 – \"HD Voice\" (ETSI TS 102 527-1): wideband audio, calling party line and name identification (CLIP/CNAP)\nBULLET::::- CAT-iq 2.0 – \"Multi Line\" (ETSI TS 102 527-3): multiple lines, call waiting, call transfer, call intrusion, phonebook, caller list\nBULLET::::- CAT-iq 2.1 – \"Green\" (ETSI TS 102 527-5): 3-party conference, call intrusion, caller blocking (CLIR), answering machine control, SMS, power-management\nBULLET::::- CAT-iq Data – light data services, software upgrade over the air (SUOTA) (ETSI TS 102 527-4)\nBULLET::::- CAT-iq IOT – Smart Home connectivity (IOT) with DECT Ultra Low Energy (ETSI TS 102 939)\n\nCAT-iq allows any DECT handset to communicate with a DECT base from a different vendor, providing full interoperability. CAT-iq 2.0/2.1 feature set is designed to support IP-DECT base stations found in office IP-PBX and home gateways.\n\nThe DECT standard specifies a means for a portable phone or \"Portable Part\" to access a fixed telephone network via radio. Base station or \"Fixed Part\" is used to terminate the radio link and provide access to a fixed line. A gateway is then used to connect calls to the fixed network, such as public switched telephone network (telephone jack), office PBX, ISDN, or VoIP over Ethernet connection.\n\nTypical abilities of a domestic DECT Generic Access Profile (GAP) system include multiple handsets to one base station and one phone line socket. This allows several cordless telephones to be placed around the house, all operating from the same telephone jack. Additional handsets have a battery charger station that does not plug into the telephone system. Handsets can in many cases be used as intercoms, communicating between each other, and sometimes as walkie-talkies, intercommunicating without telephone line connection.\n\nDECT operates in the 1880–1900 MHz band and defines ten frequency channels from 1881.792 MHz to 1897.344 MHz with a band gap of 1728 kHz.\n\nDECT operates as a multicarrier frequency division multiple access (FDMA) and time division multiple access (TDMA) system. This means that the radio spectrum is divided into physical carriers in two dimensions: frequency and time. FDMA access provides up to 10 frequency channels, and TDMA access provides 24 time slots per every frame of 10ms. DECT uses time division duplex (TDD), which means that down- and uplink use the same frequency but different time slots. Thus a base station provides 12 duplex speech channels in each frame, with each time slot occupying any available channel – thus 10 × 12 = 120 carriers are available, each carrying 32 kbit/s.\n\nDECT also provides frequency-hopping spread spectrum over TDMA/TDD structure for ISM band applications. If frequency-hopping is avoided, each base station can provide up to 120 channels in the DECT spectrum before frequency reuse. Each timeslot can be assigned to a different channel in order to exploit advantages of frequency hopping and to avoid interference from other users in asynchronous fashion.\n\nDECT allows interference-free wireless operation to around outdoors, much less indoors when separated by walls. Operates clearly in common congested domestic radio traffic situations, for instance, generally immune to interference from other DECT systems, Wi-Fi networks, video senders, Bluetooth technology, baby monitors and other wireless devices.\n\nETSI standards documentation ETSI EN 300 175 parts 1–8 (DECT), ETSI EN 300 444 (GAP) and ETSI TS 102 527 parts 1–5 (NG-DECT) prescribe the following technical properties:\nBULLET::::- Audio codec:\nBULLET::::- mandatory:\nBULLET::::- 32kbit/s G.726 ADPCM (narrow band),\nBULLET::::- 64kbit/s G.722 sub-band ADPCM (wideband)\nBULLET::::- optional:\nBULLET::::- 64kbit/s G.711 μ-law/A-law PCM (narrow band),\nBULLET::::- 32kbit/s G.729.1 (wideband),\nBULLET::::- 32kbit/s MPEG-4 ER AAC-LD (wideband),\nBULLET::::- 64kbit/s MPEG-4 ER AAC-LD (super-wideband)\nBULLET::::- Frequency: the DECT physical layer specifies RF carriers for the frequency ranges 1880 MHz to 1980 MHz and 2010 MHz to 2025 MHz, as well as 902 MHz to 928 MHz and 2400 MHz to 2483,5 MHz ISM band with frequency-hopping for the U.S. market. The most common spectrum allocation is 1880 MHz to 1900 MHz; outside Europe, 1900 MHz to 1920 MHz and 1910 MHz to 1930 MHz spectrum is available in several countries.\nBULLET::::- in Europe, as well as South Africa, Asia, Hong Kong, Australia, and New Zealand\nBULLET::::- in Korea\nBULLET::::- in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- (J-DECT) in Japan\nBULLET::::- in China (until 2003)\nBULLET::::- in Brazil\nBULLET::::- in Latin America\nBULLET::::- (DECT 6.0) in the United States and Canada\nBULLET::::- Carriers (1.728 MHz spacing):\nBULLET::::- 10 channels in Europe and Latin America\nBULLET::::- 8 channels in Taiwan\nBULLET::::- 5 channels in the US, Brazil, Japan\nBULLET::::- 3 channels in Korea\nBULLET::::- Time slots: 2 × 12 (up and down stream)\nBULLET::::- Channel allocation: dynamic\nBULLET::::- Average transmission power: (250 mW peak) in Europe & Japan, 4 mW (100 mW peak) in the US\n\nThe DECT physical layer uses FDMA/TDMA access with TDD.\n\nGaussian frequency-shift keying (GFSK) modulation is used: the binary one is coded with a frequency increase by 288 kHz, and the binary zero with frequency decrease of 288 kHz. With high quality connections, 2-, 4- or 8-level Differential BPSK modulation (DBPSK, DQPSK or D8PSK), which is similar to QAM-2, QAM-4 and QAM-8, can be used to transmit 1, 2, or 3 bits per each symbol. QAM-16 and QAM-64 modulations with 4 and 8 bits per symbol can be used for user data (B-field) only, with resulting transmission speeds of up to 5,068Mbit/s.\n\nDECT provides dynamic channel selection and assignment; the choice of transmission frequency and time slot is always made by the mobile terminal. In case of interference in the selected frequency channel, the mobile terminal (possibly from suggestion by the base station) can initiate either intracell handover, selecting another channel/transmitter on the same base, or intercell handover, selecting a different base station altogether. For this purpose, DECT devices scan all idle channels at regular 30s intervals to generate a received signal strength indication (RSSI) list. When a new channel is required, the mobile terminal (PP) or base station (FP) selects a channel with the minimum interference from the RSSI list.\n\nThe maximum allowed power for portable equipment as well as base stations is 250 mW. A portable device radiates an average of about 10 mW during a call as it is only using one of 24 time slots to transmit. In Europe, the power limit was expressed as effective radiated power (ERP), rather than the more commonly used equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP), permitting the use of high-gain directional antennas to produce much higher EIRP and hence long ranges.\n\nThe DECT media access control layer controls the physical layer and provides connection oriented, connectionless and broadcast services to the higher layers.\n\nThe DECT data link layer uses Link Access Protocol Control (LAPC), a specially designed variant of the ISDN data link protocol called LAPD. They are based on HDLC.\n\nGFSK modulation uses a bit rate of 1152 kbit/s, with a frame of 10ms (11520bits) which contains 24 time slots. Each slots contains 480 bits, some of which are reserved for physical packets and the rest is guard space. Slots 0–11 are always used for downlink (FP to PP) and slots 12–23 are used for uplink (PP to FP).\n\nThere are several combinations of slots and corresponding types of physical packets with GFSK modulation:\nBULLET::::- Basic packet (P32) – 420 or 424 bits \"full slot\", used for normal speech transmission. User data (B-field) contains 320 bits.\nBULLET::::- Low-capacity packet (P00) – 96 bits at the beginning of the time slot (\"short slot\"). This packet only contains 64-bit header (A-field) used as a dummy bearer to broadcast base station identification when idle.\nBULLET::::- Variable capacity packet (P00\"j\") – 100 + \"j\" or 104 + \"j\" bits, either two half-slots (0 ≤ \"j\" ≤ 136) or \"long slot\" (137 ≤ \"j\" ≤ 856). User data (B-field) contains \"j\" bits.\nBULLET::::- P64 (\"j\" = 640), P67 (\"j\" = 672) – \"long slot\", used by NG-DECT/CAT-iq wideband voice and data.\nBULLET::::- High-capacity packet (P80) – 900 or 904 bits, \"double slot\". This packet uses two time slots and always begins in an even time slot. The B-field is increased to 800 bits..\n\nThe 420/424 bits of a GFSK basic packet (P32) contain the following fields:\nBULLET::::- 32 bits – synchronization code (S-field): constant bit string AAAAE98AH for FP transmission, 55551675H for PP transmission\nBULLET::::- 388 bits – data (D-field), including\nBULLET::::- 64 bits – header (A-field): control traffic in logical channels C, M, N, P, and Q\nBULLET::::- 320 bits – user data (B-field): DECT payload, i.e. voice data\nBULLET::::- 4 bits – error-checking (X-field): CRC of the B-field\nBULLET::::- 4 bits – collision detection/channel quality (Z-field): optional, contains a copy of the X-field\n\nThe resulting full data rate is 32 kbit/s, available in both directions.\n\nThe DECT network layer always contains the following protocol entities:\nBULLET::::- Call Control (CC)\nBULLET::::- Mobility Management (MM)\n\nOptionally it may also contain others:\nBULLET::::- Call Independent Supplementary Services (CISS)\nBULLET::::- Connection Oriented Message Service (COMS)\nBULLET::::- Connectionless Message Service (CLMS)\n\nAll these communicate through a Link Control Entity (LCE).\n\nThe call control protocol is derived from ISDN DSS1, which is a Q.931-derived protocol. Many DECT-specific changes have been made.\n\nThe mobility management protocol includes the management of identities, authentication, location updating, on-air subscription and key allocation. It includes many elements similar to the GSM protocol, but also includes elements unique to DECT.\n\nUnlike the GSM protocol, the DECT network specifications do not define cross-linkages between the operation of the entities (for example, Mobility Management and Call Control). The architecture presumes that such linkages will be designed into the interworking unit that connects the DECT access network to whatever mobility-enabled fixed network is involved. By keeping the entities separate, the handset is capable of responding to any combination of entity traffic, and this creates great flexibility in fixed network design without breaking full interoperability.\n\nDECT GAP is an interoperability profile for DECT. The intent is that two different products from different manufacturers that both conform not only to the DECT standard, but also to the GAP profile defined within the DECT standard, are able to interoperate for basic calling. The DECT standard includes full testing suites for GAP, and GAP products on the market from different manufacturers are in practice interoperable for the basic functions.\n\nThe DECT media access control layer includes authentication of handsets to the base station using the DECT Standard Authentication Algorithm (DSAA). When registering the handset on the base, both record a shared 128-bit Unique Authentication Key (UAK). The base can request authentication by sending two random numbers to the handset, which calculates the response using the shared 128-bit key. The handset can also request authentication by sending a 64-bit random number to the base, which chooses a second random number, calculates the response using the shared key, and sends it back with the second random number.\n\nThe standard also provides encryption services with the DECT Standard Cipher (DSC). The encryption is fairly weak, using a 35-bit initialization vector and encrypting the voice stream with 64-bit encryption. While most of the DECT standard is publicly available, the part describing the DECT Standard Cipher was only available under a non-disclosure agreement to the phones' manufacturers from ETSI.\n\nThe properties of the DECT protocol make it hard to intercept a frame, modify it and send it later again, as DECT frames are based on time-division multiplexing and need to be transmitted at a specific point in time. Unfortunately very few DECT devices on the market implemented authentication and encryption procedures – and even when encryption was used by the phone, it was possible to implement a man-in-the-middle attack impersonating a DECT base station and revert to unencrypted mode – which allows calls to be listened to, recorded, and re-routed to a different destination.\n\nAfter an unverified report of a successful attack in 2002, members of the deDECTed.org project actually did reverse engineer the DECT Standard Cipher in 2008, and as of 2010 there has been a viable attack on it that can recover the key.\n\nIn 2012, an improved authentication algorithm, the DECT Standard Authentication Algorithm 2 (DSAA2), and improved version of the encryption algorithm, the DECT Standard Cipher 2 (DSC2), both based on AES 128-bit encryption, were included as optional in the NG-DECT/CAT-iq suite.\n\nDECT Forum also launched the DECT Security certification program which mandates the use of previously optional security features in the GAP profile, such as early encryption and base authentication.\n\nVarious access profiles have been defined in the DECT standard:\nBULLET::::- Public Access Profile (PAP) (deprecated)\nBULLET::::- Generic Access Profile (GAP) - ETSI EN 300 444\nBULLET::::- Cordless Terminal Mobility (CTM) Access Profile (CAP) - ETSI EN 300 824\nBULLET::::- Data access profiles\nBULLET::::- DECT Packet Radio System (DPRS) - ETSI EN 301 649\nBULLET::::- DECT Multimedia Access Profile (DMAP)\nBULLET::::- Multimedia in the Local Loop Access Profile (MRAP)\nBULLET::::- Open Data Access Profile (ODAP)\nBULLET::::- Radio in the Local Loop (RLL) Access Profile (RAP) - ETSI ETS 300 765\nBULLET::::- Interworking profiles (IWP)\nBULLET::::- DECT/ISDN Interworking Profile (IIP) - ETSI EN 300 434\nBULLET::::- DECT/GSM Interworking Profile (GIP) - ETSI EN 301 242\nBULLET::::- DECT/UMTS Interworking Profile (UIP) - ETSI TS 101 863\n\nOther interoperability profiles exist in the DECT suite of standards, and in particular the DPRS (DECT Packet Radio Services) bring together a number of prior interoperability profiles for the use of DECT as a wireless LAN and wireless internet access service. With good range (up to indoors and using directional antennae outdoors), dedicated spectrum, high interference immunity, open interoperability and data speeds of around 500 kbit/s, DECT appeared at one time to be a superior alternative to Wi-Fi. The protocol capabilities built into the DECT networking protocol standards were particularly good at supporting fast roaming in the public space, between hotspots operated by competing but connected providers. The first DECT product to reach the market, Olivetti's Net, was a wireless LAN, and German firms Dosch & Amand and Hoeft & Wessel built niche businesses on the supply of data transmission systems based on DECT.\n\nHowever, the timing of the availability of DECT, in the mid-1990s, was too early to find wide application for wireless data outside niche industrial applications. Whilst contemporary providers of Wi-Fi struggled with the same issues, providers of DECT retreated to the more immediately lucrative market for cordless telephones. A key weakness was also the inaccessibility of the U.S. market, due to FCC spectrum restrictions at that time. By the time mass applications for wireless Internet had emerged, and the U.S. had opened up to DECT, well into the new century, the industry had moved far ahead in terms of performance and DECT's time as a technically competitive wireless data transport had passed.\n\nDECT uses UHF radio, similar to mobile phones, baby monitors, Wi-Fi, and other cordless telephone technologies. The UK Health Protection Agency (HPA) claims that due to a mobile phone's adaptive power ability, a DECT cordless phone's radiation could actually exceed the radiation of a mobile phone. A DECT cordless phone's radiation has an average output power of 10 mW but is in the form of 100 bursts per second of 250 mW, a strength comparable to some mobile phones.\nMost studies have been unable to demonstrate any link to health effects, or have been inconclusive. Electromagnetic fields may have an effect on protein expression in laboratory settings but have not yet been demonstrated to have clinically significant effects in real-world settings. The World Health Organization has issued a statement on medical effects of mobile phones which acknowledges that the longer term effects (over several decades) require further research.\n\nBULLET::::- Cordless telephone\nBULLET::::- CAT-iq\nBULLET::::- Generic access profile (GAP)\nBULLET::::- GSM Interworking Profile (GIP)\nBULLET::::- IP-DECT\nBULLET::::- CT2 (DECT's predecessor in Europe)\nBULLET::::- Net\nBULLET::::- CorDECT\nBULLET::::- WDECT\nBULLET::::- Unlicensed Personal Communications Services\nBULLET::::- Microcell\nBULLET::::- Wireless local loop\n\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175 V2.7.1 (2017-11). Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT) – Common Interface (CI):\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-1. Part 1: Overview\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-2. Part 2: Physical Layer (PHL)\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-3. Part 3: Medium Access Control (MAC) layer\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-4. Part 4: Data Link Control (DLC) layer\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-5. Part 5: Network (NWK) layer\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-6. Part 6: Identities and addressing\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-7. Part 7: Security features\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 175-8. Part 8: Speech and audio coding and transmission\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 939 (2017-10). Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT) – Ultra Low Energy (ULE) – Machine to Machine Communications:\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 939-1 V1.3.1. Part 1: Home Automation Network (phase 1)\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 939-2 V1.2.1. Part 2: Home Automation Network (phase 2)\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 527. Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT) – New Generation DECT:\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 527-1 V1.4.1 (2014-04). Part 1: Wideband speech\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 527-2 V1.1.1 (2007-06). Part 2: Support of transparent IP packet data\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 527-3 V1.6.1 (2014-01). Part 3: Extended wideband speech services\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 527-4 V1.3.1 (2015-11). Part 4: Light Data Services; Software Update Over The Air (SUOTA), content downloading and HTTP based applications\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 527-5 V1.2.1 (2014-01). Part 5: Additional feature set nr. 1 for extended wideband speech services\nBULLET::::- Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT):\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 444 V2.5.1 (2017-10). Generic Access Profile (GAP)\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 824 V1.3.1 (2001-08). Cordless Terminal Mobility (CTM) – CTM Access Profile (CAP)\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 700 V2.1.1 (2016-11). Wireless Relay Station (WRS)\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 301 649 V2.3.1 (2015-03). DECT Packet Radio Service (DPRS)\nBULLET::::- ETSI EN 300 757 V1.5.1 (2004-09). Low Rate Messaging Service (LRMS) including Short Messaging Service (SMS)\nBULLET::::- Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications (DECT) – New Generation DECT\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 841 V1.5.1 (2014-01). Extended wideband speech services – Profile Test Specification (PTS) and Test Case Library (TCL)\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 102 843 V1.1.1 (2014-01). Additional feature set nr.1 for extended wideband speech services; Profile Test Specification (PTS) and Test Case Library (TCL)\nBULLET::::- ETSI TS 103 158 V1.1.1 (2014-11). Light Data Services – Software Update Over The Air (SUOTA) – Profile Test Specification (PTS) and Test Case Library (TCL)\n\nBULLET::::- Technical Report: Multicell Networks based on DECT and CAT-iq. Dosch & Amand Research\n\nBULLET::::- DECT Forum at dect.org\nBULLET::::- DECT information at ETSI\nBULLET::::- DECTWeb.com\nBULLET::::- Open source implementation of a DECT stack\n"}
{"id": "8676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8676", "title": "Dhyāna", "text": "Dhyāna\n\nDhyāna may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Dhyāna in Buddhism (Pāli: \"jhāna\")\nBULLET::::- Dhyāna in Hinduism\nBULLET::::- Jain Dhyāna, see Jain meditation\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dhyana\", a work by British composer John Tavener (1944-2013)\nBULLET::::- \"Dhyana\" (MaYaN album), 2018\nBULLET::::- Hygon Dhyana, a x86 compatible microprocessor\n"}
{"id": "8677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8677", "title": "December 30", "text": "December 30\n\nBULLET::::- 999 – Battle of Glenmama: The combined forces of Munster and Meath under king Brian Boru inflict a crushing defeat on the allied armies of Leinster and Dublin near Lyons Hill in Ireland.\nBULLET::::- 1066 – Granada massacre: A Muslim mob storms the royal palace in Granada, crucifies Jewish vizier Joseph ibn Naghrela and massacres most of the Jewish population of the city.\nBULLET::::- 1419 – Hundred Years' War: Battle of La Rochelle\nBULLET::::- 1460 – Wars of the Roses: Lancastrians kill the 3rd Duke of York and win the Battle of Wakefield.\nBULLET::::- 1702 – Queen Anne's War: James Moore, Governor of the Province of Carolina, abandons the Siege of St. Augustine.\nBULLET::::- 1813 – War of 1812: British soldiers burn Buffalo, New York.\nBULLET::::- 1816 – The Treaty of St. Louis between the United States and the united Ottawa, Ojibwa, and Potawatomi Indian tribes is proclaimed.\nBULLET::::- 1825 – The Treaty of St. Louis between the United States and the Shawnee Nation is proclaimed.\nBULLET::::- 1853 – Gadsden Purchase: The United States buys land from Mexico to facilitate railroad building in the Southwest.\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Following the Wounded Knee Massacre, the United States Army and Lakota warriors face off in the Drexel Mission Fight.\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Filipino patriot and reform advocate José Rizal is executed by a Spanish firing squad in Manila.\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Canadian ice hockey player Ernie McLea scores the first hat-trick in Stanley Cup play, and the Cup-winning goal as the Montreal Victorias defeat the Winnipeg Victorias 6–5.\nBULLET::::- 1897 – The British Colony of Natal annexes Zululand.\nBULLET::::- 1903 – A fire at the Iroquois Theater in Chicago, Illinois kills at least 605.\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Former Idaho Governor Frank Steunenberg is assassinated at the front gate of his home in Caldwell.\nBULLET::::- 1906 – The All-India Muslim League is founded in Dacca, East Bengal, British India (later Dhaka, Bangladesh).\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Russian mystic and advisor to the Tsar Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin was murdered by a loyalist group led by Prince Felix Yusupov. His frozen, partially-trussed body was discovered in a Moscow river three days later.\nBULLET::::- 1916 – The last coronation in Hungary is performed for King Charles IV and Queen Zita.\nBULLET::::- 1922 – The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is formed.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – The Ginza Line, the first subway line in Asia, opens in Tokyo, Japan.\nBULLET::::- 1935 – The Italian Air Force bombs a Swedish Red Cross hospital during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War.\nBULLET::::- 1936 – The United Auto Workers union stages its first sitdown strike.\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Subhas Chandra Bose raises the flag of Indian independence at Port Blair.\nBULLET::::- 1944 – King George II of Greece declares a regency, leaving the throne vacant.\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Cold War: King Michael I of Romania is forced to abdicate by the Soviet Union-backed Communist government of Romania.\nBULLET::::- 1958 – The Guatemalan Air Force sinks several Mexican fishing boats alleged to have breached maritime borders, killing three and sparking international tension.\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Ferdinand Marcos becomes President of the Philippines.\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Vietnam War: The United States halts heavy bombing of North Vietnam.\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Israel establishes diplomatic relations with Vatican City and also upgrades to full diplomatic relations with Ireland.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Proposed budget cuts by Benjamin Netanyahu spark protests from 250,000 workers who shut down services across Israel.\nBULLET::::- 1997 – In the worst incident in Algeria's insurgency, the Wilaya of Relizane massacres, 400 people from four villages are killed.\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Rizal Day bombings: A series of bombs explode in various places in Metro Manila, Philippines within a period of a few hours, killing 22 and injuring about a hundred.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – A fire in the República Cromagnon nightclub in Buenos Aires, Argentina kills 194.\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Tropical Storm Zeta forms in the open Atlantic Ocean, tying the record for the latest tropical cyclone ever to form in the North Atlantic basin.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Madrid–Barajas Airport is bombed.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – The Indonesian passenger ferry sinks in a storm, resulting in at least 400 deaths.\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Former President of Iraq Saddam Hussein is executed.\nBULLET::::- 2009 – A segment of the Lanzhou–Zhengzhou–Changsha pipeline ruptures in Shaanxi, China, and approximately of diesel oil flows down the Wei River before finally reaching the Yellow River.\nBULLET::::- 2009 – A suicide bomber kills nine people at Forward Operating Base Chapman, a key facility of the Central Intelligence Agency in Afghanistan.\nBULLET::::- 2013 – More than 100 people are killed when anti-government forces attack key buildings in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.\n\nBULLET::::- AD 39 – Titus, Roman emperor (d. 81)\nBULLET::::- 159 – Empress Dowager Bian, second wife of Cao Cao, mother of Cao Wei's first emperor, Cao Pi (d. 230)\nBULLET::::- 1204 – Abû 'Uthmân Sa'îd ibn Hakam al Qurashi, ruler of Minorca (d. 1282)\nBULLET::::- 1371 – Vasily I of Moscow (d. 1425)\nBULLET::::- 1490 – Ebussuud Efendi, Ottoman lawyer and jurist (d. 1574)\nBULLET::::- 1548 – David Pareus, German theologian (d. 1622)\nBULLET::::- 1578 – Ulrik of Denmark, Danish prince-bishop (d. 1624)\nBULLET::::- 1642 – Vincenzo da Filicaja, Italian poet (d. 1707)\nBULLET::::- 1673 – Ahmed III, Ottoman sultan (d. 1736)\nBULLET::::- 1678 – William Croft, English organist and composer (d. 1727)\nBULLET::::- 1722 – Charles Yorke, English lawyer and politician, Lord Chancellor of Great Britain (d. 1770)\nBULLET::::- 1724 – Louis-Jean-François Lagrenée, French painter and educator (d. 1805)\nBULLET::::- 1760 – Charles Sapinaud de La Rairie, French general (d. 1829)\nBULLET::::- 1792 – Sylvester Jordan, German lawyer and politician (d. 1861)\nBULLET::::- 1819 – Theodor Fontane, German author and poet (d. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1819 – John W. Geary, American lawyer and politician, 16th Governor of Pennsylvania (d. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1825 – Samuel Newitt Wood, American lawyer and politician (d. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1842 – Osman Hamdi Bey, Ottoman administrator, intellectual, art expert and painter (d. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1849 – John Milne, English seismologist and geologist (d. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1851 – Asa Griggs Candler, American businessman and politician, 44th Mayor of Atlanta (d. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1853 – André Messager, French pianist, composer, and conductor (d. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1857 – Sylvio Lazzari, French-Austrian composer (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1865 – Rudyard Kipling, Indian-English author and poet, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Stephen Leacock, English-Canadian political scientist and author (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1869 – Ōzutsu Man'emon, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 18th Yokozuna (d. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1873 – Al Smith, American lawyer and politician, 42nd Governor of New York (d. 1944)\nBULLET::::- 1878 – William Aberhart, Canadian evangelist and politician, 7th Premier of Alberta (d. 1943)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Ramana Maharshi, Indian guru and philosopher (d. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Archer Baldwin, American-English farmer and politician (d. 1966)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Lester Patrick, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1884 – Hideki Tōjō, Japanese general and politician, 40th Prime Minister of Japan (d. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 1887 – William Kolehmainen, Finnish-American runner and coach (d. 1967)\nBULLET::::- 1890 – Adolfo Ruiz Cortines, Mexican soldier and politician, 47th President of Mexico (1952-1958) who granted women the right to vote. (d. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 1897 – Alfredo Bracchi, Italian songwriter and screenwriter (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1899 – Helge Ingstad, Norwegian explorer, lawyer, and politician, 2nd Governor of Svalbard (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – Dmitry Kabalevsky, Russian composer and academic (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Daniil Kharms, Russian poet, author, and playwright (d. 1942)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Alziro Bergonzo, Italian architect and painter (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Carol Reed, English director and producer (d. 1976)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Paul Bowles, American composer and author (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Jeanette Nolan, American actress (d. 1998)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Lucio Agostini, Italian-Canadian conductor and composer (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1913 – Elyne Mitchell, Australian author (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Bert Parks, American actor, singer, television personality, and beauty pageant host (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Seymour Melman, American engineer and author (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Dick Spooner, English cricketer (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – David Willcocks, English organist, composer, and conductor (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1921 – Rashid Karami, Lebanese lawyer and politician, 32nd Prime Minister of Lebanon (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1922 – Jane Langton, American author and illustrator (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Prakash Vir Shastri, Indian academic and politician (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Yvonne Brill, Canadian-American propulsion engineer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Ian MacNaughton, Scottish actor, producer, and director (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Stan Tracey, English pianist and composer (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Jan Kubíček, Czech painter and sculptor (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Bo Diddley, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2008)\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Rosalinde Hurley, English physician, microbiologist, and academic (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Roy Yorke Calne, English surgeon and academic\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Red Rhodes, American guitarist (d. 1995)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Mary Rose Tuitt, Montserrat politician (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Tu Youyou, Chinese chemist and pharmacist, Nobel Prize laureate\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Skeeter Davis, American singer-songwriter (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – John T. Houghton, Welsh physicist and author\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Frank Torre, American baseball player and manager (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Timité Bassori, Ivorian filmmaker, actor, and writer\nBULLET::::- 1934 – John N. Bahcall, American astrophysicist and astronomer, co-developed the Hubble Space Telescope (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Joseph Bologna, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 2017)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Barry Briggs, New Zealand motorcycle racer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Joseph P. Hoar, American general\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Del Shannon, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1990)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Russ Tamblyn, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Omar Bongo, Gabonese lieutenant and politician, President of Gabon (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Sandy Koufax, American baseball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Jack Riley, American actor (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Gordon Banks, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1937 – John Hartford, American singer-songwriter and fiddler (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Jim Marshall, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Paul Stookey, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Ron Wolf, American Football Hall of Fame General Manager\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Glenda Adams, Australian author and academic (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Felix Pappalardi, American singer-songwriter, bass player, and producer (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – James Burrows, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Mel Renfro, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Vladimir Bukovsky, Russian author and activist\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Guy Edwards, English race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Michael Nesmith, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Janko Prunk, Slovenian historian, academic, and politician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Robert Quine, American guitarist (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Toomas Savi, Estonian physician and politician\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Fred Ward, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1944 – William J. Fallon, American admiral\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Joseph Hilbe, American mathematician and philosopher\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Davy Jones, English singer-songwriter and actor (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Lloyd Kaufman, American director, producer, and screenwriter, co-founded Troma Entertainment\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Paola Pigni, Italian runner\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Concetta Tomei, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Clive Bunker, English drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Patti Smith, American singer-songwriter and poet\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Berti Vogts, German footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1947 – James Kahn, American author, screenwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Jeff Lynne, English singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Steve Mix, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Jed Johnson, American interior designer and director (d. 1996)\nBULLET::::- 1949 – David Bedford, English runner\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Jim Flaherty, Canadian lawyer and politician, 37th Canadian Minister of Finance (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Timothy Mo, Chinese-English author\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Lewis Shiner, American journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Bjarne Stroustrup, Danish computer scientist, created the C++ programming language\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Martti Vainio, Finnish runner\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Doug Allder, English footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Chris Jasper, American musician, singer-songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Nick Rose, English runner\nBULLET::::- 1952 – June Anderson, American soprano and actress\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Daniel T. Barry, American engineer and astronaut\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Dana Key, American singer, guitarist, and producer (d. 2010)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Graham Vick, English director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Meredith Vieira, American journalist and game show host\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Barry Greenstein, American poker player and philanthropist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Ingus Baušķenieks, Latvian singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Suzy Bogguss, American country singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Patricia Kalember, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Sheryl Lee Ralph, American actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Matt Lauer, American television journalist and anchor\nBULLET::::- 1957 – Glenn Robbins, Australian comedian and actor\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Pedro Costa, Portuguese director, screenwriter, and cinematographer\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Steven Smith, American engineer and astronaut\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Antonio Pappano, English pianist and conductor\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Kåre Thomsen, Norwegian guitarist and graphic designer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Tracey Ullman, English-American actress, singer, director, and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Josée Verner, Canadian politician, 8th Canadian Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Richard M. Durbin, English biologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Douglas Coupland, German-Canadian author and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Bill English, New Zealand farmer and politician, 39th Prime Minister of New Zealand\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Sean Hannity, American radio and television host\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Ben Johnson, Jamaican-Canadian sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Charlie Nicholas, Scottish footballer and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Chandler Burr, American journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Milan Šrejber, Czech tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Mike Pompeo, American diplomat and politician; 70th United States Secretary of State\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Almir Kayumov, Russian footballer and referee (d. 2013)\nBULLET::::- 1964 – Sylvie Moreau, Canadian actress and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1964 – George Newbern, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Heidi Fleiss, American procurer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Gary Chartier, American philosopher, scholar, and academic\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Bennett Miller, American director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Carl Ouellet, Canadian wrestler and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Bryan Burk, American screenwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Adam Dale, Australian cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Sandra Glover, American hurdler\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Albano Mucci, Australian champion\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Emmanuel Clérico, French race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Dave England, American snowboarder and stuntman\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Kersti Kaljulaid, President of Estonia\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Michelle McGann, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Meredith Monroe, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Sister Bliss, English keyboard player, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1971 – C. S. Lee, Korean-American actor\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Ricardo, Spanish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Daniel Amokachi, Nigerian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Paul Keegan, Irish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Dita Indah Sari, Indonesian trade union leader and activist\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Steven Wiig, American actor and drummer\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Jason Behr, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Ato Boldon, Trinidadian runner, sportscaster, and politician\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Alexandro Alves do Nascimento, Brazilian footballer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Scott Chipperfield, Australian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Tiger Woods, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Kastro, American rapper\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Patrick Kerney, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1976 – A. J. Pierzynski, American baseball player and sportscaster\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Laila Ali, American boxer and actress\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Glory Alozie, Nigerian-Spanish sprinter and hurdler\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Grant Balfour, Australian baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Saša Ilić, Serbian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Scott Lucas, Australian footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Kenyon Martin, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Lucy Punch, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Kazuyuki Toda, Japanese footballer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Devin Brown, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Tyrese Gibson, American singer-songwriter, producer, and actor\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Phillips Idowu, English triple jumper\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Zbigniew Robert Promiński, Polish drummer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Rob Scuderi, American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Michael Grimm, American singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Yelawolf, American rapper, singer, songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Eliza Dushku, American actress and producer\nBULLET::::- 1980 – D. J. Mbenga, Congolese-Belgian basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Alison McGovern, English politician\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Cédric Carrasso, French footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Ali Al-Habsi, Omani footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Michael Rodríguez, Costa Rican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Matt Ulrich, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Kristin Kreuk, Canadian actress\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Tobias Kurbjuweit, German footballer\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Dawan Landry, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Dathan Ritzenhein, American runner\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Davide Mandorlini, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Eddie Edwards, American professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Nick Symmonds, American runner\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Kevin Systrom, American computer programmer and businessman, co-founded Instagram\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Randall Azofeifa, Costa Rican footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – LeBron James, American basketball player, producer and businessman\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Lars Boom, Dutch cyclist\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Bryson Goodwin, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Joseph H. H. Howard, American martial artist, writer, activist, and Civil Air Patrol soldier\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Domenico Criscito, Italian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Ellie Goulding, English singer-songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Gianni Zuiverloon, Dutch footballer\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Caity Lotz, American actress\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Ryan Sheckler, American skateboarder and entrepreneur\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Kateřina Vaňková, Czech tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Joe Root, English cricketer\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Bruno Henrique Pinto, Brazilian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Camila Giorgi, Italian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Ryan Tunnicliffe, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Carson Wentz, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1995 – V, South Korean singer and actor\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Brad Abbey, New Zealand rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 274 – Pope Felix I\nBULLET::::- 717 – Egwin of Evesham, bishop of Worcester\nBULLET::::- 903 – Tian Jun, Chinese warlord (b. 858)\nBULLET::::- 925 – Wang Shenzhi, founder of Min (b. 862)\nBULLET::::- 1115 – Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine\nBULLET::::- 1331 – Bernard Gui, inquisitor (b. 1261 or 1262)\nBULLET::::- 1435 – Bonne of Berry, Regent of Savoy (b. 1362)\nBULLET::::- 1436 – Louis III, Elector Palatine (b. 1378)\nBULLET::::- 1460 – Edmund, Earl of Rutland, Irish politician, Lord Chancellor of Ireland (b. 1443)\nBULLET::::- 1460 – Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York (b. 1411)\nBULLET::::- 1525 – Jakob Fugger, German banker and businessman (b. 1459)\nBULLET::::- 1572 – Galeazzo Alessi, Italian architect, designed the Basilica of Santa Maria degli Angeli (b. 1512)\nBULLET::::- 1573 – Giovanni Battista Giraldi, Italian author and poet (b. 1504)\nBULLET::::- 1591 – Pope Innocent IX (b. 1519)\nBULLET::::- 1621 – Job of Manyava, Ukrainian monk and saint (b. 1550)\nBULLET::::- 1640 – John Francis Regis, French priest and saint (b. 1597)\nBULLET::::- 1643 – Giovanni Baglione, Italian painter and historian of art (b. 1566)\nBULLET::::- 1644 – Jan Baptist van Helmont, Flemish chemist, physiologist, and physician (b. 1577)\nBULLET::::- 1662 – Ferdinand Charles, Archduke of Austria (b. 1628)\nBULLET::::- 1769 – Nicholas Taaffe, 6th Viscount Taaffe, Irish-Austrian soldier and courtier (b. 1685)\nBULLET::::- 1777 – Maximilian III Joseph, Elector of Bavaria (b. 1727)\nBULLET::::- 1788 – Francesco Zuccarelli, Italian painter and academic (b. 1702)\nBULLET::::- 1803 – Francis Lewis, Welsh-American merchant and politician (b. 1713)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Manuel de Araújo Porto-Alegre, Baron of Santo Ângelo, Brazilian poet and painter (b. 1806)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – José Rizal, Filipino ophthalmologist, journalist, and author (b. 1861)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Josephine Butler, English feminist and social reformer (b. 1828)\nBULLET::::- 1908 – Thomas-Alfred Bernier, Canadian journalist, lawyer, and politician (b. 1844)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Grigori Rasputin, Russian mystic (b. 1869)\nBULLET::::- 1928 – Jean Collas, French rugby player and tug of war competitor (b. 1874)\nBULLET::::- 1937 – Hans Niels Andersen, Danish businessman, founded the East Asiatic Company (b. 1852)\nBULLET::::- 1940 – Childe Wills, American engineer (b. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – El Lissitzky, Russian photographer and architect (b. 1890)\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Romain Rolland, French author and playwright, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1945 – Song Jin-woo, South Korean journalist and politician (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Han van Meegeren, Dutch painter (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Alfred North Whitehead, English-American mathematician and philosopher (b. 1861)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Archduke Eugen of Austria (b. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Rex Ingamells, Australian poet and author (b. 1913)\nBULLET::::- 1967 – Vincent Massey, Canadian lawyer and politician, 18th Governor General of Canada (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Trygve Lie, Norwegian journalist and politician, 1st Secretary-General of the United Nations (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Sonny Liston, American boxer (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Jo Cals, Dutch lawyer and politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Vikram Sarabhai, Indian physicist and academic (b. 1919)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Richard Rodgers, American playwright and composer (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Alberto Vargas, Peruvian-American painter and illustrator (b. 1896)\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Violette Cordery, English race car driver (b. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Era Bell Thompson, American journalist (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Yuli Daniel, Russian author and poet (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Isamu Noguchi, American sculptor and landscaper (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Raghuvir Sahay, Indian author, poet, and critic (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Romeo Muller, American actor, screenwriter, for screenplays like the 1964, Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer (TV special) (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – İhsan Sabri Çağlayangil, Turkish lawyer and politician, 20th Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Irving \"Swifty\" Lazar, American talent agent (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Giuseppe Occhialini, Italian-French physicist and academic (b. 1907)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Dmitri Ivanenko, Ukrainian-Russian physicist and academic (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Ralph Flanagan, American pianist, composer, and conductor (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Doris Grau, American voice actor and script supervisor (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Lew Ayres, American actor (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Shinichi Hoshi, Japanese author and illustrator (b. 1926)\nBULLET::::- 1998 – Sam Muchnick, American wrestling promoter, co-founded the National Wrestling Alliance (b. 1905)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Joff Ellen, Australian comedian and actor (b. 1915)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Fritz Leonhardt, German engineer, co-designed the Cologne Rodenkirchen Bridge and Fernsehturm Stuttgart (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Des Renford, Australian swimmer (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Sarah Knauss, American supercentenarian (b. 1880)\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Julius J. Epstein, American screenwriter and producer (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Mary Brian, American actress (b. 1906)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Eleanor J. Gibson, American psychologist and academic (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Mary Wesley, English author (b. 1912)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – John Gregory Dunne, American novelist, screenwriter, and critic (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Artie Shaw, American clarinet player, composer, and bandleader (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Eddie Barlow, South African cricketer and coach (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Rona Jaffe, American novelist (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Saddam Hussein, Iraqi general and politician, 5th President of Iraq (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Terry Peck, Falkland Islander police officer and spy (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2006 – Michel Plasse, Canadian ice hockey player (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Rowland S. Howard, Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1959)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Abdurrahman Wahid, Indonesian journalist and politician, 4th President of Indonesia (b. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 2010 – Bobby Farrell, Dutch dancer and performer from Aruba (b. 1949)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Ronald Searle, English-French cartoonist (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Philip Coppens, Belgian-American journalist and author (b. 1971)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Beate Sirota Gordon, Austrian-American director and producer (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Rita Levi-Montalcini, Italian neurologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Carl Woese, American microbiologist and biophysicist (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Dennis Ferguson, Australian sex offender (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Kinnaird R. McKee, American admiral (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – José María Maguregui, Spanish footballer and manager (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Eiichi Ohtaki, Japanese singer-songwriter and producer (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Johnny Orr, American basketball player and coach (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Paul Sally, American mathematician and academic (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Terry Becker, American actor, director, and producer (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Jim Galloway, Scottish-Canadian clarinet player and saxophonist (b. 1936)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Luise Rainer, German-born American-British actress (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Doug Atkins, American football player (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Howard Davis, Jr., American boxer and trainer (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Mangesh Padgaonkar, Indian poet, playwright, and translator (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Howard Pawley, Canadian lawyer and politician, 18th Premier of Manitoba (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2017 – Erica Garner, American civil rights activist (b. 1990)\n\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Abraham the Writer\nBULLET::::- Anysia of Salonika\nBULLET::::- Egwin of Evesham\nBULLET::::- Frances Joseph-Gaudet (Episcopal Church)\nBULLET::::- Liberius of Ravenna\nBULLET::::- Pope Felix I\nBULLET::::- Ralph of Vaucelles\nBULLET::::- Roger of Cannae\nBULLET::::- December 30 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Day of the Declaration of Slovakia as an Independent Ecclesiastic Province (Slovakia)\nBULLET::::- Rizal Day (Philippines)\nBULLET::::- The fifth day of Kwanzaa. (United States)\nBULLET::::- The sixth of the Twelve Days of Christmas. (Western Christianity)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- On This Day in Canada\n"}
{"id": "8678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8678", "title": "Donn", "text": "Donn\n\nIn Irish mythology, Donn (\"the dark one\", from ) is an ancestor of the Gaels and is believed to have been a god of the dead. Donn is said to dwell in Tech Duinn (the \"house of Donn\" or \"house of the dark one\"), where the souls of the dead gather. He may have originally been an aspect of the Dagda. Folklore about Donn survived into the modern era in parts of Ireland, in which he is said to be a phantom horseman riding a white horse.\n\nA 9th-century poem says that Donn's dying wish was that all his descendants would gather at Tech Duinn after death: \"To me, to my house, you shall all come after your deaths\". The 10th-century tale \"Airne Fíngein\" (\"Fíngen's Vigil\") says that Tech Duinn is where the souls of the dead gather. In their translation of \"Acallam na Senórach\", Ann Dooley and Harry Roe commented that \"to go to the House of Donn in Irish tradition means to die\". This suggests that the pagan Gaels saw Donn as their ancestor and believed they would go to his abode when they died. Tech Duinn may have been thought of as a place where the souls of the dead gathered before travelling to their final destination in the otherworld, or before being reincarnated. According to Julius Caesar, the Gauls also claimed descent from a god whom he likened to Dīs Pater, the Roman god of the underworld.\n\nThe Christian writers who recorded the \"Lebor Gabála Érenn\" made Donn (also called Éber Donn) one of the Milesians, the mythical ancestors of the Gaels. The Milesians invade Ireland and take it from the Tuatha Dé Danann. During their invasion, Donn slights Ériu, one of the eponymous goddesses of Ireland, and he drowns in a shipwreck off the southwest coast. Donn is then buried on a rocky island which becomes known as Tech Duinn. In the literature, Tech Duinn is said to lie at or beyond the western edge of Ireland. Tech Duinn is commonly identified with Bull Rock, an islet off the western tip of the Beara Peninsula. Bull Rock resembles a dolmen or portal tomb as it has a natural tunnel through it, allowing the sea to pass under it as if through a portal. In Ireland there was a belief that the souls of the dead departed westwards over the sea with the setting sun.\n\nThe \"Metrical Dindshenchas\" entry for “Tech Duinn” recounts the tale:Through the incantations of the druids a storm came upon them, and the ship wherein Donn was foundered. ‘Let his body be carried to yonder high rock’, says Amairgen: ‘his folk shall come to this spot.’ So hence it is called Tech Duinn: and for this cause, according to the heathen, the souls of sinners visit Tech Duinn before they go to hell, and give their blessing, ere they go, to the soul of Donn. But as for the righteous soul of a penitent, it beholds the place from afar, and is not borne astray. Such, at least, is the belief of the heathen. – Translation by E. Gwynn\"\n\nIn the tale \"Togail Bruidne Dá Derga\" (\"The Destruction of Dá Derga's Hostel\"), king Conaire Mór meets his death in Bruiden Dá Derga (the \"great hall or hostel of the red god\"). On his way to the hostel, Conaire meets three red men riding red horses from the otherworld. They foretell his doom and tell him \"we ride the horses of Donn ... although we are alive, we are dead\". Donn is called \"king of the dead\" in the tale. It has been suggested that Dá Derga and Dá Derga's Hostel is another name for Donn and his abode. It may be a name for the death god in the context of violent death or sacrifice, hence the name \"red god\".\n\nIn the tale \"Tochmarc Treblainne\" (\"The Wooing of Treblann\"), the otherworld woman Treblann elopes with the mortal man Fráech, who sends her to safety in Tech Duinn while he embarks on a quest. In this tale, Donn is said to be the son or foster-son of the Dagda. Dáithí Ó hÓgáin notes similarities between the two and suggests that Donn was originally an epithet of the Dagda.\n\nDonn is the father of Diarmuid Ua Duibhne, whom he gives to the god of youth, Aengus mac Óg, to raise. \n\nFolklore about Donn survived into the early modern era. In County Limerick, a Donn Fírinne was said to dwell in the sacred hill of Cnoc Fírinne (Knockfeerina or Knockfierna), and folklore told of people being brought into the hill to be with Donn when they died. He was said to appear as a phantom horseman riding a white horse. He was also associated with the weather: thunder and lightning meant that Donn Fírinne was riding his horse through the sky, and if clouds were over the hill it meant that he was gathering them together to make rain. This imagery may have been influenced by the lore of Odin and his horse Sleipnir from the Norse settlers in Limerick. Donn Fírinne was also said to appear and warn anyone who interfered with his hill. On the west coast of County Clare there was a Donn na Duimhche or Donn Dumhach (\"Donn of the dunes\"), who \"was also often encountered as a night-horseman\". In later folklore, the name 'Donn' came to mean an 'otherworld lord' in general.\n\nIn modern Irish, \"donn\" is the word for the colour brown.\n\nBULLET::::- Hy-Brasil - legendary island to the west of Ireland\n"}
{"id": "8681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8681", "title": "Data compression ratio", "text": "Data compression ratio\n\nData compression ratio, also known as compression power, is a measurement of the relative reduction in size of data representation produced by a data compression algorithm. It is typically expressed as the division of uncompressed size by compressed size.\n\nData compression ratio is defined as the ratio between the \"uncompressed size\" and \"compressed size\":\n\nThus, a representation that compresses a file's storage size from 10 MB to 2 MB has a compression ratio of 10/2 = 5, often notated as an explicit ratio, 5:1 (read \"five\" to \"one\"), or as an implicit ratio, 5/1. This formulation applies equally for compression, where the uncompressed size is that of the original; and for decompression, where the uncompressed size is that of the reproduction. \n\nSometimes the \"space savings\" is given instead, which is defined as the reduction in size relative to the uncompressed size: \n\nThus, a representation that compresses the storage size of a file from 10MB to 2MB yields a space savings of 1 - 2/10 = 0.8, often notated as a percentage, 80%.\n\nFor signals of indefinite size, such as streaming audio and video, the compression ratio is defined in terms of uncompressed and compressed data rates instead of data sizes: \n\nand instead of space savings, one speaks of data-rate savings, which is defined as the data-rate reduction relative to the uncompressed data rate: \n\nFor example, uncompressed songs in CD format have a data rate of 16 bits/channel x 2 channels x 44.1 kHz ≅ 1.4 Mbit/s, whereas AAC files on an iPod are typically compressed to 128 kbit/s, yielding a compression ratio of 10.9, for a data-rate savings of 0.91, or 91%. \n\nWhen the uncompressed data rate is known, the compression ratio can be inferred from the compressed data rate.\n\nLossless compression of digitized data such as video, digitized film, and audio preserves all the information, but it does not generally achieve compression ratio much better than 2:1 because of the intrinsic entropy of the data. Compression algorithms which provide higher ratios either incur very large overheads or work only for specific data sequences (e.g. compressing a file with mostly zeros). In contrast, lossy compression (e.g. JPEG for images, or MP3 and Opus for audio) can achieve much higher compression ratios at the cost of a decrease in quality, such as Bluetooth audio streaming, as visual or audio compression artifacts from loss of important information are introduced. A compression ratio of at least 50:1 is needed to get 1080i video into a 20 Mbit/s MPEG transport stream.\n\nThe data compression ratio can serve as a measure of the complexity of a data set or signal, in particular it is used to approximate the algorithmic complexity. It is also used to see how much of a file is able to compressed without increasing its original size.\n\nBULLET::::- Nondegrading lossy compression\n"}
