{"id": "6653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6653", "title": "Cape Town", "text": "Cape Town\n\nCape Town (Khoekhoe: \"ǁHuiǃgaeb\"; ; Xhosa: \"iKapa\"; South Sotho\": Motse Kapa)\" is the legislative capital of South Africa. Colloquially named the Mother City, it is the largest city of the Western Cape province. It forms part of the City of Cape Town metropolitan municipality.\n\nThe Parliament of South Africa sits in Cape Town. The other two capitals are located in Pretoria (the executive capital where the Presidency is based) and Bloemfontein (the judicial capital where the Supreme Court of Appeal is located). The city is known for its harbour, for its natural setting in the Cape Floristic Region, and for landmarks such as Table Mountain and Cape Point. Cape Town is home to 64% of the Western Cape's population. It is one of the most multicultural cities in the world, reflecting its role as a major destination for immigrants and expatriates to South Africa. The city was named the World Design Capital for 2014 by the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design. In 2014, Cape Town was named the best place in the world to visit by both \"The New York Times\" and \"The Daily Telegraph\".\n\nLocated on the shore of Table Bay, Cape Town, as the oldest urban area in South Africa, was developed by the United East India Company (VOC) as a supply station for Dutch ships sailing to East Africa, India, and the Far East. Jan van Riebeeck's arrival on 6 April 1652 established VOC Cape Colony, the first permanent European settlement in South Africa. Cape Town outgrew its original purpose as the first European outpost at the Castle of Good Hope, becoming the economic and cultural hub of the Cape Colony. Until the Witwatersrand Gold Rush and the development of Johannesburg, Cape Town was the largest city in South Africa.\n\nThe earliest known remnants in the region were found at Peers Cave in Fish Hoek and date to between 15,000 and 12,000 years ago. Little is known of the history of the region's first residents, since there is no written history from the area before it was first mentioned by Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias in 1488 who was the first European to reach the area and named it \"Cape of Storms\" (Cabo das Tormentas). It was later renamed by John II of Portugal as \"Cape of Good Hope\" (Cabo da Boa Esperança) because of the great optimism engendered by the opening of a sea route to India and the East. Vasco da Gama recorded a sighting of the Cape of Good Hope in 1497. In 1510, at the Battle of Salt River, Francisco de Almeida and fifty of his men were killed and his party were defeated by ox-mounted !Uriǁ’aekua (\"Goringhaiqua\" in Dutch approximate spelling), which was one of the so-called Khoekhoe clans of the area that also included the !Uriǁ’aeǀ’ona (\"Goringhaicona\" in Dutch approximate spelling, also known as \"Strandlopers\"), said to be the ancestors of the !Ora nation of today. In the late 16th century, Portuguese, French, Danish, Dutch and English but mainly Portuguese ships regularly continued to stop over in Table Bay en route to the Indies. They traded tobacco, copper and iron with the Khoekhoe-speaking clans of the region, in exchange for fresh meat.\n\nIn 1652, Jan van Riebeeck and other employees of the United East India Company (, VOC) were sent to the Cape to establish a way-station for ships travelling to the Dutch East Indies, and the Fort de Goede Hoop (later replaced by the Castle of Good Hope). The settlement grew slowly during this period, as it was hard to find adequate labour. This labour shortage prompted the authorities to import slaves from Indonesia and Madagascar. Many of these became ancestors of the first Cape Coloured communities. Under Van Riebeeck and his successors as VOC commanders and later governors at the Cape, an impressive range of useful plants were introduced to the Cape – in the process changing the natural environment forever. Some of these, including grapes, cereals, ground nuts, potatoes, apples and citrus, had an important and lasting influence on the societies and economies of the region.\n\nThe Dutch Republic being transformed in Revolutionary France's vassal Batavian Republic, Great Britain moved to take control of its colonies. Britain captured Cape Town in 1795, but the Cape was returned to the Dutch by treaty in 1803. British forces occupied the Cape again in 1806 following the Battle of Blaauwberg. In the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814, Cape Town was permanently ceded to Britain. It became the capital of the newly formed Cape Colony, whose territory expanded very substantially through the 1800s. With expansion came calls for greater independence from Britain, with the Cape attaining its own parliament (1854) and a locally accountable Prime Minister (1872). Suffrage was established according to the non-racial, but sexist Cape Qualified Franchise.\n\nThe discovery of diamonds in Griqualand West in 1867, and the Witwatersrand Gold Rush in 1886, prompted a flood of immigrants to South Africa. Conflicts between the Boer republics in the interior and the British colonial government resulted in the Second Boer War of 1899–1902, which Britain won.\n\nIn 1910, Britain established the Union of South Africa, which unified the Cape Colony with the two defeated Boer Republics and the British colony of Natal. Cape Town became the legislative capital of the Union, and later of the Republic of South Africa.\n\nPrior to the mid-twentieth century the Cape Town was arguably the most racially integrated city in the South Africa. In the 1948 national elections, the National Party won on a platform of \"apartheid\" (racial segregation) under the slogan of \"swart gevaar\". This led to the erosion and eventual abolition of the Cape's multiracial franchise, as well as to the Group Areas Act, which classified all areas according to race. Formerly multi-racial suburbs of Cape Town were either purged of residents deemed unlawful by apartheid legislation or demolished. The most infamous example of this in Cape Town was District Six. After it was declared a whites-only region in 1965, all housing there was demolished and over 60,000 residents were forcibly removed. Many of these residents were relocated to the Cape Flats and Lavender Hill. Under apartheid, the Cape was considered a \"Coloured labour preference area\", to the exclusion of \"Bantus\", i.e. Africans.\n\nSchool students from Langa, Gugulethu and Nyanga in Cape Town reacted to the news of protests against Bantu Education in Soweto in June 1976 and organised gatherings and marches which were met with resistance from the police. A number of school buildings were burnt down.\n\nCape Town was home to many leaders of the anti-apartheid movement. On Robben Island, a former penitentiary island from the city, many famous political prisoners were held for years. In one of the most famous moments marking the end of apartheid, Nelson Mandela made his first public speech since his imprisonment, from the balcony of Cape Town City Hall hours after being released on 11 February 1990. His speech heralded the beginning of a new era for the country, and the first democratic election, was held four years later, on 27 April 1994. Nobel Square in the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront features statues of South Africa's four Nobel Peace Prize winners: Albert Luthuli, Desmond Tutu, F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela.\n\nIn recent years, the city has struggled with problems such as drugs, a surge in violent drug-related crime and more recently gang violence. In the Cape Flats alone, there are approximately 100,000 people in over 130 different gangs in 2018. While there are some alliances, this multitude and division is also cause for conflict between groups. At the same time, the economy has grown due to the boom in the tourism and the real estate industries. With a Gini coefficient of 0.58, Cape Town had the lowest inequality rate in South Africa in 2012. Between 2015 and 2018 Cape Town experienced a severe water shortage that resulted in temporary but widespread water rationing. Since July 2019 widespread violent crime in poorer gang dominated areas of greater Cape Town has resulted in an ongoing military presence in these neighbourhoods. Cape Town had the highest murder rate among large South African cities at 77 murders per 100,000 people in the period April 2018 to March 2019, with 3157 murders mostly occurring in poor townships created under the apartheid regime.\n\nCape Town is located at latitude 33.55° S (approx. the same as Sydney and Buenos Aires and equivalent to Casablanca and Los Angeles in the northern hemisphere) and longitude 18.25° E. Table Mountain, with its near vertical cliffs and flat-topped summit over high, and with Devil's Peak and Lion's Head on either side, together form a dramatic mountainous backdrop enclosing the central area of Cape Town, the so-called City Bowl. A thin strip of cloud, known colloquially as the \"tablecloth\", sometimes forms on top of the mountain. To the immediate south, the Cape Peninsula is a scenic mountainous spine jutting southwards into the Atlantic Ocean and terminating at Cape Point. There are over 70 peaks above within Cape Town's official city limits. Many of the city's suburbs lie on the large plain called the Cape Flats, which extends over to the east and joins the peninsula to the mainland. The Cape Town region is characterised by an extensive coastline, rugged mountain ranges, coastal plains, inland valleys and semi-desert fringes.\nUNESCO declared Robben Island in the Western Cape a World Heritage Site in 1999. Robben Island is located in Table Bay, some west of Bloubergstrand in Cape Town, and stands some 30m above sea level. Robben Island has been used as a prison where people were isolated, banished and exiled to for nearly 400 years. It was also used as a leper colony, a post office, a grazing ground, a mental hospital, and an outpost.\n\nCurrently visitors can only access the island via the Robben Island Museum boat service, which runs three times daily until the beginning of the peak season (1 September). The ferries depart from the Nelson Mandela Gateway at the V&A Waterfront. The boat ride over to Robben's Island can be rough and cold, depending what time of day you go.\n\nCape Town has a warm Mediterranean climate (Köppen \"Csb\"),\nwith mild, moderately wet winters and dry, warm summers. Winter, which lasts from the beginning of June to the end of August, may see large cold fronts entering for limited periods from the Atlantic Ocean with significant precipitation and strong north-westerly winds. Winter months in the city average a maximum of and minimum of \nTotal annual rainfall in the city averages . Summer, which lasts from December to March, is warm and dry with an average maximum of and minimum of . The region can get uncomfortably hot when the Berg Wind, meaning \"mountain wind\", blows from the Karoo interior for a couple of weeks in February or March. Spring and summer generally feature a strong wind from the south-east, known locally as the south- or the Cape Doctor, so called because it blows air pollution away. This wind is caused by a high-pressure system which sits in the South Atlantic to the west of Cape Town, known as the South Atlantic High. Cape Town receives 3,100 hours of sunshine per year.\n\nWater temperatures range greatly, between on the Atlantic Seaboard, to over in False Bay. Average annual Ocean temperatures are between on the Atlantic Seaboard (similar to Californian waters, such as San Francisco or Big Sur), and in False Bay (similar to Northern Mediterranean temperatures, such as Nice or Monte Carlo).\n\nLocated in a CI Biodiversity hotspot as well as the unique Cape Floristic Region, the city of Cape Town has one of the highest levels of biodiversity of any equivalent area in the world. These protected areas are a World Heritage Site, and an estimated 2,200 species of plants are confined to Table Mountain – more than exist in the whole of the United Kingdom which has 1200 plant species and 67 endemic plant species. Many of these species, including a great many types of proteas, are endemic to the mountain and can be found nowhere else.\n\nIt is home to a total of 19 different vegetation types, of which several are endemic to the city and occur nowhere else in the world.\nIt is also the only habitat of hundreds of endemic species, and hundreds of others which are severely restricted or threatened. This enormous species diversity is mainly because the city is uniquely located at the convergence point of several different soil types and micro-climates.\n\nTable Mountain has an unusually rich biodiversity. Its vegetation consists predominantly of several different types of the unique and rich Cape Fynbos. The main vegetation type is endangered Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos, but critically endangered Peninsula Granite Fynbos, Peninsula Shale Renosterveld and Afromontane forest occur in smaller portions on the mountain.\n\nUnfortunately, rapid population growth and urban sprawl has covered much of these ecosystems with development. Consequently, Cape Town now has over 300 threatened plant species and 13 which are now extinct. The Cape Peninsula, which lies entirely within the city of Cape Town, has the highest concentration of threatened species of any continental area of equivalent size in the world.\nTiny remnant populations of critically endangered or near extinct plants sometimes survive on road sides, pavements and sports fields. The remaining ecosystems are partially protected through a system of over 30 nature reserves – including the massive Table Mountain National Park.\n\nCape Town reached first place in the 2019 iNaturalist City Nature Challenge in two out of the three categories: Most Observations, and Most Species. This was the first entry by Capetonians in this annual competition to observe and record the local biodiversity over a four-day long weekend during what is considered the worst time of the year for local observations. However, a worldwide survey showed that the extinction rate of endemic plants from the City of Cape Town is one of the highest in the world, at roughly three per year since 1900 - partly a consequence of the very small and localised habitats and high endemicity.\n\nCape Town's urban geography is influenced by the contours of Table Mountain, its surrounding peaks, the Durbanville Hills, and the expansive lowland region known as the Cape Flats. These geographic features in part divide the city into several commonly known groupings of suburbs (equivalent to districts outside South Africa), many of which developed historically together and share common attributes of language and culture.\n\nThe City Bowl is a natural amphitheatre-shaped area bordered by Table Bay and defined by the mountains of Signal Hill, Lion's Head, Table Mountain and Devil's Peak.\n\nThe area includes the central business district of Cape Town, the harbour, the Company's Garden, and the residential suburbs of De Waterkant, Devil's Peak, District Six, Zonnebloem, Gardens, Bo-Kaap, Higgovale, Oranjezicht, Schotsche Kloof, Tamboerskloof, University Estate, Vredehoek, Walmer Estate and Woodstock.\n\nThe Foreshore Freeway Bridge has stood in its unfinished state since construction officially ended in 1977. It was intended to be the Eastern Boulevard Highway in the city bowl, but is unfinished due to budget constraints.\n\nThe Atlantic Seaboard lies west of the City Bowl and Table Mountain, and is characterised by its beaches, cliffs, promenade and hillside communities. The area includes, from north to south, the neighbourhoods of Green Point, Mouille Point, Three Anchor Bay, Sea Point, Fresnaye, Bantry Bay, Clifton, Camps Bay, Llandudno, and Hout Bay. The Atlantic Seaboard has some of the most expensive real estate in South Africa particularly on Nettleton and Clifton Roads in Clifton, Ocean View Drive and St Leon Avenue in Bantry Bay, Theresa Avenue in Bakoven and Fishermans Bend in Llandudno. Camps Bay is home to the highest concentration of multimillionaires in Cape Town and has the highest number of high-priced mansions in South Africa with more than 155 residential units exceeding R20 million (or $US1.8 million).\n\nThe West Coast suburbs lie along the beach to the north of the Cape Town city centre, and include Bloubergstrand, Milnerton, Tableview, West Beach, Big Bay, Sunset Beach, Sunningdale, Parklands and Parklands North, as well as the exurbs of Atlantis and Melkbosstrand. The Koeberg Nuclear Power Station is located within this area and maximum housing density regulations are enforced in much of the area surrounding the nuclear plant.\n\nThe Northern Suburbs are Afrikaans-speaking, and include Bellville, Kanonberg, Bothasig, Brooklyn, Burgundy Estate, Durbanville, Edgemead, Brackenfell, Elsie's River, Factreton, Kraaifontein, Goodwood, Kensington, Maitland, Monte Vista, Panorama, Parow, Richwood, Welgemoed, Fairdale, Kraaifontein, Kuils River, Blue Downs, Belhar, Delft, Mfuleni and Protea Heights.\n\nThe Northern Suburbs are home to Tygerberg Hospital, the largest hospital in the Western Cape and second largest in South Africa\n\nThe Southern Suburbs lie along the eastern slopes of Table Mountain, southeast of the city centre. This area has mixed languages but is predominantly English-speaking, and includes, from north to south, Observatory, Rondebosch, Newlands, Mowbray, Bishopscourt, Claremont, Lansdowne, Wynberg, Plumstead, Hout Bay, Ottery, and Bergvliet. West of Wynberg lies Constantia which, in addition to being a wealthy neighbourhood, is a notable wine-growing region within the City of Cape Town, and attracts tourists for its well-known wine farms and Cape Dutch architecture.\n\nThe South Peninsula is generally regarded as the area South of Muizenberg on False Bay and Noordhoek on the Atlantic Ocean, all the way to Cape Point. Until recently, this predominantly English-speaking area was quite rural, however the population of the area is growing quickly as new coastal developments proliferate and larger plots are subdivided to provide more compact housing. It includes Capri Village, Clovelly, Fish Hoek, Glencairn, Kalk Bay, Kommetjie, Masiphumelele, Muizenberg, Noordhoek, Ocean View, Scarborough, Simon's Town, St James, Sunnydale and Sun Valley. South Africa's largest naval base is located at Simon's Town harbour, and close by is Boulders Beach, the site of a large colony of African penguins.\n\nThe Cape Flats is an expansive, low-lying, flat predominantly Afrikaans-speaking area situated to the southeast of the CBD of Cape Town. From the 1950s the area became home to people the apartheid government designated as non-White and has been described by some as 'Apartheid's dumping ground'. Race-based legislation such as the Group Areas Act and pass laws either forced non-white people out of more central urban areas designated for white people and into government-built townships in the Flats or made living in the area illegal, forcing many people designated as Black and Coloured into informal settlements elsewhere in the Flats.\n\nSince then the Flats have been home to much of the population of Greater Cape Town. This includes Mitchell's Plain, Athlone, Elsie's River, Grassy Park, Lotus River, Hanover Park, Bishop Lavis, Manenberg, Strandfontein, Gugulethu, Nyanga, Langa, and Khayelitsha.\n\nThe Helderberg consists of Somerset West, Strand, Gordons Bay and a few other suburbs which were previously towns in the Helderberg district. The district takes its name from the imposing Helderberg Mountain, which reaches a height of \n\nCape Town is governed by a 231-member city council elected in a system of mixed-member proportional representation. The city is divided into 116 wards, each of which elects a councillor by first-past-the-post voting. The remaining 115 councillors are elected from party lists so that the total number of councillors for each party is proportional to the number of votes received by that party.\n\nIn the local government elections of 3 August 2016, the Democratic Alliance (DA) won an outright majority, taking 154 of the 231 council seats. The African National Congress, the national ruling party, received 57 seats. As a result of this victory, Patricia de Lille of the Democratic Alliance was re-elected to a second term as Executive Mayor. However, De Lille resigned as Mayor on 31 October 2018. The Democratic Alliance designated Dan Plato as their candidate to replace her.\n\nAccording to the South African National Census of 2011, the population of the City of Cape Town metropolitan municipalityan area that includes suburbs and exurbs not always considered as part of Cape Townis 3,740,026 people. This represents an annual growth rate of 2.6% compared to the results of the previous census in 2001 which found a population of 2,892,243 people.\n\nIn 1944, 47% of the city's population was White, 46% was Coloured, less than 6% was Black African and 1% was Asian.\n\nOf those residents who were asked about their first language, 35.7% spoke Afrikaans, 29.8% spoke Xhosa and 28.4% spoke English. 24.8% of the population is under the age of 15, while 5.5% is 65 or older.\n\nOf those residents aged 20 or older, 1.8% have no schooling, 8.1% have some schooling but did not finish primary school, 4.6% finished primary school but have no secondary schooling, 38.9% have some secondary schooling but did not finish Grade 12, 29.9% finished Grade 12 but have no higher education, and 16.7% have higher education. Overall, 46.6% have at least a Grade 12 education. Of those aged between 5 and 25, 67.8% are attending an educational institution. Amongst those aged between 15 and 65 the unemployment rate is 23.7%. The average annual household income is R161,762.\n\nThere are 1,068,573 households in the municipality, giving an average household size of 3.3 people. Of those households, 78.4% are in formal structures (houses or flats), while 20.5% are in informal structures (shacks). 94.0% of households use electricity for lighting. 87.3% of households have piped water to the dwelling, while 12.0% have piped water through a communal tap. 94.9% of households have regular refuse collection service. 91.4% of households have a flush toilet or chemical toilet, while 4.5% still use a bucket toilet. 82.1% of households have a refrigerator, 87.3% have a television and 70.1% have a radio. Only 34.0% have a landline telephone, but 91.3% have a cellphone. 37.9% have a computer, and 49.3% have access to the Internet (either through a computer or a cellphone).\n\nCape Town is the economic hub of the Western Cape Province, South Africa's second main economic centre and Africa's third main economic hub city. It serves as the regional manufacturing centre in the Western Cape. In 2011 the city's GDP was US$56.8 billion with a GDP per capita of US$15,721. In the five years preceding 2014 Cape Town GDP grew at an average of 3.7% a year. As a proportion of GDP, the agriculture and manufacturing sectors have declined whilst finance, business services, transport and logistics have grown reflecting the growth in specialised services sectors of the local economy. Fishing, clothing and textiles, wood product manufacturing, electronics, furniture, hospitality, finance and business services are industries in which Cape Town's economy has the largest comparative advantage.\n\nBetween 2001 and 2010 the city's Gini coefficient, a measure of inequality, improved by dropping from 0.59 in 2007 to 0.57 in 2010 only to increase to 0.58 by 2017. The city has the lowest rate of inequality in South Africa.\n\nCape Town has recently enjoyed a booming real estate and construction market, because of the 2010 FIFA World Cup as well as many people buying summer homes in the city or relocating there permanently. Cape Town hosted nine World Cup matches: Six first-round matches, one second-round match, one quarter final and one semifinal. The central business district is under an extensive urban renewal programme, with numerous new buildings and renovations taking place under the guidance of the Cape Town Partnership.\n\nCape Town has four major commercial nodes, with Cape Town Central Business District containing the majority of job opportunities and office space. Century City, the Bellville/TygerValley strip and Claremont commercial nodes are well established and contain many offices and corporate headquarters as well. Most companies headquartered in the city are insurance companies, retail groups, publishers, design houses, fashion designers, shipping companies, petrochemical companies, architects and advertising agencies. The most notable companies headquartered in the city are food and fashion retailer Woolworths, supermarket chain Pick n Pay Stores and Shoprite, New Clicks Holdings Limited, fashion retailer Foschini Group, isp MWEB, Mediclinic International, etv, multi-national mass media giant Naspers, and financial services giant Sanlam. Other notable companies include Belron (vehicle glass repair and replacement group operating worldwide), CapeRay (develops, manufactures and supplies medical imaging equipment for the diagnosis of breast cancer), Ceres Fruit Juices (produces fruit juice and other fruit based products), Coronation Fund Managers (third-party fund management company), ICS (was one of the largest meat processing and distribution companies in the world), Vida e Caffè (chain of coffee retailers), Capitec Bank (commercial bank in the Republic of South Africa). The city is a manufacturing base for several multi-national companies including, Johnson & Johnson, GlaxoSmithKline, Levi Strauss & Co., Adidas, Bokomo Foods, Yoco and Nampak.\n\nMuch of the produce is handled through the Port of Cape Town or Cape Town International Airport. Most major shipbuilding companies have offices and manufacturing locations in Cape Town. The Province is also a centre of energy development for the country, with the existing Koeberg nuclear power station providing energy for the Western Cape's needs.\n\nThe Western Cape is an important tourist region in South Africa; the tourism industry accounts for 9.8% of the GDP of the province and employs 9.6% of the province's workforce. In 2010, over 1.5 million international tourists visited the area.\n\nWith the highest number of successful Information Technology companies in Africa, Cape Town is an important centre for the industry on the continent. Growing at an annual rate of 8.5% and an estimated worth of R77 billion in 2010, nationwide the IT industry in Cape Town is becoming increasingly important to the city's economy.\n\nThe city was recently named as the most entrepreneurial city in South Africa, with the percentage of Capetonians pursuing business opportunities almost three times higher than the national average. Those aged between 18 and 64 were 190% more likely to pursue new business, whilst in Johannesburg, the same demographic group was only 60% more likely than the national average to pursue a new business.\n\nCape Town is not only a popular international tourist destination in South Africa, but Africa as a whole. This is due to its mild climate, natural setting, and well-developed infrastructure. The city has several well-known natural features that attract tourists, most notably Table Mountain, which forms a large part of the Table Mountain National Park and is the back end of the City Bowl. Reaching the top of the mountain can be achieved either by hiking up, or by taking the Table Mountain Cableway. Cape Point is recognised as the dramatic headland at the end of the Cape Peninsula. Many tourists also drive along Chapman's Peak Drive, a narrow road that links Noordhoek with Hout Bay, for the views of the Atlantic Ocean and nearby mountains. It is possible to either drive or hike up Signal Hill for closer views of the City Bowl and Table Mountain.\nMany tourists also visit Cape Town's beaches, which are popular with local residents. Due to the city's unique geography, it is possible to visit several different beaches in the same day, each with a different setting and atmosphere. Though the Cape's water ranges from cold to mild, the difference between the two sides of the city is dramatic. While the Atlantic Seaboard averages annual water temperatures barely above that of coastal California around , the False Bay coast is much warmer, averaging between annually. This is similar to water temperatures in much of the Northern Mediterranean (for example Nice). In summer, False Bay water averages slightly over , with a common high. Beaches located on the Atlantic Coast tend to have very cold water due to the Benguela current which originates from the Southern Ocean, whilst the water at False Bay beaches may be warmer by up to at the same moment due to the influence of the warm Agulhas current. It is a common misconception that False Bay is part of the Indian Ocean, with Cape Point being both the meeting point of the Indian and Atlantic Oceans, and the southernmost tip of Africa. The oceans in fact meet at the actual southernmost tip, Cape Agulhas, which lies approximately to the south east. The misconception is fuelled by the relative warmth of the False Bay water to the Atlantic Seaboard water, and the many confusing instances of \"Two Oceans\" in names synonymous with Cape Town, such as the Two Oceans Marathon, the Two Oceans Aquarium, and places such as Two Oceans wine farm.\nBoth coasts are equally popular, although the beaches in affluent Clifton and elsewhere on the Atlantic Coast are better developed with restaurants and cafés, with a strip of restaurants and bars accessible to the beach at Camps Bay. The Atlantic seaboard, known as Cape Town's Riviera, is regarded as one of the most scenic routes in South Africa, along the slopes of the Twelve Apostles to the boulders and white sand beaches of Llandudno, which the route ending in Hout Bay, a diverse bustling suburb with a harbour and a seal island. This fishing village is flanked by the Constantia valley and the picturesque Chapman's Peak drive. Boulders Beach near Simon's Town is known for its colony of African penguins. Surfing is popular and the city hosts the Red Bull Big Wave Africa surfing competition every year.\n\nThe city has several notable cultural attractions. The Victoria & Alfred Waterfront, built on top of part of the docks of the Port of Cape Town, is the city's most visited tourist attraction. It is also one of the city's most popular shopping venues, with several hundred shops and the Two Oceans Aquarium. The V&A also hosts the Nelson Mandela Gateway, through which ferries depart for Robben Island. It is possible to take a ferry from the V&A to Hout Bay, Simon's Town and the Cape fur seal colonies on Seal and Duiker Islands. Several companies offer tours of the Cape Flats, a mostly Coloured township, and Khayelitsha, a mostly black township.\n\nThe most popular areas for visitors to stay include Camps Bay, Sea Point, the V&A Waterfront, the City Bowl, Hout Bay, Constantia, Rondebosch, Newlands, and Somerset West.\n\nIn November 2013, Cape Town was voted the best global city in \"The Daily Telegraph\"'s annual Travel Awards.\n\nThe City of Cape Town works closely with Cape Town Tourism to promote the city both locally and internationally. The primary focus of Cape Town Tourism is to represent Cape Town as a tourist destination. Cape Town Tourism receives a portion of its funding from the City of Cape Town while the remainder is made up of membership fees and own-generated funds.\n\nCape Town is noted for its architectural heritage, with the highest density of Cape Dutch style buildings in the world. Cape Dutch style, which combines the architectural traditions of the Netherlands, Germany, France and Indonesia, is most visible in Constantia, the old government buildings in the Central Business District, and along Long Street. The annual Cape Town Minstrel Carnival, also known by its Afrikaans name of \"Kaapse Klopse\", is a large minstrel festival held annually on 2 January or \"\"Tweede Nuwe Jaar\"\" (Afrikaans: Second New Year). Competing teams of minstrels parade in brightly coloured costumes, performing Cape Jazz, either carrying colourful umbrellas or playing an array of musical instruments. The Artscape Theatre Centre is the largest performing arts venue in Cape Town.\nThe city also encloses the 36 hectare Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden that contains protected natural forest and fynbos along with a variety of animals and birds. There are over 7,000 species in cultivation at Kirstenbosch, including many rare and threatened species of the Cape Floristic Region. In 2004 this Region, including Kirstenbosch, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\n\nCape Town's transport system links it to the rest of South Africa; it serves as the gateway to other destinations within the province. The Cape Winelands and in particular the towns of Stellenbosch, Paarl and Franschhoek are popular day trips from the city for sightseeing and wine tasting. Whale watching is popular amongst tourists: southern right whales and humpback whales are seen off the coast during the breeding season (August to November) and Bryde's whales and killer whale can be seen any time of the year. The nearby town of Hermanus is known for its Whale Festival, but whales can also be seen in False Bay. Heaviside's dolphins are endemic to the area and can be seen from the coast north of Cape Town; dusky dolphins live along the same coast and can occasionally be seen from the ferry to Robben Island.\n\nThe only complete windmill in South Africa is Mostert's Mill, Mowbray. It was built in 1796 and restored in 1935 and again in 1995.\n\nMost places of worship in the city are Christian churches and cathedrals: Zion Christian Church, Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa, Assemblies of God, Baptist Union of Southern Africa (Baptist World Alliance), Methodist Church of Southern Africa (World Methodist Council), Anglican Church of Southern Africa (Anglican Communion), Presbyterian Church of Africa (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cape Town (Catholic Church). Islam is the city's second largest religion with a long history in Cape Town resulting in a number of mosques and other Muslim religious sites spread across the city such as the Auwal Mosque South Africa's first mosque. Cape Town's significant Jewish population supports a number of synagogues most notably the historic Gardens Shul. The Cape Town Progressive Jewish Congregation (CTPJC) also has three temples in the city. Other religious sites in the city include Hindu, Buddhist and Baha'i temples.\n\nSeveral newspapers, magazines and printing facilities have their offices in the city. Independent News and Media publishes the major English language papers in the city, the \"Cape Argus\" and the \"Cape Times\". Naspers, the largest media conglomerate in South Africa, publishes \"Die Burger\", the major Afrikaans language paper.\n\nCape Town has many local community newspapers. Some of the largest community newspapers in English are the \"Athlone News\" from Athlone, the \"Atlantic Sun\", the \"Constantiaberg Bulletin\" from Constantiaberg, the \"City Vision\" from Bellville, the \"False Bay Echo\" from False Bay, the \"Helderberg Sun\" from Helderberg, the \"Plainsman\" from Michell's Plain, the \"Sentinel News\" from Hout Bay, the \"Southern Mail\" from the Southern Peninsula, the \"Southern Suburbs Tatler\" from the Southern Suburbs, \"Table Talk\" from Table View and \"Tygertalk\" from Tygervalley/Durbanville. Afrikaans language community newspapers include the \"Landbou-Burger\" and the \"Tygerburger\".\n\"Vukani\", based in the Cape Flats, is published in Xhosa.\n\nCape Town is a centre for major broadcast media with several radio stations that only broadcast within the city. 94.5 Kfm (94.5 MHz FM) and Good Hope FM (94–97 MHz FM) mostly play pop music. Heart FM (104.9 MHz FM), the former P4 Radio, plays jazz and R&B, while Fine Music Radio (101.3 FM) plays classical music and jazz. Bush Radio is a community radio station (89.5 MHz FM). The Voice of the Cape (95.8 MHz FM) and Cape Talk (567 kHz MW) are the major talk radio stations in the city. Bokradio (98.9 MHz FM) is an Afrikaans music station. The University of Cape Town also runs its own radio station, UCT Radio (104.5 MHz FM).\n\nThe SABC has a small presence in the city, with satellite studios located at Sea Point. e.tv has a greater presence, with a large complex located at Longkloof Studios in Gardens. M-Net is not well represented with infrastructure within the city. Cape Town TV is a local TV station, supported by numerous organisation and focusing mostly on documentaries. Numerous productions companies and their support industries are located in the city, mostly supporting the production of overseas commercials, model shoots, TV-series and movies. The local media infrastructure remains primarily in Johannesburg.\n\n style=\"text-align: center; background: #eee\"\n!Venue !!Sport !!Capacity !!Club(s)\nCape Town Stadium\nAssociation football/Rugby\n69,070\nAjax CT, Cape Town City FC\nNewlands Cricket Ground\nCricket\n25,000\nCape Cobras, Western Province Cricket\nNewlands Rugby Stadium\nRugby\n47,000\nStormers, Western Province\nAthlone Stadium\nAssociation football\n24,000\nSantos Football Club\nPhilippi Stadium\nAssociation football\n5,000\n\nBellville Velodrome\nCycling track\n3,000\nWestern Province Cycling\nHartleyvale Hockey Centre\nField Hockey\n2,000\nWestern Province Hockey\nTurfhall Stadium\nSoftball\n3,000\nWestern Province Softball\nGood Hope Centre\nVarious indoor sports\n6,000\nVarious\nRoyal Cape Yacht Club\nSailing\nN/A\nRoyal Cape Yacht Club\nGrand West Arena\nVarious\n6,000\nN/A\nGreen Point Athletics Stadium\nAthletics, Association football\n5,000\nN/A\nNewlands Swimming Pool\nSwimming/water polo/diving\n2,000\nWP Aquatics\nAutshumato/Berg River Dam\nRowing/Canoe-Kayak\nN/A\nN/A\nKhayelitsha canal\nRowing/Canoe\nKhayelitsha Rugby & Soccer stadium\nAssociation football/Rugby\n6,000\n\nCape Town's most popular sports by participation are cricket, association football, swimming, and rugby union. In rugby union, Cape Town is the home of the Western Province side, who play at Newlands Stadium and compete in the Currie Cup. In addition, Western Province players (along with some from Wellington's Boland Cavaliers) comprise the Stormers in the Southern Hemisphere's Super Rugby competition. Cape Town also regularly hosts the national team, the Springboks, and hosted matches during the 1995 Rugby World Cup, including the opening ceremony and game, as well as the semi-final between New Zealand and England that saw Jonah Lomu run in four tries.\n\nAssociation football, which is also known as \"soccer\" in South Africa, is also popular. Two clubs from Cape Town play in the Premier Soccer League (PSL), South Africa's premier league. These teams are Ajax Cape Town, which formed as a result of the 1999 amalgamation of the Seven Stars and the Cape Town Spurs and resurrected Cape Town City F.C. Cape Town was also the location of several of the matches of the FIFA 2010 World Cup including a semi-final, held in South Africa. The Mother City built a new 70,000 seat stadium (Cape Town Stadium) in the Green Point area.\n\nIn cricket, the Cape Cobras represent Cape Town at the Newlands Cricket Ground. The team is the result of an amalgamation of the Western Province Cricket and Boland Cricket teams. They take part in the Supersport and Standard Bank Cup Series. The Newlands Cricket Ground regularly hosts international matches.\n\nCape Town has had Olympic aspirations. For example, in 1996, Cape Town was one of the five candidate cities shortlisted by the IOC to launch official candidatures to host the 2004 Summer Olympics. Although the Games ultimately went to Athens, Cape Town came in third place. There has been some speculation that Cape Town was seeking the South African Olympic Committee's nomination to be South Africa's bid city for the 2020 Summer Olympic Games. That however was quashed when the International Olympic Committee awarded the 2020 Games to Tokyo.\n\nThe city of Cape Town has vast experience in hosting major national and international sports events.\n\nThe Cape Town Cycle Tour is the world's largest individually timed cycle raceand the first event outside Europe to be included in the International Cycling Union's Golden Bike Series. It sees over 35,000 cyclists tackling a route around Cape Town. The Absa Cape Epic is the largest full-service mountain bike stage race in the world.\n\nSome notable events hosted by Cape Town have included the 1995 Rugby World Cup, 2003 ICC Cricket World Cup, and World Championships in various sports such as athletics, fencing, weightlifting, hockey, cycling, canoeing, gymnastics and others.\n\nCape Town was also a host city to the 2010 FIFA World Cup from 11 June to 11 July 2010, further enhancing its profile as a major events city. It was also one of the host cities of the 2009 Indian Premier League cricket tournament.\n\nPublic primary and secondary schools in Cape Town are run by the Western Cape Education Department. This provincial department is divided into seven districts; four of these are \"Metropole\" districtsMetropole Central, North, South, and Eastwhich cover various areas of the city. There are also many private schools, both religious and secular, in Cape Town.\n\nCape Town has a well-developed higher system of public universities. Cape Town is served by three public universities: the University of Cape Town (UCT), the University of the Western Cape (UWC) and the Cape Peninsula University of Technology (CPUT). Stellenbosch University, while not in the city itself, is 50 kilometres from the City Bowl and has additional campuses, such as the Tygerberg Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences and the Bellville Business Park closer to the City.\n\nBoth the University of Cape Town and Stellenbosch University are leading universities in South Africa. This is due in large part to substantial financial contributions made to these institutions by both the public and private sector. UCT is an English-speaking institution. It has over 21,000 students and has an MBA programme that is ranked 51st by the Financial Times in 2006. It is also the top-ranked university in Africa, being the only African university to make the world's Top 200 university list at number 146. Since the African National Congress has come into governmental power, some restructuring of Western Cape universities has taken place and as such, traditionally non-white universities have seen increased financing, which has benefitted the University of the Western Cape.\n\nThe public Cape Peninsula University of Technology was formed on 1 January 2005, when two separate institutions – Cape Technikon and Peninsula Technikon – were merged. The new university offers education primarily in English, although one may take courses in any of South Africa's official languages. The institution generally awards the National Diploma.\n\nCape Town has also become a popular study abroad destination for many international college students. Many study abroad providers offer semester, summer, short-term, and internship programs in partnership with Cape Town universities as a chance for international students to gain intercultural understanding.\n\nCape Town International Airport serves both domestic and international flights. It is the second-largest airport in South Africa and serves as a major gateway for travelers to the Cape region. Cape Town has direct flights to most cities in South Africa as well as a number of international destinations.\n\nCape Town International Airport recently opened a brand new central terminal building that was developed to handle an expected increase in air traffic as tourism numbers increased in the lead-up to the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Other renovations include several large new parking garages, a revamped domestic departure terminal, a new Bus Rapid Transit system station and a new double-decker road system. The airport's cargo facilities are also being expanded and several large empty lots are being developed into office space and hotels.\n\nThe Cape Town International Airport was among the winners of the World Travel Awards for being Africa's leading airport.\n\nCape Town International Airport is located 18 km from the Central Business District\n\nCape Town has a long tradition as a port city. The Port of Cape Town, the city's main port, is in Table Bay directly to the north of the CBD. The port is a hub for ships in the southern Atlantic: it is located along one of the busiest shipping corridors in the world. It is also a busy container port, second in South Africa only to Durban. In 2004, it handled 3,161 ships and 9.2 million tonnes of cargo.\n\nSimon's Town Harbour on the False Bay coast of the Cape Peninsula is the main operational base of the South African Navy.\n\nThe Shosholoza Meyl is the passenger rail operations of Spoornet and operates two long-distance passenger rail services from Cape Town: a daily service to and from Johannesburg via Kimberley and a weekly service to and from Durban via Kimberley, Bloemfontein and Pietermaritzburg. These trains terminate at Cape Town railway station and make a brief stop at Bellville. Cape Town is also one terminus of the luxury tourist-oriented Blue Train as well as the five-star Rovos Rail.\n\nMetrorail operates a commuter rail service in Cape Town and the surrounding area. The Metrorail network consists of 96 stations throughout the suburbs and outskirts of Cape Town.\n\nCape Town is the origin of three national roads. The N1 and N2 begin in the foreshore area near the City Center.\n\nThe N1 runs East-North-East through Edgemead, Parow, Bellville, and Brackenfell. It connects Cape Town to major cities further inland, namely Bloemfontein, Johannesburg, and Pretoria An older at-grade road, the R101, runs parallel to the N1 from Bellville.\n\nThe N2 runs East-South-Ease through Rondebosch, Guguletu, Khayelitsha, Macassar to Somerset West. It becomes a multiple-carriageway at-grade road from the intersection with the R44 onwards. The N2 continues east along the coast, linking Cape Town to the coastal cities of Port Elizabeth, East London and Durban. An older at-grade road, the R101, runs parallel to the N1 initially, before veering south at Bellville, to join the N2 at Somerset West via the suburbs of Kuils River and Eerste River.\n\nThe N7 originates from the N1 at Wingfield Interchange near Edgemead. It runs north, initially as a highway, but becoming an at-grade road from the intersection with the M5 (Potsdam Rd) onwards. It links Cape Town with towns further North and eventually, Namibia.\n\nThere are also a number of regional routes linking Cape Town with surrounding areas. The R27 originates from the N1 near the Foreshore and runs north parallel to the N7, but nearer to the coast. It passes through the suburbs of Milnerton, Table View and Bloubergstrand and links the City to the West Coast, ending at the town of Velddrif. The R44 enters the east of the metro from the north, from Stellenbosch. It connects Stellenbosch to Somerset West, then crosses the N2 to Strand and Gordon's Bay. It exits the metro heading south hugging the coast, leading to the towns of Betty's Bay and Kleinmond.\n\nOf the three-digit routes, the R300, is an expressway linking the N1 at Brackenfell to the N2 near Mitchells Plain and the Cape Town International Airport. The R302 runs from the R102 in Bellville, heading north across the N1 through Durbanville leaving the metro to Malmesbury. The R304 enters the northern limits of the metro from Stellenbosch, running NNW before veering west to cross the N7 at Philadelphia to end at Atlantis at a junction with the\\sR307. This R307 starts north of Koeberg from the R27 and, after meeting the R304, continues north to Darling. The R310 originates from Muizenberg and runs along the coast, to the south of Mitchell's Plain and Khayelitsha, before veering north-east, crossing the N2 west of Macassar, and exiting the metro heading to Stellenbosch.\n\nCape Town, like most South African cities, uses Metropolitan or \"M\" routes for important intra-city routes, a layer below National (N) roads and Regional (R) routes. Each city's M roads are independently numbered. Most are at-grade roads. However, the M3 splits from the N2 and runs to the south along the eastern slopes of Table Mountain, connecting the City Bowl with Muizenberg. Except for a section between Rondebosch and Newlands that has at-grade intersections, this route is a highway. The M5 splits from the N1 further east than the M3, and links the Cape Flats to the CBD. It is a highway as far as the interchange with the M68 at Ottery, before continuing as an at-grade road.\n\nCape Town suffers from the worst traffic congestion in South Africa.\n\nGolden Arrow Bus Services operates scheduled bus services in the Cape Town metropolitan area. Several companies run long-distance bus services from Cape Town to the other cities in South Africa.\n\nCape Town has a public transport system in about 10% of the city, running north to south along the west coastline of the city, comprising Phase 1 of the IRT system. This is known as the MyCiTi service.\n\nMyCiTi Phase 1 includes services linking the Airport to the Cape Town inner city, as well as the following areas: Blouberg / Table View, Dunoon, Atlantis and Melkbosstrand, Milnerton, Paarden Eiland, Century City, Salt River and Walmer Estate, and all suburbs of the City Bowl and Atlantic Seaboard all the way to Llandudno and Hout Bay.\n\nThe MyCiTi N2 Express service consists of two routes each linking the Cape Town inner city and Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plain on the Cape Flats.\n\nThe service use high floor articulated and standard size buses in dedicated busways, low floor articulated and standard size buses on the N2 Express service, and smaller Optare buses in suburban and inner city areas. It offers universal access through level boarding and numerous other measures, and requires cashless fare payment using the EMV compliant smart card system, called myconnect. Headway of services (i.e. the time between buses on the same route) range from 3 mins to 20 mins in peak times to 60 minutes during quiet off-peak periods.\n\nCape Town has two kinds of taxis: metered taxis and minibus taxis. Unlike many cities, metered taxis are not allowed to drive around the city to solicit fares and instead must be called to a specific location.\n\nCape Town metered taxi cabs mostly operate in the city bowl, suburbs and Cape Town International Airport areas. Large companies that operate fleets of cabs can be reached by phone and are cheaper than the single operators that apply for hire from taxi ranks and Victoria and Alfred Waterfront. There are about one thousand meter taxis in Cape Town. Their rates vary from R8 per kilometre to about R15 per kilometre. The larger taxi companies in Cape Town are Excite Taxis, Cabnet and Intercab and single operators are reachable by cellular phone. The seven seated Toyota Avanza are the most popular with larger Taxi companies. Meter cabs are mostly used by tourists and are safer to use than minibus taxis.\n\nMinibus taxis are the standard form of transport for the majority of the population who cannot afford private vehicles. Although essential, these taxis are often poorly maintained and are frequently not road-worthy. These taxis make frequent unscheduled stops to pick up passengers, which can cause accidents. With the high demand for transport by the working class of South Africa, minibus taxis are often filled over their legal passenger allowance. Minibuses are generally owned and operated in fleets.\n\nCape Town has nine twin towns and sister cities:\n! Country\n! City\n! Established\nAntwerp\n1996\nAachen\n2000\nHaifa\n1975\nHangzhou\n2005\nMaputo\n1994\nNice\n1974\nSaint Petersburg\n2001\nFunchal\n1995\nLuanda\n1997\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of Cape Town\nBULLET::::- OPENCities\n\nBULLET::::- Official website of the City of Cape Town\nBULLET::::- Official website of the Western Cape\nBULLET::::- Official Cape Town Tourism website\n"}
{"id": "6654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6654", "title": "Chicago Cubs", "text": "Chicago Cubs\n\nThe Chicago Cubs are an American professional baseball team based in Chicago, Illinois. The Cubs compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) Central division. The team plays its home games at Wrigley Field, located on the city's North Side. The Cubs are one of two major league teams in Chicago; the other, the Chicago White Sox, is a member of the American League (AL) Central division. The Cubs, first known as the White Stockings, were a founding member of the NL in 1876, becoming the Chicago Cubs in 1903.\n\nThe Cubs have appeared in a total of eleven World Series. The 1906 Cubs won 116 games, finishing 116–36 and posting a modern-era record winning percentage of , before losing the World Series to the Chicago White Sox (\"The Hitless Wonders\") by four games to two. The Cubs won back-to-back World Series championships in 1907 and 1908, becoming the first major league team to play in three consecutive World Series, and the first to win it twice. Most recently, the Cubs won the 2016 National League Championship Series and 2016 World Series, which ended a 71-year National League pennant drought and a 108-year World Series championship drought, both of which are record droughts in Major League Baseball. The 108-year drought was also the longest such occurrence in all major North American sports. Since the start of divisional play in 1969, the Cubs have appeared in the postseason ten times through the 2018 season.\n\nThe Cubs are known as \"the North Siders\", a reference to the location of Wrigley Field within the city of Chicago, and in contrast to the White Sox, whose home field (Guaranteed Rate Field) is located on the South Side.\n\nThe Cubs began playing in 1870 as the Chicago White Stockings, joining the National League (NL) in 1876 as a charter member. Owner William Hulbert signed multiple star players, such as pitcher Albert Spalding and infielders Ross Barnes, Deacon White, and Adrian \"Cap\" Anson, to join the team prior to the N.L.'s first season. The White Stockings played their home games at West Side Grounds and quickly established themselves as one of the new league's top teams. Spalding won forty-seven games and Barnes led the league in hitting at .429 as Chicago won the first ever National League pennant, which at the time was the game's top prize.\n\nAfter back-to-back pennants in 1880 and 1881, Hulbert died, and Spalding, who had retired to start Spalding sporting goods, assumed ownership of the club. The White Stockings, with Anson acting as player-manager, captured their third consecutive pennant in 1882, and Anson established himself as the game's first true superstar. In 1885 and 1886, after winning N.L. pennants, the White Stockings met the champions of the short-lived American Association in that era's version of a World Series. Both seasons resulted in matchups with the St. Louis Brown Stockings, with the clubs tying in 1885 and with St. Louis winning in 1886. This was the genesis of what would eventually become one of the greatest rivalries in sports. In all, the Anson-led Chicago Base Ball Club won six National League pennants between 1876 and 1886. As a result, Chicago's club nickname transitioned, and by 1890 they had become known as the Chicago Colts, or sometimes \"Anson's Colts\", referring to Cap's influence within the club. Anson was the first player in history credited with collecting 3,000 career hits. After a disappointing record of 59–73 and a ninth-place finish in 1897, Anson was released by the Cubs as both a player and manager. Due to Anson's absence from the club after 22 years, local newspaper reporters started to refer to the Colts as the \"Orphans\".\n\nAfter the 1900 season, the American Base-Ball League formed as a rival professional league, and incidentally the club's old White Stockings nickname (eventually shortened to White Sox) would be adopted by a new American League neighbor to the south.\n\n In 1902, Spalding, who by this time had revamped the roster to boast what would soon be one of the best teams of the early century, sold the club to Jim Hart. The franchise was nicknamed the Cubs by the \"Chicago Daily News\" in 1902, although not officially becoming the Chicago Cubs until the 1907 season. During this period, which has become known as baseball's dead-ball era, Cub infielders Joe Tinker, Johnny Evers, and Frank Chance were made famous as a double-play combination by Franklin P. Adams' poem \"Baseball's Sad Lexicon\". The poem first appeared in the July 18, 1910 edition of the \"New York Evening Mail\". Mordecai \"Three-Finger\" Brown, Jack Taylor, Ed Reulbach, Jack Pfiester, and Orval Overall were several key pitchers for the Cubs during this time period. With Chance acting as player-manager from 1905 to 1912, the Cubs won four pennants and two World Series titles over a five-year span. Although they fell to the \"Hitless Wonders\" White Sox in the 1906 World Series, the Cubs recorded a record 116 victories and the best winning percentage (.763) in Major League history. With mostly the same roster, Chicago won back-to-back World Series championships in 1907 and 1908, becoming the first Major League club to play three times in the Fall Classic and the first to win it twice. However, the Cubs would not win another World Series until 2016; this remains the longest championship drought in North American professional sports.\nThe next season, veteran catcher Johnny Kling left the team to become a professional pocket billiards player. Some historians think Kling's absence was significant enough to prevent the Cubs from also winning a third straight title in 1909, as they finished 6 games out of first place. When Kling returned the next year, the Cubs won the pennant again, but lost to the Philadelphia Athletics in the 1910 World Series.\n\nIn 1914, advertising executive Albert Lasker obtained a large block of the club's shares and before the 1916 season assumed majority ownership of the franchise. Lasker brought in a wealthy partner, Charles Weeghman, the proprietor of a popular chain of lunch counters who had previously owned the Chicago Whales of the short-lived Federal League. As principal owners, the pair moved the club from the West Side Grounds to the much newer Weeghman Park, which had been constructed for the Whales only two years earlier, where they remain to this day. The Cubs responded by winning a pennant in the war-shortened season of 1918, where they played a part in another team's curse: the Boston Red Sox defeated Grover Cleveland Alexander's Cubs four games to two in the 1918 World Series, Boston's last Series championship until 2004.\n\nBeginning in 1916, Bill Wrigley of chewing-gum fame acquired an increasing quantity of stock in the Cubs. By 1921 he was the majority owner, maintaining that status into the 1930s.\n\nMeanwhile, the year 1919 saw the start of the tenure of Bill Veeck, Sr. as team president. Veeck would hold that post throughout the 1920s and into the 30s. The management team of Wrigley and Veeck came to be known as the \"double-Bills.\"\n\nNear the end of the first decade of the double-Bills' guidance, the Cubs won the NL Pennant in 1929 and then achieved the unusual feat of winning a pennant every three years, following up the 1929 flag with league titles in 1932, 1935, and 1938. Unfortunately, their success did not extend to the Fall Classic, as they fell to their AL rivals each time. The '32 series against the Yankees featured Babe Ruth's \"called shot\" at Wrigley Field in game three. There were some historic moments for the Cubs as well; In 1930, Hack Wilson, one of the top home run hitters in the game, had one of the most impressive seasons in MLB history, hitting 56 home runs and establishing the current runs-batted-in record of 191. That 1930 club, which boasted six eventual hall of fame members (Wilson, Gabby Hartnett, Rogers Hornsby, George \"High Pockets\" Kelly, Kiki Cuyler and manager Joe McCarthy) established the current team batting average record of .309. In 1935 the Cubs claimed the pennant in thrilling fashion, winning a record 21 games in a row in September. The '38 club saw Dizzy Dean lead the team's pitching staff and provided a historic moment when they won a crucial late-season game at Wrigley Field over the Pittsburgh Pirates with a walk-off home run by Gabby Hartnett, which became known in baseball lore as \"The Homer in the Gloamin'\".\n\nAfter the \"Double-Bills\" (Wrigley and Veeck) died in 1932 and 1933 respectively, P.K. Wrigley, son of Bill Wrigley, took over as majority owner. He was unable to extend his father's baseball success beyond 1938, and the Cubs slipped into years of mediocrity, although the Wrigley family would retain control of the team until 1981.\n\nThe Cubs enjoyed one more pennant at the close of World War II, finishing 98–56. Due to the wartime travel restrictions, the first three games of the 1945 World Series were played in Detroit, where the Cubs won two games, including a one-hitter by Claude Passeau, and the final four were played at Wrigley. The Cubs lost the series, and did not return until the 2016 World Series. After losing the 1945 World Series to the Detroit Tigers, the Cubs finished with a respectable 82–71 record in the following year, but this was only good enough for third place.\n\nIn the following two decades, the Cubs played mostly forgettable baseball, finishing among the worst teams in the National League on an almost annual basis. From 1947 to 1966, they only notched one winning season. Longtime infielder-manager Phil Cavarretta, who had been a key player during the 1945 season, was fired during spring training in 1954 after admitting the team was unlikely to finish above fifth place. Although shortstop Ernie Banks would become one of the star players in the league during the next decade, finding help for him proved a difficult task, as quality players such as Hank Sauer were few and far between. This, combined with poor ownership decisions such as the College of Coaches, and the ill-fated trade of future Hall of Fame member Lou Brock to the Cardinals for pitcher Ernie Broglio (who won only seven games over the next three seasons), hampered on-field performance.\n\nThe late-1960s brought hope of a renaissance, with third baseman Ron Santo, pitcher Ferguson Jenkins, and outfielder Billy Williams joining Banks. After losing a dismal 103 games in 1966, the Cubs brought home consecutive winning records in '67 and '68, marking the first time a Cub team had accomplished that feat in over two decades.\n\nIn the Cubs, managed by Leo Durocher, built a substantial lead in the newly created National League Eastern Division by mid-August. Ken Holtzman pitched a no-hitter on August 19, and the division lead grew to 8 games over the St. Louis Cardinals and by 9 games over the New York Mets. After the game of September 2, the Cubs record was 84–52 with the Mets in second place at 77–55. But then a losing streak began just as a Mets winning streak was beginning. The Cubs lost the final game of a series at Cincinnati, then came home to play the resurgent Pittsburgh Pirates (who would finish in third place). After losing the first two games by scores of 9–2 and 13–4, the Cubs led going into the ninth inning. A win would be a positive springboard since the Cubs were to play a crucial series with the Mets the next day. But Willie Stargell drilled a two-out, two-strike pitch from the Cubs' ace reliever, Phil Regan, onto Sheffield Avenue to tie the score in the top of the ninth. The Cubs would lose 7–5 in extra innings.[6]\nBurdened by a four-game losing streak, the Cubs traveled to Shea Stadium for a short two-game set. The Mets won both games, and the Cubs left New York with a record of 84–58 just 1⁄2 game in front. More of the same followed in Philadelphia, as a 99 loss Phillies team nonetheless defeated the Cubs twice, to extend Chicago's losing streak to eight games. In a key play in the second game, on September 11, Cubs starter Dick Selma threw a surprise pickoff attempt to third baseman Ron Santo, who was nowhere near the bag or the ball. Selma's throwing error opened the gates to a Phillies rally.\nAfter that second Philly loss, the Cubs were 84–60 and the Mets had pulled ahead at 85–57. The Mets would not look back. The Cubs' eight-game losing streak finally ended the next day in St. Louis, but the Mets were in the midst of a ten-game winning streak, and the Cubs, wilting from team fatigue, generally deteriorated in all phases of the game.[1] The Mets (who had lost a record 120 games 7 years earlier), would go on to win the World Series. The Cubs, despite a respectable 92–70 record, would be remembered for having lost a remarkable 17½ games in the standings to the Mets in the last quarter of the season.\n\nFollowing the 1969 season, the club posted winning records for the next few seasons, but no playoff action. After the core players of those teams started to move on, the 70s got worse for the team, and they became known as \"the Loveable Losers.\" In , the team found some life, but ultimately experienced one of its biggest collapses. The Cubs hit a high-water mark on June 28 at 47–22, boasting an game NL East lead, as they were led by Bobby Murcer (27 HR/89 RBI), and Rick Reuschel (20–10). However, the Philadelphia Phillies cut the lead to two by the All-star break, as the Cubs sat 19 games over .500, but they swooned late in the season, going 20–40 after July 31. The Cubs finished in fourth place at 81–81, while Philadelphia surged, finishing with 101 wins. The following two seasons also saw the Cubs get off to a fast start, as the team rallied to over 10 games above .500 well into both seasons, only to again wear down and play poorly later on, and ultimately settling back to mediocrity. This trait became known as the \"June Swoon\". Again, the Cubs' unusually high number of day games is often pointed to as one reason for the team's inconsistent late season play.\n\nWrigley died in 1977. The Wrigley family sold the team to the Chicago Tribune in 1981, ending a 65-year family relationship with the Cubs.\n\nAfter over a dozen more subpar seasons, in 1981 the Cubs hired GM Dallas Green from Philadelphia to turn around the franchise. Green had managed the 1980 Phillies to the World Series title. One of his early GM moves brought in a young Phillies minor-league 3rd baseman named Ryne Sandberg, along with Larry Bowa for Iván DeJesús. The 1983 Cubs had finished 71–91 under Lee Elia, who was fired before the season ended by Green. Green continued the culture of change and overhauled the Cubs roster, front-office and coaching staff prior to 1984. Jim Frey was hired to manage the 1984 Cubs, with Don Zimmer coaching 3rd base and Billy Connors serving as pitching coach.\n\nGreen shored up the 1984 roster with a series of transactions. In December, 1983 Scott Sanderson was acquired from Montreal in a three-team deal with San Diego for Carmelo Martínez. Pinch hitter Richie Hebner (.333 BA in 1984) was signed as a free-agent. In spring training, moves continued: LF Gary Matthews and CF Bobby Dernier came from Philadelphia on March 26, for Bill Campbell and a minor leaguer. Reliever Tim Stoddard (10–6 3.82, 7 saves) was acquired the same day for a minor leaguer; veteran pitcher Ferguson Jenkins was released.\n\nThe team's commitment to contend was complete when Green made a midseason deal on June 15 to shore up the starting rotation due to injuries to Rick Reuschel (5–5) and Sanderson. The deal brought 1979 NL Rookie of the Year pitcher Rick Sutcliffe from the Cleveland Indians. Joe Carter (who was with the Triple-A Iowa Cubs at the time) and right fielder Mel Hall were sent to Cleveland for Sutcliffe and back-up catcher Ron Hassey (.333 with Cubs in 1984). Sutcliffe (5–5 with the Indians) immediately joined Sanderson (8–5 3.14), Eckersley (10–8 3.03), Steve Trout (13–7 3.41) and Dick Ruthven (6–10 5.04) in the starting rotation. Sutcliffe proceeded to go 16–1 for Cubs and capture the Cy Young Award.\n\nThe Cubs 1984 starting lineup was very strong. It consisted of LF Matthews (.291 14–82 101 runs 17 SB), C Jody Davis (.256 19–94), RF Keith Moreland (.279 16–80), SS Larry Bowa (.223 10 SB), 1B Leon \"Bull\" Durham (.279 23–96 16SB), CF Dernier (.278 45 SB), 3B Ron Cey (.240 25–97), Closer Lee Smith(9–7 3.65 33 saves) and 1984 NL MVP Ryne Sandberg (.314 19–84 114 runs, 19 triples,32 SB).\n\nReserve players Hebner, Thad Bosley, Henry Cotto, Hassey and Dave Owen produced exciting moments. The bullpen depth of Rich Bordi, George Frazier, Warren Brusstar and Dickie Noles did their job in getting the game to Smith or Stoddard.\n\nAt the top of the order, Dernier and Sandberg were exciting, aptly coined \"the Daily Double\" by Harry Caray. With strong defense – Dernier CF and Sandberg 2B, won the NL Gold Glove- solid pitching and clutch hitting, the Cubs were a well balanced team. Following the \"Daily Double\", Matthews, Durham, Cey, Moreland and Davis gave the Cubs an order with no gaps to pitch around. Sutcliffe anchored a strong top-to-bottom rotation, and Smith was one of the top closers in the game.\n\nThe shift in the Cubs' fortunes was characterized June 23 on the \"NBC Saturday Game of the Week\" contest against the St. Louis Cardinals; it has since been dubbed simply \"The Sandberg Game.\" With the nation watching and Wrigley Field packed, Sandberg emerged as a superstar with not one, but two game-tying home runs against Cardinals closer Bruce Sutter. With his shots in the 9th and 10th innings Wrigley Field erupted and Sandberg set the stage for a comeback win that cemented the Cubs as the team to beat in the East. No one would catch them.\n\nIn early August the Cubs swept the Mets in a 4-game home series that further distanced them from the pack. An infamous Keith Moreland-Ed Lynch fight erupted after Lynch hit Moreland with a pitch, perhaps forgetting Moreland was once a linebacker at the University of Texas. It was the second game of a double header and the Cubs had won the first game in part due to a three run home run by Moreland. After the bench-clearing fight the Cubs won the second game, and the sweep put the Cubs at 68–45.\n\nIn 1984, each league had two divisions, East and West. The divisional winners met in a best-of-5 series to advance to the World Series, in a \"2–3\" format, first two games were played at the home of the team who did not have home field advantage. Then the last three games were played at the home of the team, with home field advantage. Thus the first two games were played at Wrigley Field and the next three at the home of their opponents, San Diego. A common and unfounded myth is that since Wrigley Field did not have lights at that time the National League decided to give the home field advantage to the winner of the NL West. In fact, home field advantage had rotated between the winners of the East and West since 1969 when the league expanded. In even numbered years, the NL West had home field advantage. In odd numbered years, the NL East had home field advantage. Since the NL East winners had had home field advantage in 1983, the NL West winners were entitled to it.\n\nThe confusion may stem from the fact that Major League Baseball did decide that, should the Cubs make it to the World Series, the American League winner would have home field advantage unless the Cubs hosted home games at an alternate site since the Cubs home field of Wrigley Field did not yet have lights. Rumor was the Cubs could hold home games across town at Comiskey Park, home of the American League's Chicago White Sox. Rather than hold any games in the cross town rival Sox Park, the Cubs made arrangements with the August A. Busch, owner of the St. Louis Cardinals, to use Busch Stadium in St. Louis as the Cubs \"home field\" for the World Series. This was approved by Major League Baseball and would have enabled the Cubs to host games 1 and 2, along with games 6 and 7 if necessary. At the time home field advantage was rotated between each league. Odd numbered years the AL had home field advantage. Even numbered years the NL had home field advantage. In the 1982 World Series the St. Louis Cardinals of the NL had home field advantage. In the 1983 World Series the Baltimore Orioles of the AL had home field advantage.\n\nIn the NLCS, the Cubs easily won the first two games at Wrigley Field against the San Diego Padres. The Padres were the winners of the Western Division with Steve Garvey, Tony Gwynn, Eric Show, Goose Gossage and Alan Wiggins. With wins of 13–0 and 4–2, the Cubs needed to win only one game of the next three in San Diego to make it to the World Series. After being beaten in Game 3 7–1, the Cubs lost Game 4 when Smith, with the game tied 5–5, allowed a game-winning home run to Garvey in the bottom of the ninth inning. In Game 5 the Cubs took a 3–0 lead into the 6th inning, and a 3–2 lead into the seventh with Sutcliffe (who won the Cy Young Award that year) still on the mound. Then, Leon Durham had a sharp grounder go under his glove. This critical error helped the Padres win the game 6–3, with a 4-run 7th inning and keep Chicago out of the 1984 World Series against the Detroit Tigers. The loss ended a spectacular season for the Cubs, one that brought alive a slumbering franchise and made the Cubs relevant for a whole new generation of Cubs fans.\n\nThe Padres would be defeated in 5 games by Sparky Anderson's Tigers in the World Series.\n\nThe 1985 season brought high hopes. The club started out well, going 35–19 through mid-June, but injuries to Sutcliffe and others in the pitching staff contributed to a 13-game losing streak that pushed the Cubs out of contention.\n\nIn 1989, the first full season with night baseball at Wrigley Field, Don Zimmer's Cubs were led by a core group of veterans in Ryne Sandberg, Rick Sutcliffe and Andre Dawson, who were boosted by a crop of youngsters such as Mark Grace, Shawon Dunston, Greg Maddux, Rookie of the Year Jerome Walton, and Rookie of the Year Runner-Up Dwight Smith. The Cubs won the NL East once again that season winning 93 games. This time the Cubs met the San Francisco Giants in the NLCS. After splitting the first two games at home, the Cubs headed to the Bay Area, where despite holding a lead at some point in each of the next three games, bullpen meltdowns and managerial blunders ultimately led to three straight losses. The Cubs couldn't overcome the efforts of Will Clark, whose home run off Maddux, just after a managerial visit to the mound, led Maddux to think Clark knew what pitch was coming. Afterward, Maddux would speak into his glove during any mound conversation, beginning what is a norm today. Mark Grace was 11–17 in the series with 8 RBI. Eventually, the Giants lost to the \"Bash Brothers\" and the Oakland A's in the famous \"\"Earthquake Series\".\"\n\nThe 1998 season would begin on a somber note with the death of legendary broadcaster Harry Caray. After the retirement of Sandberg and the trade of Dunston, the Cubs had holes to fill, and the signing of Henry Rodríguez to bat cleanup provided protection for Sammy Sosa in the lineup, as Rodriguez slugged 31 round-trippers in his first season in Chicago. Kevin Tapani led the club with a career high 19 wins while Rod Beck anchored a strong bullpen and Mark Grace turned in one of his best seasons. The Cubs were swamped by media attention in 1998, and the team's two biggest headliners were Sosa and rookie flamethrower Kerry Wood. Wood's signature performance was one-hitting the Houston Astros, a game in which he tied the major league record of 20 strikeouts in nine innings. His torrid strikeout numbers earned Wood the nickname \"\"Kid K,\"\" and ultimately earned him the 1998 NL Rookie of the Year award. Sosa caught fire in June, hitting a major league record 20 home runs in the month, and his home run race with Cardinals slugger Mark McGwire transformed the pair into international superstars in a matter of weeks. McGwire finished the season with a new major league record of 70 home runs, but Sosa's .308 average and 66 homers earned him the National League MVP Award. After a down-to-the-wire Wild Card chase with the San Francisco Giants, Chicago and San Francisco ended the regular season tied, and thus squared off in a one-game playoff at Wrigley Field. Third baseman Gary Gaetti hit the eventual game winning homer in the playoff game. The win propelled the Cubs into the postseason for the first time since 1989 with a 90–73 regular season record. Unfortunately, the bats went cold in October, as manager Jim Riggleman's club batted .183 and scored only four runs en route to being swept by Atlanta in the National League Division Series. The home run chase between Sosa, McGwire and Ken Griffey, Jr. helped professional baseball to bring in a new crop of fans as well as bringing back some fans who had been disillusioned by the 1994 strike. The Cubs retained many players who experienced career years in 1998, but, after a fast start in 1999, they collapsed again (starting with being swept at the hands of the cross-town White Sox in mid-June) and finished in the bottom of the division for the next two seasons.\n\nDespite losing fan favorite Grace to free agency and the lack of production from newcomer Todd Hundley, skipper Don Baylor's Cubs put together a good season in 2001. The season started with Mack Newton being brought in to preach \"positive thinking.\" One of the biggest stories of the season transpired as the club made a midseason deal for Fred McGriff, which was drawn out for nearly a month as McGriff debated waiving his no-trade clause. The Cubs led the wild card race by 2.5 games in early September, but crumbled when Preston Wilson hit a three run walk off homer off of closer Tom \"Flash\" Gordon, which halted the team's momentum. The team was unable to make another serious charge, and finished at 88–74, five games behind both Houston and St. Louis, who tied for first. Sosa had perhaps his finest season and Jon Lieber led the staff with a 20-win season.\n\nThe Cubs had high expectations in 2002, but the squad played poorly. On July 5, 2002, the Cubs promoted assistant general manager and player personnel director Jim Hendry to the General Manager position. The club responded by hiring Dusty Baker and by making some major moves in 2003. Most notably, they traded with the Pittsburgh Pirates for outfielder Kenny Lofton and third baseman Aramis Ramírez, and rode dominant pitching, led by Kerry Wood and Mark Prior, as the Cubs led the division down the stretch.\n\nChicago halted St. Louis' run to the playoffs by taking four of five games from the Cardinals at Wrigley Field in early September, after which they won their first division title in 14 years. They then went on to defeat the Atlanta Braves in a dramatic five-game Division Series, the franchise's first postseason series win since beating the Detroit Tigers in the 1908 World Series.\n\nAfter losing an extra-inning game in Game 1, the Cubs rallied and took a three-games-to-one lead over the Wild Card Florida Marlins in the National League Championship Series. Florida shut the Cubs out in Game 5, but the Cubs returned home to Wrigley Field with young pitcher Mark Prior to lead the Cubs in Game 6 as they took a 3–0 lead into the 8th inning. It was at this point when a now-infamous incident took place. Several spectators attempted to catch a foul ball off the bat of Luis Castillo. A Chicago Cubs fan by the name of Steve Bartman, of Northbrook, Illinois, reached for the ball and deflected it away from the glove of Moisés Alou for the second out of the eighth inning. Alou reacted angrily toward the stands and after the game stated that he would have caught the ball. Alou at one point recanted, saying he would not have been able to make the play, but later said this was just an attempt to make Bartman feel better and believing the whole incident should be forgotten. Interference was not called on the play, as the ball was ruled to be on the spectator side of the wall. Castillo was eventually walked by Prior. Two batters later, and to the chagrin of the packed stadium, Cubs shortstop Alex Gonzalez misplayed an inning-ending double play, loading the bases. The error would lead to eight Florida runs and a Marlin victory. Despite sending Kerry Wood to the mound and holding a lead twice, the Cubs ultimately dropped Game 7, and failed to reach the World Series.\n\nThe \"Steve Bartman incident\" was seen as the \"first domino\" in the turning point of the era, and the Cubs did not win a playoff game for the next eleven seasons.\n\nIn 2004, the Cubs were a consensus pick by most media outlets to win the World Series. The offseason acquisition of Derek Lee (who was acquired in a trade with Florida for Hee-seop Choi) and the return of Greg Maddux only bolstered these expectations. Despite a mid-season deal for Nomar Garciaparra, misfortune struck the Cubs again. They led the Wild Card by 1.5 games over San Francisco and Houston on September 25. On that day, both teams lost, giving the Cubs a chance at increasing the lead to 2.5 games with only eight games remaining in the season, but reliever LaTroy Hawkins blew a save to the Mets, and the Cubs lost the game in extra innings. The defeat seemingly deflated the team, as they proceeded to drop six of their last eight games as the Astros won the Wild Card.\n\nDespite the fact that the Cubs had won 89 games, this fallout was decidedly unlovable, as the Cubs traded superstar Sammy Sosa after he had left the season's final game early and then lied about it publicly. Already a controversial figure in the clubhouse after his corked-bat incident, Sammy's actions alienated much of his once strong fan base as well as the few teammates still on good terms with him, (many teammates grew tired of Sosa playing loud salsa music in the locker room) and possibly tarnished his place in Cubs' lore for years to come. The disappointing season also saw fans start to become frustrated with the constant injuries to ace pitchers Mark Prior and Kerry Wood. Additionally, the 2004 season led to the departure of popular commentator Steve Stone, who had become increasingly critical of management during broadcasts and was verbally attacked by reliever Kent Mercker. Things were no better in 2005, despite a career year from first baseman Derrek Lee and the emergence of closer Ryan Dempster. The club struggled and suffered more key injuries, only managing to win 79 games after being picked by many to be a serious contender for the N.L. pennant. In 2006, bottom fell out as the Cubs finished 66–96, last in the NL Central.\n\nAfter finishing last in the NL Central with 66 wins in 2006, the Cubs re-tooled and went from \"worst to first\" in 2007. In the offseason they signed Alfonso Soriano to a contract at eight years for $136 million, and replaced manager Dusty Baker with fiery veteran manager Lou Piniella. After a rough start, which included a brawl between Michael Barrett and Carlos Zambrano, the Cubs overcame the Milwaukee Brewers, who had led the division for most of the season. The Cubs traded Barrett to the Padres, and later acquired catcher Jason Kendall from Oakland. Kendall was highly successful with his management of the pitching rotation and helped at the plate as well. By September, Geovany Soto became the full-time starter behind the plate, replacing the veteran Kendall. Winning streaks in June and July, coupled with a pair of dramatic, late-inning wins against the Reds, led to the Cubs ultimately clinching the NL Central with a record of 85–77. They met Arizona in the NLDS, but controversy followed as Piniella, in a move that has since come under scrutiny, pulled Carlos Zambrano after the sixth inning of a pitcher's duel with D-Backs ace Brandon Webb, to \"...save Zambrano for (a potential) Game 4.\" The Cubs, however, were unable to come through, losing the first game and eventually stranding over 30 baserunners in a three-game Arizona sweep.\n\nThe Tribune company, in financial distress, was acquired by real-estate mogul Sam Zell in December 2007. This acquisition included the Cubs. However, Zell did not take an active part in running the baseball franchise, instead concentrating on putting together a deal to sell it.\n\nThe Cubs successfully defended their National League Central title in 2008, going to the postseason in consecutive years for the first time since 1906–08. The offseason was dominated by three months of unsuccessful trade talks with the Orioles involving 2B Brian Roberts, as well as the signing of Chunichi Dragons star Kosuke Fukudome. The team recorded their 10,000th win in April, while establishing an early division lead. Reed Johnson and Jim Edmonds were added early on and Rich Harden was acquired from the Oakland Athletics in early July. The Cubs headed into the All-Star break with the N.L.'s best record, and tied the league record with eight representatives to the All-Star game, including catcher Geovany Soto, who was named Rookie of the Year. The Cubs took control of the division by sweeping a four-game series in Milwaukee. On September 14, in a game moved to Miller Park due to Hurricane Ike, Zambrano pitched a no-hitter against the Astros, and six days later the team clinched by beating St. Louis at Wrigley. The club ended the season with a 97–64 record and met Los Angeles in the NLDS. The heavily favored Cubs took an early lead in Game 1, but James Loney's grand slam off Ryan Dempster changed the series' momentum. Chicago committed numerous critical errors and were outscored 20–6 in a Dodger sweep, which provided yet another sudden ending.\n\nThe Ricketts family acquired a majority interest in the Cubs in 2009, ending the Tribune years. Apparently handcuffed by the Tribune's bankruptcy and the sale of the club to the Ricketts siblings, led by chairman Thomas S. Ricketts, the Cubs' quest for a NL Central three-peat started with notice that there would be less invested into contracts than in previous years. Chicago engaged St. Louis in a see-saw battle for first place into August 2009, but the Cardinals played to a torrid 20–6 pace that month, designating their rivals to battle in the Wild Card race, from which they were eliminated in the season's final week. The Cubs were plagued by injuries in 2009, and were only able to field their Opening Day starting lineup three times the entire season. Third baseman Aramis Ramírez injured his throwing shoulder in an early May game against the Milwaukee Brewers, sidelining him until early July and forcing journeyman players like Mike Fontenot and Aaron Miles into more prominent roles. Additionally, key players like Derrek Lee (who still managed to hit .306 with 35 HR and 111 RBI that season), Alfonso Soriano, and Geovany Soto also nursed nagging injuries. The Cubs posted a winning record (83–78) for the third consecutive season, the first time the club had done so since 1972, and a new era of ownership under the Ricketts family was approved by MLB owners in early October.\n\nRookie Starlin Castro debuted in early May (2010) as the starting shortstop. However, the club played poorly in the early season, finding themselves 10 games under .500 at the end of June. In addition, long-time ace Carlos Zambrano was pulled from a game against the White Sox on June 25 after a tirade and shoving match with Derrek Lee, and was suspended indefinitely by Jim Hendry, who called the conduct \"unacceptable.\" On August 22, Lou Piniella, who had already announced his retirement at the end of the season, announced that he would leave the Cubs prematurely to take care of his sick mother. Mike Quade took over as the interim manager for the final 37 games of the year. Despite being well out of playoff contention the Cubs went 24–13 under Quade, the best record in baseball during that 37 game stretch, earning Quade the manager position going forward on October 19.\n\nOn December 3, 2010, Cubs broadcaster and former third baseman, Ron Santo, died due to complications from bladder cancer and diabetes. He spent 13 seasons as a player with the Cubs, and at the time of his death was regarded as one of the greatest players not in the Hall of Fame. He was posthumously elected to the Major League Baseball Hall of Fame in 2012.\n\nDespite trading for pitcher Matt Garza and signing free-agent slugger Carlos Peña, the Cubs finished the 2011 season 20 games under .500 with a record of 71–91. Weeks after the season came to an end, the club was rejuvenated in the form of a new philosophy, as new owner Tom Ricketts signed Theo Epstein away from the Boston Red Sox, naming him club President and giving him a five-year contract worth over $18 million, and subsequently discharged manager Mike Quade. Epstein, a proponent of sabremetrics and one of the architects of the 2004 and 2007 World Series championships in Boston, brought along Jed Hoyer from the Padres to fill the role of GM and hired Dale Sveum as manager. Although the team had a dismal 2012 season, losing 101 games (the worst record since 1966), it was largely expected. The youth movement ushered in by Epstein and Hoyer began as longtime fan favorite Kerry Wood retired in May, followed by Ryan Dempster and Geovany Soto being traded to Texas at the All-Star break for a group of minor league prospects headlined by Christian Villanueva, but also included little thought of Kyle Hendricks. The development of Castro, Anthony Rizzo, Darwin Barney, Brett Jackson and pitcher Jeff Samardzija, as well as the replenishing of the minor-league system with prospects such as Javier Baez, Albert Almora, and Jorge Soler became the primary focus of the season, a philosophy which the new management said would carry over at least through the 2013 season.\n\nThe 2013 season resulted in much as the same the year before. Shortly before the trade deadline, the Cubs traded Matt Garza to the Texas Rangers for Mike Olt, Carl Edwards Jr, Neil Ramirez, and Justin Grimm. Three days later, the Cubs sent Alfonso Soriano to the New York Yankees for minor leaguer Corey Black. The mid season fire sale led to another last place finish in the NL Central, finishing with a record of 66–96. Although there was a five-game improvement in the record from the year before, Anthony Rizzo and Starlin Castro seemed to take steps backward in their development. On September 30, 2013, Theo Epstein made the decision to fire manager Dale Sveum after just two seasons at the helm of the Cubs. The regression of several young players was thought to be the main focus point, as the front office said Sveum would not be judged based on wins and losses. In two seasons as skipper, Sveum finished with a record of 127–197.\n\nThe 2013 season was also notable as the Cubs drafted future Rookie of the Year and MVP Kris Bryant with the second overall selection.\n\nOn November 7, 2013, the Cubs hired San Diego Padres bench coach Rick Renteria to be the 53rd manager in team history. The Cubs finished the 2014 season in last place with a 73–89 record in Rentería's first and only season as manager. Despite the poor record, the Cubs improved in many areas during 2014, including rebound years by Anthony Rizzo and Starlin Castro, ending the season with a winning record at home for the first time since 2009, and compiling a 33–34 record after the All-Star Break. However, following unexpected availability of Joe Maddon when he exercised a clause that triggered on October 14 with the departure of General Manager Andrew Friedman to the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Cubs relieved Rentería of his managerial duties on October 31, 2014. During the season, the Cubs drafted Kyle Schwarber with the fourth overall selection.\n\nHall of Famer Ernie Banks died of a heart attack on January 23, 2015, shortly before his 84th birthday. The 2015 uniform carried a commemorative #14 patch on both its home and away jerseys in his honor.\n\nOn November 2, 2014, the Cubs announced that Joe Maddon had signed a five-year contract to be the 54th manager in team history. On December 10, 2014, Maddon announced that the team had signed free agent Jon Lester to a six-year, $155 million contract. Many other trades and acquisitions occurred during the off season. The opening day lineup for the Cubs contained five new players including center fielder Dexter Fowler. Rookies Kris Bryant and Addison Russell were in the starting lineup by mid-April, and rookie Kyle Schwarber was added in mid-June. On August 30, Jake Arrieta threw a no hitter against the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Cubs finished the 2015 season in third place in the NL Central, with a record of 97–65, the third best record in the majors and earned a wild card berth. On October 7, in the 2015 National League Wild Card Game, Arrieta pitched a complete game shutout and the Cubs defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates 4–0.\n\nThe Cubs defeated the Cardinals in the NLDS three-games-to-one, qualifying for a return to the NLCS for the first time in 12 years, where they faced the New York Mets. This was the first time in franchise history that the Cubs had clinched a playoff series at Wrigley Field. However, they were swept in four games by the Mets and were unable to make it to their first World Series since 1945.\n\nBefore the season, in an effort to shore up their lineup, free agents Ben Zobrist, Jason Heyward and John Lackey were signed. To make room for the Zobrist signing, Starlin Castro was traded to the Yankees for Adam Warren and Brendan Ryan, the latter of whom was released a week later. Also during the middle of the season, the Cubs traded their top prospect Gleyber Torres for Aroldis Chapman.\nIn a season that included a no-hitter on April 21 by Jake Arrieta, the Cubs finished with the best record in Major League Baseball and won their first National League Central title since the 2008 season, winning by 17.5 games. The team also reached the 100-win mark for the first time since 1935 and won 103 total games, the most wins for the franchise since 1910. The Cubs defeated the San Francisco Giants in the National League Division Series and returned to the National League Championship Series for the second year in a row, where they defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers in six games. This was their first NLCS win since the series was created in 1969. The win earned the Cubs their first World Series appearance since 1945 and a chance for their first World Series win since 1908. Coming back from a three-games-to-one deficit, the Cubs defeated the Cleveland Indians in seven games in the 2016 World Series, They were the first team to come back from a three-games-to-one deficit since the Kansas City Royals in 1985. On November 4, the city of Chicago held a victory parade and rally for the Cubs that began at Wrigley Field, headed down Lake Shore Drive, and ended in Grant Park. The city estimated that over five million people attended the parade and rally, which made it one of the largest recorded gatherings in history.\nIn an attempt to be the first team to repeat as World Series champions since the Yankees in 1998, 1999, and 2000, the Cubs struggled for most of the first half of the 2017 season, never moving more than four games over .500 and finishing the first half two games under .500. On July 15, the Cubs fell to a season-high 5.5 games out of first in the NL Central. The Cubs struggled mainly due to their pitching as Jake Arrieta and Jon Lester struggled and no starting pitcher managed to win more than 14 games (four pitchers won 15 games or more for the Cubs in 2016). The Cub offense also struggled as Kyle Schwarber batted near .200 for most of the first half and was even sent to the minors. However, the Cubs recovered in the second half of the season to finish 22 games over .500 and win the NL Central by six games over the Milwaukee Brewers. The Cubs pulled out a five-game NLDS series win over the Washington Nationals to advance to the NLCS for the third consecutive year. For the second consecutive year, they faced the Dodgers. This time, however, the Dodgers defeated the Cubs in five games. In May 2017, the Cubs and the Rickets family formed Marquee Sports & Entertainment as a central sales and marketing company for the various Rickets family sports and entertainment assets. Marquee would hand sales and marketing for the Cubs, the new Park at Wrigley, Wrigley Rooftops, new Cubs headquarters' American Airlines Conference Center and the Hotel Zachary.\nPrior to the 2018 season, the Cubs made several key free agent signings to bolster their pitching staff. The team signed starting pitcher Yu Darvish to a six-year, $126 million contract and veteran closer Brandon Morrow to two-year, $21-million contract, in addition to Tyler Chatwood and Steve Cishek. However, the Cubs struggled to stay healthy throughout the season. Anthony Rizzo missed much of April due to a back injury, and Bryant missed almost a month due to shoulder injury. However, Darvish, who only started eight games in 2018, was lost for the season due to elbow and triceps injuries. Morrow also faced two injuries before the team ruled him out for the season in September. \n\nThe team maintained first place in their division for much of the season. The injury-depleted team only went 16–11 during September, which allowed the Milwaukee Brewers, to finish with the same record. The Brewers defeated the Cubs in a tie-breaker game to win the Central Division and secure the top-seed in the National League. The Cubs subsequently lost to the Colorado Rockies in the 2018 National League Wild Card Game for their earliest playoff exit in three seasons.\n\nThe Cubs' roster remained largely intact going into the 2019 season. The team led the Central Division by a half-game over the Brewers at the All-Star Break. However, the team’s control over the division once again dissipated going into final months of the season. The Cubs lost several key players to injuries, including Javier Báez, Anthony Rizzo, and Kris Bryant during this stretch. The team's postseason chances were compromised after suffering a nine-game losing streak in late September. The Cubs were eliminated from playoff contention on September 25, marking the first time the team had failed to qualify for the playoffs since 2014. The Cubs announced they would not renew manager Joe Maddon's contract at the end of the season.\n\nThe Cubs have played their home games at Wrigley Field, also known as \"\"The Friendly Confines\"\" since 1916. It was built in 1914 as Weeghman Park for the Chicago Whales, a Federal League baseball team. The Cubs also shared the park with the Chicago Bears of the NFL for 50 years. The ballpark includes a manual scoreboard, ivy-covered brick walls, and relatively small dimensions.\n\nLocated in Chicago's Lake View neighborhood, Wrigley Field sits on an irregular block bounded by Clark and Addison Streets and Waveland and Sheffield Avenues. The area surrounding the ballpark is typically referred to as Wrigleyville. There is a dense collection of sports bars and restaurants in the area, most with baseball inspired themes, including Sluggers, Murphy's Bleachers and The Cubby Bear. Many of the apartment buildings surrounding Wrigley Field on Waveland and Sheffield Avenues have built bleachers on their rooftops for fans to view games and other sell space for advertisement. One building on Sheffield Avenue has a sign atop its roof which says \"Eamus Catuli!\" which is Latin for \"Let's Go Cubs!\" and another chronicles the time since the last Division title, pennant, and World Series championship. The 00 denotes the 2016 NL Central title, NL pennant, and the World Series championship. On game days, many residents rent out their yards and driveways to people looking for parking spots. The uniqueness of the neighborhood itself has ingrained itself into the culture of the Chicago Cubs as well as the Wrigleyville neighborhood, and has led to being used for concerts and other sporting events, such as the 2010 NHL Winter Classic between the Chicago Blackhawks and Detroit Red Wings, as well as a 2010 NCAA men's football game between the Northwestern Wildcats and Illinois Fighting Illini.\n\nIn 2013, Tom Ricketts and team president Crane Kenney unveiled plans for a five-year, $575 million privately funded renovation of Wrigley Field. Called the 1060 Project, the proposed plans included vast improvements to the stadium's facade, infrastructure, restrooms, concourses, suites, press box, bullpens, and clubhouses, as well as a t jumbotron to be added in the left field bleachers, batting tunnels, a video board in right field, and, eventually, an adjacent hotel, plaza, and office-retail complex. In previous years mostly all efforts to conduct any large-scale renovations to the field had been opposed by the city, former mayor Richard M. Daley (a staunch White Sox fan), and especially the rooftop owners.\n\nMonths of negotiations between the team, a group of rooftop properties investors, local Alderman Tom Tunney, and Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel followed with the eventual endorsements of the city's Landmarks Commission, the Plan Commission and final approval by the Chicago City Council in July 2013. The project began at the conclusion of the 2014 season.\n\nThe \"Bleacher Bums\" is a name given to fans, many of whom spend much of the day heckling, who sit in the bleacher section at Wrigley Field. Initially, the group was called \"bums\" because they attended most of the games, and as Wrigley did not yet have lights, these were all day games, so it was jokingly presumed these fans were jobless. A Broadway play, starring Joe Mantegna, Dennis Farina, Dennis Franz, and James Belushi ran for years and was based on a group of Cub fans who frequented the club's games. The group was started in 1967 by dedicated fans Ron Grousl, Tom Nall and \"mad bugler\" Mike Murphy, who was a sports radio host during mid days on Chicago-based WSCR AM 670 \"The Score\". Murphy alleges that Grousl started the Wrigley tradition of throwing back opposing teams' home run balls.\n\nBeginning in the days of P.K. Wrigley and the 1937 bleacher/scoreboard reconstruction, and prior to modern media saturation, a flag with either a \"W\" or an \"L\" has flown from atop the scoreboard masthead, indicating the day's result(s) when baseball was played at Wrigley. In case of a split doubleheader, both the \"W\" and \"L\" flags are flown.\n\nPast Cubs media guides show that originally the flags were blue with a white \"W\" and white with a blue \"L\". In 1978, consistent with the dominant colors of the flags, blue and white lights were mounted atop the scoreboard, denoting \"win\" and \"loss\" respectively for the benefit of nighttime passers-by.\n\nThe flags were replaced by 1990, the first year in which the Cubs media guide reports the switch to the now familiar colors of the flags: White with blue \"W\" and blue with white \"L\". In addition to needing to replace the worn-out flags, by then the retired numbers of Banks and Williams were flying on the foul poles, as white with blue numbers; so the \"good\" flag was switched to match that scheme.\n\nThis long-established tradition has evolved to fans carrying the white-with-blue-W flags to both home and away games, and displaying them after a Cub win. The flags have become more and more popular each season since 1998, and are now even sold as T-shirts with the same layout. In 2009, the tradition spilled over to the NHL as Chicago Blackhawks fans adopted a red and black \"W\" flag of their own.\n\nDuring the early and mid-2000s, Chip Caray usually declared that a Cubs win at home meant it was \"\"White flag time at Wrigley!\"\" More recently, the Cubs have promoted the phrase \"Fly the W!\" among fans and on social media.\nThe official Cubs team mascot is a young bear cub, named Clark, described by the team's press release as a young and friendly Cub. Clark made his debut at Advocate Health Care on January 13, 2014, the same day as the press release announcing his installation as the club's first ever official physical mascot. The bear cub itself was used in the clubs since the early 1900s and was the inspiration of the Chicago Staleys changing their team's name to the Chicago Bears, because the Cubs allowed the bigger football players—like bears to cubs—to play at Wrigley Field in the 1930s.\n\nThe Cubs had no official physical mascot prior to Clark, though a man in a 'polar bear' looking outfit, called \"The Bear-man\" (or Beeman), which was mildly popular with the fans, paraded the stands briefly in the early 1990s. There is no record of whether or not he was just a fan in a costume or employed by the club. Through the 2013 season, there were \"Cubbie-bear\" mascots outside of Wrigley on game day, but none were employed by the team. They pose for pictures with fans for tips. The most notable of these was \"Billy Cub\" who worked outside of the stadium for over six years until July 2013, when the club asked him to stop. Billy Cub, who is played by fan John Paul Weier, had unsuccessfully petitioned the team to become the official mascot.\n\nAnother unofficial but much more well-known mascot is Ronnie \"Woo Woo\" Wickers who is a longtime fan and local celebrity in the Chicago area. He is known to Wrigley Field visitors for his idiosyncratic cheers at baseball games, generally punctuated with an exclamatory \"Woo!\" (e.g., \"Cubs, woo! Cubs, woo! Big-Z, woo! Zambrano, woo! Cubs, woo!\") Longtime Cubs announcer Harry Caray dubbed Wickers \"Leather Lungs\" for his ability to shout for hours at a time. He is not employed by the team, although the club has on two separate occasions allowed him into the broadcast booth and allow him some degree of freedom once he purchases or is given a ticket by fans to get into the games. He is largely allowed to roam the park and interact with fans by Wrigley Field security.\n\nDuring the summer of 1969, a Chicago studio group produced a single record called \"Hey Hey! Holy Mackerel! (The Cubs Song)\" whose title and lyrics incorporated the catch-phrases of the respective TV and radio announcers for the Cubs, Jack Brickhouse and Vince Lloyd. Several members of the Cubs recorded an album called \"Cub Power\" which contained a cover of the song. The song received a good deal of local airplay that summer, associating it very strongly with that bittersweet season. It was played much less frequently thereafter, although it remained an unofficial Cubs theme song for some years after.\n\nFor many years, Cubs radio broadcasts started with \"It's a Beautiful Day for a Ball Game\" by the Harry Simeone Chorale. In 1979, Roger Bain released a 45 rpm record of his song \"Thanks Mr. Banks\", to honor \"Mr. Cub\" Ernie Banks.\n\nThe song \"Go, Cubs, Go!\" by Steve Goodman was recorded early in the 1984 season, and was heard frequently during that season. Goodman died in September of that year, four days before the Cubs clinched the National League Eastern Division title, their first title in 39 years. Since 1984, the song started being played from time to time at Wrigley Field; since 2007, the song has been played over the loudspeakers following each Cubs home victory.\n\nThe Mountain Goats recorded a song entitled \"Cubs in Five\" on its 1995 EP Nine Black Poppies which refers to the seeming impossibility of the Cubs winning a World Series in both its title and Chorus.\n\nIn 2007, Pearl Jam frontman Eddie Vedder composed a song dedicated to the team called \"All the Way\". Vedder, a Chicago native, and lifelong Cubs fan, composed the song at the request of Ernie Banks.\nPearl Jam has played this song live multiple times several of which occurring at Wrigley Field. Eddie Vedder has played this song live twice, at his solo shows at the Chicago Auditorium on August 21 and 22, 2008.\n\nAn album entitled \"Take Me Out to a Cubs Game\" was released in 2008. It is a collection of 17 songs and other recordings related to the team, including Harry Caray's final performance of \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" on September 21, 1997, the Steve Goodman song mentioned above, and a newly recorded rendition of \"Talkin' Baseball\" (subtitled \"Baseball and the Cubs\") by Terry Cashman. The album was produced in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Cubs' 1908 World Series victory and contains sounds and songs of the Cubs and Wrigley Field.\n\nThe 1986 film \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\" showed a game played by the Cubs when Ferris' principal goes to a bar looking for him.\n\nThe 1989 film \"Back to the Future Part II\" depicts the Chicago Cubs defeating a baseball team from Miami in the 2015 World Series, ending the longest championship drought in all four of the major North American professional sports leagues. In 2015, the Miami Marlins failed to make the playoffs but the Cubs were able to make it to the 2015 National League Wild Card round and move on to the 2015 National League Championship Series by October 21, 2015, the date where protagonist Marty McFly traveled to the future in the film. However, it was on October 21 that the Cubs were swept by the New York Mets in the NLCS.\n\nThe 1993 film \"Rookie of the Year\", directed by Daniel Stern, centers on the Cubs as a team going nowhere into August when the team chances upon 12-year-old Cubs fan Henry Rowengartner (Thomas Ian Nicholas), whose right (throwing) arm tendons have healed tightly after a broken arm and granted him the ability to regularly pitch at speeds in excess of . Following the Cubs' win over the Cleveland Indians in Game 7 of the 2016 World Series, Nicholas, in celebration, tweeted the final shot from the movie: Henry holding his fist up to the camera to show a Cubs World Series ring.\n\n\"\"Baseball's Sad Lexicon,\"\" also known as \"\"Tinker to Evers to Chance\"\" after its refrain, is a 1910 baseball poem by Franklin Pierce Adams. The poem is presented as a single, rueful stanza from the point of view of a New York Giants fan seeing the talented Chicago Cubs infield of shortstop Joe Tinker, second baseman Johnny Evers, and first baseman Frank Chance complete a double play. The trio began playing together with the Cubs in 1902, and formed a double play combination that lasted through April 1912. The Cubs won the pennant four times between 1906 and 1910, often defeating the Giants en route to the World Series.\n\nThe poem was first published in the \"New York Evening Mail\" on July 12, 1912. Popular among sportswriters, numerous additional verses were written. The poem gave Tinker, Evers, and Chance increased popularity and has been credited with their elections to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1946.\n\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\";\"Season\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\";\"Manager\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\";\"Record\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\";\"Wild Card/Division\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\";\"National League<br>Division Series\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\";\"National League<br>Championship Series\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\";\"World Series\n! style=\";\"Runners-up\n! style=\";\"\n! style=\";\"Opponent\n! style=\";\"Series\n! style=\";\"Opponent\n! style=\";\"Series\n! style=\";\"Opponent\n! style=\";\"Series\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n1–4\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\";\"Total\n! style=\";\"Wild Cards<br>Division titles\n! style=\";\"3<br>7\n! style=\";\"Division Series titles\n! style=\";\"4\n! style=\";\"NL pennants\n! style=\";\"17\n! style=\";\"World Series titles\n! style=\";\"3\nBULLET::::- Prior to 1969, divisions did not exist in MLB. The Chicago Cubs played in the National League East between 1969–1993 before moving to the newly created National League Central in 1994.\nBULLET::::- Prior to 1995, only two divisions existed in each league. With the realignment into three divisions and the institution of the wild card in 1995, the Division Series was added. \"Division Series\".\nBULLET::::- Prior to 1969, the National League champion was determined by the best win–loss record at the end of the regular season. \"See League Championship Series\".\nBULLET::::- None of the World Series contested before 1903 are recognized by MLB. \"See List of pre-World Series baseball champions\".\n\nThroughout the history of the Chicago Cubs' franchise, fifteen different Cubs pitchers have pitched no-hitters; however, no Cubs pitcher has thrown a perfect game.\n\nAs of 2018, the Chicago Cubs are ranked as the 16th most valuable sports team in the world, 12th in the United States, third in MLB behind the New York Yankees and the Los Angeles Dodgers, and first in the city of Chicago.\n\n! style=\";\"Year\n! style=\";\"World\n! style=\";\"US\n! style=\";\"MLB\n! style=\";\"CHI\n! style=\";\" data-sort-type=\"currency\"  Value\n! class=\"unsortable\" style=\";\" Ref.\n\n2018\n$2,900,000,000\n\nThe Chicago Cubs retired numbers are commemorated on pinstriped flags flying from the foul poles at Wrigley Field, with the exception of Jackie Robinson, the Brooklyn Dodgers player whose number 42 was retired for all clubs. The first retired number flag, Ernie Banks' number 14, was raised on the left field pole, and they have alternated since then. 14, 10 and 31 (Jenkins) fly on the left field pole; and 26, 23 and 31 (Maddux) fly on the right field pole.\nBULLET::::- There is also a movement to retire numbers for other players, most notably the uniform shirt of Gabby Hartnett. The Cubs first wore numbers on their shirts in 1932, and Hartnett wore #7 initially but switched to #9 for the next four seasons. From 1937 to 1940 he wore #2, which is the number considered for retirement. Petitions have been sent in to the team for Cap Anson (shirt), Hack Wilson (shirt), Phil Cavarretta (3), Andre Dawson (8) and, as well as more recent departures Kerry Wood (34), Sammy Sosa (21), and Mark Grace (17).\n\n<nowiki>*</nowiki> Robinson's number was retired by all MLB clubs.\n\n! style=\"text-align:center; ;\" Level\n! style=\"text-align:center; ;\" Team\n! style=\"text-align:center; ;\" League\n! style=\"text-align:center; ;\" Location\n\"Short Season A\"\nrowspan=4\"Rookie\"\n\nBefore signing a developmental agreement with the Kane County Cougars in 2012, the Cubs had a Class A minor league affiliation on two occasions with the Peoria Chiefs (1985–1995 and 2004–2012). Ryne Sandberg managed the Chiefs from 2006 to 2010. In the period between those associations with the Chiefs the club had affiliations with the Dayton Dragons and Lansing Lugnuts. The Lugnuts were often affectionately referred to by Chip Caray as \"Steve Stone's favorite team.\" The 2007 developmental contract with the Tennessee Smokies was preceded by Double A affiliations with the Orlando Cubs and West Tenn Diamond Jaxx. On September 16, 2014 the Cubs announced a move of their top Class A affiliate from Daytona in the Florida State League to Myrtle Beach in the Carolina League for the 2015 season. Two days later, the Cubs signed a four-year player development contract with the South Bend Silver Hawks of the Midwest League, ending their brief relationship with the Kane County Cougars and shortly thereafter renaming the Silver Hawks the South Bend Cubs.\n\nThe Chicago White Stockings, (today's Chicago Cubs), began spring training in Hot Springs, Arkansas in 1886. President Albert Spalding (founder of Spalding Sporting Goods) and player/manager Cap Anson brought their players to Hot Springs and played at the Hot Springs Baseball Grounds. The concept was for the players to have training and fitness before the start of the regular season, utilizing the bath houses of Hot Springs after practices. After the White Stockings had a successful season in 1886, winning the National League Pennant, other teams began bringing their players to Hot Springs for \"spring training\". The Chicago Cubs, St. Louis Browns, New York Yankees, St. Louis Cardinals, Cleveland Spiders, Detroit Tigers, Pittsburgh Pirates, Cincinnati Reds, New York Highlanders, Brooklyn Dodgers and Boston Red Sox were among the early squads to arrive. Whittington Park (1894) and later Majestic Park (1909) and Fogel Field (1912) were all built in Hot Springs specifically to host Major League teams.\n\nThe Cubs' current spring training facility is located in Sloan Park in Mesa, Arizona, where they play in the Cactus League. The park seats 15,000, making it Major League baseball's largest spring training facility by capacity. The Cubs annually sell out most of their games both at home and on the road. Before Sloan Park opened in 2014, the team played games at HoHoKam Park – Dwight Patterson Field from 1979. \"HoHoKam\" is literally translated from Native American as \"those who vanished.\" The North Siders have called Mesa their spring home for most seasons since 1952.\n\nIn addition to Mesa, the club has held spring training in Hot Springs, Arkansas (1886, 1896–1900), (1909–1910) New Orleans (1870, 1907, 1911–1912); Champaign, Illinois (1901–02, 1906); Los Angeles (1903–04, 1948–1949), Santa Monica, California (1905); French Lick, Indiana (1908, 1943–1945); Tampa, Florida (1913–1916); Pasadena, California (1917–1921); Santa Catalina Island, California (1922–1942, 1946–1947, 1950–1951); Rendezvous Park in Mesa (1952–1965); Blair Field in Long Beach, California (1966); and Scottsdale, Arizona (1967–1978).\n\nThe curious location on Catalina Island stemmed from Cubs owner William Wrigley Jr.'s then-majority interest in the island in 1919. Wrigley constructed a ballpark on the island to house the Cubs in spring training: it was built to the same dimensions as Wrigley Field. The ballpark was called Wrigley Field of Avalon. (The ballpark is long gone, but a clubhouse built by Wrigley to house the Cubs exists as the Catalina County Club.) However, by 1951 the team chose to leave Catalina Island and spring training was shifted to Mesa, Arizona. The Cubs' 30-year association with Catalina is chronicled in the book, \"The Cubs on Catalina\", by Jim Vitti, which was named International 'Book of the Year' by \"The Sporting News\". The Cubs left Catalina after some bad weather in 1951, choosing to move to Mesa, a city where the Wrigleys also had interests. Today, there is an exhibit at the Catalina Museum dedicated to the Cubs' spring training on the island.\n\nThe former location in Mesa is actually the second HoHoKam Park; the first was built in 1976 as the spring-training home of the Oakland Athletics who left the park in 1979. Apart from HoHoKam Park and Sloan Park the Cubs also have another Mesa training facility called Fitch Park, this complex provides of team facilities, including major league clubhouse, four practice fields, one practice infield, enclosed batting tunnels, batting cages, a maintenance facility, and administrative offices for the Cubs.\n\nCubs radio rights are held by CBS Radio; its acquisition of the radio rights effective 2015 ended the team's 90-year association with 720 WGN. During the first season of the contract, Cubs games aired on WBBM, taking over as flagship of the Chicago Cubs Radio Network. On November 11, 2015, CBS announced that the Cubs would move to WBBM's all-sports sister station, WSCR, beginning in the 2016 season. The move was enabled by WSCR's end of their rights agreement for the White Sox, who moved to WLS.\n\nThe play-by-play voice of the Cubs is Pat Hughes, who has held the position since 1996, joined by Ron Coomer. Former Cubs third baseman and fan favorite Ron Santo had been Hughes' long-time partner until his death in 2010. Keith Moreland replaced Hall of Fame inductee Santo for three seasons, followed by Coomer for the 2014 season.\n\nThe club also produces its own print media; the Cubs' official magazine \"Vineline\", which has 12 annual issues, is in its third decade, and spotlights players and events involving the club. The club also publishes a traditional media guide.\n\nAs of September 1, 2016, Cubs games air locally on the following outlets:\nBULLET::::- NBC Sports Chicago, a cable network owned in part by NBCUniversal and the Ricketts family. It broadcasts all Cubs games not broadcast over-the-air, or nationally by Major League Baseball's television partners.\nBULLET::::- WGN-TV (channel 9.1), a Tribune Media-owned over-the-air station that has aired Cubs telecasts since its inception in 1948; WGN-TV's Cubs telecasts are produced by the station's sports department, WGN Sports. In November 2013, the team exercised an option to terminate its existing deal with WGN-TV after the 2014 season, requesting a higher-valued contract lasting through the 2019 season (which would be aligned with the end of its contract with CSN Chicago). WGN-TV announced on January 7, 2015 that it would maintain broadcast rights to 45 Cubs games through the 2019 season within the Chicago market only.\nBULLET::::- WLS-TV (channel 7.1), an ABC owned-and-operated station. It was announced on December 12, 2014 that the station would acquire rights to 25 games per season through 2019.\n\nPrior to September 1, 2016, when WGN-TV ended their CW affiliation to return to being an independent station, several games in the WGN package since 2015 were sub-licensed to Fox Television Stations-owned MyNetworkTV station WPWR-TV (channel 50.1), due to CW pre-emption limits which precluded airing on WGN-TV. These games returned full-time to WGN-TV upon that date, when WPWR assumed the market's CW affiliation and WGN was no longer limited by a network. In previous years, the sublicensed games were carried by WCIU-TV (channel 26.1) under the branding of \"CubsNet\" and \"WGN Sports on The U\".\n\nWGN's Cubs games formerly aired nationally on WGN America; however, prior to the 2015 season, the Cubs, as well as all other Chicago sports programming, was dropped from the channel as part of its re-positioning as a general entertainment cable channel. To compensate, all games carried by over-the-air channels are syndicated to a network of other television stations within the Cubs' region, which includes Illinois and parts of Indiana and Iowa.\n\nAll of the team's current television contracts end after the 2019 season. On November 16, 2015 in an interview with WSCR radio, the Cubs' president of business operations Crane Kenney stated that the team was seeking to launch its own in-house regional sports network. On December 18, 2018, it was reported by the Chicago Sun-Times that the team was preparing to launch its RSN, \"Marquee\", in 2020, and that Sinclair Broadcast Group (which had previously attempted to purchase WGN's parent company Tribune Media, and runs the national sports network Stadium with the White Sox's investment arm Silver Chalice) was a frontrunner to serve as managing partner. The venture was officially announced in February 2019.\n\nLen Kasper has been the Cubs' television play-by-play announcer since 2005 and was joined by Jim Deshaies in 2013. Bob Brenly (analyst, 2005–12), Chip Caray (play-by-play, 1998–2004), Steve Stone (analyst, 1983–2000, 2003–04), Joe Carter (analyst for WGN-TV games, 2001–02) and Dave Otto (analyst for FSN Chicago games, 2001–02) also have spent time broadcasting from the Cubs booth since the death of Harry Caray in 1998.\n\nBULLET::::- Brewers–Cubs rivalry\nBULLET::::- Cardinals–Cubs rivalry\nBULLET::::- Cubs–White Sox rivalry\nBULLET::::- Curse of the Billy Goat\nBULLET::::- Grant DePorter\nBULLET::::- Lee Elia\nBULLET::::- List of Major League Baseball franchise postseason droughts\nBULLET::::- Major League Baseball uniforms\nBULLET::::- Major professional sports teams of the United States and Canada\nBULLET::::- Old Style Beer\nBULLET::::- The Bleacher Preacher\nBULLET::::- West Side Park\nBULLET::::- Bales, Jack (2019). \"Before They Were the Cubs: The Early Years of Chicago’s First Professional Baseball Team\". Jefferson, NC: McFarland.\n\nBULLET::::- Chicago Cubs at \"Chicago Tribune\"\n"}
{"id": "6655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6655", "title": "Coldcut", "text": "Coldcut\n\nColdcut are an English electronic music duo composed of Matt Black and Jonathan More. Credited as pioneers for pop sampling in the 1980s, Coldcut are also considered the first stars of UK electronic dance music due to their innovative style, which featured cut-up samples of hip-hop, soul, funk, spoken word and various other types of music, as well as video and multimedia. According to \"Spin\", \"in '87 Coldcut pioneered the British fad for 'DJ records'\".\n\nColdcut's records first introduced the public to pop artists Yazz and Lisa Stansfield, through which these artists achieved pop chart success. In addition, Coldcut has remixed and created productions on tracks by the likes of Eric B & Rakim, James Brown, Queen Latifah, Eurythmics, INXS, Steve Reich, Blondie, The Fall, Pierre Henry, Nina Simone, Fog, Red Snapper, and BBC Radiophonic Workshop.\n\nBeyond their work as a production duo, Coldcut are the founders of Ninja Tune, an independent record label in London, England (with a satellite office in Montreal) with an overall emphasis on encouraging interactive technology and finding innovative uses of software. The label's first releases (the first four volumes of DJ Food - \"Jazz Brakes\") were produced by Coldcut in the early 90s, and composed of instrumental hip-hop cuts that led the duo to help pioneer the trip hop genre, with artists such as Funki Porcini, The Herbaliser and DJ Vadim.\n\nIn 1986, computer programmer Matt Black and ex-art teacher Jonathan More were part-time DJs on the rare groove scene. More also DJed on pirate radio, hosting the \"Meltdown Show\" on Kiss FM and worked at the Reckless Records store on Berwick Street, London where Black visited as a customer. The first collaboration between the two artists was \"Say Kids What Time Is It?\" on a white label in January 1987, which mixed Jungle Book's \"King of the Swingers\" with the break from James Brown's \"Funky Drummer\". The innovation of \"Say Kids...\" caused More and Black to be heralded by SPIN as \"the first Brit artists to really get hip-hop's class-cutup aesthetic\". It is regarded as the UK's first breaks record, the first UK record to be built entirely of samples and \"the final link in the chain connecting European collage-experiment with the dance-remix-scratch edit\". This was later sampled in \"Pump Up the Volume\" by MARRS, a single that reached #1 in the UK in October 1987.\n\nThough Black had joined Kiss FM with his own mix-based show, the pair eventually joined forces on its own show later in 1987 called \"Solid Steel\". The eclectic show became a unifying force in underground experimental electronic music and is still running, celebrating 25 years in 2013.\n\nThe duo adopted the name \"Coldcut\" and set up a record label called Ahead Of Our Time to release the single \"Beats + Pieces\" (one of the formats also included \"That Greedy Beat\") in 1987. All of these tracks were assembled using cassette pause button edits and later spliced tape edits that would sometimes run \"all over the room\". The duo used sampling from Led Zeppelin to James Brown. Electronic act The Chemical Brothers have described \"Beats + Pieces\" as the \"first bigbeat record\", a style which appeared in the mid-1990s.\n\nColdcut's first mainstream success came when Julian Palmer from Island Records asked them to remix Eric B. & Rakim's \"Paid in Full\". Released in October 1987, the landmark remix is said to have \"laid the groundwork for hip hop's entry into the UK mainstream\", becoming a breakthrough hit for Eric B & Rakim outside the U.S., reaching No. 15 in the UK, and the top 20 in a number of European countries. It featured a prominent Ofra Haza sample and many other vocal cut ups as well as a looped rhythm which later, when speeded up, proved popular in the Breakbeat genre. Off the back of its success in clubs, the Coldcut \"Seven Minutes of Madness\" remix ended up being promoted as the single in the UK.\n\nIn 1988, More and Black formed Hex, a self-titled \"multimedia pop group\", with Mile Visman and Rob Pepperell. While working on videos for artists such as Kevin Saunderson, Queen Latifah and Spiritualized, Hex's collaborative work went on to incorporate 3D modelling, punk video art, and algorithmic visuals on desktop machines. The video for Coldcut's 'Christmas Break' in 1989 is arguably one of the first pop promos produced entirely on microcomputers.\n\nIn 1988, Coldcut released \"Out To Lunch With Ahead Of Our Time\", a double LP of Coldcut productions and re-cuts, and the various aliases under which the duo had recorded. This continued the duo's tradition of releasing limited available vinyl.\n\nThe next Coldcut single, released in February 1988, moved towards a more house-influenced style. \"Doctorin' the House\", which debuted singer Yazz, became a top ten hit, and peaked at No. 6. In the same year, under the guise Yazz and the Plastic Population, they produced \"The Only Way Is Up\", a cover of a Northern soul song. The record reached No. 1 in the UK in August, and remained there for five weeks, becoming 1988's second biggest selling single. Producer Youth of Killing Joke also helped Coldcut with this record. The duo had another top hit in September with \"Stop This Crazy Thing\", which featured reggae vocalist Junior Reid and reached number 21 in the UK.\n\nThe single \"People Hold On\" became another UK Top 20 hit. Released in March 1989, it helped launch the career of the then relatively unknown singer Lisa Stansfield. Coldcut and Mark Saunders produced her debut solo single \"This Is the Right Time\", which became another UK Top 20 hit in August as well as reaching No. 21 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 the following year.\n\nAs the duo started to enjoy critical and commercial success, their debut album \"What's That Noise?\" was released in April 1989 on Ahead of Our Time and distributed by Big Life Records. The album gave \"breaks the full length treatment\", and showcased \"their heady blend of hip-hop production aesthetics and proto-acid house grooves\". It also rounded up a heap of unconventional guest features, quoted by SPIN as having \"somehow found room at the same table for Queen Latifah and Mark E. Smith\". The album's track \"I'm in Deep\" (featuring Smith) prefigured the indie-dance guitar-breaks crossover of such bands as the Stone Roses and Happy Mondays, utilizing Smith's freestyle raucous vocals over an acid house backing, and also including psych guitar samples from British rock band Deep Purple. \"What's That Noise?\" reached the Top 20 in the UK and was certified Silver.\n\nColdcut's second album, \"Some Like It Cold\", released in 1990 on Ahead Of Our Time, featured a collaboration with Queen Latifah on the single \"Find a Way\". Though \"Find a Way\" was a minor hit in the UK, no more singles were released from the album. The duo was given the BPI \"Producer of the Year Award\" in 1990. Hex - alongside some other London visual experimenters such as iE - produced a series of videos for a longform VHS version of the album. This continued Coldcut and Hex's pioneering of the use of microcomputers to synthesize electronic music visuals.\n\nAfter their success with Lisa Stansfield, Coldcut signed with her label, Arista. Conflicts arose with the major label, as Coldcut's \"vision extended beyond the formulae of house and techno\" and mainstream pop culture (CITATION: The Virgin Encyclopedia Of Nineties Music, 2000). Eventually, the duo's album Philosophy emerged in 1993. Singles \"Dreamer\" and \"Autumn Leaves\" (1994) sung by vocalist Janis Alexander were both minor hits but the album did not chart.\n\n\"Autumn Leaves\" had strings recorded at Abbey Road, with a 30-piece string section and an arrangement by film composer Ed Shearmur. The leader of the string section was Simon Jeffes of Penguin Cafe Orchestra. Coldcut's insistence on their friend Mixmaster Morris to remix \"Autumn Leaves\" led to one of Morris' most celebrated remixes, which became a minor legend in ambient music. It has appeared on numerous compilations.\n\nIn 1990, whilst on their first tour in Japan (which also featured Norman Cook, who later became Fatboy Slim), Matt and Jon formed their second record label, Ninja Tune, as a self-titled \"technocoloured escape pod\", and a way to escape the creative control of major labels. The label enabled them to release music under different aliases (e.g. Bogus Order, DJ Food), which also helped them to avoid pigeonholing as producers. Ninja Tune's first release was Bogus Order's \"Zen Brakes\". The name Coldcut stayed with Arista so there were no official Coldcut releases for the next three years.\n\nDuring this time, Coldcut still produced for artists on their new label, releasing a flood of material under different names and continuing to work with young groups. They additionally kept on with \"Solid Steel\" on Kiss FM and running the night club Stealth (Club of the Year in the NME, \"The Face\", and \"Mixmag\" in 1996).\n\nIn 1991, Hex released their first video game, \"Top Banana\", which was included on a Hex release for the Commodore CDTV machine in 1992, arguably the first complete purpose-designed multimedia system. \"Top Banana\" was innovative in that it used sampled graphics, contained an ecological theme and a female lead character (dubbed \"KT\"), and its music changed through random processes. Coldcut and Hex presented this multimedia project as an example of the forthcoming convergence of pop music and computer-game characters.\n\nIn 1992, Hex's first single - \"Global Chaos\" / \"Digital Love Opus 1\" - combined rave visuals with techno and ambient interactive visuals.\nIn November of that year, Hex released Global Chaos CDTV, which took advantage of the possibilities of the new CD-ROM medium. The Global Chaos CDTV disk (which contained the \"Top Banana\" game, interactive visuals and audio), was a forerunner of the \"CD+\" concept, uniting music, graphics, and video games into one. This multi-dimensional entertainment product received wide coverage in the national media, including features on Dance Energy, Kaleidoscope on BBC Radio 4, \"What's Up Doc?\" on ITV and \"Reportage\" on BBC Two. \"i-D Magazine\" was quoted as saying, \"It's like your TV tripping\".\n\nColdcut videos were made for most songs, often by Hexstatic, and used a lot of stock and sampled footage. Their \"Timber\" video, which created an AV collage piece using analogous techniques to audio sample collage, was put on heavy rotation on MTV. Stuart Warren Hill of Hexstatic referred to this technique as: \"What you see is what you hear\". \"Timber\" (which appears on both \"Let Us Play\", Coldcut's fourth album, and \"Let Us Replay\", their fifth) won awards for its innovative use of repetitive video clips synced to the music, including being shortlisted at the Edinburgh Television and Film Festival in their top five music videos of the year in 1998.\n\nColdcut began integrating video sampling into their live DJ gigs at the time, and incorporated multimedia content that caused press to credit the act as segueing \"into the computer age\". Throughout the 90s, Hex created visuals for Coldcut's live performances, and developed the CD-ROM portion of Coldcut's \"Let Us Play\" and \"Let Us Replay\", in addition to software developed specifically for the album's world tour. Hex's inclusion of music videos and \"playtools\" (playful art/music software programs) on Coldcut's CD-Roms was completely ahead of the curve at that time, offering viewers/listeners a high level of interactivity. Playtools such as My Little Funkit and Playtime were the prototypes for Ninja Jamm, the app Coldcut designed and launched 16 years later. Playtime followed on from Coldcut and Hex's Synopticon installation, developing the auto-cutup algorhythm, and using other random processes to generate surprising combinations. Coldcut and Hex performed live using Playtime at the 1st Sonar Festival in 1994. Playtime was also used to generate the backing track for Coldcut's collaboration with Jello Biafra, \"Every Home a Prison\".\n\nIn 1994 Coldcut and Hex contributed an installation to the Glasgow Gallery of Modern Art. The piece, called \"Generator\" was installed in the Fire Gallery. \"Generator\" was an interactive installation which allowed users to mix sound, video, text and graphics and make their own audio-visual mix, modelled on the techniques and technology used by Coldcut in clubs and live performance events. It consisted of two consoles: the left controlling how the sounds are played, the right controlling how the images are played.\n\nAs part of the JAM exhibition of \"Style, Music and Media\" at the Barbican Art Gallery in 1996, Coldcut and Hex were commissioned to produce an interactive audiovisual piece called Synopticon. Conceived and designed by Robert Pepperell and Matt Black, the digital culture synthesiser allows users to \"remix\" sounds, images, text and music in a partially random, partially controlled way.\n\nThe year 1996 also brought the Coldcut name back to More and Black, and the pair celebrated with \"70 Minutes of Madness\", a mix CD that became part of the Journeys by DJ series. The release was credited with \"bringing to wider attention the sort of freestyle mixing the pair were always known for through their radio show on KISS FM, Solid Steel, and their steady club dates\". It was voted \"Best Compilation of All Time\" by Jockey Slut in 1998.\n\nIn February 1997, they released a double pack single \"Atomic Moog 2000\" / \"Boot the System\", the first Coldcut release on Ninja Tune. This was not eligible for the UK chart because time and format restrictions prevented the inclusion of the \"Natural Rhythm\" video on the CD. In August 1997, a reworking of the early track \"More Beats + Pieces\" gave them their first UK Top 40 hit since 1989.\n\nThe album \"Let Us Play!\" followed in September and also made the Top 40. The fourth album by Coldcut, \"Let Us Play!\" paid homage to the greats that inspired them. Their first album to be released on Ninja Tune, it featured guest appearances by Grandmaster Flash, Steinski, Jello Biafra, Jimpster, The Herbaliser, Talvin Singh, Daniel Pemberton and Selena Saliva. Coldcut's cut 'n' paste method on the album was compared to that of Dadaism and William Burroughs. Hex collaborated with Coldcut to produce the multimedia CD-Rom for the album. Hex later evolved the software into the engine that was used on the Let Us Play! world tour.\n\nIn 1997, Matt Black - alongside Cambridge based developers Camart - created real-time video manipulation software VJAMM. It allowed users to be a \"digital video jockey\", remixing and collaging sound and images and trigger audio and visual samples simultaneously, subsequently bringing futuristic technology to the audio-visual field. VJAMM rivalled some of the features of high-end and high cost tech at the time. The VJAMM technology, praised as being proof of how far computers changed the face of live music, became seminal in both Coldcut's live sets (which were called a \"revelaton\" by Melody Maker and DJ sets. Their CCTV live show was featured at major festivals including Glastonbury, Roskilde, Sónar, the Montreux Jazz Festival, and John Peel's Meltdown. The \"beautifully simple and devastatingly effective\" software was deemed revolutionary, and became recognized as a major factor in the evolution of clubs. It eventually earned a place in the American Museum of the Moving Image's permanent collection. As quoted by The Independent, Coldcut's rallying cry was \"Don't hate the media, be the media'\". NME was quoted as saying: \"Veteran duo Coldcut are so cool they invented the remix - now they are doing the same for television.\"\n\nAlso working with Camart, Black designed DJamm software in 1998, which Coldcut used on laptops for their live shows, providing the audio bed alongside VJAMM's audiovisual samples. Matt Black explained they designed DJamm so they \"could perform electronic music in a different way – i.e., not just taking a session band out to reproduce what you put together in the studio using samples. It had a relationship to DJing, but was more interactive and more effective.\" Excitingly at that time, DJamm was pioneering in its ability to shuffle sliced loops into intricate sequences, enabling users to split loops into any number of parts.\n\nIn 1999, \"Let Us Replay!\" was released, a double-disc remix album where Coldcut's classic tunes were remixed by the likes of Cornelius (which was heralded as a highlight of the album, Irresistible Force, Shut Up And Dance, Carl Craig and J Swinscoe. Let Us Replay! pieces together \"short sharp shocks that put the mental in 'experimental' and still bring the breaks till the breakadawn\". It also includes a few live tracks from the duo's innovative world tour. The CD-Rom of the album, which also contained a free demo disc of the VJamm software, was one of the earliest audiovisual CD- ROMs on the market, and Muzik claimed deserved to \"have them canonized...it's like buying an entire mini studio for under $15\".\n\nIn 2000, the \"Solid Steel\" show moved to BBC London.\n\nColdcut continued to forge interesting collaborations, including 2001's \"Re:volution\" as an EP in which Coldcut created their own political party (The Guilty Party). Featuring scratches and samples of Tony Blair and William Hague speeches, the 3-track EP included Nautilus' \"Space Journey\", which won an Intermusic contest in 2000. The video was widely played on MTV. With \"Space Journey\", Coldcut were arguably the first group to give fans access to the multitrack parts, or \"stems\" of their songs, building on the idea of interactivity and sharing from \"Let Us Play\".\n\nIn 2001, Coldcut produced tracks for the Sega music video game \"Rez\". \"Rez\" replaced typical video-game sound effects with electronic music; the player created sounds and melodies, intended to simulate a form of synesthesia. The soundtrack also featured Adam Freeland and Oval.\n\nIn 2002, while utilizing VJamm and Detraktor, Coldcut and Juxta remixed Herbie Hancock's classic \"Rockit\", creating both an audio and video remix.\n\nWorking with Marcus Clements in 2002, Coldcut released the sample manipulation algorhythm from their DJamm software as a standalone VST plugin that could be used in other software, naming it the \"Coldcutter\".\n\nAlso in 2002, Coldcut with UK VJs Headspace (now mainly performing as the VJamm Allstars developed Gridio, an interactive, immersive audio-visual installation for the Pompidou Centre as part of the ‘'Sonic Process\" exhibition. The \"Sonic Process\" exhibition was launched at the MACBA in Barcelona in conjunction with Sónar, featuring Gridio as its centerpiece. In 2003, a commission for Graz led to a specially built version of Gridio, in a cave inside the castle mountain in Austria. Gridio was later commissioned by O2 for two simultaneous customised installations at the O2 Wireless Festivals in Leeds and London in 2007. That same year, Gridio was featured as part of Optronica at the opening week of the new BFI Southbank development in London.\n\nIn 2003, Black worked with Penny Rimbaud (ex Crass) on Crass Agenda's Savage Utopia project. Black performed the piece with Rimbaud, Eve Libertine and other players at London's Vortex Jazz Club.\n\nIn 2004, Coldcut collaborated with American video mashup artist TV Sheriff to produce their cut-up entitled \"Revolution USA\". The tactical-media project (coordinated with Canadian art duo NomIg) followed on from the UK version and extended the premise \"into an open access participatory project\". Through the multimedia political art project, over 12 gigabytes of footage from the last 40 years of US politics were made accessible to download, allowing participants to create a cut-up over a Coldcut beat. Coldcut also collaborated with TV Sheriff and NomIg to produce two audiovisual pieces \"World of Evil\" (2004) and \"Revolution '08\" (2008), both composed of footage from the United States presidential elections of respective years. The music used was composed by Coldcut, with \"Revolution '08\" featuring a remix by the Qemists.\n\nLater that year, a collaboration with the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) led to the psychedelic art documentary \"Wavejammer\". Coldcut was given access to the BAS archive in order to create sounds and visuals for the short film.\n\n2004 also saw Coldcut produce a radio play in conjunction with renowned young author Hari Kunzru for BBC Radio 3 (incidentally called \"Sound Mirrors\").\n\nColdcut returned with the single \"Everything Is Under Control” at the end of 2005, featuring Jon Spencer (of Jon Spencer Blues Explosion) and Mike Ladd. It was followed in 2006 by their fifth studio album \"Sound Mirrors\", which was quoted as being “one of the most vital and imaginative records Jon Moore and Matt Black have ever made”, and saw the duo \"continue, impressively, to find new ways to present political statements through a gamut of pristine electronics and breakbeats\" (CITATION: Future Music, 2007). The fascinating array of guest vocalists included Soweto Kinch, Annette Peacock, Ameri Baraka, and Saul Williams. The latter followed on from Coldcut's remix of Williams' \"The Pledge\" for a project with DJ Spooky.\n\nA 100-date audiovisual world tour commenced for \"Sound Mirrors\", which was considered \"no small feat in terms of technology or human effort\". Coldcut was accompanied by scratch DJ Raj and AV artist Juxta, in addition to guest vocalists from the album, including UK rapper Juice Aleem, Roots Manuva, Mpho Skeef, Jon Spencer and house legend Robert Owens.\n\nThree further singles were released from the album including the Top 75 hit \"True Skool\" with Roots Manuva. The same track appeared on the soundtrack of the video game FIFA Street 2.\n\nSponsored by the British Council, in 2005 Coldcut introduced AV mixing to India with the Union project, alongside collaborators Howie B and Aki Nawaz of Fun-Da-Mental. Coldcut created an A/V remix of the Bollywood hit movie \"Kal Ho Naa Ho\".\n\nIn 2006, Coldcut performed an A/V set based on \"Music for 18 Musicians\" as part of Steve Reich's 70th birthday gig at the Barbican Centre in London. This was originally written for the 1999 album \"Reich Remixed\".\n\nColdcut remixed another classic song in 2007: Nina Simone's \"Save Me\". This was part of a remix album called \"Nina Simone: Remixed & Re-imagined\", featuring remixes from Tony Humphries, Francois K and Chris Coco.\n\nIn February 2007, Coldcut and Mixmaster Morris created a psychedelic AV obituary/tribute Coldcut, Mixmaster Morris, Ken Campbell, Bill Drummond and Alan Moore (18 March 2007). Robert Anton Wilson tribute show. Queen Elizabeth Hall, London: Mixmaster Morris. (28 August 2009) to Robert Anton Wilson, the 60s author of Illuminatus! Trilogy. The tribute featured graphic novel writer Alan Moore and artist Bill Drummond and a performance by experimental theatre legend Ken Campbell. Coldcut and Morris' hour and a half performance resembled a documentary being remixed on the fly, cutting up nearly 15 hours' worth of Wilson's lectures.\n\nIn 2008, an international group of party organisers, activists and artists including Coldcut received a grant from the Intelligent Energy Department of the European Union, to create a project that promoted intelligent energy and environmental awareness to the youth of Europe. The result was Energy Union, a piece of VJ cinema, political campaign, music tour, party, art exhibition and social media hub. Energy Union toured 12 EU countries throughout 2009 and 2010, completing 24 events in total. Coldcut created the Energy Union show for the tour, a one-hour Audio/Visual montage on the theme of Intelligent Energy. In presenting new ideas for climate, environmental and energy communication strategies, the Energy Union tour was well received, and reached a widespread audience in cities across the UK, Germany, Belgium, The Netherlands, Croatia, Slovenia, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, Spain and the Czech Republic.\n\nAlso in 2008, Coldcut was asked to remix the theme song for British cult TV show \"Doctor Who\" for the program's 40th anniversary. In October 2008, Coldcut celebrated the legacy of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop (the place where the Doctor Who theme was created) with a live DJ mix at London's legendary Roundhouse. The live mix incorporated classic Radiophonic Workshop compositions with extended sampling of the original gear.\n\nAdditionally in 2008, Coldcut remixed \"Ourselves\", a Japanese No. 1 hit from the single \"&\" by Ayumi Hamasaki. This mix was included on the album \"\".\n\nStarting in 2009, Matt Black, with musician/artist/coder Paul Miller (creator of the TX Modular Open Source synth), developed Granul8, a new type of visual fx/source Black termed a \"granular video synthesiser\". Granul8 allows the use of realtime VJ techniques including video feedback combined with VDMX VJ software.\n\nFrom 2009 onwards, Black has been collaborating with coder and psychedelic mathematician William Rood to create a forthcoming project called Liveloom, a social media AV mixer.\n\nIn 2010, Coldcut celebrated 20 years of releasing music with its label, Ninja Tune. A book entitled \"Ninja Tune: 20 Years of Beats and Pieces\" was released on 12 August 2010, and an exhibition was held at Black Dog Publishing's Black Dog Space in London, showcasing artwork, design and photography from the label's 20-year history. A compilation album was released on 20 September in two formats: a regular version consisting of two 2-disc volumes, and a limited edition which contained six CDs, six 7\" vinyl singles, a hardback copy of the book, a poster and additional items. Ninja Tune also incorporated a series of international parties. This repositioned Ninja as a continually compelling and influential label, being one of the \"longest-running (and successful) UK indie labels to come out of the late-1980s/early-90s explosion in dance music and hip-hop\" (Pitchfork, 28 September 2010). Pitchfork claimed it had a \"right to show off a little\".\n\nIn July 2013, Coldcut produced a piece entitled \"D'autre\" based on the writings of French poet Arthur Rimbaud, for Forum Des Images in Paris. The following month, in August, Coldcut produced a new soundtrack for a section of André Sauvage's classic film \"Études sur Paris\", which was shown as part of Noise of Art at the BFI in London, which celebrated 100 years of electronic music and silent cinema. Coldcut put new music to films from the Russolo era, incorporating original recordings of Russolo's proto-synths.\n\nIn 2014 Coldcut did 3 soundtracks as part of the project New City, a series of animated skylines of the near future developed by Tomorrow's Thought Today's Liam Young, with accompanying writing from sci-fi authors Jeff Noon, Pat Cadigan and Tim Maughan.\n\nMost recently, Coldcut released Ninja Jamm, a music making app, for Android and iOS, in collaboration with London-based arts and technology firm Seeper. Geared toward both casual listeners and more experienced DJs and music producers, the freemium app allows users to download, remix and make music with samplepacks and tunepacks that feature pro quality sample libraries and also original tracks and mixes by Coldcut, as well as other Ninja artists, creating something new altogether. With the \"intuitive yet deep\" app, users can turn instruments on and off, swap between clips, add glitches and effects, trigger and pitch-bend stabs and one-off samples, and change the tempo of the track instantly. Users can additionally record as they mix and instantly upload to SoundCloud or save the mixes locally. Tunepack releases for Ninja Jamm are increasingly synchronised with Ninja Tune releases on conventional formats. To date over 30 tunepacks have been released, including Amon Tobin, Bonobo, Coldcut, DJ Food, Martyn, Lapalux, Machinedrum, Raffertie, Irresistible Force, FaltyDL, Shuttle, Starkey. Ninja Jamm was featured by Apple in the New and Noteworthy section of the App Store in the week of release and it received over 100,000 downloads in the first week. Coldcut are developing Ninja Jamm further after the Android release garnered acclaim from the Guardian, Independent, Gizmodo and many more reviewers.\n\nIn 2015, Coldcut are working on a new album, collaborating with producer Dave Taylor (a.k.a. Solid Groove a.k.a. Switch). This is planned for release in 2016.\n\nOn 6 December 2017, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a play, \"Billie Homeless Dies at the End\" by Tom Kelly with electronic music by Coldcut.\n\nBULLET::::- \"What's That Noise?\" (April 1989) - UK No. 20\nBULLET::::- \"Some Like It Cold\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Zen Brakes\" [as \"Bogus Order\"] (September 1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Philosophy\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Let Us Play!\" (September 1997) UK No. 33\nBULLET::::- \"Let Us Replay!\" (February 1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Cold-Cut-Outs\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Sound Mirrors\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Only Heaven EP\" (2016)\nBULLET::::- \"Outside The Echo Chamber\" [as \"Coldcut x On-U Sound\"] (May 2017)\n\n! rowspan=\"2\" Year\n! rowspan=\"2\" style=\"width:38em;\" Single\n! colspan=\"10\" Peak positions\n! rowspan=\"2\" Album\n! style=\"width:35px;\" <br>\n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" <br>\n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" \n! style=\"width:35px;\" <br>\n! scope=\"row\" \"Say Kids, What Time Is it?\"\n! scope=\"row\" \"Beats + Pieces\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Doctorin' the House\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Stop This Crazy Thing\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"People Hold On\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"My Telephone\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Coldcut's Christmas Break\"\n! scope=\"row\" \"Coldcut' Megamix\" \n\n! scope=\"row\" \"Find a Way\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Dreamer\"\n! scope=\"row\" \"Autumn Leaves\"\n! scope=\"row\" \"Atomic Moog 2000 / Boot the System\"\n! scope=\"row\" \"More Beats + Pieces\"\n! scope=\"row\" \"Timber\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Re:volution\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Mr. Nichols\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Everything Is Under Control\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Man in a Garage\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"True Skool\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Walk a Mile in My Shoes\" \n! scope=\"row\" \"Everyday Another Sanction\" \n\nBULLET::::- \"ColdKrushCuts\" — Mixed by Coldcut / DJ Food + DJ Krush (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Journeys by DJ — 70 minutes of Madness\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"People Hold On — The Best of Coldcut\" (2 February 2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Coldcut Selection Deal\"\n\nBULLET::::- Coldcut.net, official site\nBULLET::::- Ninja Tune: Coldcut\nBULLET::::- Interview with Matt Black on R4NT Magazine\nBULLET::::- Interview by Iara Lee (Modulations) at Furious.com\n \n"}
{"id": "6656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6656", "title": "Cuisine", "text": "Cuisine\n\nA cuisine is a style of cooking characterized by distinctive ingredients, techniques and dishes, and usually associated with a specific culture or geographic region. Regional food preparation traditions, customs and ingredients often combine to create dishes unique to a particular region.\n\nA cuisine is primarily influenced by the ingredients that are available locally or through trade, they can even be made into distinct ingredients themselves when they become popular within a region, take for example Japanese rice in Japanese cuisine and New Mexico chile in New Mexican cuisine.\n\nReligious food laws can also exercise a strong influence on cuisine, such as Hinduism in Indian cuisine, Sikhism in Punjabi cuisine, Buddhism in Asian cuisine, Islam in Middle Eastern cuisine, and Judaism in Israeli cuisine.\n\nSome factors that have an influence on a region's cuisine include the area's climate, the trade among different countries, religiousness or sumptuary laws and culinary culture exchange. For example, a Tropical diet may be based more on fruits and vegetables, while a polar diet might rely more on meat and fish.\n\nThe area's climate, in large measure, determines the native foods that are available. In addition, climate influences food preservation. For example, foods preserved for winter consumption by smoking, curing, and pickling have remained significant in world cuisines for their altered gustatory properties.\n\nThe trade among different countries also largely affects a region's cuisine. Dating back to the ancient spice trade, seasonings such as cinnamon, cassia, cardamom, ginger, and turmeric were important items of commerce in the earliest evolution of trade. Cinnamon and cassia found their way to the Middle East at least 4,000 years ago.\n\nCertain foods and food preparations are required or proscribed by the religiousness or sumptuary laws, such as Islamic dietary laws and Jewish dietary laws.\n\nCulinary culture exchange is also an important factor for cuisine in many regions: Japan’s first substantial and direct exposure to the West came with the arrival of European missionaries in the second half of the 16th century. At that time, the combination of Spanish and Portuguese game frying techniques with a Chinese method for cooking vegetables in oil led to the development of \"tempura\", the \"popular Japanese dish in which seafood and many different types of vegetables are coated with batter and deep fried\".\n\nCuisine dates back to the Antiquity. As food began to require more planning, there was an emergence of meals that situated around culture.\n\nCuisines evolve continually, and new cuisines are created by innovation and cultural interaction. One recent example is fusion cuisine, which combines elements of various culinary traditions while not being categorized per any one cuisine style, and generally refers to the innovations in many contemporary restaurant cuisines since the 1970s. \"Nouvelle cuisine\" (New cuisine) is an approach to cooking and food presentation in French cuisine that was popularized in the 1960s by the food critics Henri Gault, who invented the phrase, and his colleagues André Gayot and Christian Millau in a new restaurant guide, the Gault-Millau, or \"Le Nouveau Guide\". Molecular cuisine, is a modern style of cooking which takes advantage of many technical innovations from the scientific disciplines (molecular cooking). The term was coined in 1999 by the French INRA chemist Hervé This because he wanted to distinguish it from the name Molecular cuisine that was previously introduced by him and the late Oxford physicist Nicholas Kurti. It is also named as multi sensory cooking, modernist cuisine, culinary physics, and experimental cuisine by some chefs. Besides, international trade brings new foodstuffs including ingredients to existing cuisines and leads to changes. The introduction of hot pepper to China from South America around the end of the 17th century, greatly influencing Sichuan cuisine, which combines the original taste with the taste of introduced hot pepper and creates a unique flavor of both spicy and pungent.\n\nA global cuisine is a cuisine that is practiced around the world, and can be categorized according to the common use of major foodstuffs, including grains, produce and cooking fats.\n\nRegional cuisines can vary based on availability and usage of specific ingredients, local cooking traditions and practices, as well as overall cultural differences. Such factors can be more-or-less uniform across wide swaths of territory, or vary intensely within individual regions. For example, in Central and South America, corn (maize), both fresh and dried, is a staple food, and is used in many different ways. In northern Europe, wheat, rye, and fats of animal origin predominate, while in southern Europe olive oil is ubiquitous and rice is more prevalent. In Italy, the cuisine of the north, featuring butter and rice, stands in contrast to that of the south, with its wheat pasta and olive oil. In some parts of China, rice is the staple, while in others this role is filled by noodles and bread. Throughout the Middle East and Mediterranean, common ingredients include lamb, olive oil, lemons, peppers, and rice. The vegetarianism practiced in much of India has made pulses (crops harvested solely for the dry seed) such as chickpeas and lentils as important as wheat or rice. From India to Indonesia, the extenive use of spices is characteristic; coconuts and seafood are also used throughout the region both as foodstuffs and as seasonings.\n\nAfrican cuisines use a combination of locally available fruits, cereal grains and vegetables, as well as milk and meat products. In some parts of the continent, the traditional diet features a preponderance of milk, curd and whey products. In much of tropical Africa, however, cow's milk is rare and cannot be produced locally (owing to various diseases that affect livestock). The continent's diverse demographic makeup is reflected in the many different eating and drinking habits, dishes, and preparation techniques of its manifold populations.\n\nAsian cuisines are many and varied. Ingredients common to many cultures in the east and Southeast regions of the continent include rice, ginger, garlic, sesame seeds, chilies, dried onions, soy, and tofu. Stir frying, steaming, and deep frying are common cooking methods. While rice is common to most Asian cuisines, different varieties are popular in the various regions; Basmati rice is popular in the South Asia, Jasmine is often found across the southeast, while long-grain rice is popular in China and short-grain in Japan and Korea. Curry is also a common dish found in southern and eastern Asia, however, they are not as popular in western Asian cuisines. Those curry dishes with origins in India and other South Asian countries usually have a yogurt base while Southeastern and Eastern curries generally use coconut milk as their foundation.\n\nEuropean cuisine (alternatively, \"Western cuisine\") include the cuisines of Europe and other Western countries. European cuisine includes that of Europe and to some extent Russia, as well as non-indigenous cuisines of North America, Australasia, Oceania, and Latin America. The term is used by East Asians to contrast with Asian styles of cooking. This is analogous to Westerners referring collectively to the cuisines of Asian countries as Asian cuisine. When used by Westerners, the term may refer more specifically to cuisine \"in\" Europe; in this context, a synonym is Continental cuisine, especially in British English.\n\nOceanian cuisines include Australian cuisine, New Zealand cuisine, and the cuisines from many other islands or island groups throughout Oceania. Australian cuisine consists of immigrant European cuisine, and Bushfood prepared and eaten by native Aboriginal Australian peoples, and various newer Asian influences. New Zealand cuisine also consists of European inspired dishes, such as Pavlova, and native Maori cuisine. Across Oceania, staples include the Kumura (Sweet potato) and Taro, which was/is a staple from Papua New Guinea to the South Pacific. On most islands in the south pacific, fish are widely consumed because of the proximity to the ocean.\n\nThe cuisines of the Americas are found across North and South America, and are based on the cuisines of the countries from which the immigrant people came, primarily Europe. However, the traditional European cuisine has been adapted by the addition of many local and native ingredients, and many techniques have been added to traditional foods as well. Native American cuisine is prepared by indigenous populations across the continent, and its influences can be seen on multi-ethnic Latin American cuisine. Many staple foods eaten across the continent, such as Corn, Beans, and Potatoes have native origins. The regional cuisines are North American cuisine, Mexican cuisine, Central American cuisine, South American cuisine, and Caribbean cuisine.\n\nBULLET::::- Culinary art\nBULLET::::- Diet food\nBULLET::::- Dish (food)\nBULLET::::- Food group\nBULLET::::- Food photography\nBULLET::::- Food preparation\nBULLET::::- Food presentation\nBULLET::::- Foodpairing\nBULLET::::- Haute cuisine\nBULLET::::- Kitchen\nBULLET::::- List of cuisines\nBULLET::::- List of foods\nBULLET::::- List of nutrition guides\nBULLET::::- Meal\nBULLET::::- Outline of cuisines\nBULLET::::- Outline of food preparation\nBULLET::::- Portion size\nBULLET::::- Recipe\nBULLET::::- Restaurant\nBULLET::::- Traditional food\nBULLET::::- Whole food\nBULLET::::- Albala, Ken (2011). \"Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia\" Greenwood.\nBULLET::::- California Culinary Academy (2001). \"In the World Kitchen: Global Cuisine from California Culinary Academy\". Bay Books (CA). .\nBULLET::::- Laudan, Rachel (2013). \"Cuisine and Empire: Cooking in World History\" University of California Press.\nBULLET::::- MacVeigh, Jeremy (2008). \"International Cuisine\". Delmar Cengage Learning; 1st edition. .\nBULLET::::- Nenes, Michael F; Robbins, Joe (2008). \"International Cuisine\". Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, John & Sons; 1st edition. .\nBULLET::::- Scarparto, Rosario (2000). \"New global cuisine: the perspective of postmodern gastronomy studies\". Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology.\nBULLET::::- Zobel, Myron (1962). \"Global cuisine: being the unique recipes of the 84 top restaurants of the world\". Patron Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Wikibooks Cookbook\nBULLET::::- The Elizabeth Robins Pennell Collection at the Library of Congress has many volumes on the topic of cuisine.\n"}
{"id": "6660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6660", "title": "Codec", "text": "Codec\n\nA codec is a device or computer program for encoding or decoding a digital data stream or signal. \"Codec\" is a portmanteau of \"coder-decoder\".\n\nA coder encodes a data stream or a signal for transmission or storage, possibly in encrypted form, and the decoder function reverses the encoding for playback or editing. Codecs are used in videoconferencing, streaming media, and video editing applications.\n\nIn the mid-20th century, a codec was a device that coded analog signals into digital form using pulse-code modulation (PCM). Later, the name was also applied to software for converting between digital signal formats, including compander functions.\n\nAn audio codec converts analog audio signals into digital signals for transmission or encodes them for storage. A receiving device converts the digital signals back to analog form using an audio decoder for playback. An example of this are the codecs used in the sound cards of personal computers. A video codec accomplishes the same task for video signals.\n\nIn addition to encoding a signal, a codec may also compress the data to reduce transmission bandwidth or storage space. Compression codecs are classified primarily into \"lossy\" codecs and \"lossless\" codecs.\n\nLossless codecs are often used for archiving data in a compressed form while retaining all information present in the original stream. If preserving the original quality of the stream is more important than eliminating the correspondingly larger data sizes, lossless codecs are preferred. This is especially true if the data is to undergo further processing (for example editing) in which case the repeated application of processing (encoding and decoding) on lossy codecs will degrade the quality of the resulting data such that it is no longer identifiable (visually, audibly or both). Using more than one codec or encoding scheme successively can also degrade quality significantly. The decreasing cost of storage capacity and network bandwidth has a tendency to reduce the need for lossy codecs for some media.\n\nMany popular codecs are lossy. They reduce quality in order to maximize compression. Often, this type of compression is virtually indistinguishable from the original uncompressed sound or images, depending on the codec and the settings used. The most widely used lossy data compression technique in digital media is based on the discrete cosine transform (DCT), used in compression standards such as JPEG images, H.26x and MPEG video, and MP3 and AAC audio. Smaller data sets ease the strain on relatively expensive storage sub-systems such as non-volatile memory and hard disk, as well as write-once-read-many formats such as CD-ROM, DVD and Blu-ray Disc. Lower data rates also reduce cost and improve performance when the data is transmitted.\n\nTwo principal techniques are used in codecs, pulse-code modulation and delta modulation. Codecs are often designed to emphasize certain aspects of the media to be encoded. For example, a digital video (using a DV codec) of a sports event needs to encode motion well but not necessarily exact colors, while a video of an art exhibit needs to encode color and surface texture well.\n\nAudio codecs for cell phones need to have very low latency between source encoding and playback. In contrast, audio codecs for recording or broadcast can use high-latency audio compression techniques to achieve higher fidelity at a lower bit-rate.\n\nThere are thousands of audio and video codecs, ranging in cost from free to hundreds of dollars or more. This variety of codecs can create compatibility and obsolescence issues. The impact is lessened for older formats, for which free or nearly-free codecs have existed for a long time. The older formats are often ill-suited to modern applications, however, such as playback in small portable devices. For example, raw uncompressed PCM audio (44.1 kHz, 16 bit stereo, as represented on an audio CD or in a .wav or .aiff file) has long been a standard across multiple platforms, but its transmission over networks is slow and expensive compared with more modern compressed formats, such as Opus and MP3.\n\nMany multimedia data streams contain both audio and video, and often some metadata that permit synchronization of audio and video. Each of these three streams may be handled by different programs, processes, or hardware; but for the multimedia data streams to be useful in stored or transmitted form, they must be encapsulated together in a container format.\n\nLower bitrate codecs allow more users, but they also have more distortion. Beyond the initial increase in distortion, lower bit rate codecs also achieve their lower bit rates by using more complex algorithms that make certain assumptions, such as those about the media and the packet loss rate. Other codecs may not make those same assumptions. When a user with a low bitrate codec talks to a user with another codec, additional distortion is introduced by each transcoding.\n\nAudio Video Interleave (AVI) is sometimes erroneously described as a codec, but AVI is actually a container format, while a codec is a software or hardware tool that encodes or decodes audio or video into or from some audio or video format. Audio and video encoded with many codecs might be put into an AVI container, although AVI is not an ISO standard. There are also other well-known container formats, such as Ogg, ASF, QuickTime, RealMedia, Matroska, and DivX Media Format. MPEG transport stream, MPEG program stream, MP4, and ISO base media file format are examples of container formats that are ISO standardized.\n\nBULLET::::- Datatypes (Amiga)\nBULLET::::- Audio signal processing\nBULLET::::- Digital signal processing\nBULLET::::- List of codecs\nBULLET::::- Lossless data compression\nBULLET::::- Lossy compression\nBULLET::::- List of open source codecs\nBULLET::::- Transcoding\nBULLET::::- Video coding\n\nBULLET::::- Comparison of container formats\nBULLET::::- Comparison of audio coding formats\nBULLET::::- Comparison of video codecs\n"}
{"id": "6663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6663", "title": "Clyde Tombaugh", "text": "Clyde Tombaugh\n\nClyde William Tombaugh (; February 4, 1906January 17, 1997) was an American astronomer. He discovered Pluto in 1930, the first object to be discovered in what would later be identified as the Kuiper belt. At the time of discovery, Pluto was considered a planet but was later reclassified as a dwarf planet in 2006. Tombaugh also discovered many asteroids. He called for the serious scientific research of unidentified flying objects, or UFOs.\n\nTombaugh was born in Streator, Illinois, son of Muron Dealvo Tombaugh, a farmer, and his wife Adella Pearl Chritton. After his family moved to Burdett, Kansas in 1922, Tombaugh's plans for attending college were frustrated when a hailstorm ruined his family's farm crops. Starting in 1926, he built several telescopes with lenses and mirrors by himself. To better test his telescope mirrors, Tombaugh, with just a pick and shovel, dug a pit 24 feet long, 8 feet deep, and 7 feet wide. This provided a constant air temperature, free of air currents, and was also used by the family as a root cellar and emergency shelter. He sent drawings of Jupiter and Mars to the Lowell Observatory, at Flagstaff, Arizona which offered him a job. Tombaugh worked there from 1929 to 1945.\n\nFollowing his discovery of Pluto, Tombaugh earned bachelor's and master's degrees in astronomy from the University of Kansas in 1936 and 1938. During World War II he taught naval personnel navigation at Northern Arizona University. He worked at White Sands Missile Range in the early 1950s, and taught astronomy at New Mexico State University from 1955 until his retirement in 1973. In 1980 he was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame.\n\nThe asteroid 1604 Tombaugh, discovered in 1931, is named after him. He discovered hundreds of asteroids, beginning with 2839 Annette in 1929, mostly as a by-product of his search for Pluto and his searches for other celestial objects. Tombaugh named some of them after his wife, children and grandchildren. The Royal Astronomical Society awarded him the Jackson-Gwilt Medal in 1931.\n\nDirect visual observation became rare in astronomy. By 1965 Robert S. Richardson called Tombaugh one of two great living experienced visual observers as talented as Percival Lowell or Giovanni Schiaparelli. In 1980, Tombaugh and Patrick Moore wrote a book \"Out of the Darkness: The Planet Pluto\". In August 1992, JPL scientist Robert Staehle called Tombaugh, requesting permission to visit his planet. \"I told him he was welcome to it,\" Tombaugh later remembered, \"though he's got to go one long, cold trip.\" The call eventually led to the launch of the \"New Horizons\" space probe to Pluto in 2006. Following the passage on July 14, 2015 of Pluto by the \"New Horizons\" spacecraft the \"Cold Heart of Pluto\" was named Tombaugh Regio.\n\nTombaugh died on January 17, 1997, when he was in Las Cruces, New Mexico, at the age of 90. He was cremated. A small portion of his ashes was placed aboard the \"New Horizons\" spacecraft. The container includes the inscription: \"Interred herein are remains of American Clyde W. Tombaugh, discoverer of Pluto and the solar system's 'third zone'. Adelle and Muron's boy, Patricia's husband, Annette and Alden's father, astronomer, teacher, punster, and friend: Clyde W. Tombaugh (1906–1997)\". Tombaugh was survived by his wife, Patricia (1912–2012), and their children, Annette and Alden.\n\nTombaugh was an active Unitarian Universalist, and he and his wife helped found the Unitarian Universalist Church of Las Cruces, New Mexico.\n\nClyde Tombaugh had five siblings. Through the daughter of his youngest brother Robert, he is the great-uncle of Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Clayton Kershaw.\n\nWhile a young researcher working for the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, Tombaugh was given the job to perform a systematic search for a trans-Neptunian planet (also called Planet X), which had been predicted by Percival Lowell and William Pickering.\n\nTombaugh used the observatory's 13-inch astrograph to take photographs of the same section of sky several nights apart. He then used a blink comparator to compare the different images. When he shifted between the two images, a moving object, such as a planet, would appear to jump from one position to another, while the more distant objects such as stars would appear stationary. Tombaugh noticed such a moving object in his search, near the place predicted by Lowell, and subsequent observations showed it to have an orbit beyond that of Neptune. This ruled out classification as an asteroid, and they decided this was the ninth planet that Lowell had predicted. The discovery was made on Tuesday, February 18, 1930, using images taken the previous month. The name \"Pluto\" was suggested by an 11-year-old English schoolgirl, Venetia Burney. It won out over numerous other suggestions because it was the name of the Roman god of the underworld, who was able to render himself invisible, and because Percival Lowell's initials PL formed the first 2 letters. The name Pluto was officially adopted on May 1, 1930.\n\nFollowing the discovery, starting in the 1990s, of other Kuiper belt objects, Pluto began to be seen not as a planet orbiting alone at 40 AU, but as the largest of a group of icy bodies in that region of space. After it was shown that at least one such body was more massive than Pluto, on August 24, 2006 the International Astronomical Union (IAU) reclassified Pluto, grouping it with two similarly sized \"dwarf planets\" rather than with the eight \"classical planets\".\n\nTombaugh's widow Patricia stated after the IAU's decision that while Clyde may have been disappointed with the change since he had resisted attempts to remove Pluto's planetary status in his lifetime, he would have accepted the decision now if he were alive. She noted that he \"was a scientist. He would understand they had a real problem when they start finding several of these things flying around the place.\" Hal Levison offered this perspective on Tombaugh's place in history: \"Clyde Tombaugh discovered the Kuiper Belt. That's a helluva lot more interesting than the ninth planet.\"\n\nTombaugh continued searching for some years after the discovery of Pluto, and the lack of further discoveries left him satisfied that no other object of a comparable apparent magnitude existed near the ecliptic. No more trans-Neptunian objects were discovered until 15760 Albion in 1992.\n\nHowever, more recently the relatively bright object has been discovered. It has a relatively high orbital inclination, but at the time of Tombaugh's discovery of Pluto, Makemake was only a few degrees from the ecliptic near the border of Taurus and Auriga at an apparent magnitude of 16. This position was also very near the galactic equator, making it almost impossible to find such an object within the dense concentration of background stars of the Milky Way. In the fourteen years of looking for planets, Tombaugh looked for motion in 90 million star images.\n\nTombaugh is officially credited by the Minor Planet Center with discovering 15 asteroids, and he observed nearly 800 asteroids during his search for Pluto and years of follow-up searches looking for another candidate for the postulated Planet X. Tombaugh is also credited with the discovery of periodic comet 274P/Tombaugh–Tenagra. He also discovered hundreds of variable stars, as well as star clusters, galaxy clusters, and a galaxy supercluster.\n+ Minor planets discovered by Tombaugh\n! Designation !! Discovery\n\nTombaugh was probably the most eminent astronomer to have reported seeing unidentified flying objects. On August 20, 1949, Tombaugh saw several unidentified objects near Las Cruces, New Mexico. He described them as six to eight rectangular lights, stating: \"I doubt that the phenomenon was any terrestrial reflection, because... nothing of the kind has ever appeared before or since... I was so unprepared for such a strange sight that I was really petrified with astonishment.\".\n\nTombaugh observed these rectangles of light for about 3 seconds and his wife saw them for about seconds. He never supported the interpretation as a spaceship that has often been attributed to him. He considered other possibilities, with a temperature inversion as the most likely cause.From my own studies of the solar system I cannot entertain any serious possibility for intelligent life on other planets, not even for Mars... The logistics of visitations from planets revolving around the nearer stars is staggering. In consideration of the hundreds of millions of years in the geologic time scale when such visits may have possibly occurred, the odds of a single visit in a given century or millennium are overwhelmingly against such an event.\nA much more likely source of explanation is some natural optical phenomenon in our own atmosphere. In my 1949 sightings the faintness of the object, together with the manner of fading in intensity as it traveled away from the zenith towards the southeastern horizon, is quite suggestive of a reflection from an optical boundary or surface of slight contrast in refractive index, as in an inversion layer.\nI have never seen anything like it before or since, and I have spent a lot of time where the night sky could be seen well. This suggests that the phenomenon involves a comparatively rare set of conditions or circumstances to produce it, but nothing like the odds of an interstellar visitation.\n\nAnother sighting by Tombaugh a year or two later while at a White Sands observatory was of an object of −6 magnitude, four times brighter than Venus at its brightest, going from the zenith to the southern horizon in about 3 seconds. The object executed the same maneuvers as in Tombaugh's first sighting.\n\nTombaugh later reported having seen three of the mysterious green fireballs, which suddenly appeared over New Mexico in late 1948 and continued at least through the early 1950s. A researcher on Project Twinkle reported that Tombaugh \"... never observed an unexplainable aerial object despite his continuous and extensive observations of the sky.\"\n\nAccording to an entry in \"UFO updates\", Tombaugh said: \"I have seen three objects in the last seven years which defied any explanation of known phenomenon, such as Venus, atmospheric optic, meteors or planes. I am a professional, highly skilled, professional astronomer. In addition I have seen three green fireballs which were unusual in behavior from normal green fireballs... I think that several reputable scientists are being unscientific in refusing to entertain the possibility of extraterrestrial origin and nature.\"\n\nShortly after this in January 1957, in an Associated Press article in the \"Alamogordo Daily News\" titled \"Celestial Visitors May Be Invading Earth's Atmosphere,\" Tombaugh was again quoted on his sightings and opinion about them. \"Although our own solar system is believed to support no other life than on Earth, other stars in the galaxy may have hundreds of thousands of habitable worlds. Races on these worlds may have been able to utilize the tremendous amounts of power required to bridge the space between the stars...\" Tombaugh stated that he had observed celestial phenomena which he could not explain, but had seen none personally since 1951 or 1952. \"These things, which do appear to be directed, are unlike any other phenomena I ever observed. Their apparent lack of obedience to the ordinary laws of celestial motion gives credence.\"\n\nIn 1949, Tombaugh had also told the Naval missile director at White Sands Missile Range, Commander Robert McLaughlin, that he had seen a bright flash on Mars on August 27, 1941, which he now attributed to an atomic blast. Tombaugh also noted that the first atomic bomb tested in New Mexico would have lit up the dark side of the Earth like a neon sign and that Mars was coincidentally quite close at the time, the implication apparently being that the atomic test would have been visible from Mars.\n\nIn June 1952, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, an astronomer acting as a scientific consultant to the Air Force's Project Blue Book UFO study, secretly conducted a survey of fellow astronomers on UFO sightings and attitudes while attending an astronomy convention. Tombaugh and four other astronomers, including Dr. Lincoln LaPaz of the University of New Mexico, told Hynek about their sightings. Tombaugh also told Hynek that his telescopes were at the Air Force's disposal for taking photos of UFOs, if he was properly alerted.\n\nTombaugh's offer may have led to his involvement in a search for near-Earth satellites, first announced in late 1953 and sponsored by the Army Office of Ordnance Research. Another public statement was made on the search in March 1954, emphasizing the rationale that such an orbiting object would serve as a natural space station. However, according to Donald Keyhoe, later director of the National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena (NICAP), the real reason for the sudden search was because two near-Earth orbiting objects had been picked up on new long-range radar in the summer of 1953, according to his Pentagon source.\n\nBy May 1954, Keyhoe was making public statements that his sources told him the search had indeed been successful, and either one or two objects had been found. However, the story did not break until August 23, 1954, when \"Aviation Week\" magazine stated that two satellites had been found only 400 and 600 miles out. They were termed \"natural satellites\" and implied that they had been recently captured, despite this being a virtual impossibility. The next day, the story was in many major newspapers. Dr. LaPaz was implicated in the discovery in addition to Tombaugh. LaPaz had earlier conducted secret investigations on behalf of the Air Force on the green fireballs and other unidentified aerial phenomena over New Mexico. \"The New York Times\" reported on August 29 that \"a source close to the O. O. R. unit here described as 'quite accurate' the report in the magazine Aviation Week that two previously unobserved satellites had been spotted and identified by Dr. Lincoln LaPaz of the University of New Mexico as natural and not artificial objects. This source also said there was absolutely no connection between the reported satellites and flying saucer reports.\" However, in the October 10th issue, LaPaz said the magazine article was \"false in every particular, in so far as reference to me is concerned.\"\n\nBoth LaPaz and Tombaugh were to issue public denials that anything had been found. The October 1955 issue of \"Popular Mechanics\" magazine reported: \"Professor Tombaugh is closemouthed about his results. He won't say whether or not any small natural satellites have been discovered. He does say, however, that newspaper reports of 18 months ago announcing the discovery of natural satellites at 400 and 600 miles out are not correct. He adds that there is no connection between the search program and the reports of so-called flying saucers.\"\n\nAt a meteor conference in Los Angeles in 1957, Tombaugh reiterated that his four-year search for \"natural satellites\" had been unsuccessful. In 1959, Tombaugh was to issue a final report stating that nothing had been found in his search. His personal 16-inch telescope was reassembled and dedicated on September 17, 2009 at Rancho Hidalgo, New Mexico (near Animas, New Mexico), adjacent to \"Astronomy\" 's new observatory.\n\nBULLET::::- The 2006 release \"The Avalanche\", by musical artist Sufjan Stevens contains an instrumental 3m43s track entitled \"For Clyde Tombaugh\".\n\nBULLET::::- Tombaugh (Martian crater)\nBULLET::::- Tombaugh Cliffs\nBULLET::::- Tombaugh Regio\n\nBULLET::::- Falk, Dan, \"More than a one-hit wonder\", \"Astronomy\", February 2006, 40–45.\nBULLET::::- David H. Levy \"Clyde Tombaugh: Discoverer of the Planet Pluto\" (Tucson, Ariz.: University of Arizona Press, 1991). ; also Sky Publishing Corporation, March 2006\n\nBULLET::::- Clyde Tombaugh papers at New Mexico State University\nBULLET::::- Many biographical articles on Clyde Tombaugh\nBULLET::::- Biography, Interviews, Photo Gallery of Clyde Tombaugh, achievement.org\nBULLET::::- Illinois proposes a Pluto Day and reinstate Pluto as a Planet in honor of C. Tombaugh: Illinois General Assembly, Senate Resolution SR0046 2/26/2009\n"}
{"id": "6666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6666", "title": "Christopher Báthory", "text": "Christopher Báthory\n\nChristopher Báthory (; 1530 – 27 May 1581) was voivode of Transylvania from 1576 to 1581. He was a younger son of Stephen Báthory of Somlyó. Christopher's career began during the reign of Queen Isabella Jagiellon, who administered the eastern territories of the Kingdom of Hungary on behalf of her son, John Sigismund Zápolya, from 1556 to 1559. He was one of the commanders of John Sigismund's army in the early 1560s.\n\nChristopher's brother, Stephen Báthory, who succeeded John Sigismund in 1571, made Christopher captain of Várad (now Oradea in Romania). After being elected King of Poland, Stephen Báthory adopted the title of Prince of Transylvania and made Christopher voivode in 1576. Christopher cooperated with Márton Berzeviczy, whom his brother appointed to supervise the administration of the Principality of Transylvania as the head of the Transylvanian chancellery at Kraków. Christopher ordered the imprisonment of Ferenc Dávid, a leading theologian of the Unitarian Church of Transylvania, who started to condemn the adoration of Jesus. He supported his brother's efforts to settle the Jesuits in Transylvania.\n\nChristopher was the third of the four sons of Stephen Báthory of Somlyó and Catherine Telegdi. His father was a supporter of John Zápolya, King of Hungary, who made him voivode of Transylvania in February 1530. Christopher was born in Báthorys' castle at Szilágysomlyó (now Șimleu Silvaniei in Romania) in the same year. His father died in 1534.\n\nHis brother, Andrew, and their kinsman, Tamás Nádasdy, took charge of Christopher's education. Christopher visited England, France, Italy, Spain, and the Holy Roman Empire in his youth. He also served as a page in Emperor Charles V's court.\n\nChristopher entered the service of John Zápolya's widow, Isabella Jagiellon, in the late 1550s. At the time, Isabella administered the eastern territories of the Kingdom of Hungary on behalf of her son, John Sigismund Zápolya. She wanted to persuade Henry II of France to withdraw his troops from three fortresses that the Ottomans had captured in Banat, so she sent Christopher to France to start negotiations in 1557.\n\nJohn Sigismund took charge of the administration of his realm after his mother died on 15 November 1559. He retained his mother's advisors, including Christopher who became one of his most influential officials. After the rebellion of Melchior Balassa, Christopher persuaded John Sigismund to fight for his realm instead of fleeing to Poland in 1562. Christopher was one of the commanders of John Sigismund's troops during the ensuing war against the Habsburg rulers of the western territories of the Kingdom of Hungary, Ferdinand and Maximilian, who tried to reunite the kingdom under their rule. Christopher defeated Maximilian's commander, Lazarus von Schwendi, forcing him to lift the siege of Huszt (now Khust in Ukraine) in 1565.\n\nAfter the death of John Sigismund, the Diet of Transylvania elected Christopher's younger brother, Stephen Báthory, voivode (or ruler) on 25 May 1571. Stephen made Christopher captain of Várad (now Oradea in Romania). The following year, the Ottoman Sultan, Selim II (who was the overlord of Transylvania), acknowledged the hereditary right of the Báthory family to rule the province.\n\nStephen Báthory was elected King of Poland on 15 December 1575. He adopted the title of Prince of Transylvania and made Christopher voivode on 14 January 1576. An Ottoman delegation confirmed Christopher's appointment at the Diet in Gyulafehérvár (now Alba Iulia in Romania) in July. The sultan's charter (or \"ahidnâme\") sent to Christopher emphasized that he should keep the peace along the frontiers. Stephen set up a separate chancellery in Kraków to keep an eye on the administration of Transylvania. The head of the new chancellery, Márton Berzeviczy, and Christopher cooperated closely.\n\nAnti-Trinitarian preachers began to condemn the worshiping of Jesus in Partium and Székely Land in 1576, although the Diet had already forbade all doctrinal innovations. Ferenc Dávid, the most influential leader of the Unitarian Church of Transylvania, openly joined the dissenters in the autumn of 1578. Christopher invited Fausto Sozzini, a leading Anti-Trinitarian theologian, to Transylvania to convince Dávid that the new teaching was erroneous. Since Dávid refused to obey, Christopher held a Diet and the \"Three Nations\" (including the Unitarian delegates) ordered Dávid's imprisonment. Christopher also supported his brother's attempts to strengthen the position of the Roman Catholic Church in Transylvania. He granted estates to the Jesuits to promote the establishment of a college in Kolozsvár (now Cluj-Napoca in Romania) on 5 May 1579.\n\nChristopher fell seriously ill after his second wife, Elisabeth Bocskai, died in early 1581. After a false rumor about Christopher's dead reached Istanbul, Koca Sinan Pasha proposed Transylvania to Pál Márkházy whom Christopher had been forced into exile. Although Christopher's only surviving son Sigismund was still a minor, the Diet elected him as voivode before Christopher's death, because they wanted to prevent the appointment of Márkházy. Christopher died in Gyulafehérvár on 27 May 1581. He was buried in the Jesuits' church in Gyulafehérvár, almost two years later, on 14 March 1583.\n\nChristopher's first wife, Catherina Danicska, was a Polish noblewoman, but only the Hungarian form of her name is known. Their eldest son, Balthasar Báthory, moved to Kraków shortly after Stephen Báthory was crowned King of Poland; he drowned in the Vistula River in May 1577 at the age of 22. Christopher's and Catherina's second son, Nicholas, was born in 1567 and died in 1576.\n\nChristopher's second wife, Elisabeth Bocskai, was a Calvinist noblewoman. Their first child, Cristina (or Griselda), was born in 1569. She was given in marriage to Jan Zamoyski, Chancellor of Poland, in 1583. Christopher's youngest son, Sigismund, was born in 1573.\n\n"}
{"id": "6667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6667", "title": "CPAN", "text": "CPAN\n\nThe Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN) is a repository of over 250,000 software modules and accompanying documentation for 39,000 distributions, written in the Perl programming language by over 12,000 contributors. \"CPAN\" can denote either the archive network or the Perl program that acts as an interface to the network and as an automated software installer (somewhat like a package manager). Most software on CPAN is free and open source software. CPAN was conceived in 1993 and has been active online since October 1995. It is based on the CTAN model and began as a place to unify the structure of scattered Perl archives.\n\nLike many programming languages, Perl has mechanisms to use external libraries of code, making one file contain common routines used by several programs. Perl calls these \"modules\". Perl modules are typically installed in one of several directories whose paths are placed in the Perl interpreter when it is first compiled; on Unix-like operating systems, common paths include \"/usr/lib/perl5\", \"/usr/local/lib/perl5\", and several of their subdirectories.\n\nPerl comes with a small set of \"core modules\". Some of these perform bootstrapping tasks, such as codice_1, which is used for building and installing other extension modules; others, like CGI.pm, are merely commonly used.\n\nThe CPAN's main purpose is to help programmers locate modules and programs not included in the Perl standard distribution. Its structure is decentralized. Authors maintain and improve their own modules. Forking, and creating competing modules for the same task or purpose, is common. There is no formal bug tracking system, but there is a third-party bug tracking system that CPAN designated as the suggested official method of reporting issues with modules. Continuous development on modules is rare; many are abandoned by their authors, or go years between new versions being released. Sometimes a maintainer will be appointed to an abandoned module. They can release new versions of the module, and accept patches from the community to the module as their time permits. CPAN has no revision control system, although the source for the modules is often stored on GitHub. Also, the complete history of the CPAN and all its modules is available as the GitPAN project, allowing to easily see the complete history for all the modules and for easy maintenance of forks. CPAN is also used to distribute new versions of Perl, as well as related projects, such as Parrot and Raku.\n\nFiles on the CPAN are referred to as \"distributions\". A distribution may consist of one or more modules, documentation files, or programs packaged in a common archiving format, such as a gzipped tar archive or a ZIP file. Distributions will often contain installation scripts (usually called \"Makefile.PL\" or \"Build.PL\") and test scripts which can be run to verify the contents of the distribution are functioning properly. New distributions are uploaded to the Perl Authors Upload Server, or PAUSE (see the section Uploading distributions with PAUSE).\n\nIn 2003, distributions started to include metadata files, called \"META.yml\", indicating the distribution's name, version, dependencies, and other useful information; however, not all distributions contain metadata. When metadata is not present in a distribution, the PAUSE's software will usually try to analyze the code in the distribution to look for the same information; this is not necessarily very reliable.\n\nWith thousands of distributions, CPAN needs to be structured to be useful. Distributions on the CPAN are divided into 24 broad \"chapters\" based on their purpose, such as \"Internationalization and Locale\"; \"Archiving, Compression, And Conversion\"; and \"Mail and Usenet News\". Distributions can also be browsed by author. Finally, the natural hierarchy of Perl module names (such as codice_2 or codice_3) can sometimes be used to browse modules in the CPAN.\n\nCPAN module distributions usually have names in the form of \"CGI-Application-3.1\" (where the :: used in the module's name has been replaced with a dash, and the version number has been appended to the name), but this is only a convention; many prominent distributions break the convention, especially those that contain multiple modules. Security restrictions prevent a distribution from ever being replaced, so virtually all distribution names do include a version number.\n\nThe distribution infrastructure of CPAN consists of its worldwide network of more than 250 mirrors in more than 60 countries. Each full mirror hosts around 20 gigabytes of data.\n\nMost mirrors update themselves hourly, daily or bidaily from the CPAN master site. Some sites are major FTP servers which mirror lots of other software, but others are simply servers owned by companies that use Perl heavily. There are at least two mirrors on every continent except Antarctica.\n\nSeveral search engines have been written to help Perl programmers sort through the CPAN. The official includes textual search, a browsable index of modules, and extracted copies of all distributions currently on the CPAN. On May 16, 2018, the Perl Foundation announced that search.cpan.org would be shut down on June 29, 2018 (after 19 years of operation), due to its aging codebase and maintenance burden. Users will be transitioned and redirected to the third-party alternative MetaCPAN.\n\nCPAN Testers are a group of volunteers, who will download and test distributions as they are uploaded to CPAN. This enables the authors to have their modules tested on many platforms and environments that they would otherwise not have access to, thus helping to promote portability, as well as a degree of quality. Smoke testers send reports, which are then collated and used for a variety of presentation websites, including the main reports site, statistics and dependencies.\n\nThere is also a Perl core module named CPAN; it is usually differentiated from the repository itself by using the name CPAN.pm. CPAN.pm is mainly an interactive shell which can be used to search for, download, and install distributions. An interactive shell called cpan is also provided in the Perl core, and is the usual way of running CPAN.pm. After a short configuration process and mirror selection, it uses tools available on the user's computer to automatically download, unpack, compile, test, and install modules. It is also capable of updating itself.\n\nMore recently, an effort to replace CPAN.pm with something cleaner and more modern has resulted in the CPANPLUS (or CPAN++) set of modules. CPANPLUS separates the back-end work of downloading, compiling, and installing modules from the interactive shell used to issue commands. It also supports several advanced features, such as cryptographic signature checking and test result reporting. Finally, CPANPLUS can uninstall a distribution. CPANPLUS was added to the Perl core in version 5.10.0.\n\nBoth modules can check a distribution's dependencies and can be set to recursively install any prerequisites, either automatically or with individual user approval. Both support FTP and HTTP and can work through firewalls and proxies.\n\nAuthors can upload new distributions to the CPAN through the \"Perl Authors Upload Server\" (PAUSE). To do so, they must request a PAUSE account.\n\nOnce registered, they may use a web interface at pause.perl.org, or an FTP interface to upload files to their directory and delete them. PAUSE will warn an administrator if a user uploads a module that already exists, unless they are listed as a \"co-maintainer\". This can be specified through PAUSE's web interface.\n\nExperienced Perl programmers often comment that half of Perl's power is in the CPAN. It has been called Perl's killer app. It is roughly equivalent to the PECL and PEAR for PHP; the PyPI (Python Package Index) repository for Python; RubyGems for Ruby; CRAN for R; npm for Node.js; LuaRocks for Lua; Maven for Java; and Hackage for Haskell. CPAN's use of arbitrated name spaces, a testing regime and a well defined documentation style makes it unique.\n\nGiven its importance to the Perl developer community, the CPAN both shapes and is shaped by Perl's culture. Its \"self-appointed master librarian\", Jarkko Hietaniemi, often takes part in the April Fools' Day jokes; on 1 April 2002 the site was temporarily named to \"CJAN\", where the \"J\" stood for \"Java\". In 2003, the codice_4 domain name was redirected to Matt's Script Archive, a site infamous in the Perl community for having badly written code.\n\nSome of the distributions on the CPAN are distributed as jokes. The codice_5 hierarchy is reserved for joke modules; for instance, codice_6 adds a codice_7 function that doesn't run the code given to it (to complement the codice_8 built-in, which does). Even outside the codice_5 hierarchy, some modules are still written largely for amusement; one example is codice_10, which can be used to write Perl programs in a subset of Latin.\n\nIn 2005, a group of Perl developers who also had an interest in JavaScript got together to create JSAN, the JavaScript Archive Network. The JSAN is a near-direct port of the CPAN infrastructure for use with the JavaScript language, which for most of its lifespan did not have a cohesive \"community\".\n\nIn 2008, after a chance meeting with CPAN admin Adam Kennedy at the Open Source Developers Conference, Linux kernel developer Rusty Russell created the CCAN, the Comprehensive C Archive Network. The CCAN is a direct port of the CPAN architecture for use with the C language.\n\nBULLET::::- MetaCPAN\nBULLET::::- List of official CPAN mirrors\nBULLET::::- ZCAN - \"The Zen of Comprehensive Archive Networks\" - a document that aims to explain how and why CPAN succeeded and how to duplicate it in similar efforts. (9 January 2003 by Jarkko Hietaniemi).\n"}
{"id": "6669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6669", "title": "Colorado Rockies", "text": "Colorado Rockies\n\nThe Colorado Rockies are an American professional baseball team based in Denver, Colorado. They compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) West division. The team's home venue is Coors Field, located in the Lower Downtown area of Denver. The team is owned by the Monfort brothers and managed by Bud Black.\n\nThe Rockies began play as an expansion team for the 1993 season, and played their home games for their first two seasons at Mile High Stadium. Since 1995, they have played at Coors Field, which has earned a reputation as a hitter's park. The Rockies have qualified for the postseason five times, each time as a Wild Card winner. In 2007, the team earned its first (and only) NL pennant after winning 14 of their final 15 games in the regular season to secure a Wild Card position. In the 2007 World Series, they were swept by the American League (AL) champions Boston Red Sox in four games.\n\nDenver had long been a hotbed of Denver Bears/Zephyrs minor league baseball and many in the area desired a Major League team. Following the Pittsburgh drug trials, an unsuccessful attempt was made to purchase the Pittsburgh Pirates and relocate them. However, in 1991, as part of Major League Baseball's two-team expansion (along with the Florida (now Miami) Marlins), an ownership group representing Denver led by John Antonucci and Michael I. Monus was granted a franchise; they took the name \"Rockies\" due to Denver's proximity to the Rocky Mountains, which is reflected in their logo; the name was previously used by the city's first NHL team (who are now the New Jersey Devils). Monus and Antonucci were forced to drop out in 1992 after Monus' reputation was ruined by an accounting scandal. Trucking magnate Jerry McMorris stepped in at the 11th hour to save the franchise, allowing the team to begin play in 1993. The Rockies shared Mile High Stadium (which had originally been built for the Bears) with the National Football League (NFL)'s Denver Broncos for their first two seasons while Coors Field was constructed. It was completed for the 1995 Major League Baseball season.\n\nIn 1993, they started play in the West division of the National League. The Rockies were MLB's first team based in the Mountain Time Zone. They have reached the Major League Baseball postseason five times, each time as the National League wild card team. Twice (1995 and 2009) they were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs. In 2007, the Rockies advanced to the World Series, only to be swept by the Boston Red Sox. Like their expansion brethren, the Miami Marlins, they have never won a division title since their establishment; they are also one of two current MLB teams that have never won their division.\n\nThe Rockies have played their home games at Coors Field since 1995. Their newest spring training home, Salt River Fields at Talking Stick in Scottsdale, Arizona, opened in March 2011 and is shared with the Arizona Diamondbacks.\n\nAt the start of the 2012 season, the Rockies introduced \"Purple Mondays\" in which the team wears its purple uniform every Monday game day.\n\nNo inducted members of the Baseball Hall of Fame have played for or managed the Rockies.\n\n colspan=\"5\" style=\";\"Colorado Rockies in the Colorado Sports Hall of Fame\n! style=\"width:40px; ;\"No.\n! style=\"width:90px; ;\"Name\n! style=\"width:60px; ;\"Position(s)\n! style=\"width:70px; ;\"Seasons\n! style=\"width:210px; ;\"Notes\n\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Larry Walker\n\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Matt Holliday\n\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Jason Jennings\n\nBULLET::::- Dante Bichette (1995)\nBULLET::::- Vinny Castilla (1995, 1997–98)\nBULLET::::- Andrés Galarraga (1996)\nBULLET::::- Eric Young (1996)\nBULLET::::- Ellis Burks (1996)\nBULLET::::- Larry Walker (1997, 1999)\nBULLET::::- Mike Hampton (2001–02)\nBULLET::::- Todd Helton (2000–03)\nBULLET::::- Matt Holliday (2006–08)\nBULLET::::- Carlos González (2010, 2015)\nBULLET::::- Troy Tulowitzki (2010–11)\nBULLET::::- Michael Cuddyer (2013)\nBULLET::::- Nolan Arenado (2015–18)\nBULLET::::- Charlie Blackmon (2016–17)\nBULLET::::- Trevor Story (2018)\nBULLET::::- Germán Márquez (2018)\n\nBULLET::::- 2000 – Todd Helton\n\nBULLET::::- Larry Walker (1997–99, 2001–02)\nBULLET::::- Neifi Pérez (2000)\nBULLET::::- Todd Helton (2001–02, 2004)\nBULLET::::- Carlos González (2010, 2012–13)\nBULLET::::- Troy Tulowitzki (2010–11)\nBULLET::::- Nolan Arenado (2013–19)\nBULLET::::- DJ LeMahieu (2014, 2017–18)\n\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Don Baylor\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Jim Tracy\n\nBULLET::::- Andrés Galarraga (1993)\nBULLET::::- Larry Walker (1998, 1999, 2001)\nBULLET::::- Todd Helton (2000)\nBULLET::::- Matt Holliday (2007)\nBULLET::::- Carlos González (2010)\nBULLET::::- Michael Cuddyer (2013)\nBULLET::::- Justin Morneau (2014)\nBULLET::::- DJ LeMahieu (2016)\nBULLET::::- Charlie Blackmon (2017)\n\nBULLET::::- Larry Walker – voted by MLB fans as the most outstanding player in the history of the franchise, based on on-field performance, leadership quality and character value\n\nBULLET::::- – Warren Giles Trophy (National League champion)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – \"Baseball America\" Organization of the Year\n\n colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;\" National League Champions\n\nTodd Helton is the sole Colorado player to have his number (17) retired, which was done on Sunday, August 17, 2014.\n\nJackie Robinson's number, 42, was retired throughout all of baseball in 1997.\n\nKeli McGregor had worked with the Rockies since their inception in 1993, rising from senior director of operations to team president in 2002, until his death on April 20, 2010. He is honored at Coors Field alongside Helton and Robinson with his initials.\n\n! style=\";\"Level\n! style=\";\"Team\n! style=\";\"League\n! style=\";\"Location\n\"Short Season A\"\nrowspan=2\"Rookie\"\n\nAs of 2010, Rockies' flagship radio station is KOA 850AM, with some late-season games broadcast on KHOW 630 AM due to conflicts with Denver Broncos games. The Rockies Radio Network is composed of 38 affiliate stations in eight states.\n\nAs of 2019, Jerry Schemmel and Jack Corrigan are the radio announcers; both serve as backup TV announcers whenever Drew Goodman is not available. \n\nAs of 2013, Spanish language radio broadcasts of the Rockies are heard on KNRV 1150 AM.\n\nAs of 2013, all games are produced and televised by AT&T SportsNet Rocky Mountain. All 150 games produced by AT&T SportsNet Rocky Mountain are broadcast in HD. Jeff Huson and Drew Goodman are the usual the TV broadcast team, with Ryan Spilborghs and Taylor McGregor handling on-field coverage and clubhouse interviews. Jenny Cavnar, Jason Hirsh, and Cory Sullivan handle the pre-game and post-game shows. Schemmel, Corrigan, Spilborghs, Cavnar, and Sullivan also fill in as play-by-play or color commentator during absences of Huson or Goodman.\n\nThe Rockies led MLB attendance records for the first seven years of their existence. The inaugural season is currently the MLB all-time record for home attendance.\n\n! colspan=5 style=\";\"Home Attendance at Mile High Stadium\n\n! colspan=5 style=\";\"Home Attendance at Coors Field\n+ = 57 home games in strike shortened season. ++ = 72 home games in strike shortened season.\nBULLET::::- Minor League Affiliates of the Colorado Rockies\n"}
{"id": "6670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6670", "title": "Cement", "text": "Cement\n\nA cement is a binder, a substance used for construction that sets, hardens, and adheres to other materials to bind them together. Cement is seldom used on its own, but rather to bind sand and gravel (aggregate) together. Cement mixed with fine aggregate produces mortar for masonry, or with sand and gravel, produces concrete. Cement is the most widely used material in existence and is only behind water as the planet's most-consumed resource.\n\nCements used in construction are usually inorganic, often lime or calcium silicate based, and can be characterized as either hydraulic or non-hydraulic, depending on the ability of the cement to set in the presence of water (see hydraulic and non-hydraulic lime plaster).\n\nNon-hydraulic cement does not set in wet conditions or under water. Rather, it sets as it dries and reacts with carbon dioxide in the air. It is resistant to attack by chemicals after setting.\n\nHydraulic cements (e.g., Portland cement) set and become adhesive due to a chemical reaction between the dry ingredients and water. The chemical reaction results in mineral hydrates that are not very water-soluble and so are quite durable in water and safe from chemical attack. This allows setting in wet conditions or under water and further protects the hardened material from chemical attack. The chemical process for hydraulic cement was found by ancient Romans who used volcanic ash (pozzolana) with added lime (calcium oxide).\n\nThe word \"cement\" can be traced back to the Roman term \"opus caementicium\", used to describe masonry resembling modern concrete that was made from crushed rock with burnt lime as binder. The volcanic ash and pulverized brick supplements that were added to the burnt lime, to obtain a hydraulic binder, were later referred to as \"cementum\", \"cimentum\", \"cäment\", and \"cement\". In modern times, organic polymers are sometimes used as cements in concrete.\n\nIf the cement industry were a country, it would be the third largest carbon dioxide emitter in the world with up to 2.8bn tonnes, surpassed only by China and the US.\n\nCement materials can be classified into two distinct categories: non-hydraulic cements and hydraulic cements according to their respective setting and hardening mechanisms. Hydraulic cements setting and hardening involve hydration reactions and therefore require water, while non-hydraulic cements only react with a gas and can directly set under air.\n\nNon-hydraulic cement, such as slaked lime (calcium oxide mixed with water), hardens by carbonation in contact with carbon dioxide, which is present in the air (~ 412 vol. ppm ≃ 0.04 vol. %). First calcium oxide (lime) is produced from calcium carbonate (limestone or chalk) by calcination at temperatures above 825 °C (1,517 °F) for about 10 hours at atmospheric pressure:\nThe calcium oxide is then \"spent\" (slaked) mixing it with water to make slaked lime (calcium hydroxide):\nOnce the excess water is completely evaporated (this process is technically called \"setting\"), the carbonation starts:\nThis reaction takes time, because the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the air is low (~ 0.4 millibar). The carbonation reaction requires that the dry cement be exposed to air, so the slaked lime is a non-hydraulic cement and cannot be used under water. This process is called the \"lime cycle\".\n\nConversely, hydraulic cement hardens by hydration of the clinker minerals when water is added. Hydraulic cements (such as Portland cement) are made of a mixture of silicates and oxides, the four main mineral phases of the clinker, abbreviated in the cement chemist notation, being:\n\nThe silicates are responsible for the cement's mechanical properties — the tricalcium aluminate and brownmillerite are essential for the formation of the liquid phase during the sintering (firing) process of clinker at high temperature in the kiln. The chemistry of these reactions is not completely clear and is still the object of research.\n\nPerhaps the earliest known occurrence of cement is from twelve million years ago. A deposit of cement was formed after an occurrence of oil shale located adjacent to a bed of limestone burned due to natural causes. These ancient deposits were investigated in the 1960s and 1970s.\n\nCement, chemically speaking, is a product that includes lime as the primary curing ingredient, but is far from the first material used for cementation. The Babylonians and Assyrians used bitumen to bind together burnt brick or alabaster slabs. In Egypt stone blocks were cemented together with a mortar made of sand and roughly burnt gypsum (CaSO · 2HO), which often contained calcium carbonate (CaCO).\n\nLime (calcium oxide) was used on Crete and by the ancient Greeks. There is evidence that the Minoans of Crete used crushed potshards as an artificial pozzolan for hydraulic cement. Nobody knows who first discovered that a combination of hydrated non-hydraulic lime and a pozzolan produces a hydraulic mixture (see also: Pozzolanic reaction), but such concrete was used by the Ancient Macedonians, and three centuries later on a large scale by Roman engineers.\n\nThe Greeks used volcanic tuff from the island of Thera as their pozzolan and the Romans used crushed volcanic ash (activated aluminium silicates) with lime. This mixture could set under water, increasing its resistance. The material was called \"pozzolana\" from the town of Pozzuoli, west of Naples where volcanic ash was extracted. In the absence of pozzolanic ash, the Romans used powdered brick or pottery as a substitute and they may have used crushed tiles for this purpose before discovering natural sources near Rome. The huge dome of the Pantheon in Rome and the massive Baths of Caracalla are examples of ancient structures made from these concretes, many of which still stand. The vast system of Roman aqueducts also made extensive use of hydraulic cement. Roman concrete was rarely used on the outside of buildings. The normal technique was to use brick facing material as the formwork for an infill of mortar mixed with an aggregate of broken pieces of stone, brick, potsherds, recycled chunks of concrete, or other building rubble.\n\nAny preservation of this knowledge in literature from the Middle Ages is unknown, but medieval masons and some military engineers actively used hydraulic cement in structures such as canals, fortresses, harbors, and shipbuilding facilities. A mixture of lime mortar and aggregate with brick or stone facing material was used in the Eastern Roman Empire as well as in the West into the Gothic period. The German Rhineland continued to use hydraulic mortar throughout the Middle Ages, having local pozzolana deposits called trass.\n\nTabby is a building material made from oyster-shell lime, sand, and whole oyster shells to form a concrete. The Spanish introduced it to the Americas in the sixteenth century.\n\nThe technical knowledge for making hydraulic cement was formalized by French and British engineers in the 18th century.\n\nJohn Smeaton made an important contribution to the development of cements while planning the construction of the third Eddystone Lighthouse (1755–59) in the English Channel now known as Smeaton's Tower. He needed a hydraulic mortar that would set and develop some strength in the twelve-hour period between successive high tides. He performed experiments with combinations of different limestones and additives including trass and pozzolanas and did exhaustive market research on the available hydraulic limes, visiting their production sites, and noted that the \"hydraulicity\" of the lime was directly related to the clay content of the limestone used to make it. Smeaton was a civil engineer by profession, and took the idea no further.\n\nIn the South Atlantic seaboard of the United States, tabby relying on the oyster-shell middens of earlier Native American populations was used in house construction from the 1730s to the 1860s.\n\nIn Britain particularly, good quality building stone became ever more expensive during a period of rapid growth, and it became a common practice to construct prestige buildings from the new industrial bricks, and to finish them with a stucco to imitate stone. Hydraulic limes were favored for this, but the need for a fast set time encouraged the development of new cements. Most famous was Parker's \"Roman cement\". This was developed by James Parker in the 1780s, and finally patented in 1796. It was, in fact, nothing like material used by the Romans, but was a \"natural cement\" made by burning septaria – nodules that are found in certain clay deposits, and that contain both clay minerals and calcium carbonate. The burnt nodules were ground to a fine powder. This product, made into a mortar with sand, set in 5–15 minutes. The success of \"Roman cement\" led other manufacturers to develop rival products by burning artificial hydraulic lime cements of clay and chalk.\nRoman cement quickly became popular but was largely replaced by Portland cement in the 1850s.\n\nApparently unaware of Smeaton's work, the same principle was identified by Frenchman Louis Vicat in the first decade of the nineteenth century. Vicat went on to devise a method of combining chalk and clay into an intimate mixture, and, burning this, produced an \"artificial cement\" in 1817 considered the \"principal forerunner\" of Portland cement and \"...Edgar Dobbs of Southwark patented a cement of this kind in 1811.\"\n\nIn Russia, Egor Cheliev created a new binder by mixing lime and clay. His results were published in 1822 in his book \"A Treatise on the Art to Prepare a Good Mortar\" published in St. Petersburg. A few years later in 1825, he published another book, which described various methods of making cement and concrete, and the benefits of cement in the construction of buildings and embankments.\nPortland cement, the most common type of cement in general use around the world as a basic ingredient of concrete, mortar, stucco, and non-speciality grout, was developed in England in the mid 19th century, and usually originates from limestone. James Frost produced what he called \"British cement\" in a similar manner around the same time, but did not obtain a patent until 1822. In 1824, Joseph Aspdin patented a similar material, which he called \"Portland cement\", because the render made from it was in color similar to the prestigious Portland stone quarried on the Isle of Portland, Dorset, England. However, Aspdins' cement was nothing like modern Portland cement but was a first step in its development, called a \"proto-Portland cement\". Joseph Aspdins' son William Aspdin had left his father's company and in his cement manufacturing apparently accidentally produced calcium silicates in the 1840s, a middle step in the development of Portland cement. William Aspdin's innovation was counterintuitive for manufacturers of \"artificial cements\", because they required more lime in the mix (a problem for his father), a much higher kiln temperature (and therefore more fuel), and the resulting clinker was very hard and rapidly wore down the millstones, which were the only available grinding technology of the time. Manufacturing costs were therefore considerably higher, but the product set reasonably slowly and developed strength quickly, thus opening up a market for use in concrete. The use of concrete in construction grew rapidly from 1850 onward, and was soon the dominant use for cements. Thus Portland cement began its predominant role. Isaac Charles Johnson further refined the production of \"meso-Portland cement\" (middle stage of development) and claimed he was the real father of Portland cement.\n\nSetting time and \"early strength\" are important characteristics of cements. Hydraulic limes, \"natural\" cements, and \"artificial\" cements all rely on their belite content for strength development. Belite develops strength slowly. Because they were burned at temperatures below , they contained no alite, which is responsible for early strength in modern cements. The first cement to consistently contain alite was made by William Aspdin in the early 1840s: This was what we call today \"modern\" Portland cement. Because of the air of mystery with which William Aspdin surrounded his product, others (\"e.g.,\" Vicat and Johnson) have claimed precedence in this invention, but recent analysis of both his concrete and raw cement have shown that William Aspdin's product made at Northfleet, Kent was a true alite-based cement. However, Aspdin's methods were \"rule-of-thumb\": Vicat is responsible for establishing the chemical basis of these cements, and Johnson established the importance of sintering the mix in the kiln.\n\nIn the US the first large-scale use of cement was Rosendale cement, a natural cement mined from a massive deposit of a large dolomite deposit discovered in the early 19th century near Rosendale, New York. Rosendale cement was extremely popular for the foundation of buildings (\"e.g.\", Statue of Liberty, Capitol Building, Brooklyn Bridge) and lining water pipes.\n\nSorel cement was patented in 1867 by Frenchman Stanislas Sorel. It was stronger than Portland cement but its poor water resistance and corrosive qualities limited its use in building construction. The next development in the manufacture of Portland cement was the introduction of the rotary kiln, which produced a stronger, more homogeneous mixture and facilitated a continuous manufacturing process.\n\nCalcium aluminate cements were patented in 1908 in France by Jules Bied for better resistance to sulfates.\n\nIn the US, after World War One, the long curing time of at least a month for Rosendale cement made it unpopular for constructing highways and bridges, and many states and construction firms turned to Portland cement. Because of the switch to Portland cement, by the end of the 1920s only one of the 15 Rosendale cement companies had survived. But in the early 1930s, builders discovered that, while Portland cement set faster, it was not as durable, especially for highways—to the point that some states stopped building highways and roads with cement. Bertrain H. Wait, an engineer whose company had helped construct the New York City's Catskill Aqueduct, was impressed with the durability of Rosendale cement, and came up with a blend of both Rosendale and Portland cements that had the good attributes of both. It was highly durable and had a much faster setting time. Wait convinced the New York Commissioner of Highways to construct an experimental section of highway near New Paltz, New York, using one sack of Rosendale to six sacks of Portland cement. It was a success, and for decades the Rosendale-Portland cement blend was used in highway and bridge construction.\n\nCementitious materials have been used as a nuclear waste immobilizing matrix for more than a half-century. Technologies of waste cementation have been developed and deployed at industrial scale in many countries. Cementitious wasteforms require a careful selection and design process adapted to each specific type of waste to satisfy the strict waste acceptance criteria for long-term storage and disposal.\n\nModern hydraulic development began with the start of the Industrial Revolution (around 1800), driven by three main needs:\nBULLET::::- Hydraulic cement render (stucco) for finishing brick buildings in wet climates\nBULLET::::- Hydraulic mortars for masonry construction of harbor works, etc., in contact with sea water\nBULLET::::- Development of strong concretes\nModern cements are often Portland cement or Portland cement blends, but industry also uses other cements.\n\nPortland cement is by far the most common type of cement in general use around the world. This cement is made by heating limestone (calcium carbonate) with other materials (such as clay) to in a kiln, in a process known as calcination that liberates a molecule of carbon dioxide from the calcium carbonate to form calcium oxide, or quicklime, which then chemically combines with the other materials in the mix to form calcium silicates and other cementitious compounds. The resulting hard substance, called 'clinker', is then ground with a small amount of gypsum into a powder to make \"ordinary Portland cement\", the most commonly used type of cement (often referred to as OPC).\nPortland cement is a basic ingredient of concrete, mortar, and most non-specialty grout. The most common use for Portland cement is to make concrete. Concrete is a composite material made of aggregate (gravel and sand), cement, and water. As a construction material, concrete can be cast in almost any shape, and once it hardens, can be a structural (load bearing) element. Portland cement may be grey or white.\n\nPortland cement blends are often available as inter-ground mixtures from cement producers, but similar formulations are often also mixed from the ground components at the concrete mixing plant.\n\nPortland blast-furnace slag cement, or Blast furnace cement (ASTM C595 and EN 197-1 nomenclature respectively), contains up to 95% ground granulated blast furnace slag, with the rest Portland clinker and a little gypsum. All compositions produce high ultimate strength, but as slag content is increased, early strength is reduced, while sulfate resistance increases and heat evolution diminishes. Used as an economic alternative to Portland sulfate-resisting and low-heat cements.\n\nPortland-fly ash cement contains up to 40% fly ash under ASTM standards (ASTM C595), or 35% under EN standards (EN 197-1). The fly ash is pozzolanic, so that ultimate strength is maintained. Because fly ash addition allows a lower concrete water content, early strength can also be maintained. Where good quality cheap fly ash is available, this can be an economic alternative to ordinary Portland cement.\n\nPortland pozzolan cement includes fly ash cement, since fly ash is a pozzolan, but also includes cements made from other natural or artificial pozzolans. In countries where volcanic ashes are available (e.g., Italy, Chile, Mexico, the Philippines), these cements are often the most common form in use. The maximum replacement ratios are generally defined as for Portland-fly ash cement.\n\nPortland silica fume cement. Addition of silica fume can yield exceptionally high strengths, and cements containing 5–20% silica fume are occasionally produced, with 10% being the maximum allowed addition under EN 197-1. However, silica fume is more usually added to Portland cement at the concrete mixer.\n\nMasonry cements are used for preparing bricklaying mortars and stuccos, and must not be used in concrete. They are usually complex proprietary formulations containing Portland clinker and a number of other ingredients that may include limestone, hydrated lime, air entrainers, retarders, waterproofers and coloring agents. They are formulated to yield workable mortars that allow rapid and consistent masonry work. Subtle variations of Masonry cement in the US are Plastic Cements and Stucco Cements. These are designed to produce a controlled bond with masonry blocks.\n\nExpansive cements contain, in addition to Portland clinker, expansive clinkers (usually sulfoaluminate clinkers), and are designed to offset the effects of drying shrinkage normally encountered in hydraulic cements. This cement can make concrete for floor slabs (up to 60 m square) without contraction joints.\n\nWhite blended cements may be made using white clinker (containing little or no iron) and white supplementary materials such as high-purity metakaolin. Colored cements serve decorative purposes. Some standards allow the addition of pigments to produce \"colored Portland cement\". Other standards (e.g., ASTM) do not allow pigments in Portland cement, and colored cements are sold as \"blended hydraulic cements\".\n\nVery finely ground cements are cement mixed with sand or with slag or other pozzolan type minerals that are extremely finely ground together. Such cements can have the same physical characteristics as normal cement but with 50% less cement, particularly due to their increased surface area for the chemical reaction. Even with intensive grinding they can use up to 50% less energy (and thus less carbon emissions) to fabricate than ordinary Portland cements.\n\n\"Pozzolan-lime cements\" are mixtures of ground pozzolan and lime. These are the cements the Romans used, and are present in surviving Roman structures like the Pantheon in Rome. They develop strength slowly, but their ultimate strength can be very high. The hydration products that produce strength are essentially the same as those in Portland cement.\n\n\"Slag-lime cements\"—ground granulated blast-furnace slag is not hydraulic on its own, but is \"activated\" by addition of alkalis, most economically using lime. They are similar to pozzolan lime cements in their properties. Only granulated slag (i.e., water-quenched, glassy slag) is effective as a cement component.\n\n\"Supersulfated cements\" contain about 80% ground granulated blast furnace slag, 15% gypsum or anhydrite and a little Portland clinker or lime as an activator. They produce strength by formation of ettringite, with strength growth similar to a slow Portland cement. They exhibit good resistance to aggressive agents, including sulfate.\nCalcium aluminate cements are hydraulic cements made primarily from limestone and bauxite. The active ingredients are monocalcium aluminate CaAlO (CaO · AlO or CA in Cement chemist notation, CCN) and mayenite CaAlO (12 CaO · 7 AlO, or CA in CCN). Strength forms by hydration to calcium aluminate hydrates. They are well-adapted for use in refractory (high-temperature resistant) concretes, e.g., for furnace linings.\n\n\"Calcium sulfoaluminate cements\" are made from clinkers that include ye'elimite (Ca(AlO)SO or CA in Cement chemist's notation) as a primary phase. They are used in expansive cements, in ultra-high early strength cements, and in \"low-energy\" cements. Hydration produces ettringite, and specialized physical properties (such as expansion or rapid reaction) are obtained by adjustment of the availability of calcium and sulfate ions. Their use as a low-energy alternative to Portland cement has been pioneered in China, where several million tonnes per year are produced. Energy requirements are lower because of the lower kiln temperatures required for reaction, and the lower amount of limestone (which must be endothermically decarbonated) in the mix. In addition, the lower limestone content and lower fuel consumption leads to a CO emission around half that associated with Portland clinker. However, SO emissions are usually significantly higher.\n\n\"\"Natural\" cements\" corresponding to certain cements of the pre-Portland era, are produced by burning argillaceous limestones at moderate temperatures. The level of clay components in the limestone (around 30–35%) is such that large amounts of belite (the low-early strength, high-late strength mineral in Portland cement) are formed without the formation of excessive amounts of free lime. As with any natural material, such cements have highly variable properties.\n\n\"Geopolymer cements\" are made from mixtures of water-soluble alkali metal silicates, and aluminosilicate mineral powders such as fly ash and metakaolin.\n\nPolymer cements are made from organic chemicals that polymerise. Producers often use thermoset materials. While they are often significantly more expensive, they can give a water proof material that has useful tensile strength.\n\nCement starts to set when mixed with water, which causes a series of hydration chemical reactions. The constituents slowly hydrate and the mineral hydrates solidify and harden. The interlocking of the hydrates gives cement its strength. Contrary to popular belief, hydraulic cement does not set by drying out — proper curing requires maintaining the appropriate moisture content necessary for the hydration reactions during the setting and the hardening processes. If hydraulic cements dry out during the curing phase, the resulting product can be insufficiently hydrated and significantly weakened. A minimum temperature of 5 °C is recommended, and no more than 30 °C. The concrete at young age must be protected against water evaporation due to direct insolation, elevated temperature, low relative humidity and wind.\n\nBags of cement routinely have health and safety warnings printed on them because not only is cement highly alkaline, but the setting process is exothermic. As a result, wet cement is strongly caustic (pH = 13.5) and can easily cause severe skin burns if not promptly washed off with water. Similarly, dry cement powder in contact with mucous membranes can cause severe eye or respiratory irritation. Some trace elements, such as chromium, from impurities naturally present in the raw materials used to produce cement may cause allergic dermatitis. Reducing agents such as ferrous sulfate (FeSO) are often added to cement to convert the carcinogenic hexavalent chromate (CrO) into trivalent chromium (Cr), a less toxic chemical species. Cement users need also to wear appropriate gloves and protective clothing.\n\nIn 2010, the world production of hydraulic cement was . The top three producers were China with 1,800, India with 220, and USA with 63.5 million tonnes for a total of over half the world total by the world's three most populated states.\n\nFor the world capacity to produce cement in 2010, the situation was similar with the top three states (China, India, and USA) accounting for just under half the world total capacity.\n\nOver 2011 and 2012, global consumption continued to climb, rising to 3585 Mt in 2011 and 3736 Mt in 2012, while annual growth rates eased to 8.3% and 4.2%, respectively.\n\nChina, representing an increasing share of world cement consumption, remains the main engine of global growth. By 2012, Chinese demand was recorded at 2160 Mt, representing 58% of world consumption. Annual growth rates, which reached 16% in 2010, appear to have softened, slowing to 5–6% over 2011 and 2012, as China's economy targets a more sustainable growth rate.\n\nOutside of China, worldwide consumption climbed by 4.4% to 1462 Mt in 2010, 5% to 1535 Mt in 2011, and finally 2.7% to 1576 Mt in 2012.\n\nIran is now the 3rd largest cement producer in the world and has increased its output by over 10% from 2008 to 2011. Due to climbing energy costs in Pakistan and other major cement-producing countries, Iran is in a unique position as a trading partner, utilizing its own surplus petroleum to power clinker plants. Now a top producer in the Middle-East, Iran is further increasing its dominant position in local markets and abroad.\n\nThe performance in North America and Europe over the 2010–12 period contrasted strikingly with that of China, as the global financial crisis evolved into a sovereign debt crisis for many economies in this region and recession. Cement consumption levels for this region fell by 1.9% in 2010 to 445 Mt, recovered by 4.9% in 2011, then dipped again by 1.1% in 2012.\n\nThe performance in the rest of the world, which includes many emerging economies in Asia, Africa and Latin America and representing some 1020 Mt cement demand in 2010, was positive and more than offset the declines in North America and Europe. Annual consumption growth was recorded at 7.4% in 2010, moderating to 5.1% and 4.3% in 2011 and 2012, respectively.\n\nAs at year-end 2012, the global cement industry consisted of 5673 cement production facilities, including both integrated and grinding, of which 3900 were located in China and 1773 in the rest of the world.\n\nTotal cement capacity worldwide was recorded at 5245 Mt in 2012, with 2950 Mt located in China and 2295 Mt in the rest of the world.\n\n\"For the past 18 years, China consistently has produced more cement than any other country in the world. [...] (However,) China's cement export peaked in 1994 with 11 million tonnes shipped out and has been in steady decline ever since. Only 5.18 million tonnes were exported out of China in 2002. Offered at $34 a ton, Chinese cement is pricing itself out of the market as Thailand is asking as little as $20 for the same quality.\"\n\nIn 2006, it was estimated that China manufactured 1.235 billion tonnes of cement, which was 44% of the world total cement production. \"Demand for cement in China is expected to advance 5.4% annually and exceed 1 billion tonnes in 2008, driven by slowing but healthy growth in construction expenditures. Cement consumed in China will amount to 44% of global demand, and China will remain the world's largest national consumer of cement by a large margin.\"\n\nIn 2010, 3.3 billion tonnes of cement was consumed globally. Of this, China accounted for 1.8 billion tonnes.\n\nCement manufacture causes environmental impacts at all stages of the process. These include emissions of airborne pollution in the form of dust, gases, noise and vibration when operating machinery and during blasting in quarries, and damage to countryside from quarrying. Equipment to reduce dust emissions during quarrying and manufacture of cement is widely used, and equipment to trap and separate exhaust gases are coming into increased use. Environmental protection also includes the re-integration of quarries into the countryside after they have been closed down by returning them to nature or re-cultivating them.\n\nCarbon concentration in cement spans from ≈5% in cement structures to ≈8% in the case of roads in cement. Cement manufacturing releases in the atmosphere both directly when calcium carbonate is heated, producing lime and carbon dioxide, and also indirectly through the use of energy if its production involves the emission of CO. The cement industry produces about 10% of global man-made CO emissions, of which 60% is from the chemical process, and 40% from burning fuel. A Chatham House study from 2018 estimates that the 4 billion tonnes of cement produced annually account for 8% of worldwide CO emissions.\n\nNearly 900 kg of CO are emitted for every 1000 kg of Portland cement produced. In the European Union, the specific energy consumption for the production of cement clinker has been reduced by approximately 30% since the 1970s. This reduction in primary energy requirements is equivalent to approximately 11 million tonnes of coal per year with corresponding benefits in reduction of CO emissions. This accounts for approximately 5% of anthropogenic CO.\n\nThe majority of carbon dioxide emissions in the manufacture of Portland cement (approximately 60%) are produced from the chemical decomposition of limestone to lime, an ingredient in Portland cement clinker. These emissions may be reduced by lowering the clinker content of cement. They can also be reduced by alternative fabrication methods such as the intergrinding cement with sand or with slag or other pozzolan type minerals to a very fine powder.\n\nTo reduce the transport of heavier raw materials and to minimize the associated costs, it is more economical to build cement plants closer to the limestone quarries rather than to the consumer centers.\n\nIn certain applications, lime mortar reabsorbs some of the CO as was released in its manufacture, and has a lower energy requirement in production than mainstream cement. Newly developed cement types from Novacem and Eco-cement can absorb carbon dioxide from ambient air during hardening.\n\nIn some circumstances, mainly depending on the origin and the composition of the raw materials used, the high-temperature calcination process of limestone and clay minerals can release in the atmosphere gases and dust rich in volatile heavy metals, e.g. thallium, cadmium and mercury are the most toxic. Heavy metals (Tl, Cd, Hg, ...) and also selenium are often found as trace elements in common metal sulfides (pyrite (FeS), zinc blende (ZnS), galena (PbS), ...) present as secondary minerals in most of the raw materials. Environmental regulations exist in many countries to limit these emissions. As of 2011 in the United States, cement kilns are \"legally allowed to pump more toxins into the air than are hazardous-waste incinerators.\"\n\nThe presence of heavy metals in the clinker arises both from the natural raw materials and from the use of recycled by-products or alternative fuels. The high pH prevailing in the cement porewater (12.5 < pH < 13.5) limits the mobility of many heavy metals by decreasing their solubility and increasing their sorption onto the cement mineral phases. Nickel, zinc and lead are commonly found in cement in non-negligible concentrations. Chromium may also directly arise as natural impurity from the raw materials or as secondary contamination from the abrasion of hard chromium steel alloys used in the ball mills when the clinker is ground. As chromate (CrO) is toxic and may cause severe skin allergies at trace concentration, it is sometimes reduced into trivalent Cr(III) by addition of ferrous sulfate (FeSO).\n\nA cement plant consumes 3 to 6 GJ of fuel per tonne of clinker produced, depending on the raw materials and the process used. Most cement kilns today use coal and petroleum coke as primary fuels, and to a lesser extent natural gas and fuel oil. Selected waste and by-products with recoverable calorific value can be used as fuels in a cement kiln (referred to as co-processing), replacing a portion of conventional fossil fuels, like coal, if they meet strict specifications. Selected waste and by-products containing useful minerals such as calcium, silica, alumina, and iron can be used as raw materials in the kiln, replacing raw materials such as clay, shale, and limestone. Because some materials have both useful mineral content and recoverable calorific value, the distinction between alternative fuels and raw materials is not always clear. For example, sewage sludge has a low but significant calorific value, and burns to give ash containing minerals useful in the clinker matrix. Scrap automobile and truck tires are useful in cement manufacturing as they have high calorific value and the iron embedded in tires is useful as a feed stock.\n\nClinker is manufactured by heating raw materials inside the main burner of a kiln to a temperature of 1450 °C. The flame reaches temperatures of 1800 °C. The material remains at 1200 °C for 12–15 seconds at 1800 °C for 5–8 seconds (also referred to as residence time). These characteristics of a clinker kiln offer numerous benefits and they ensure a complete destruction of organic compounds, a total neutralization of acid gases, sulphur oxides and hydrogen chloride. Furthermore, heavy metal traces are embedded in the clinker structure and no by-products, such as ash of residues, are produced.\n\nThe EU cement industry already uses more than 40% fuels derived from waste and biomass in supplying the thermal energy to the grey clinker making process. Although the choice for this so-called alternative fuels (AF) is typically cost driven, other factors are becoming more important. Use of alternative fuels provides benefits for both society and the company: CO-emissions are lower than with fossil fuels, waste can be co-processed in an efficient and sustainable manner and the demand for certain virgin materials can be reduced. Yet there are large differences in the share of alternative fuels used between the European Union (EU) member states. The societal benefits could be improved if more member states increase their alternative fuels share. The Ecofys study assessed the barriers and opportunities for further uptake of alternative fuels in 14 EU member states. The Ecofys study found that local factors constrain the market potential to a much larger extent than the technical and economic feasibility of the cement industry itself.\n\nGreen cement is a cementitious material that meets or exceeds the functional performance capabilities of ordinary Portland cement by incorporating and optimizing recycled materials, thereby reducing consumption of natural raw materials, water, and energy, resulting in a more sustainable construction material. One is Geopolymer cement.\n\nNew manufacturing processes for producing green cement are being researched with the goal to reduce, or even eliminate, the production and release of damaging pollutants and greenhouse gasses, particularly CO.\n\nGrowing environmental concerns and the increasing cost of fuels of fossil origin have resulted in many countries in a sharp reduction of the resources needed to produce cement and effluents (dust and exhaust gases).\n\nA team at the University of Edinburgh has developed the 'DUPE' process based on the microbial activity of \"Sporosarcina pasteurii\", a bacterium precipitating calcium carbonate, which, when mixed with sand and urine, can produce mortar blocks with a compressive strength 70% of that of conventional construction materials.\n\nBULLET::::- BET theory\nBULLET::::- Cement chemist notation\nBULLET::::- Cement render\nBULLET::::- Cenocell\nBULLET::::- Energetically modified cement (EMC)\nBULLET::::- Fly ash\nBULLET::::- Geopolymer cement\nBULLET::::- Portland cement\nBULLET::::- Rosendale cement\nBULLET::::- Tiocem\nBULLET::::- Void (composites)\nBULLET::::- Friedrich W. Locher: \"Cement : Principles of production and use\", Düsseldorf, Germany: Verlag Bau + Technik GmbH, 2006,\nBULLET::::- Javed I. Bhatty, F. MacGregor Miller, Steven H. Kosmatka; editors: \"Innovations in Portland Cement Manufacturing\", SP400, Portland Cement Association, Skokie, Illinois, U.S., 2004,\nBULLET::::- \"Why cement emissions matter for climate change\" \"Carbon Brief\" 2018\n\n"}
{"id": "6671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6671", "title": "Cincinnati Reds", "text": "Cincinnati Reds\n\nThe Cincinnati Reds are an American professional baseball team based in Cincinnati, Ohio. They compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) Central division. They were a charter member of the American Association in 1882 and joined the NL in 1890.\n\nThe Reds played in the NL West division from 1969 to 1993, before joining the Central division in 1994. They have won five World Series championships, nine NL pennants, one AA pennant, and 10 division titles. The team plays its home games at Great American Ball Park, which opened in 2003 replacing Riverfront Stadium. Bob Castellini has been chief executive officer since 2006.\n\nFrom 1882 to 2019, the Reds' overall win-loss record is 10,599–10,393 (a 0.505 winning percentage).\n\nThe origins of the modern Cincinnati Reds can be traced to the expulsion of an earlier team bearing that name. In 1876, Cincinnati became one of the charter members of the new National League, but the club ran afoul of league organizer and long-time president William Hulbert for selling beer during games and renting out their ballpark on Sundays. Both were important activities to entice the city's large German population. While Hulbert made clear his distaste for both beer and Sunday baseball at the founding of the league, neither practice was actually against league rules in those early years. On October 6, 1880, however, seven of the eight team owners pledged at a special league meeting to formally ban both beer and Sunday baseball at the regular league meeting that December. Only Cincinnati president W. H. Kennett refused to sign the pledge, so the other owners formally expelled Cincinnati for violating a rule that would not actually go into effect for two more months.\n\nCincinnati's expulsion from the National League incensed \"Cincinnati Enquirer\" sports editor O. P. Caylor, who made two attempts to form a new league on behalf of the receivers for the now bankrupt Reds franchise. When these attempts failed, he formed a new independent ballclub known as the Red Stockings in the Spring of 1881, and brought the team to St. Louis for a weekend exhibition. The Reds' first game was a 12–3 victory over the St. Louis club. After the 1881 series proved a success, Caylor and a former president of the old Reds named Justus Thorner received an invitation from Philadelphia businessman Horace Phillips to attend a meeting of several clubs in Pittsburgh with the intent of establishing a rival to the National League. Upon arriving in the city, however, Caylor and Thorner discovered that no other owners had decided to accept the invitation, with even Phillips not bothering to attend his own meeting. By chance, the duo met a former pitcher named Al Pratt, who hooked them up with former Pittsburgh Alleghenys president H. Denny McKnight. Together, the three men hatched a scheme to form a new league by sending a telegram to each of the other owners who were supposed to attend the meeting stating that he was the only person who did not attend and that everyone else was enthusiastic about the new venture and eager to attend a second meeting in Cincinnati. The ploy worked, and the American Association was officially formed at the Hotel Gibson in Cincinnati with the new Reds a charter member with Thorner as president.\n\nLed by the hitting of third baseman Hick Carpenter, the defense of future Hall of Fame second baseman Bid McPhee, and the pitching of 40-game-winner Will White, the Reds won the inaugural AA pennant in 1882. With the establishment of the Union Association Justus Thorner left the club to finance the Cincinnati Outlaw Reds and managed to acquire the lease on the Reds Bank Street Grounds playing field, forcing new president Aaron Stern to relocate three blocks away at the hastily built League Park. The club never placed higher than second or lower than fifth for the rest of its tenure in the American Association.\n\nThe Cincinnati Red Stockings left the American Association on November 14, 1889 and joined the National League along with the Brooklyn Bridegrooms after a dispute with St. Louis Browns owner Chris Von Der Ahe over the selection of a new league president. The National League was happy to accept the teams in part due to the emergence of the new Player's League. This new league, an early failed attempt to break the reserve clause in baseball, threatened both existing leagues. Because the National League decided to expand while the American Association was weakening, the team accepted an invitation to join the National League. It was also at this time that the team first shortened their name from \"Red Stockings\" to \"Reds\". The Reds wandered through the 1890s signing local stars and aging veterans. During this time, the team never finished above third place (1897) and never closer than 10 games (1890).\n\nAt the start of the 20th century, the Reds had hitting stars Sam Crawford and Cy Seymour. Seymour's .377 average in 1905 was the first individual batting crown won by a Red. In 1911, Bob Bescher stole 81 bases, which is still a team record. Like the previous decade, the 1900s (decade) were not kind to the Reds, as much of the decade was spent in the league's second division.\n\nIn 1912, the club opened a new steel-and-concrete ballpark, Redland Field (later to be known as Crosley Field). The Reds had been playing baseball on that same site, the corner of Findlay and Western Avenues on the city's west side, for 28 years, in wooden structures that had been occasionally damaged by fires. By the late 1910s the Reds began to come out of the second division. The 1918 team finished fourth, and new manager Pat Moran led the Reds to an NL pennant in 1919, in what the club advertised as its \"Golden Anniversary\". The 1919 team had hitting stars Edd Roush and Heinie Groh while the pitching staff was led by Hod Eller and left-hander Harry \"Slim\" Sallee. The Reds finished ahead of John McGraw's New York Giants, and then won the world championship in eight games over the Chicago White Sox.\n\nBy 1920, the \"Black Sox\" scandal had brought a taint to the Reds' first championship. After 1926, and well into the 1930s, the Reds were second division dwellers. Eppa Rixey, Dolf Luque and Pete Donohue were pitching stars, but the offense never lived up to the pitching. By 1931, the team was bankrupt, the Great Depression was in full swing and Redland Field was in a state of disrepair.\n\nPowel Crosley, Jr., an electronics magnate who, with his brother Lewis M. Crosley, produced radios, refrigerators, and other household items, bought the Reds out of bankruptcy in 1933, and hired Larry MacPhail to be the General Manager. Crosley had started WLW radio, the Reds flagship radio broadcaster, and the Crosley Broadcasting Corporation in Cincinnati, where he was also a prominent civic leader. MacPhail began to develop the Reds' minor league system and expanded the Reds' fan base. The Reds, throughout the 1930s, became a team of \"firsts\". The now-renamed Crosley Field became the host of the first night game in 1935, which was also the first baseball fireworks night, the fireworks at the game were shot by Joe Rozzi of Rozzi's Famous Fireworks. Johnny Vander Meer became the only pitcher in major league history to throw back-to-back no-hitters in 1938. Thanks to Vander Meer, Paul Derringer and second baseman/third baseman-turned-pitcher Bucky Walters, the Reds had a solid pitching staff. The offense came around in the late 1930s. By 1938 the Reds, now led by manager Bill McKechnie, were out of the second division finishing fourth. Ernie Lombardi was named the National League's Most Valuable Player in 1938. By 1939, they were National League champions, but in the World Series, they were swept by the New York Yankees. In 1940, they repeated as NL Champions, and for the first time in 21 years, the Reds captured a World championship, beating the Detroit Tigers 4 games to 3. Frank McCormick was the 1940 NL MVP. Other position players included Harry Craft, Lonny Frey, Ival Goodman, Lew Riggs and Bill Werber.\n\nWorld War II and age finally caught up with the Reds. Throughout the 1940s and early 1950s, Cincinnati finished mostly in the second division. In 1944, Joe Nuxhall (who was later to become part of the radio broadcasting team), at age 15, pitched for the Reds on loan from Wilson Junior High school in Hamilton, Ohio. He became the youngest player ever to appear in a major league game—a record that still stands today. Ewell \"The Whip\" Blackwell was the main pitching stalwart before arm problems cut short his career. Ted Kluszewski was the NL home run leader in 1954. The rest of the offense was a collection of over-the-hill players and not-ready-for-prime-time youngsters.\n\nIn April 1953, the Reds announced a preference to be called the \"Redlegs\", saying that the name of the club had been \"Red Stockings\" and then \"Redlegs\". A newspaper speculated that it was due to the developing political connotation of the word 'red' to mean Communism. From 1956 to 1960, the club's logo was altered to remove the term \"REDS\" from the inside of the \"wishbone \"C\" symbol. The \"REDS\" reappeared on the 1961 uniforms, but the point of the \"C\" was removed, leaving a smooth, non-wishbone curve. The traditional home-uniform logo was restored in 1967.\n\nIn 1956, led by National League Rookie of the Year Frank Robinson, the Redlegs hit 221 HR to tie the NL record. By 1961, Robinson was joined by Vada Pinson, Wally Post, Gordy Coleman, and Gene Freese. Pitchers Joey Jay, Jim O'Toole, and Bob Purkey led the staff.\n\nThe Reds captured the 1961 National League pennant, holding off the Los Angeles Dodgers and the San Francisco Giants, only to be defeated by the perennially powerful New York Yankees in the World Series.\n\nThe Reds had winning teams during the rest of the 1960s, but did not produce any championships. They won 98 games in 1962, paced by Purkey's 23, but finished third. In 1964, they lost the pennant by one game to the Cardinals after having taken first place when the Phillies collapsed in September. Their beloved manager Fred Hutchinson died of cancer just weeks after the end of the 1964 season. The failure of the Reds to win the 1964 pennant led to owner Bill DeWitt's selling off key components of the team, in anticipation of relocating the franchise. In response to DeWitt's threatened move, the women of Cincinnati banded together to form the Rosie Reds to urge DeWitt to keep the franchise in Cincinnati. The Rosie Reds are still in existence, and are currently the oldest fan club in Major League Baseball. After the 1965 season he executed what may be the most lopsided trade in baseball history, sending former Most Valuable Player Frank Robinson to the Baltimore Orioles for pitchers Milt Pappas and Jack Baldschun, and outfielder Dick Simpson. Robinson went on to win the MVP and triple crown in the American league for 1966, and lead Baltimore to its first ever World Series title in a sweep of the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Reds did not recover from this trade until the rise of the \"Big Red Machine\" of the 1970s.\n\nStarting in the early 1960s, the Reds' farm system began producing a series of stars, including Jim Maloney (the Reds' pitching ace of the 1960s), Pete Rose, Tony Pérez, Johnny Bench, Lee May, Tommy Helms, Bernie Carbo, Hal McRae, Dave Concepción, and Gary Nolan. The tipping point came in 1967 with the appointment of Bob Howsam as general manager. That same year the Reds avoided a move to San Diego when the city of Cincinnati and Hamilton County agreed to build a state of the art, downtown stadium on the edge of the Ohio River. The Reds entered into a 30-year lease in exchange for the stadium commitment keeping the franchise in its original home city. In a series of strategic moves, Howsam brought in key personnel to complement the homegrown talent. The Reds' final game at Crosley Field, home to more than 4,500 baseball games, was played on June 24, 1970, a 5–4 victory over the San Francisco Giants.\n\nUnder Howsam's administration starting in the late 1960s, the Reds instituted a strict rule barring the team's players from wearing facial hair and long hair. The clean cut look was meant to present the team as wholesome in an era of turmoil. All players coming to the Reds were required to shave and cut their hair for the next three decades. Over the years, the rule was controversial, but persisted well into the ownership of Marge Schott. On at least one occasion, in the early 1980s, enforcement of this rule lost them the services of star reliever and Ohio native Rollie Fingers, who would not shave his trademark handlebar mustache in order to join the team. The rule was not officially rescinded until 1999 when the Reds traded for slugger Greg Vaughn, who had a goatee. The New York Yankees continue to have a similar rule today, though unlike the Reds during this period, Yankees players are permitted to have mustaches. Much like when players leave the Yankees today, players who left the Reds took advantage with their new teams; Pete Rose, for instance, grew his hair out much longer than would be allowed by the Reds once he signed with the Philadelphia Phillies in 1979.\n\nThe Reds' rules also included conservative uniforms. In Major League Baseball, a club generally provides most of the equipment and clothing needed for play. However, players are required to supply their gloves and shoes themselves. Many players enter into sponsorship arrangements with shoe manufacturers, but through the mid-1980s, the Reds had a strict rule that players were to wear only plain black shoes with no prominent logo. Reds players decried what they considered to be the boring color choice as well as the denial of the opportunity to earn more money through shoe contracts. A compromise was struck in 1985 in which players could paint red marks on their black shoes, then the following year, they were allowed to wear all-red shoes.\n\nIn , little known George \"Sparky\" Anderson was hired as manager, and the Reds embarked upon a decade of excellence, with a team that came to be known as \"The Big Red Machine\". Playing at Crosley Field until June 30, 1970, when the Reds moved into brand-new Riverfront Stadium, a 52,000 seat multi-purpose venue on the shores of the Ohio River, the Reds began the 1970s with a bang by winning 70 of their first 100 games. Johnny Bench, Tony Pérez, Pete Rose, Lee May and Bobby Tolan were the early Red Machine offensive leaders; Gary Nolan, Jim Merritt, Wayne Simpson and Jim McGlothlin led a pitching staff which also contained veterans Tony Cloninger and Clay Carroll and youngsters Pedro Borbón and Don Gullett. The Reds breezed through the 1970 season, winning the NL West and captured the NL pennant by sweeping the Pittsburgh Pirates in three games. By the time the club got to the World Series, however, the Reds pitching staff had run out of gas and the veteran Baltimore Orioles, led by Hall of Fame third baseman and World Series MVP Brooks Robinson, beat the Reds in five games.\n\nAfter the disastrous season (the only season of the 1970s during which the Reds finished with a losing record) the Reds reloaded by trading veterans Jimmy Stewart, May, and Tommy Helms for Joe Morgan, César Gerónimo, Jack Billingham, Ed Armbrister, and Denis Menke. Meanwhile, Dave Concepción blossomed at shortstop. 1971 was also the year a key component of the future world championships was acquired in George Foster from the San Francisco Giants in a trade for shortstop Frank Duffy.\n\nThe Reds won the NL West in baseball's first ever strike-shortened season and defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates in an exciting five-game playoff series. They then faced the Oakland Athletics in the World Series. Six of the seven games were won by one run. With powerful slugger Reggie Jackson sidelined by an injury incurred during Oakland's playoff series, Ohio native Gene Tenace got a chance to play in the series, delivering four home runs that tied the World Series record for homers, propelling Oakland to a dramatic seven-game series win. This was one of the few World Series in which no starting pitcher for either side pitched a complete game.\n\nThe Reds won a third NL West crown in after a dramatic second half comeback, that saw them make up games on the Los Angeles Dodgers after the All-Star break. However they lost the NL pennant to the New York Mets in five games in the NLCS. In game one, Tom Seaver faced Jack Billingham in a classic pitching duel, with all three runs of the 2–1 margin being scored on home runs. John Milner provided New York's run off Billingham, while Pete Rose tied the game in the seventh inning off Seaver, setting the stage for a dramatic game ending home run by Johnny Bench in the bottom of the ninth. The New York series provided plenty of controversy with the riotous behavior of Shea Stadium fans towards Pete Rose when he and Bud Harrelson scuffled after a hard slide by Rose into Harrelson at second base during the fifth inning of Game 3. A full bench-clearing fight resulted after Harrelson responded to Rose's aggressive move to prevent him from completing a double play by calling him a name. This also led to two more incidents in which play was stopped. The Reds trailed 9–3 and New York's manager, Yogi Berra, and legendary outfielder Willie Mays, at the request of National League president Warren Giles, appealed to fans in left field to restrain themselves. The next day the series was extended to a fifth game when Rose homered in the 12th inning to tie the series at two games each.\n\nThe Reds won 98 games in but they finished second to the 102-win Los Angeles Dodgers. The 1974 season started off with much excitement, as the Atlanta Braves were in town to open the season with the Reds. Hank Aaron entered opening day with 713 home runs, one shy of tying Babe Ruth's record of 714. The first pitch Aaron swung at in the 1974 season was the record tying home run off Jack Billingham. The next day the Braves benched Aaron, hoping to save him for his record-breaking home run on their season-opening homestand. The commissioner of baseball, Bowie Kuhn, ordered Braves management to play Aaron the next day, where he narrowly missed the historic home run in the fifth inning. Aaron went on to set the record in Atlanta two nights later. The 1974 season was also the debut of Hall of Fame radio announcer Marty Brennaman, who replaced Al Michaels, after Michaels left the Reds to broadcast for the San Francisco Giants.\n\nWith 1975, the Big Red Machine lineup solidified with the \"Great Eight\" starting team of Johnny Bench (catcher), Tony Pérez (first base), Joe Morgan (second base), Dave Concepción (shortstop), Pete Rose (third base), Ken Griffey (right field), César Gerónimo (center field), and George Foster (left field). The starting pitchers included Don Gullett, Fred Norman, Gary Nolan, Jack Billingham, Pat Darcy, and Clay Kirby. The bullpen featured Rawly Eastwick and Will McEnaney combining for 37 saves, and veterans Pedro Borbón and Clay Carroll. On Opening Day, Rose still played in left field, Foster was not a starter, while John Vukovich, an off-season acquisition, was the starting third baseman. While Vuckovich was a superb fielder, he was a weak hitter. In May, with the team off to a slow start and trailing the Dodgers, Sparky Anderson made a bold move by moving Rose to third base, a position where he had very little experience, and inserting Foster in left field. This was the jolt that the Reds needed to propel them into first place, with Rose proving to be reliable on defense, while adding Foster to the outfield gave the offense some added punch. During the season, the Reds compiled two notable streaks: (1) by winning 41 out of 50 games in one stretch, and (2) by going a month without committing any errors on defense.\nIn the 1975 season, Cincinnati clinched the NL West with 108 victories, then swept the Pittsburgh Pirates in three games to win the NL pennant. In the World Series, the Boston Red Sox were the opponents. After splitting the first four games, the Reds took Game 5. After a three-day rain delay, the two teams met in Game 6, one of the most memorable baseball games ever played and considered by many to be the best World Series game ever. The Reds were ahead 6–3 with 5 outs left, when the Red Sox tied the game on former Red Bernie Carbo's three-run home run. It was Carbo's second pinch-hit three-run homer in the series. After a few close-calls either way, Carlton Fisk hit a dramatic 12th inning home run off the foul pole in left field to give the Red Sox a 7–6 win and force a deciding Game 7. Cincinnati prevailed the next day when Morgan's RBI single won Game 7 and gave the Reds their first championship in 35 years. The Reds have not lost a World Series game since Carlton Fisk's home run, a span of 9 straight wins.\n\n1976 saw a return of the same starting eight in the field. The starting rotation was again led by Nolan, Gullett, Billingham, and Norman, while the addition of rookies Pat Zachry and Santo Alcalá comprised an underrated staff in which four of the six had ERAs below 3.10. Eastwick, Borbon, and McEnaney shared closer duties, recording 26, 8, and 7 saves respectively. The Reds won the NL West by ten games. They went undefeated in the postseason, sweeping the Philadelphia Phillies (winning Game 3 in their final at-bat) to return to the World Series. They continued to dominate by sweeping the Yankees in the newly renovated Yankee Stadium, the first World Series games played in Yankee Stadium since 1964. This was only the second ever sweep of the Yankees in the World Series. In winning the Series, the Reds became the first NL team since the 1921–22 New York Giants to win consecutive World Series championships, and the Big Red Machine of 1975–76 is considered one of the best teams ever. So far in MLB history, the 1975 and '76 Reds were the last NL team to repeat as champions.\n\nBeginning with the 1970 National League pennant, the Reds beat either of the two Pennsylvania-based clubs, the Philadelphia Phillies or the Pittsburgh Pirates to win their pennants (Pirates in 1970, 1972, 1975, and 1990, Phillies in 1976), making The Big Red Machine part of the rivalry between the two Pennsylvania teams. In 1979, Pete Rose added further fuel in The Big Red Machine being part of the rivalry when he signed with the Phillies and helped them win their first World Series championship in .\n\nThe later years of the 1970s brought turmoil and change. Popular Tony Pérez was sent to Montreal after the 1976 season, breaking up the Big Red Machine's starting lineup. Manager Sparky Anderson and General Manager Bob Howsam later considered this trade the biggest mistake of their careers. Starting pitcher Don Gullett left via free agency and signed with the New York Yankees. In an effort to fill that gap, a trade with the Oakland A's for starting ace Vida Blue was arranged during the 1976–77 off-season. However, Bowie Kuhn, the Commissioner of Baseball, vetoed the trade for the stated reason of maintaining competitive balance in baseball. Some have suggested that the actual reason had more to due with Kuhn's continued feud with Oakland A's owner Charlie Finley. On June 15, 1977, the Reds acquired Mets' franchise pitcher Tom Seaver for Pat Zachry, Doug Flynn, Steve Henderson, and Dan Norman. In other deals that proved to be less successful, the Reds traded Gary Nolan to the Angels for Craig Hendrickson, Rawly Eastwick to St. Louis for Doug Capilla and Mike Caldwell to Milwaukee for Rick O'Keeffe and Garry Pyka, and got Rick Auerbach from Texas. The end of the Big Red Machine era was heralded by the replacement of General Manager Bob Howsam with Dick Wagner.\n\nIn Rose's last season as a Red, he gave baseball a thrill as he challenged Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak, tying for the second-longest streak ever at 44 games. The streak came to an end in Atlanta after striking out in his fifth at bat in the game against Gene Garber. Rose also earned his 3,000th hit that season, on his way to becoming baseball's all-time hits leader when he rejoined the Reds in the mid-1980s. The year also witnessed the only no-hitter of Hall of Fame pitcher Tom Seaver's career, coming against the St. Louis Cardinals on June 16, 1978.\n\nAfter the 1978 season and two straight second-place finishes, Wagner fired manager Anderson—an unpopular move. Pete Rose, who since 1963 had played almost every position for the team except pitcher, shortstop, and catcher, signed with Philadelphia as a free agent. By 1979, the starters were Bench (c), Dan Driessen (1b), Morgan (2b), Concepción (ss), Ray Knight (3b), with Griffey, Foster, and Geronimo again in the outfield. The pitching staff had experienced a complete turnover since 1976 except for Fred Norman. In addition to ace starter Tom Seaver; the remaining starters were Mike LaCoss, Bill Bonham, and Paul Moskau. In the bullpen, only Borbon had remained. Dave Tomlin and Mario Soto worked middle relief with Tom Hume and Doug Bair closing. The Reds won the 1979 NL West behind the pitching of Tom Seaver but were dispatched in the NL playoffs by Pittsburgh. Game 2 featured a controversial play in which a ball hit by Pittsburgh's Phil Garner was caught by Cincinnati outfielder Dave Collins but was ruled a trap, setting the Pirates up to take a 2–1 lead. The Pirates swept the series 3 games to 0 and went on to win the World Series against the Baltimore Orioles.\n\nThe 1981 team fielded a strong lineup, but with only Concepción, Foster, and Griffey retaining their spots from the 1975–76 heyday. After Johnny Bench was able to play only a few games at catcher each year after 1980 due to ongoing injuries, Joe Nolan took over as starting catcher. Driessen and Bench shared 1st base, and Knight starred at third. Morgan and Geronimo had been replaced at second base and center field by Ron Oester and Dave Collins. Mario Soto posted a banner year starting on the mound, only surpassed by the outstanding performance of Seaver's Cy Young runner-up season. La Coss, Bruce Berenyi, and Frank Pastore rounded out the starting rotation. Hume again led the bullpen as closer, joined by Bair and Joe Price. In , Cincinnati had the best overall record in baseball, but they finished second in the division in both of the half-seasons that were created after a mid-season players' strike, and missed the playoffs. To commemorate this, a team photo was taken, accompanied by a banner that read \"Baseball's Best Record 1981\".\n\nBy , the Reds were a shell of the original Red Machine; they lost 101 games that year. Johnny Bench, after an unsuccessful transition to 3rd base, retired a year later.\n\nAfter the heartbreak of 1981, General Manager Dick Wagner pursued the strategy of ridding the team of veterans including third-baseman Knight and the entire starting outfield of Griffey, Foster, and Collins. Bench, after being able to catch only seven games in 1981, was moved from platooning at first base to be the starting third baseman; Alex Treviño became the regular starting catcher. The outfield was staffed with Paul Householder, César Cedeño, and future Colorado Rockies & Pittsburgh Pirates manager Clint Hurdle on opening day. Hurdle was an immediate bust, and rookie Eddie Milner took his place in the starting outfield early in the year. The highly touted Householder struggled throughout the year despite extensive playing time. Cedeno, while providing steady veteran play, was a disappointment, and was unable to recapture his glory days with the Houston Astros. The starting rotation featured the emergence of a dominant Mario Soto, and featured strong years by Pastore and Bruce Berenyi, but Seaver was injured all year, and their efforts were wasted without a strong offensive lineup. Tom Hume still led the bullpen, along with Joe Price. But the colorful Brad \"The Animal\" Lesley was unable to consistently excel, and former all-star Jim Kern was a big disappointment. Kern was also publicly upset over having to shave off his prominent beard to join the Reds, and helped force the issue of getting traded during mid-season by growing it back. The season also saw the midseason firing of Manager John McNamara, who was replaced as skipper by Russ Nixon.\n\nThe Reds fell to the bottom of the Western Division for the next few years. After the 1982 season, Seaver was traded back to the Mets. The year 1983 found Dann Bilardello behind the plate, Bench returning to part-time duty at first base, rookies Nick Esasky taking over at third base and Gary Redus taking over from Cedeno. Tom Hume's effectiveness as a closer had diminished, and no other consistent relievers emerged. Dave Concepción was the sole remaining starter from the Big Red Machine era.\n\nWagner's tenure ended in 1983, when Howsam, the architect of the Big Red Machine, was brought back. The popular Howsam began his second term as Reds' General Manager by signing Cincinnati native Dave Parker as a free agent from Pittsburgh. In the Reds began to move up, depending on trades and some minor leaguers. In that season Dave Parker, Dave Concepción and Tony Pérez were in Cincinnati uniforms. In August 1984, Pete Rose was reacquired and hired to be the Reds player-manager. After raising the franchise from the grave, Howsam gave way to the administration of Bill Bergesch, who attempted to build the team around a core of highly regarded young players in addition to veterans like Parker. However, he was unable to capitalize on an excess of young and highly touted position players including Kurt Stillwell, Tracy Jones, and Kal Daniels by trading them for pitching. Despite the emergence of Tom Browning as rookie of the year in 1985 when he won 20 games, the rotation was devastated by the early demise of Mario Soto's career to arm injury.\n\nUnder Bergesch, from –89 the Reds finished second four times. Among the highlights, Rose became the all-time hits leader, Tom Browning threw a perfect game, Eric Davis became the first player in baseball history to hit at least 35 home runs and steal 50 bases, and Chris Sabo was the 1988 National League Rookie of the Year. The Reds also had a bullpen star in John Franco, who was with the team from 1984 to 1989. Rose once had Concepción pitch late in a game at Dodger Stadium. Following the release of the Dowd Report which accused Rose for betting on baseball games, in Rose was banned from baseball by Commissioner Bart Giamatti, who declared Rose guilty of \"conduct detrimental to baseball\". Controversy also swirled around Reds owner Marge Schott, who was accused several times of ethnic and racial slurs.\n\nIn , General Manager Bergesch was replaced by Murray Cook, who initiated a series of deals that would finally bring the Reds back to the championship, starting with acquisitions of Danny Jackson and José Rijo. An aging Dave Parker was let go after a revival of his career in Cincinnati following the Pittsburgh drug trials. Barry Larkin emerged as the starting shortstop over Kurt Stillwell, who along with reliever Power, was traded for Jackson. In , Cook was succeeded by Bob Quinn, who put the final pieces of the championship puzzle together, with the acquisitions of Hal Morris, Billy Hatcher and Randy Myers.\nIn , the Reds under new manager Lou Piniella shocked baseball by leading the NL West from wire-to-wire. Winning their first nine games, they started off 33–12 and maintained their lead throughout the year. Led by Chris Sabo, Barry Larkin, Eric Davis, Paul O'Neill and Billy Hatcher in the field, and by José Rijo, Tom Browning and the \"Nasty Boys\" of Rob Dibble, Norm Charlton and Randy Myers on the mound, the Reds took out the Pirates in the NLCS. The Reds swept the heavily favored Oakland Athletics in four straight, and extended a Reds winning streak in the World Series to nine consecutive games. The World Series, however, saw Eric Davis severely bruise a kidney diving for a fly ball in Game 4, and his play was greatly limited the next year. In winning the World Series the Reds became the only National League team to go wire to wire.\n\nIn , Quinn was replaced in the front office by Jim Bowden. On the field, manager Lou Piniella wanted outfielder Paul O'Neill to be a power-hitter to fill the void Eric Davis left when he was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers in exchange for Tim Belcher. However, O'Neill only hit .246 and 14 homers. The Reds returned to winning after a losing season in 1991, but 90 wins was only enough for second place behind the division-winning Atlanta Braves. Before the season ended, Piniella got into an altercation with reliever Rob Dibble. In the off season, Paul O'Neill was traded to the New York Yankees for outfielder Roberto Kelly. Kelly was a disappointment for the Reds over the next couple of years, while O'Neill blossomed, leading a down-trodden Yankees franchise to a return to glory. Also, the Reds would replace their \"Big Red Machine\" era uniforms in favor of a pinstriped uniform with no sleeves.\n\nFor the 1993 season Piniella was replaced by fan favorite Tony Pérez, but he lasted only 44 games at the helm, replaced by Davey Johnson. With Johnson steering the team, the Reds made steady progress. In 1994, the Reds were in the newly created National League Central Division with the Chicago Cubs, St. Louis Cardinals, as well as fellow rivals Pittsburgh Pirates and Houston Astros. By the time the strike hit, the Reds finished a half-game ahead of the Astros for first-place in the NL Central. By , the Reds won the division thanks to Most Valuable Player Barry Larkin. After defeating the NL West champion Dodgers in the first NLDS since 1981, they lost to the Atlanta Braves.\n\nTeam owner Marge Schott announced mid-season that Johnson would be gone by the end of the year, regardless of outcome, to be replaced by former Reds third baseman Ray Knight. Johnson and Schott had never gotten along and she did not approve of Johnson living with his fiancée before they were married, In contrast, Knight, along with his wife, professional golfer Nancy Lopez, were friends of Schott. The team took a dive under Knight and he was unable to complete two full seasons as manager, subject to complaints in the press about his strict managerial style.\n\nIn the Reds won 96 games, led by manager Jack McKeon, but lost to the New York Mets in a one game playoff. Earlier that year, Schott sold controlling interest in the Reds to Cincinnati businessman Carl Lindner. Despite an 85–77 finish in 2000, and being named 1999 NL manager of the year, McKeon was fired after the 2000 season. The Reds did not have another winning season until 2010.\n\nRiverfront Stadium, by then known as Cinergy Field, was demolished in . Great American Ball Park opened in with high expectations for a team led by local favorites, including outfielder Ken Griffey, Jr., shortstop Barry Larkin, and first baseman Sean Casey. Although attendance improved considerably with the new ballpark, the team continued to lose. Schott had not invested much in the farm system since the early 1990s, leaving the team relatively thin on talent. After years of promises that the club was rebuilding toward the opening of the new ballpark, General Manager Jim Bowden and manager Bob Boone were fired on July 28. This broke up the father-son combo of manager Bob Boone and third baseman Aaron Boone, and Aaron was soon traded to the New York Yankees. Tragedy struck in November when Dernell Stenson, a promising young outfielder for the Reds, was shot and killed during a carjack. Following the season Dan O'Brien was hired as the Reds' 16th General Manager.\n\nThe and seasons continued the trend of big hitting, poor pitching, and poor records. Griffey, Jr. joined the 500 home run club in 2004, but was again hampered by injuries. Adam Dunn emerged as consistent home run hitter, including a home run against José Lima. He also broke the major league record for strikeouts in 2004. Although a number of free agents were signed before 2005, the Reds were quickly in last place and manager Dave Miley was forced out in the 2005 mid season and replaced by Jerry Narron. Like many other small market clubs, the Reds dispatched some of their veteran players and began entrusting their future to a young nucleus that included Adam Dunn and Austin Kearns.\n\nLate summer 2004 saw the opening of the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame (HOF). The Reds HOF had been in existence in name only since the 1950s, with player plaques, photos and other memorabilia scattered throughout their front offices. Ownership and management desired a stand-alone facility, where the public could walk through inter-active displays, see locker room recreations, watch videos of classic Reds moments and peruse historical items. The first floor houses a movie theater which resembles an older, ivy-covered brick wall ball yard. The hallways contain many vintage photographs. The rear of the building features a three-story wall containing a baseball for every hit Pete Rose had during his career. The third floor contains interactive exhibits including a pitcher's mound, radio booth, and children's area where the fundamentals of baseball are taught through videos featuring former Reds players.\nRobert Castellini took over as controlling owner from Lindner in 2006. Castellini promptly fired general manager Dan O'Brien and hired Wayne Krivsky. The Reds made a run at the playoffs but ultimately fell short. The 2007 season was again mired in mediocrity. Midway through the season Jerry Narron was fired as manager and replaced by Pete Mackanin. The Reds ended up posting a winning record under Mackanin, but finished the season in 5th place in the Central Division. Mackanin was manager in an interim capacity only, and the Reds, seeking a big name to fill the spot, ultimately brought in Dusty Baker. Early in the 2008 season, Krivsky was fired and replaced by Walt Jocketty. Though the Reds did not win under Krivsky, he is credited with revamping the farm system and signing young talent that could potentially lead the Reds to success in the future.\n\nThe Reds failed to post winning records in both 2008 and 2009. In 2010, with NL MVP Joey Votto and Gold Glovers Brandon Phillips and Scott Rolen the Reds posted a 91-71 record and were NL Central champions. The following week, the Reds became only the second team in MLB history to be no-hit in a postseason game when Philadelphia's Roy Halladay shut down the National League's number one offense in game one of the NLDS. The Reds lost in a 3-game sweep of the NLDS to Philadelphia.\n\nAfter coming off their surprising 2010 NL Central Division Title, the Reds fell short of many expectations for the 2011 season. Multiple injuries and inconsistent starting pitching played a big role in their mid-season collapse, along with a less productive offense as compared to the previous year. The Reds ended the season at 79-83. The Reds won the 2012 NL Central Division Title. On September 28, Homer Bailey threw a 1-0 no-hitter against the Pittsburgh Pirates at PNC Park, this was the first Reds no-hitter since Tom Browning's perfect game in September of the 1988 season. Finishing with a 97–65 record, they earned the second seed in the Division Series and a match-up with the eventual World Series champion San Francisco Giants. After taking a 2–0 lead with road victories at AT&T Park, they headed home looking to win the series. However, they lost three straight at their home ballpark to become the first National League team since the Cubs in 1984 to lose a division series after leading 2–0.\n\nIn the off-season, the team traded outfielder Drew Stubbs, as part of a three team deal with the Arizona Diamondbacks and Cleveland Indians, to the Indians, and in turn received right fielder Shin-Soo Choo. On July 2, 2013, Homer Bailey pitched a no-hitter against the San Francisco Giants for a 4-0 Reds victory, making Bailey the third pitcher in Reds history with two complete game no-hitters in their career.\n\nFollowing six consecutive losses to close out the 2013 season, including a loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates, at PNC Park, in the National League wild-card playoff game, the Reds decided to fire Dusty Baker. During his six years as manager, Baker led the Reds to the playoff three times; however, they never advanced beyond the first round.\n\nOn October 22, 2013, the Reds hired pitching coach Bryan Price to replace Baker as manager.\n\nUnder Bryan Price, the Reds were led by pitchers Johnny Cueto and the hard-throwing Cuban Aroldis Chapman. While the offense was led by all-star third baseman Todd Frazier, Joey Votto, and Brandon Phillips. Although with plenty of star power, the Reds never got off to a good start and ending the season in lowly fourth place in the division to go along with a 76-86 record. During the offseason, the Reds traded pitchers Alfredo Simón to the Tigers and Mat Latos to the Marlins. In return, they acquired young talents such as Eugenio Suárez and Anthony DeSclafani. They also acquired veteran slugger Marlon Byrd from the Phillies to play left field.\n\nThe Reds' 2015 season wasn't much better, as they finished with the second worst record in the league with a record of 64-98, their worst finish since 1982. The Reds were forced to trade star pitchers Johnny Cueto (to the Kansas City Royals) and Mike Leake (to the San Francisco Giants), receiving minor league pitching prospects for both. Shortly after the season's end, the Reds traded home run derby champion Todd Frazier to the Chicago White Sox, and closing pitcher Aroldis Chapman to the New York Yankees.\n\nIn 2016, the Reds broke the record for home runs allowed during a single season. The previous record holder was the 1996 Detroit Tigers with 241 longballs yielded to opposing teams. The Reds went 68-94, and again were one of the worst teams in the MLB. The Reds traded outfielder Jay Bruce to the Mets just before the July 31st non-waiver trade deadline in exchange for two prospects, infielder Dilson Herrera and pitcher Max Wotell. During the offseason, the Reds traded Brandon Phillips to the Atlanta Braves in exchange for two minor league pitchers.\n\nThe Cincinnati Reds play their home games at Great American Ball Park, located at 100 Joe Nuxhall Way, in downtown Cincinnati. Great American Ball Park opened in 2003 at the cost of $290 million and has a capacity of 42,271. Along with serving as the home field for the Reds, the stadium also holds the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame. The Hall of Fame was added as a part of Reds tradition allowing fans to walk through the history of the franchise as well as participating in many interactive baseball features.\n\nGreat American Ball Park is the seventh home of the Cincinnati Reds, built immediately to the north of the site on which Riverfront Stadium, later named Cinergy Field, once stood. The first ballpark the Reds occupied was Bank Street Grounds from 1882 to 1883 until they moved to League Park I in 1884, where they would remain until 1893. Through the late 1890s and early 1900s (decade), the Reds moved to two different parks where they stayed for less than ten years. League Park II was the third home field for the Reds from 1894 to 1901, and then moved to the Palace of the Fans which served as the home of the Reds in the 1910s. It was in 1912 that the Reds moved to Crosley Field which they called home for fifty-eight years. Crosley served as the home field for the Reds for two World Series titles and five National League pennants. Beginning June 30, 1970, and during the dynasty of the Big Red Machine, the Reds played in Riverfront Stadium, appropriately named due to its location right by the Ohio River. Riverfront saw three World Series titles and five National League pennants. It was in the late 1990s that the city agreed to build two separate stadiums on the riverfront for the Reds and the Cincinnati Bengals. Thus, in 2003, the Reds began a new era with the opening of the current stadium.\n\nThe Reds hold their spring training in Goodyear, Arizona at Goodyear Ballpark. The Reds moved into this stadium and the Cactus League in 2010 after staying in the Grapefruit League for most of their history. The Reds share Goodyear Park with their rivals in Ohio, the Cleveland Indians.\n\nThroughout the history of the Cincinnati Reds, many different variations of the classic wishbone \"C\" logo have been introduced. For most of the history of the Reds, especially during the early history, the Reds logo has been simply the wishbone \"C\" with the word \"REDS\" inside, the only colors used being red and white. However, during the 1950s, during the renaming and re-branding of the team as the Cincinnati Redlegs because of the connections to communism of the word 'Reds', the color blue was introduced as part of the Reds color combination. During the 1960s and 1970s the Reds saw a move towards the more traditional colors, abandoning the navy blue. A new logo also appeared with the new era of baseball in 1972, when the team went away from the script \"REDS\" inside of the \"C\", instead, putting their mascot Mr. Redlegs in its place as well as putting the name of the team inside of the wishbone \"C\". In the 1990s the more traditional, early logos of Reds came back with the current logo reflecting more of what the team's logo was when they were first founded.\n\nAlong with the logo, the Reds' uniforms have been changed many different times throughout their history. Following their departure from being called the \"Redlegs\" in 1956 the Reds made a groundbreaking change to their uniforms with the use of sleeveless jerseys, seen only once before in the Major Leagues by the Chicago Cubs. At home and away, the cap was all-red with a white wishbone C insignia. The long-sleeved undershirts were red. The uniform was plain white with a red wishbone C logo on the left and the uniform number on the right. On the road the wishbone C was replaced by the mustachioed \"Mr. Red\" logo, the pillbox-hat-wearing man with a baseball for a head. The home stockings were red with six white stripes. The away stockings had only three white stripes.\n\nThe Reds changed uniforms again in 1961, when they replaced the traditional wishbone C insignia with an oval C logo, but continued to use the sleeveless jerseys. At home, the Reds wore white caps with the red bill with the oval C in red, white sleeveless jerseys with red pinstripes, with the oval C-REDS logo in black with red lettering on the left breast and the number in red on the right. The gray away uniform included a gray cap with the red oval C and a red bill. Their gray away uniforms, which also included a sleeveless jersey, bore CINCINNATI in an arched block style across with the number below on the left. In 1964, players' last names were placed on the back of each set of uniforms, below the numbers. Those uniforms were scrapped after the 1966 season.\n\nHowever, the Cincinnati uniform design most familiar to baseball enthusiasts is the one whose basic form, with minor variations, held sway for the 26 seasons from 1967 to 1992. Most significantly, the point was restored to the C insignia, making it a wishbone again. During this era, the Reds wore all-red caps both at home and on the road. The caps bore the simple wishbone C insignia in white. The uniforms were standard short-sleeved jerseys and standard trousers—white at home and grey on the road. The home uniform featured the Wishbone C-REDS logo in red with white type on the left breast and the uniform number in red on the right. The away uniform bore CINCINNATI in an arched block style across the front with the uniform number below on the left. Red, long-sleeved undershirts and plain red stirrups over white sanitary stockings completed the basic design.\n\nThe 1993 uniforms (which did away with the pullovers and brought back button-down jerseys) kept white and gray as the base colors for the home and away uniforms, but added red pinstripes. The home jerseys were sleeveless, showing more of the red undershirts. The color scheme of the C-REDS logo on the home uniform was reversed, now red lettering on a white background. A new home cap was created that had a red bill and a white crown with red pinstripes and a red wishbone C insignia. The away uniform kept the all-red cap, but moved the uniform number to the left, to more closely match the home uniform. The only additional change to these uniforms was the introduction of black as a primary color of the Reds in 1999, especially on their road uniforms.\n\nThe Reds latest uniform change came in December 2006 which differed significantly from the uniforms worn during the previous eight seasons. The home caps returned to an all-red design with a white wishbone C, lightly outlined in black. Caps with red crowns and a black bill became the new road caps. Additionally, the sleeveless jersey was abandoned for a more traditional design. The numbers and lettering for the names on the backs of the jerseys were changed to an early-1900s style typeface, and a handlebar mustached \"Mr. Redlegs\" – reminiscent of the logo used by the Reds in the 1950s and 1960s – was placed on the left sleeve.\n\nBULLET::::- Jake Daubert 1919–1924\nBULLET::::- 14 Pete Rose 1970–1978\nBULLET::::- 13 Dave Concepción 1983–1988\nBULLET::::- 11 Barry Larkin 1997–2004\n\nThe Cincinnati Reds have retired ten numbers in franchise history, as well as honoring Jackie Robinson, whose number is retired league-wide around Major League Baseball.\n\nAll of the retired numbers are located at Great American Ball Park behind home-plate on the outside of the press box. Along with the retired player and manager number, the following broadcasters are honored with microphones by the broadcast booth: Marty Brennaman, Waite Hoyt, and Joe Nuxhall.\n\nOn April 15, 1997, #42 was retired throughout Major League Baseball in honor of Jackie Robinson.\n\nThe Reds have hosted the Major League Baseball All-Star Game five times: twice at Crosley Field (1938, 1953), twice at Riverfront Stadium (1970, 1988), and once at Great American Ball Park (2015). (Until 2019, the Reds shared this record with the Cleveland Indians and the Pittsburgh Pirates; Cleveland broke this tie in 2019, hosting the All-Star Game for the sixth time.)\n\nThe Ohio Cup was an annual pre-season baseball game, which pitted the Ohio rivals Cleveland Indians and Cincinnati Reds. In its first series it was a single-game cup, played each year at minor-league Cooper Stadium in Columbus, was staged just days before the start of each new Major League Baseball season.\n\nA total of eight Ohio Cup games were played, in 1989 to 1996, with the Indians winning six of them. The winner of the game each year was awarded the Ohio Cup in postgame ceremonies. The Ohio Cup was a favorite among baseball fans in Columbus, with attendances regularly topping 15,000.\n\nThe Ohio Cup games ended with the introduction of regular-season interleague play in 1997. Thereafter, the two teams competed annually in the regular-season Battle of Ohio or Buckeye Series. The Ohio Cup was revived in 2008 as a reward for the team with the better overall record in the Reds-Indians series each year.\n\nThe Reds' flagship radio station has been WLW, 700AM since 1969. Prior to that, the Reds were heard over: WKRC, WCPO, WSAI and WCKY. WLW, a 50,000-watt station, is \"clear channel\" in more than one way, as iHeartMedia owns the \"blowtorch\" outlet which is also known as \"The Nation's Station\".\n\nMarty Brennaman has been the Reds' play-by-play voice since 1974 and has won the Ford C. Frick Award for his work, which includes his famous call of \"... and this one belongs to the Reds!\" after a win. Joining him for years on color was former Reds pitcher Joe Nuxhall, who worked in the radio booth from 1967 (the year after his retirement as an active player) until 2004, plus three more seasons doing select home games until his death, in 2007.\n\nIn 2007, Thom Brennaman, a veteran announcer seen nationwide on Fox Sports, joined his father Marty in the radio booth. Retired relief pitcher Jeff Brantley, formerly of ESPN, also joined the network in 2007. , Brantley and Thom Brennaman's increased TV schedule (see below) has led to more appearances for Jim Kelch, who had filled in on the network since 2008. In 2019, the Reds hired then-Pensacola Blue Wahoos radio play-by-play announcer Tommy Thrall to provide in-game and post-game coverage as well as a fill in play-by-play announcer.\n\nTelevised games are seen exclusively on Fox Sports Ohio and Fox Sports Indiana. In addition, Fox Sports South televises Fox Sports Ohio broadcasts of Reds games to Tennessee and western North Carolina. George Grande, who hosted the first \"SportsCenter\" on ESPN in 1979, was the play-by-play announcer, usually alongside Chris Welsh, from 1993 until his retirement during the final game of the 2009 season. Since 2009, Grande has worked part-time for the Reds as play-by-play announcer in September when Thom Brennaman is covering the NFL for Fox Sports. He has also made guest appearances throughout the season. Brennaman has been the head play-by-play commentator since 2010, with Welsh and Brantley sharing time as the color commentators. Paul Keels, who left in 2011 to become the play-by-play announcer for the Ohio State Buckeyes Radio Network, was the Reds' backup play-by-play television announcer during the 2010 season. Jim Kelch served as Keels' replacement. The Reds also added former Cincinnati First Baseman Sean Casey – known as \"The Mayor\" by Reds fans – to do color commentary for approximately 15 games in 2011.\n\nNBC affiliate WLWT carried Reds games from 1948 to 1995. Among those that have called games for WLWT include Waite Hoyt, Ray Lane, Steve Physioc, Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan, and Ken Wilson. Al Michaels, who established a long career with ABC and NBC, spent three years in Cincinnati early in his career. The last regularly-scheduled, over-the-air broadcasts of Reds games were on WSTR-TV from 1996 to 1998. Since 2010, WKRC-TV has simulcast Opening Day games with Fox Sports Ohio.\n\n! style=\";\"Level\n! style=\";\"Team\n! style=\";\"League\n! style=\";\"Location\n! style=\";\"Stadium\nrowspan=2\"Rookie Advanced\"\nrowspan=3\"Rookie\"\n\nBULLET::::- Reds Minor Leagues News\nBULLET::::- SCSR / 19th Century Cincinnati Base Ball\nBULLET::::- Voices of Oklahoma interview with Johnny Bench. First person interview conducted on March 28, 2012 with Johnny Bench, Hall of Fame Catcher for the Cincinnati Reds.\n \n"}
{"id": "6672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6672", "title": "Caribbean cuisine", "text": "Caribbean cuisine\n\nCaribbean cuisine is a fusion of African, Creole, Cajun, Amerindian, European, Latin American, Indian/South Asian, Middle Eastern, and Chinese. These traditions were brought from many different countries when they came to the Caribbean. In addition, the population has created styles that are unique to the region.\n\nIngredients that are common in most islands' dishes are rice, plantains, beans, cassava, culantro, bell peppers, chickpeas, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, coconut, and any of various meats that are locally available like beef, poultry, pork or fish. A characteristic seasoning for the region is a green herb and oil based marinade which imparts a flavor profile which is quintessentially Caribbean in character. Ingredients may include garlic, onions, scotch bonnet peppers, celery, green onions, and herbs like culantro, marjoram, rosemary, tarragon and thyme. This green seasoning is used for a variety of dishes like curries, stews and roasted meats.\n\nTraditional dishes are so important to regional culture that, for example, the local version of Caribbean goat stew has been chosen as the official national dish of Montserrat and is also one of the signature dishes of St. Kitts and Nevis. Another popular dish in the Anglophone Caribbean is called \"Cook-up\", or pelau. Ackee and saltfish is another popular dish that is unique to Jamaica. Callaloo is a dish containing leafy vegetables such as spinach and sometimes okra amongst others, widely distributed in the Caribbean, with a distinctively mixed African and indigenous character.\n\nThe variety of dessert dishes in the area also reflects the mixed origins of the recipes. In some areas, Black Cake, a derivative of English Christmas pudding may be served, especially on special occasions.\n\nOver time, food from the Caribbean has evolved into a narrative technique through which their culture has been accentuated and promoted. However, by studying Caribbean culture through a literary lens there then runs the risk of generalizing exoticist ideas about food practices from the tropical. Some food theorists argue that this depiction of Caribbean food in various forms of media contributes to the inaccurate conceptions revolving around their culinary practices, which are much more grounded in unpleasant historical events. Therefore, it can be argued that the connection between the idea of the Caribbean being the ultimate paradise and Caribbean food being exotic is based on inaccurate information.\n\nBULLET::::- Anguillian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Antigua and Barbuda cuisine\nBULLET::::- Barbadian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Bahamian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Belizean cuisine\nBULLET::::- Cayman Islands cuisine\nBULLET::::- Colombian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Costa Rican cuisine\nBULLET::::- Cuban cuisine\nBULLET::::- Curaçaoan cuisine\nBULLET::::- Dominica cuisine\nBULLET::::- Dominican Republic cuisine\nBULLET::::- French Guianese Cuisine\nBULLET::::- Grenadan cuisine\nBULLET::::- Guatemalan cuisine\nBULLET::::- Guyanese cuisine\nBULLET::::- Haitian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Honduran cuisine\nBULLET::::- Jamaican cuisine\nBULLET::::- Mexican cuisine\nBULLET::::- Nicaraguan cuisine\nBULLET::::- Puerto Rican cuisine\nBULLET::::- Panamanian cuisine\nBULLET::::- Saint Kitts and Nevis cuisine\nBULLET::::- Surinamese cuisine\nBULLET::::- Trinidadian and Tobagonian cuisine\nBULLET::::- British Virgin Islands cuisine\nBULLET::::- United States Virgin Islands cuisine\nBULLET::::- Venezuelan cuisine\n\nBULLET::::- Floribbean cuisine\nBULLET::::- Ground provisions\nBULLET::::- List of cuisines\nBULLET::::- Street food\n"}
{"id": "6673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6673", "title": "Central Powers", "text": "Central Powers\n\nThe Central Powers, also Central Empires (; ; / ; ), consisting of Germany, , the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria - hence also known as the Quadruple Alliance ()—was one of the two main coalitions that fought World War I (1914–18).\n\nIt faced and was defeated by the Allied Powers that had formed around the Triple Entente. The Powers' origin was the alliance of Germany and Austria-Hungary in 1879. Despite having nominally joined the Triple Alliance before, Italy did not take part in World War I on the side of the Central Powers; the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria did not join until after World War I had begun, even though the Ottoman Empire had retained close relations with both Germany and Austria-Hungary since the beginning of the 20th century.\n\nThe Central Powers consisted of the German Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire at the beginning of the war. The Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers later in 1914. In 1915, the Kingdom of Bulgaria joined the alliance. The name \"Central Powers\" is derived from the location of these countries; all four (including the other groups that supported them except for Finland and Lithuania) were located between the Russian Empire in the east and France and the United Kingdom in the west. Finland, Azerbaijan, and Lithuania joined them in 1918 before the war ended and after the Russian Empire collapsed\n\nThe Central Powers were composed of the following nations:\n! Nation !! Entered WWI\n\n+Economic statistics of the Central Powers \n!\n!Population(millions)\n!Land(million km)\n!GDP($ billion)\n!GDP per capita($)\nrowspan=3 (1914)\nMainland\nalign=\"right\"67.0\nalign=\"right\"0.5\nalign=\"right\"244.3\nalign=\"right\"3,648\nColonies\nalign=\"right\"10.7\nalign=\"right\"3.0\nalign=\"right\"6.4\nalign=\"right\"601\nTotal\nalign=\"right\"77.7\nalign=\"right\"3.5\nalign=\"right\"250.7\nalign=\"right\"3,227\ncolspan=2 (1914)\nalign=\"right\"50.6\nalign=\"right\"0.6\nalign=\"right\"100.5\nalign=\"right\"1,986\ncolspan=2 (1914)\nalign=\"right\"23.0\nalign=\"right\"1.8\nalign=\"right\"25.3\nalign=\"right\"1,100\ncolspan=2 (1915)\nalign=\"right\"4.8\nalign=\"right\"0.1\nalign=\"right\"7.4\nalign=\"right\"1,527\ncolspan=2 Total\nalign=\"right\"156.1\nalign=\"right\"6.0\nalign=\"right\"383.9\nalign=\"right\"2,459\n\n+ Military statistics of the Central Powers \n!class=\"unsortable\"\n!style=\"width:13.3%;\" Mobilized\n!style=\"width:13.3%;\" Killed in action\n!style=\"width:13.3%;\" Wounded\n!style=\"width:13.3%;\" Missing in action\n!style=\"width:13.3%;\" Total casualties\n!Percentage casualties of total force mobilized\nalign=\"left\"  13,250,000  1,808,546 (13.65%) 4,247,143  1,152,800  7,208,489  66%\nalign=\"left\"  7,800,000  922,500 (11.82%) 3,620,000  2,200,000  6,742,500  86%\nalign=\"left\"  2,998,321  325,000 (10.84%)  400,000  250,000  975,000  34%\nalign=\"left\"  1,200,000  75,844 (6.32%) 153,390  27,029  255,263  21%\nalign=\"left\" Total  25,257,321  3,131,890  8,419,533  3,629,829  15,181,252  66%\n\nIn early July 1914, in the aftermath of the assassination of Austro-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand and the immediate likelihood of war between Austria-Hungary and Serbia, Kaiser Wilhelm II and the German government informed the Austro-Hungarian government that Germany would uphold its alliance with Austria-Hungary and defend it from possible Russian intervention if a war between Austria-Hungary and Serbia took place. When Russia enacted a general mobilization, Germany viewed the act as provocative. The Russian government promised Germany that its general mobilization did not mean preparation for war with Germany but was a reaction to the events between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. The German government regarded the Russian promise of no war with Germany to be nonsense in light of its general mobilization, and Germany, in turn, mobilized for war. On 1 August, Germany sent an ultimatum to Russia stating that since both Germany and Russia were in a state of military mobilization, an effective state of war existed between the two countries. Later that day, France, an ally of Russia, declared a state of general mobilization.\n\nIn August 1914, Germany waged war on Russia, the German government justified military action against Russia as necessary because of Russian aggression as demonstrated by the mobilization of the Russian army that had resulted in Germany mobilizing in response.\n\nAfter Germany declared war on Russia, France with its alliance with Russia prepared a general mobilization in expectation of war. On 3 August 1914, Germany responded to this action by declaring war on France. Germany, facing a two-front war, enacted what was known as the Schlieffen Plan, that involved German armed forces needing to move through Belgium and swing south into France and towards the French capital of Paris. This plan was hoped to quickly gain victory against the French and allow German forces to concentrate on the Eastern Front. Belgium was a neutral country and would not accept German forces crossing its territory. Germany disregarded Belgian neutrality and invaded the country to launch an offensive towards Paris. This caused Great Britain to declare war against the German Empire, as the action violated the Treaty of London that both nations signed in 1839 guaranteeing Belgian neutrality and defense of the kingdom if a nation reneged.\n\nSubsequently, several states declared war on Germany in late August 1914, with Italy declaring war on Austria-Hungary in 1915 and Germany on 27 August 1916, the United States declaring war on Germany on 6 April 1917 and Greece declaring war on Germany in July 1917.\n\nBULLET::::- Europe\nUpon its founding in 1871, the German Empire controlled Alsace-Lorraine as an \"imperial territory\" incorporated from France after the Franco-Prussian War. It was held as part of Germany's sovereign territory.\n\nBULLET::::- Africa\nGermany held multiple African colonies at the time of World War I. All of Germany's African colonies were invaded and occupied by Allied forces during the war.\n\nBULLET::::- Asia\n\nThe Kiautschou Bay concession was a German dependency in East Asia leased from China in 1898. It was occupied by Japanese forces following the Siege of Tsingtao.\n\nBULLET::::- Pacific\n\nGerman New Guinea was a German protectorate in the Pacific. It was occupied by Australian forces in 1914.\n\nGerman Samoa was a German protectorate following the Tripartite Convention. It was occupied by the New Zealand Expeditionary Force in 1914.\n\nAustria-Hungary regarded the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand as being orchestrated with the assistance of Serbia. The country viewed the assassination as setting a dangerous precedent of encouraging the country's South Slav population to rebel and threaten to tear apart the multinational country. Austria-Hungary formally sent an ultimatum to Serbia demanding a full-scale investigation of Serbian government complicity in the assassination, and complete compliance by Serbia in agreeing to the terms demanded by Austria-Hungary. Serbia submitted to accept most of the demands, however Austria-Hungary viewed this as insufficient and used this lack of full compliance to justify military intervention. These demands have been viewed as a diplomatic cover for what was going to be an inevitable Austro-Hungarian declaration of war on Serbia.\n\nAustria-Hungary had been warned by Russia that the Russian government would not tolerate Austria-Hungary invading Serbia. However, with Germany supporting Austria-Hungary's actions, the Austro-Hungarian government hoped that Russia would not intervene and that the conflict with Serbia would be a regional conflict.\n\nAustria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia resulted in Russia declaring war on the country and Germany in turn declared war on Russia, setting off the beginning of the clash of alliances that resulted in the World War.\n\nBULLET::::- Territory\nAustria-Hungary was internally divided into two states with their own governments, joined in communion through the Habsburg throne. Austrian Cisleithania contained various duchies and principalities but also the Kingdom of Bohemia, the Kingdom of Dalmatia, the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria. Hungarian Transleithania comprised the Kingdom of Hungary and the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia. In Bosnia and Herzegovina sovereign authority was shared by both Austria and Hungary.\n\nThe Ottoman Empire joined the war on the side of the Central Powers in November 1914. The Ottoman Empire had gained strong economic connections with Germany through the Berlin-to-Baghdad railway project that was still incomplete at the time. The Ottoman Empire made a formal alliance with Germany signed on 2 August 1914. The alliance treaty expected that the Ottoman Empire would become involved in the conflict in a short amount of time. However, for the first several months of the war the Ottoman Empire maintained neutrality though it allowed a German naval squadron to enter and stay near the strait of Bosphorus. Ottoman officials informed the German government that the country needed time to prepare for conflict. Germany provided financial aid and weapons shipments to the Ottoman Empire.\n\nAfter pressure escalated from the German government demanding that the Ottoman Empire fulfill its treaty obligations, or else Germany would expel the country from the alliance and terminate economic and military assistance, the Ottoman government entered the war with the recently acquired cruisers from Germany, the \"Yavuz Sultan Selim\" (formerly \"SMS Goeben\") and the \"Midilli\" (formerly \"SMS Breslau\") launching a naval raid on the Russian port of Odessa, thus engaging in a military action in accordance with its alliance obligations with Germany. Russia and the Triple Entente declared war on the Ottoman Empire.\n\nBulgaria was still resentful after its defeat in July 1913 at the hands of Serbia, Greece and Romania. It signed a treaty of defensive alliance with the Ottoman Empire on 19 August 1914. It was the last country to join the Central Powers, which Bulgaria did in October 1915 by declaring war on Serbia. It invaded Serbia in conjunction with German and Austro-Hungarian forces. Bulgaria held claims on the region of Vardar Macedonia then held by Serbia following the Balkan Wars of 1912–1913 and (from the Bulgarian point of view), the costly Treaty of Bucharest (1913). As a condition of entering WW1 on the side of the Central Powers, Bulgaria was granted the right to reclaim that territory.\n\n! Date !! Declared by !! Declared against\n!colspan=\"3\" 1915\n\n!colspan=\"3\" 1916\n\n!colspan=\"3\" 1917\n\nIn opposition to the Union of South Africa, which had joined the war, Boer rebels refounded the South African Republic in 1914 and engaged in the Maritz Rebellion. Germany assisted the rebels, and the rebels operated in and out of the German colony of German South-West Africa. The rebels were eventually defeated by British imperial forces.\n\nThe Dervish movement was a rebel Somali movement which had existed since before World War I. It was led by Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, who was seeking the independence of Somali territories. The Dervish movement was supported by the Ottoman Empire and Germany, and also briefly by the Ethiopian Empire from 1915–1916. Dervish forces fought against Italian and British forces in Italian Somaliland and British Somaliland during the Somaliland Campaign.\n\nThe Senussi Order was a Muslim political-religious tariqa (Sufi order) and clan in Libya, previously under Ottoman control, which had been lost to Italy in 1912. In 1915, they were courted by the Ottoman Empire and Germany and Grand Senussi Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi declared jihad and attacked the Italians in Libya and British controlled Egypt in the so called Senussi Campaign.\n\nThe Sultanate of Darfur forces aligned themselves with the Central Powers and fought against British forces in Anglo-Egyptian Sudan in the Anglo-Egyptian Darfur Expedition of 1916.\n\nDuring 1917 and 1918, the Finns under Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim and Lithuanian nationalists fought Russia for a common cause. With the Bolshevik attack of late 1917, the General Secretariat of Ukraine sought military protection first from the Central Powers and later from the armed forces of the Entente.\n\nThe Ottoman Empire also had its own allies in Azerbaijan and the Northern Caucasus. The three nations fought alongside each other under the Army of Islam in the Battle of Baku.\n\nBULLET::::- Belarus\nThe Belarusian People's Republic was a client state of Germany created in 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Courland and Semigallia\nThe Duchy of Courland and Semigallia was a client state of Germany created in 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Crim\nThe Crimean Regional Government was a client state of Germany created in 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Don\nThe Don Republic was closely associated with the German Empire and fought against the Bolsheviks.\n\nBULLET::::- Finland\nThe Kingdom of Finland was a client state of Germany created in 1918. Prior to the declaration of the kingdom, Finland existed as an autonomous Grand Duchy of Russia since 1809.\n\nBULLET::::- Kuban\nThe Kuban People's Republic was a client state of Germany created in 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Lithuania\nThe Kingdom of Lithuania was a client state of Germany created in 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Northern Caucasus\nThe Mountainous Republic of the Northern Caucasus was associated with the Central Powers.\n\nBULLET::::- Georgia\nThe Democratic Republic of Georgia declared independence in 1918 which then led to border conflicts between newly formed republic and Ottoman Empire. Soon after Ottoman Empire invaded the republic and quickly reached Borjomi. This forced Georgia to ask for help from Germany which they were granted. Germany forced the Ottomans to withdraw from Georgian territories and recognize Georgian sovereignty. Germany, Georgia and the Ottomans signed a peace treaty, the Treaty of Batum which ended the conflict with the last two. In return Georgia become a German \"ally\". This time period of Georgian-German friendship was known as German Caucasus expedition.\n\nBULLET::::- Poland\nThe Kingdom of Poland was a client state of Germany created in 1916. This government was recognized by the emperors of Germany and Austria-Hungary in November 1916, and it adopted a constitution in 1917. The decision to create a Polish State was taken by Germany in order to attempt to legitimize its military occupation amongst the Polish inhabitants, following upon German propaganda sent to Polish inhabitants in 1915 that German soldiers were arriving as liberators to free Poland from subjugation by Russia.\n\nBULLET::::- Ukraine\nThe Ukrainian State was a client state of Germany led by Hetman Pavlo Skoropadskyi, who overthrew the government of the Ukrainian People's Republic.\n\nBULLET::::- United Baltic Duchy\nThe United Baltic Duchy was a proposed client state of Germany created in 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Azerbaijan\nIn 1918, the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, facing Bolshevik revolution and opposition from the Muslim Musavat Party, was then occupied by the Ottoman Empire, which expelled the Bolsheviks while supporting the Musavat Party. The Ottoman Empire maintained a presence in Azerbaijan until the end of the war in November 1918.\n\nBULLET::::- Jabal Shammar\nJabal Shammar was an Arab state in the Middle East that was closely associated with the Ottoman Empire.\n\nStates listed in this section were not officially members of the Central Powers, but at some point during the war engaged in cooperation with one or more Central Powers members on a level that makes their neutrality disputable.\n\nThe Ethiopian Empire was officially neutral throughout World War I but widely suspected of sympathy for the Central Powers between 1915 and 1916. At the time, Ethiopia was one of the few independent states in Africa and a major power in the Horn of Africa. Its ruler, Lij Iyasu, was widely suspected of harbouring pro-Islamic sentiments and being sympathetic to the Ottoman Empire. The German Empire also attempted to reach out to Iyasu, dispatching several unsuccessful expeditions to the region to attempt to encourage it to collaborate in an Arab Revolt-style uprising in East Africa. One of the unsuccessful expeditions was led by Leo Frobenius, a celebrated ethnographer and personal friend of Kaiser Wilhelm II. Under Iyasu's directions, Ethiopia probably supplied weapons to the Muslim Dervish rebels during the Somaliland Campaign of 1915 to 1916, indirectly helping the Central Powers' cause. \n\nFearing the rising influence of Iyasu and the Ottoman Empire, the Christian nobles of Ethiopia conspired against Iyasu over 1915. Iyasu was first excommunicated by the Ethiopian Orthodox Patriarch and eventually deposed in a coup d'état on 27 September 1916. A less pro-Ottoman regent, \"Ras\" Tafari Makonnen, was installed on the throne.\n\nOther movements supported the efforts of the Central Powers for their own reasons, such as the radical Irish Nationalists who launched the Easter Rising in Dublin in April 1916; they referred to their \"gallant allies in Europe\". However, the majority of Irish Nationalists supported the British and allied war effort up until 1916 when the Irish political landscape was changing. In 1914, Józef Piłsudski was permitted by Germany and Austria-Hungary to form independent Polish legions. Piłsudski wanted his legions to help the Central Powers defeat Russia and then side with France and the UK and win the war with them.\n\nBulgaria signed an armistice with the Allies on 29 September 1918, following a successful Allied advance in Macedonia. The Ottoman Empire followed suit on 30 October 1918 in the face of British and Arab gains in Palestine and Syria. Austria and Hungary concluded ceasefires separately during the first week of November following the disintegration of the Habsburg Empire and the Italian offensive at Vittorio Veneto; Germany signed the armistice ending the war on the morning of 11 November 1918 after the Hundred Days Offensive, and a succession of advances by New Zealand, Australian, Canadian, Belgian, British, French and US forces in north-eastern France and Belgium. There was no unified treaty ending the war; the Central Powers were dealt with in separate treaties.\n+ Central Powers by date of armistice\n!class=\"unsortable\" Flag\n! Name !! Date\nstyle=\"padding-left:2.0em;\"\n+ Central Powers treaties\n!class=\"unsortable\" Flag\n! Name !! Treaty of\n\nBULLET::::- Diplomatic history of World War I\nBULLET::::- International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)\nBULLET::::- Allies of World War I\nBULLET::::- Home front during World War I covering all major countries\n\nBULLET::::- Akin, Yigit. \"When the War Came Home: The Ottomans' Great War and the Devastation of an Empire\" (2018)\nBULLET::::- Aksakal, Mustafa. \"The Ottoman Road to War in 1914: The Ottoman Empire and the First World War\" (2010).\nBULLET::::- Brandenburg, Erich. (1927) \"From Bismarck to the World War: A History of German Foreign Policy 1870–1914\" (1927) online.\nBULLET::::- Clark, Christopher. \"The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914\" (2013)\nBULLET::::- Craig, Gordon A. \"The World War I alliance of the Central Powers in retrospect: The military cohesion of the alliance.\" \"Journal of Modern History\" 37.3 (1965): 336-344. online\nBULLET::::- Dedijer, Vladimir. \"The Road to Sarajevo\"(1966), comprehensive history of the assassination with detailed material on the Austrian Empire and Serbia.\nBULLET::::- Fay, Sidney B. \"The Origins of the World War\" (2 vols in one. 2nd ed. 1930). online, passim\nBULLET::::- Gooch, G. P. \"Before The War Vol II \" (1939) pp 373-447 on Berchtold online free\nBULLET::::- Hall, Richard C. \"Bulgaria in the First World War.\" \"Historian\" 73.2 (2011): 300-315. online\nBULLET::::- Hamilton, Richard F. and Holger H. Herwig, eds. \"Decisions for War, 1914-1917\" (2004), scholarly essays on Serbia, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France, Britain, Japan, Ottoman Empire, Italy, the United States, Bulgaria, Romania, and Greece.\nBULLET::::- Herweg, Holger H. \"The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary 1914–1918\" (2009).\nBULLET::::- Herweg, Holger H., and Neil Heyman. \"Biographical Dictionary of World War I\" (1982).\nBULLET::::- Hubatsch, Walther. \"Germany and the Central Powers in the World War, 1914- 1918\" (1963) online\nBULLET::::- Jarausch, Konrad Hugo. “Revising German History: Bethmann-Hollweg Revisited.” \"Central European History\" 21#3 (1988): 224-243, historiography in JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Pribram, A. F. \"Austrian Foreign Policy, 1908–18\" (1923) pp 68–128.\nBULLET::::- Rich, Norman. \"Great Power Diplomacy: 1814-1914\" (1991), comprehensive survey\nBULLET::::- Schmitt, Bernadotte E. \"The coming of the war, 1914\" (2 vol 1930) comprehensive history online vol 1; online vol 2, esp vol 2 ch 20 pp 334-382\nBULLET::::- Strachan, Hew. \"The First World War: Volume I: To Arms\" (2003).\nBULLET::::- Tucker, Spencer C., ed. \"The European Powers in the First World War: An Encyclopedia \" (1996) 816pp\nBULLET::::- Watson, Alexander. \"Ring of Steel: Germany and Austria-Hungary in World War I\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- Wawro, Geoffrey. \"A Mad Catastrophe: The Outbreak of World War I and the Collapse of the Habsburg Empire\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- Williamson, Samuel R. \"Austria-Hungary and the Origins of the First World War\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- Zametica, John. \"Folly and malice: the Habsburg empire, the Balkans and the start of World War One\" (London: Shepheard–Walwyn, 2017). 416pp.\n"}
{"id": "6675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6675", "title": "Conservatism", "text": "Conservatism\n\nConservatism is a political and social philosophy promoting traditional social institutions in the context of culture and civilization. The central tenets of conservatism include tradition, organic society, hierarchy, authority, and property rights. Conservatives seek to preserve a range of institutions such as religion, parliamentary government, and property rights, with the aim of emphasizing social stability and continuity. The more traditional elements—reactionaries—oppose modernism and seek a return to \"the way things were\".\n\nThe first established use of the term in a political context originated in 1818 with François-René de Chateaubriand during the period of Bourbon Restoration that sought to roll back the policies of the French Revolution. Historically associated with right-wing politics, the term has since been used to describe a wide range of views. There is no single set of policies regarded as conservative because the meaning of conservatism depends on what is considered traditional in a given place and time. Thus conservatives from different parts of the world—each upholding their respective traditions—may disagree on a wide range of issues. Edmund Burke, an 18th-century politician who opposed the French Revolution, but supported the American Revolution, is credited as one of the main theorists of conservatism in Great Britain in the 1790s.\n\nAccording to Quintin Hogg, the chairman of the British Conservative Party in 1959: \"Conservatism is not so much a philosophy as an attitude, a constant force, performing a timeless function in the development of a free society, and corresponding to a deep and permanent requirement of human nature itself.\" In contrast to the tradition-based definition of conservatism, some political theorists such as Corey Robin define conservatism primarily in terms of a general defense of social and economic inequality. From this perspective, conservatism is less an attempt to uphold traditional institutions and more, \"a meditation on—and theoretical rendition of—the felt experience of having power, seeing it threatened, and trying to win it back\". Conversely, some conservatives may argue that they are seeking less to protect their own power than they are seeking to protect “inalienable rights” and promote norms and rules that they believe should stand timeless and eternal, applying to each citizen. \n\nLiberal conservatism incorporates the classical liberal view of minimal government intervention in the economy. Individuals should be free to participate in the market and generate wealth without government interference. However, individuals cannot be thoroughly depended on to act responsibly in other spheres of life, therefore liberal conservatives believe that a strong state is necessary to ensure law and order and social institutions are needed to nurture a sense of duty and responsibility to the nation. Liberal conservatism is a variant of conservatism that is strongly influenced by liberal stances.\n\nAs these latter two terms have had different meanings over time and across countries, liberal conservatism also has a wide variety of meanings. Historically, the term often referred to the combination of economic liberalism, which champions \"laissez-faire\" markets, with the classical conservatism concern for established tradition, respect for authority and religious values. It contrasted itself with classical liberalism, which supported freedom for the individual in both the economic and social spheres.\n\nOver time, the general conservative ideology in many countries adopted economic liberal arguments and the term liberal conservatism was replaced with conservatism. This is also the case in countries where liberal economic ideas have been the tradition such as the United States and are thus considered conservative. In other countries where liberal conservative movements have entered the political mainstream, such as Italy and Spain, the terms liberal and conservative may be synonymous. The liberal conservative tradition in the United States combines the economic individualism of the classical liberals with a Burkean form of conservatism (which has also become part of the American conservative tradition, such as in the writings of Russell Kirk).\n\nA secondary meaning for the term liberal conservatism that has developed in Europe is a combination of more modern conservative (less traditionalist) views with those of social liberalism. This has developed as an opposition to the more collectivist views of socialism. Often this involves stressing what are now conservative views of free market economics and belief in individual responsibility, with social liberal views on defence of civil rights, environmentalism and support for a limited welfare state. In continental Europe, this is sometimes also translated into English as social conservatism.\n\nConservative liberalism is a variant of liberalism that combines liberal values and policies with conservative stances. The roots of conservative liberalism are found at the beginning of the history of liberalism. Until the two World Wars, in most European countries the political class was formed by conservative liberals, from Germany to Italy. Events after World War I brought the more radical version of classical liberalism to a more conservative (i.e. more moderate) type of liberalism.\n\nLibertarian conservatism describes certain political ideologies most prominently within the United States which combine libertarian economic issues with aspects of conservatism. Its four main branches are constitutionalism, paleolibertarianism, small government conservatism and Christian libertarianism. They generally differ from paleoconservatives, in that they favor more personal and economic freedom.\n\nAgorists such as Samuel Edward Konkin III labeled libertarian conservatism right-libertarianism.\n\nIn contrast to paleoconservatives, libertarian conservatives support strict \"laissez-faire\" policies such as free trade, opposition to any national bank and opposition to business regulations. They are vehemently opposed to environmental regulations, corporate welfare, subsidies and other areas of economic intervention.\n\nMany conservatives, especially in the United States, believe that the government should not play a major role in regulating business and managing the economy. They typically oppose efforts to charge high tax rates and to redistribute income to assist the poor. Such efforts, they argue, do not properly reward people who have earned their money through hard work.\n\nFiscal conservatism is the economic philosophy of prudence in government spending and debt. In his \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\", Edmund Burke argued that a government does not have the right to run up large debts and then throw the burden on the taxpayer: [I]t is to the property of the citizen, and not to the demands of the creditor of the state, that the first and original faith of civil society is pledged. The claim of the citizen is prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity. The fortunes of individuals, whether possessed by acquisition or by descent or in virtue of a participation in the goods of some community, were no part of the creditor's security, expressed or implied...[T]he public, whether represented by a monarch or by a senate, can pledge nothing but the public estate; and it can have no public estate except in what it derives from a just and proportioned imposition upon the citizens at large.\n\nNational conservatism is a political term used primarily in Europe to describe a variant of conservatism which concentrates more on national interests than standard conservatism as well as upholding cultural and ethnic identity, while not being outspokenly nationalist or supporting a far-right approach. In Europe, national conservatives are usually eurosceptics.\n\nNational conservatism is heavily oriented towards the traditional family and social stability as well as in favour of limiting immigration. As such, national conservatives can be distinguished from economic conservatives, for whom free market economic policies, deregulation and fiscal conservatism are the main priorities. Some commentators have identified a growing gap between national and economic conservatism: \"[M]ost parties of the Right [today] are run by economic conservatives who, in varying degrees, have marginalized social, cultural, and national conservatives\". National conservatism is also related to traditionalist conservatism.\n\nTraditionalist conservatism is a political philosophy emphasizing the need for the principles of natural law and transcendent moral order, tradition, hierarchy and organic unity, agrarianism, classicism and high culture as well as the intersecting spheres of loyalty. Some traditionalists have embraced the labels \"reactionary\" and \"counterrevolutionary\", defying the stigma that has attached to these terms since the Enlightenment. Having a hierarchical view of society, many traditionalist conservatives, including a few Americans, defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement.\n\nCultural conservatives support the preservation of the heritage of one nation, or of a shared culture that is not defined by national boundaries. The shared culture may be as divergent as Western culture or Chinese culture. In the United States, the term \"cultural conservative\" may imply a conservative position in the culture war. Cultural conservatives hold fast to traditional ways of thinking even in the face of monumental change. They believe strongly in traditional values and traditional politics and often have an urgent sense of nationalism.\n\nSocial conservatism is distinct from cultural conservatism, although there are some overlaps. Social conservatives may believe that society is built upon a fragile network of relationships which need to be upheld through duty, traditional values and established institutions; and that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or behaviours. A social conservative wants to preserve traditional morality and social mores, often by opposing what they consider radical policies or social engineering. Social change is generally regarded as suspect.\n\nA second meaning of the term social conservatism developed in the Nordic countries and continental Europe, where it refers to liberal conservatives supporting modern European welfare states.\n\nSocial conservatives (in the first meaning of the phrase) in many countries generally favour the pro-life position in the abortion controversy and oppose human embryonic stem cell research (particularly if publicly funded); oppose both eugenics and human enhancement (transhumanism) while supporting bioconservatism; support a traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman; view the nuclear family model as society's foundational unit; oppose expansion of civil marriage and child adoption to couples in same-sex relationships; promote public morality and traditional family values; oppose atheism, especially militant atheism, secularism and the separation of church and state; support the prohibition of drugs, prostitution and euthanasia; and support the censorship of pornography and what they consider to be obscenity or indecency. Most conservatives in the United States support the death penalty.\n\nReligious conservatism principally apply the teachings of particular religions to politics, sometimes by merely proclaiming the value of those teachings, at other times by having those teachings influence laws.\n\nIn most democracies, political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values. Religious conservatives typically oppose abortion, homosexual behavior, drug use, and sexual activity outside of marriage. In some cases, conservative values are grounded in religious beliefs, and conservatives seek to increase the role of religion in public life.\n\nPaternalistic conservatism is a strand in conservatism which reflects the belief that societies exist and develop organically and that members within them have obligations towards each other. There is particular emphasis on the paternalistic obligation of those who are privileged and wealthy to the poorer parts of society. Since it is consistent with principles such as organicism, hierarchy and duty, it can be seen as an outgrowth of traditional conservatism. Paternal conservatives support neither the individual nor the state in principle, but are instead prepared to support either or recommend a balance between the two depending on what is most practical.\n\nIt stresses the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty, support of limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation of markets in the interests of both consumers and producers. Paternalistic conservatism first arose as a distinct ideology in the United Kingdom under Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli's \"One Nation\" Toryism. There have been a variety of one nation conservative governments. In the United Kingdom, the Prime Ministers Disraeli, Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Winston Churchill, and Harold Macmillan were one nation conservatives.\n\nIn Germany, during the 19th-century German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck adopted policies of state-organized compulsory insurance for workers against sickness, accident, incapacity and old age. Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a conservative agenda called the \"New Course\".\n\nIn the United States, the administration of President William Howard Taft was a progressive conservative and he described himself as \"a believer in progressive conservatism\" and President Dwight D. Eisenhower declared himself an advocate of \"progressive conservatism\".\n\nIn Canada, a variety of conservative governments have been part of the Red tory tradition, with Canada's former major conservative party being named the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada from 1942 to 2003. In Canada, the Prime Ministers Arthur Meighen, R. B. Bennett, John Diefenbaker, Joe Clark, Brian Mulroney, and Kim Campbell led Red tory federal governments.\n\nAuthoritarian conservatism refers to autocratic regimes that center their ideology around conservative nationalism, rather than ethnic nationalism, though certain racial components such as antisemitism may exist. Authoritarian conservative movements show strong devotion towards religion, tradition and culture while also expressing fervent nationalism akin to other far-right nationalist movements. Examples of authoritarian conservative leaders include António de Oliveira Salazar and Engelbert Dollfuss. Authoritarian conservative movements were prominent in the same era as fascism, with which it sometimes clashed. Although both ideologies shared core values such as nationalism and had common enemies such as communism and materialism, there was nonetheless a contrast between the traditionalist nature of authoritarian conservatism and the revolutionary, palingenetic and populist nature of fascism—thus it was common for authoritarian conservative regimes to suppress rising fascist and National Socialist movements. The hostility between the two ideologies is highlighted by the struggle for power for the National Socialists in Austria, which was marked by the assassination of Engelbert Dollfuss.\n\nSociologist Seymour Martin Lipset has examined the class basis of right-wing extremist politics in the 1920–1960 era. He reports:\n\nIn Great Britain, conservative ideas (though not yet called that) emerged in the Tory movement during the Restoration period (1660–1688). Toryism supported a hierarchical society with a monarch who ruled by divine right. Tories opposed the idea that sovereignty derived from the people and rejected the authority of parliament and freedom of religion. Robert Filmer's \"Patriarcha: or the Natural Power of Kings\" (published posthumously in 1680, but written before the English Civil War of 1642–1651) became accepted as the statement of their doctrine. However, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 destroyed this principle to some degree by establishing a constitutional government in England, leading to the hegemony of the Tory-opposed Whig ideology. Faced with defeat, the Tories reformed their movement, now holding that sovereignty was vested in the three estates of Crown, Lords and Commons rather than solely in the Crown. Toryism became marginalized during the long period of Whig ascendancy in the 18th century.\nConservatives typically see Richard Hooker (1554–1600) as the founding father of conservatism, along with the Marquess of Halifax (1633–1695), David Hume (1711–1776) and Edmund Burke (1729–1797). Halifax promoted pragmatism in government whilst Hume argued against political rationalism and utopianism. Burke served as the private secretary to the Marquis of Rockingham and as official pamphleteer to the Rockingham branch of the Whig party. Together with the Tories, they were the conservatives in the late 18th century United Kingdom. Burke's views were a mixture of liberal and conservative. He supported the American Revolution of 1765–1783, but abhorred the violence of the French Revolution (1789–1799). He accepted the liberal ideals of private property and the economics of Adam Smith (1723–1790), but thought that economics should remain subordinate to the conservative social ethic, that capitalism should be subordinate to the medieval social tradition and that the business class should be subordinate to aristocracy. He insisted on standards of honor derived from the medieval aristocratic tradition and saw the aristocracy as the nation's natural leaders. That meant limits on the powers of the Crown, since he found the institutions of Parliament to be better informed than commissions appointed by the executive. He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of religious toleration. Burke justified the social order on the basis of tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species and he valued community and social harmony over social reforms. Burke was a leading theorist in his day, finding extreme idealism (either Tory or Whig) an endangerment to broader liberties and (like Hume) rejecting abstract reason as an unsound guide for political theory. Despite their influence on future conservative thought, none of these early contributors were explicitly involved in Tory politics. Hooker lived in the 16th century, long before the advent of toryism, whilst Hume was an apolitical philosopher and Halifax similarly politically independent. Burke described himself as a Whig.\n\nShortly after Burke's death in 1797, conservatism revived as a mainstream political force as the Whigs suffered a series of internal divisions. This new generation of conservatives derived their politics not from Burke, but from his predecessor, the Viscount Bolingbroke (1678–1751), who was a Jacobite and traditional Tory, lacking Burke's sympathies for Whiggish policies such as Catholic emancipation and American independence (famously attacked by Samuel Johnson in \"Taxation No Tyranny\"). In the first half of the 19th century, many newspapers, magazines, and journals promoted loyalist or right-wing attitudes in religion, politics and international affairs. Burke was seldom mentioned, but William Pitt the Younger (1759–1806) became a conspicuous hero. The most prominent journals included \"The Quarterly Review\", founded in 1809 as a counterweight to the Whigs' \"Edinburgh Review\" and the even more conservative \"Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine\". Sack finds that the \"Quarterly Review\" promoted a balanced Canningite toryism as it was neutral on Catholic emancipation and only mildly critical of Nonconformist Dissent; it opposed slavery and supported the current poor laws; and it was \"aggressively imperialist\". The high-church clergy of the Church of England read the \"Orthodox Churchman's Magazine\" which was equally hostile to Jewish, Catholic, Jacobin, Methodist and Unitarian spokesmen. Anchoring the ultra Tories, \"Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine\" stood firmly against Catholic emancipation and favoured slavery, cheap money, mercantilism, the Navigation Acts and the Holy Alliance.\n\nConservatism evolved after 1820, embracing free trade in 1846 and a commitment to democracy, especially under Disraeli. The effect was to significantly strengthen conservatism as a grassroots political force. Conservatism no longer was the philosophical defense of the landed aristocracy, but had been refreshed into redefining its commitment to the ideals of order, both secular and religious, expanding imperialism, strengthened monarchy and a more generous vision of the welfare state as opposed to the punitive vision of the Whigs and liberals. As early as 1835, Disraeli attacked the Whigs and utilitarians as slavishly devoted to an industrial oligarchy, while he described his fellow Tories as the only \"really democratic party of England\" and devoted to the interests of the whole people. Nevertheless, inside the party there was a tension between the growing numbers of wealthy businessmen on the one side and the aristocracy and rural gentry on the other. The aristocracy gained strength as businessmen discovered they could use their wealth to buy a peerage and a country estate.\n\nAlthough conservatives opposed attempts to allow greater representation of the middle class in parliament, they conceded that electoral reform could not be reversed and promised to support further reforms so long as they did not erode the institutions of church and state. These new principles were presented in the Tamworth Manifesto of 1834, which historians regard as the basic statement of the beliefs of the new Conservative Party.\nSome conservatives lamented the passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of \"noblesse oblige\" had promoted respect from the lower classes. They saw the Anglican Church and the aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth. They worked toward legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing. This viewpoint would later be called Tory democracy. However, since Burke, there has always been tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy business class.\n\nIn 1834, Tory Prime Minister Robert Peel issued the Tamworth Manifesto in which he pledged to endorse moderate political reform. This marked the beginning of the transformation of British conservatism from High Tory reactionism towards a more modern form based on \"conservation\". The party became known as the Conservative Party as a result, a name it has retained to this day. However, Peel would also be the root of a split in the party between the traditional Tories (led by the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli) and the \"Peelites\" (led first by Peel himself, then by the Earl of Aberdeen). The split occurred in 1846 over the issue of free trade, which Peel supported, versus protectionism, supported by Derby. The majority of the party sided with Derby whilst about a third split away, eventually merging with the Whigs and the radicals to form the Liberal Party. Despite the split, the mainstream Conservative Party accepted the doctrine of free trade in 1852.\n\nIn the second half of the 19th century, the Liberal Party faced political schisms, especially over Irish Home Rule. Leader William Gladstone (himself a former Peelite) sought to give Ireland a degree of autonomy, a move that elements in both the left and right-wings of his party opposed. These split off to become the Liberal Unionists (led by Joseph Chamberlain), forming a coalition with the Conservatives before merging with them in 1912. The Liberal Unionist influence dragged the Conservative Party towards the left as Conservative governments passing a number of progressive reforms at the turn of the 20th century. By the late 19th century, the traditional business supporters of the Liberal Party had joined the Conservatives, making them the party of business and commerce.\n\nAfter a period of Liberal dominance before the First World War, the Conservatives gradually became more influential in government, regaining full control of the cabinet in 1922. In the inter-war period, conservatism was the major ideology in Britain as the Liberal Party vied with the Labour Party for control of the left. After the Second World War, the first Labour government (1945–1951) under Clement Attlee embarked on a program of nationalization of industry and the promotion of social welfare. The Conservatives generally accepted those policies until the 1980s.\nIn the 1980s, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, guided by neoliberal economics, reversed many of Labour's programmes. The Conservative Party also adopt soft eurosceptic politics, and oppose Federal Europe. Other conservative political parties, such as the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP, founded in 1993), Northern Ireland's Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) and the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP, founded in 1971), began to appear, although they have yet to make any significant impact at Westminster (, the DUP comprises the largest political party in the ruling coalition in the Northern Ireland Assembly), and since 2017 the DUP has provided support for the Conservative minority government.\n\nAnother form of conservatism developed in France in parallel to conservatism in Britain. It was influenced by Counter-Enlightenment works by men such as Joseph de Maistre and Louis de Bonald. Many continental or traditionalist conservatives do not support separation of church and state, with most supporting state recognition of and cooperation with the Catholic Church, such as had existed in France before the Revolution.\n\nEventually, conservatives added Gaullism, patriotism, and nationalism to the list of traditional values they support. Conservatives were the first to embrace nationalism, which was previously associated with liberalism and the Revolution in France.\n\nConservatism developed alongside nationalism in Germany, culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War, the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871 and the simultaneous rise of Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage. Bismarck's \"balance of power\" model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th century. His \"revolutionary conservatism\" was a conservative state-building strategy designed to make ordinary Germans—not just the Junker elite—more loyal to state and emperor, he created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s. According to Kees van Kersbergen and Barbara Vis, his strategy was: \n\nBismarck also enacted universal male suffrage in the new German Empire in 1871. He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory after he left office in 1890.\n\nWith the rise of Nazism in 1933, agrarian movements faded and was supplanted by a more command-based economy and forced social integration. Though Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the support of many German industrialists, prominent traditionalists openly and secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide and attacks on organized religion, including Claus von Stauffenberg, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Henning von Tresckow, Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen and the monarchist Carl Friedrich Goerdeler.\n\nMore recently, the work of conservative Christian Democratic Union leader and Chancellor Helmut Kohl helped bring about German reunification, along with the closer European integration in the form of the Maastricht Treaty.\n\nToday, German conservatism is often associated with politicians such as Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose tenure has been marked by attempts to save the common European currency (Euro) from demise. The German conservatives are divided under Merkel due to the refugee crisis in Germany and many conservatives in the CDU/CSU oppose the refugee and migrant policies developed under Merkel.\n\nAmerican conservatism is a broad system of political beliefs in the United States that is characterized by respect for American traditions, support for Judeo-Christian values, economic liberalism, anti-communism and a defense of Western culture. Liberty within the bounds of conformity to conservatism is a core value, with a particular emphasis on strengthening the free market, limiting the size and scope of government and opposition to high taxes and government or labor union encroachment on the entrepreneur.\n\nThe major conservative party in the United States is the Republican Party, also known as the GOP (Grand Old Party). American conservatives consider individual liberty, as long as it conforms to conservative values, small government, deregulation of the government, economic liberalism, and free trade, as the fundamental traits of democracy, which contrasts with modern American liberals, who generally place a greater value on social equality and social justice.\n\nConservative political parties vary widely from country to country in the goals they wish to achieve. Both conservative and liberal parties tend to favor private ownership of property, in opposition to communist, socialist and green parties, which favor communal ownership or laws requiring social responsibility on the part of property owners. Where conservatives and liberals differ is primarily on social issues. Conservatives tend to reject behavior that does not conform to some social norm. Modern conservative parties often define themselves by their opposition to liberal or labor parties. The United States usage of the term \"conservative\" is unique to that country.\n\nAccording to Alan Ware, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom retained viable conservative parties into the 1980s. Ware said that Australia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malta, New Zealand, Spain, and the United States had no conservative parties, although they had either Christian democrats or liberals as major right-wing parties. Canada, Ireland and Portugal had right-wing political parties that defied categorization: the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada; Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and Progressive Democrats in Ireland; and the Social Democratic Party of Portugal. Since then, the Swiss People's Party has moved to the extreme right and is no longer considered to be conservative.\n\nKlaus von Beyme, who developed the method of party categorization, found that no modern Eastern European parties could be considered conservative, although the communist and communist-successor parties had strong similarities.\n\nIn Italy, which was united by liberals and radicals (\"Risorgimento\"), liberals, not conservatives, emerged as the party of the right. In the Netherlands, conservatives merged into a new Christian democratic party in 1980. In Austria, Germany, Portugal and Spain, conservatism was transformed into and incorporated into fascism or the far-right. In 1940, all Japanese parties were merged into a single fascist party. Following the war, Japanese conservatives briefly returned to politics, but were largely purged from public office.\n\nLouis Hartz explained the absence of conservatism in Australia or the United States as a result of their settlement as radical or liberal fragments of Great Britain. Although he said English Canada had a negligible conservative influence, subsequent writers claimed that loyalists opposed to the American Revolution brought a Tory ideology into Canada. Hartz explained conservatism in Quebec and Latin America as a result of their settlement as feudal societies. The American conservative writer Russell Kirk provided the opinion that conservatism had been brought to the United States and interpreted the American Revolution as a \"conservative revolution\".\n\nConservative elites have long dominated Latin American nations. Mostly, this has been achieved through control of and support for civil institutions, the church and the armed forces, rather than through party politics. Typically, the church was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution. Where national conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government. However, in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved. Chile, Colombia and Venezuela are examples of nations that developed strong conservative parties. Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador and Peru are examples of nations where this did not occur. The Conservative Party of Venezuela disappeared following the Federal Wars of 1858–1863. Chile's conservative party, the National Party, disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did not re-emerge as a political force following the subsequent return to democracy.\n\nHaving its roots in the conservative Catholic Party, the Christian People's Party retained a conservative edge through the twentieth century, supporting the king in the Royal Question, supporting nuclear family as the cornerstone of society, defending Christian education, and opposing euthanasia. The Christian People's Party dominated politics in post-war Belgium. In 1999, the party's support collapsed, and it became the country's fifth-largest party. Currently, the N-VA (nieuw-vlaamse alliantie/New Flemish Alliance) is the largest party in Belgium.\n\nCanada's conservatives had their roots in the loyalists Tories who left America after the American Revolution. They developed in the socio-economic and political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th century and had the support of the business, professional and established Church (Anglican) elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec. Holding a monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the \"Family Compact\" in Ontario and the \"Chateau Clique\" in Quebec. John A. Macdonald's successful leadership of the movement to confederate the provinces and his subsequent tenure as prime minister for most of the late 19th century rested on his ability to bring together the English-speaking Protestant oligarchy and the ultramontane Catholic hierarchy of Quebec and to keep them united in a conservative coalition.\n\nThe conservatives combined pro-market liberalism and Toryism. They generally supported an activist government and state intervention in the marketplace and their policies were marked by \"noblesse oblige\", a paternalistic responsibility of the elites for the less well-off. From 1942, the party was known as the Progressive Conservatives until 2003, when the national party merged with the Canadian Alliance to form the Conservative Party of Canada.\n\nThe conservative Union Nationale governed the province of Quebec in periods from 1936 to 1960 and in a close alliance with English Canadian business elites and the Catholic Church. This period, known as the Great Darkness, ended with the Quiet Revolution and the party went into terminal decline.\n\nThe modern Conservative Party of Canada has rebranded conservatism and under the leadership of Stephen Harper, the Conservative Party added more conservative policies.\n\nThe Colombian Conservative Party, founded in 1849, traces its origins to opponents of General Francisco de Paula Santander's 1833–1837 administration. While the term \"liberal\" had been used to describe all political forces in Colombia, the conservatives began describing themselves as \"conservative liberals\" and their opponents as \"red liberals\". From the 1860s until the present, the party has supported strong central government; supported the Catholic Church, especially its role as protector of the sanctity of the family; and opposed separation of church and state. Its policies include the legal equality of all men, the citizen's right to own property and opposition to dictatorship. It has usually been Colombia's second largest party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest.\n\nFounded in 1915, the Conservative People's Party of Denmark. was the successor of \"Højre\" (literally \"Right\"). The conservative party led the government coalition from 1982 to 1993. The party was a junior partner in coalition with the Liberals from 2001 to 2011. The party is preceded by 11 years by the Young Conservatives (KU), today the youth movement of the party. The party suffered a major defeat in the parliamentary elections of September 2011 in which the party lost more than half of its seat and also lost governmental power. A liberal cultural policy dominated during the post-war period. However, by the 1990s, disagreements regarding immigrants from entirely different cultures ignited a conservative backlash.\n\nThe conservative party in Finland is the National Coalition Party (in Finnish \"Kansallinen Kokoomus\", \"Kok\"). The party was founded in 1918 when several monarchist parties united. Although in the past the party was right-wing, today it is a moderate liberal conservative party. While the party advocates economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market economy.\n\nConservatism in France focused on the rejection of the secularism of the French Revolution, support for the role of the Catholic Church and the restoration of the monarchy. The monarchist cause was on the verge of victory in the 1870s, but then collapsed because the proposed king refused to fly the tri-colored flag. Religious tensions heightened in the 1890–1910 era, but moderated after the spirit of unity in fighting the First World War. An extreme form of conservatism characterized the Vichy regime of 1940–1944 with heightened antisemitism, opposition to individualism, emphasis on family life and national direction of the economy.\nFollowing the Second World War, conservatives in France supported Gaullist groups and have been nationalistic and emphasized tradition, order and the regeneration of France. Gaullists held divergent views on social issues. The number of conservative groups, their lack of stability and their tendency to be identified with local issues defy simple categorization. Conservatism has been the major political force in France since the Second World War. Unusually, post-war French conservatism was formed around the personality of a leader, Charles de Gaulle; and did not draw on traditional French conservatism, but on the Bonapartism tradition. Gaullism in France continues under The Republicans (formerly Union for a Popular Movement), which was previously led by Nicolas Sarkozy, a conservative figure in France. The word \"conservative\" itself is a term of abuse in France.\n\nThe main inter-war conservative party was called the People's Party (PP), which supported constitutional monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party. Both it and the Liberal party were suppressed by the authoritarian, arch-conservative and royalist 4th of August Regime of Ioannis Metaxas in 1936–1941. The PP was able to re-group after the Second World War as part of a United Nationalist Front which achieved power campaigning on a simple anticommunist, ultranationalist platform during the Greek Civil War (1946–1949). However, the vote received by the PP declined during the so-called \"Centrist Interlude\" in 1950–1952. In 1952, Marshal Alexandros Papagos created the Greek Rally as an umbrella for the right-wing forces. The Greek Rally came to power in 1952 and remained the leading party in Greece until 1963—after Papagos' death in 1955 reformed as the National Radical Union under Konstantinos Karamanlis. Right-wing governments backed by the palace and the army overthrew the Centre Union government in 1965 and governed the country until the establishment of the far-right Regime of the Colonels (1967–1974). After the regime's collapse in August 1974, Karamanlis returned from exile to lead the government and founded the New Democracy party. The new conservative party had four objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus, to reestablish and solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government and to make a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics.\n\nThe Independent Greeks, a newly formed political party in Greece, has also supported conservatism, particularly national and religious conservatism. The Founding Declaration of the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises in the preservation of the Greek state and its sovereignty, the Greek people and the Greek Orthodox Church.\n\nFounded in 1924 as the Conservative Party, Iceland's Independence Party adopted its current name in 1929 after the merger with the Liberal Party. From the beginning, they have been the largest vote-winning party, averaging around 40%. They combined liberalism and conservatism, supported nationalization of infrastructure and opposed class conflict. While mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments supportive of state intervention and protectionism. Unlike other Scandanivian conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class following. After the financial crisis in 2008, the party has sunk to a lower support level around 20–25%.\n\nLuxembourg's major Christian democratic conservative party, the Christian Social People's Party (CSV or PCS), was formed as the Party of the Right in 1914 and adopted its present name in 1945. It was consistently the largest political party in Luxembourg, and dominated politics throughout the 20th century.\n\nThe Conservative Party of Norway (Norwegian: Høyre, literally \"right\") was formed by the old upper class of state officials and wealthy merchants to fight the populist democracy of the Liberal Party, but lost power in 1884, when parliamentarian government was first practised. It formed its first government under parliamentarism in 1889 and continued to alternate in power with the Liberals until the 1930s, when Labour became the dominant political party. It has elements both of paternalism, stressing the responsibilities of the state, and of economic liberalism. It first returned to power in the 1960s. During Kåre Willoch's premiership in the 1980s, much emphasis was laid on liberalizing the credit and housing market, and abolishing the NRK TV and radio monopoly, while supporting law and order in criminal justice and traditional norms in education\n\nSweden's conservative party, the Moderate Party, was formed in 1904, two years after the founding of the Liberal Party. The party emphasizes tax reductions, deregulation of private enterprise and privatization of schools, hospitals, and kindergartens.\n\nThere are a number of conservative parties in Switzerland's parliament, the Federal Assembly. These include the largest, the Swiss People's Party (SVP), the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP) and the Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland (BDP), which is a splinter of the SVP created in the aftermath to the election of Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf as Federal Council. The right-wing parties have a majority in the Federal Assembly.\n\nThe Swiss People's Party (SVP or UDC) was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders and Citizens, formed in 1917 and the smaller Swiss Democratic Party, formed in 1942. The SVP emphasized agricultural policy and was strong among farmers in German-speaking Protestant areas. As Switzerland considered closer relations with the European Union in the 1990s, the SVP adopted a more militant protectionist and isolationist stance. This stance has allowed it to expand into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas. The Anti-Defamation League, a non-Swiss lobby group based in the United States has accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality and welfare benefits, awakening antisemitism and racism. The Council of Europe has called the SVP \"extreme right\", although some scholars dispute this classification. For instance, Hans-Georg Betz describes it as \"populist radical right\". The SVP is the largest party since 2003.\n\nAccording to historian James Sack, English conservatives celebrate Edmund Burke as their intellectual father. Burke was affiliated with the Whig Party which eventually became the Liberal Party, but the modern Conservative Party is generally thought to derive from the Tory party and the MPs of the modern conservative party are still frequently referred to as Tories.\n\nWhile conservatism has been seen as an appeal to traditional, hierarchical society, some writers such as Samuel P. Huntington see it as situational. Under this definition, conservatives are seen as defending the established institutions of their time.\n\nThe Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism. It is liberal in the sense of economics. Other conservative parties are the National Party of Australia, a sister party of the Liberals, Family First Party, Democratic Labor Party, Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party, Australian Conservatives, and the Katter's Australian Party.\n\nThe second largest party in the country is the Australian Labor Party and its dominant faction is Labor Right, a socially conservative element. Australia undertook significant economic reform under the Labor Party in the mid-1980s. Consequently, issues like protectionism, welfare reform, privatization and deregulation are no longer debated in the political space as they are in Europe or North America. Moser and Catley explain: \"In America, 'liberal' means left-of-center, and it is a pejorative term when used by conservatives in adversarial political debate. In Australia, of course, the conservatives are in the Liberal Party\". Jupp points out that, \"[the] decline in English influences on Australian reformism and radicalism, and appropriation of the symbols of Empire by conservatives continued under the Liberal Party leadership of Sir Robert Menzies, which lasted until 1966\".\n\nConservatism in Brazil originates from the cultural and historical tradition of Brazil, whose cultural roots are Luso-Iberian and Roman Catholic. Brazilian conservatism from the 20th century on includes names such as Gerardo Melo Mourão and Otto Maria Carpeaux in literature; Oliveira Lima and Oliveira Torres in historiography; Sobral Pinto and Miguel Reale in law; Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira and Father Paulo Ricardo in the Catholic Church; Roberto Campos and Mario Henrique Simonsen in economics; Carlos Lacerda in the political arena; and Olavo de Carvalho in philosophy. Brazilian Labour Renewal Party, Patriota, Progressistas, Social Christian Party and Social Liberal Party are the conservative parties in Brazil.\n\nIn India, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by Narendra Modi, represent conservative politics. The BJP is the largest right-wing conservative party in the world. It promotes cultural nationalism, Hindu Nationalism, an aggressive foreign policy against Pakistan and a conservative social and fiscal policy.\n\nAfter World War II, in Italy the conservative parties were mainly represented by the Christian Democracy (DC) party, which government form the foundation of the Republic until the party's dissolution in 1994. Officially, DC refused the ideology of conservatism, but in many aspects, for example family values, it was a typical social conservative party.\n\nIn 1994, the media tycoon and entrepreneur Silvio Berlusconi founded the liberal conservative party Forza Italia (FI). Berlusconi won three elections in 1994, 2001 and 2008, governing the country for almost ten years as Prime Minister. Forza Italia formed a coalition with right-wing regional party Lega Nord while in government.\n\nBesides FI, now the conservative ideas are mainly expressed by the New Centre-Right party led by Angelino Alfano, Berlusconi formed a new party, which is a rebirth of Forza Italia, thuds founding a new conservative movement. Alfano served as Minister of Foreign Affairs. After the 2018 election, Lega Nord and the Five Star Movement formed the current right-wing populist government.\n\nUnder Vladimir Putin, the dominant leader since 1999, Russia has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural and political matters, both at home and abroad. Putin has attacked globalism and economic liberalism. Russian conservatism is unique in some respects as it supports Economic intervention with a mixed economy, with a strong nationalist sentiment and social conservatism with its views being largely populist. Russian conservatism as a result opposes libertarian ideals such as the aforementioned concept of economic liberalism found in other conservative movements around the world. Putin has as a result promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club, founded in 2012 by Aleksandr Prokhanov, stresses Russian nationalism, the restoration of Russia's historical greatness and systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies. Vladislav Surkov, a senior government official, has been one of the key ideologists during Putin's presidency.\n\nIn cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Mark Woods provides specific examples of how the Church under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine. More broadly, \"The New York Times\" reports in September 2016 how that Church's policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives:\n\nSouth Korea's major conservative party, the Liberty Korea Party, has changed its form throughout its history. First it was the Democratic-Republican Party (1963–1980) and its head was Park Chung-hee, who seized power in a 1961 military coup d'état and ruled as an unelected military strongman until his formal election as President in 1963. He was President for 16 years until his assassination on 26 October 1979. The Democratic Justice Party inherited the same ideology as the Democratic-Republican Party. Its head, Chun Doo-hwan, also gained power through a coup and his followers called themselves the Hanahae. The Democratic Justice Party changed its form and acted to suppress the opposition party and to follow the people's demand for direct elections. The party's Roh Tae-woo became the first President who was elected through direct election. The next form of the major conservative party was the Democratic-Liberal Party and again through election its second leader, Kim Young-sam, became the fourteenth President of Korea. When the conservative party was beaten by the opposition party in the general election, it changed its form again to follow the party members' demand for reforms. It became the New Korean Party, but it changed again one year later since the President Kim Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the International Monetary Fund. It changed its name to Grand National Party (GNP). Since the late Kim Dae-jung assumed the presidency in 1998, GNP had been the opposition party until Lee Myung-bak won the presidential election of 2007.\n\nThe meaning of \"conservatism\" in the United States has little in common with the way the word is used elsewhere. As Ribuffo (2011) notes, \"what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism\". Since the 1950s, conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with the Republican Party. However, during the era of segregation, many Southern Democrats were conservatives and they played a key role in the conservative coalition that largely controlled domestic policy in Congress from 1937 to 1963. The conservative Democrats continued to have influence in the US politics until 1994's Republican Revolution, when the American South shifted from solid Democrat to solid Republican, while maintaining its conservative values.\n\nMajor priorities within American conservatism include support for the traditional family, law and order, the right to bear arms, Christian values, anti-communism and a defense of \"Western civilization from the challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments\". Economic conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited regulation and free enterprise. Some social conservatives see traditional social values threatened by secularism, so they support school prayer and oppose abortion and homosexuality. Neoconservatives want to expand American ideals throughout the world and show a strong support for Israel. Paleoconservatives, in opposition to multiculturalism, press for restrictions on immigration. Most US conservatives prefer Republicans over Democrats and most factions favor a strong foreign policy and a strong military. The conservative movement of the 1950s attempted to bring together these divergent strands, stressing the need for unity to prevent the spread of \"godless communism\", which Reagan later labeled an \"evil empire\". During the Reagan administration, conservatives also supported the so-called \"Reagan Doctrine\" under which the US as part of a Cold War strategy provided military and other support to guerrilla insurgencies that were fighting governments identified as socialist or communist. The Reagan administration also adopted neoliberalism and trickle-down economics, as well as Reaganomics, which made for economic growth in the 1980s, fueled by trillion-dollar deficits.\n\nOther modern conservative positions include opposition to big government and opposition to environmentalism. On average, American conservatives desire tougher foreign policies than liberals do. Economic liberalism, deregulation and social conservatism are main principles of the Republican Party.\n\nThe Tea Party movement, founded in 2009, has proven a large outlet for populist American conservative ideas. Their stated goals include rigorous adherence to the US constitution, lower taxes, and opposition to a growing role for the federal government in health care. Electorally, it was considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the US House of Representatives in 2010.\n\nThis is a broad checklist of modern conservatism in seven countries.\n! !! France !! Italy!! Russia  Poland  United Kingdom  United States  Israel\nMain parties  The Republicans, Debout la France, National Rally  Forza Italia, League, Brothers of Italy, Direction Italy, Popular Alternative  United Russia, Liberal Democratic Party  Law and Justice, United Poland, Agreement, National Movement Conservative Party, Brexit Party, Democratic Unionist Party, Ulster Unionist Party  Republican Party  Likud, Israel Beitenu, Yamina, Shas, United Torah Judaism\nGovernment  Strong defenders of republicanism. Opposed to federalism. Proponents of presidentialism and federalism.  Strong defenders of historical Russian sphere of influence.Celebratory of Russia's Tsarist and Soviet strong-man rule.  Proponents of presidentialism. Opposed to federalism.  Defends monarchism and unionism.Rejects republicanism.Supports unelected House of Lords chamber.Defends first-past-the-post voting system.Originally opposed to, but now accepting of Scottish Devolution and Welsh Devolution.To Merge between the United Kingdom and the Isle of Man as a whole Country.  Supports federalism and republicanism.  Opposed to federalism. Proponents of presidentialism and Zionism.\nState control Bonapartism, Gaullism.Small sized, but centralized state.  FI, LN: small decentralized state.FdI, NCR, and CR: small centralized state.  UR: statism. Strong, powerful, centralized state.LDPR: strong, powerful, centralized imperialist state Strong, centralized state.Allegations of statism and authoritarianism.  Small centralized state.  Small, minimal, decentralized state particularly at federal level.Strongly influenced by libertarianism.  Small, semi-central state.\nSocial views  Rule of law, traditionalism, authority, liberty, promotion of traditional gender roles, public health care.Strongly supportive of French culture, Francophone, and against Americanisation.Some members are critical of abortion.  Traditionalism, opposition to immigration, criticism of multiculturalism, individualism, cult of personality, law and order, against abortion, same-sex marriage, civil unions, and euthanasia. Supportive of legal prostitution.Critics of the Italian constitution and the Italian judiciary  Rule of law, authority, cult of personality, state unity, public unity, law and order, traditionalism.Against modernism, LGBT rights, and Western culture.  Promotion of traditional gender roles and Catholicism, opposes abortion, euthanasia, in-vitro fertilization, civil unions, same-sex marriage. Highly critical of LGBT rights.Anti-communism. \nReligious views  Defends secularism.Influenced by Catholic social teaching.  Critics of laicism, influenced by the Catholic Church  Strong adherents to the Russian Orthodox Church.  Strong adherents to the Catholic Church.  High Anglicanism.Presbyterianism in Scotland and Northern Ireland.  The 2012 Republican platform states: \"We support the public display of the Ten Commandments as a reflection of our history and of our country's Judeo-Christian heritage.\" Heavily influenced by Evangelical Protestantism in southern and midwestern states, and Mormonism in western states.  Heavily influenced by Orthodox Judaism.\nEconomic views  LR and DLR: social market economy, distributism, nationalisation of major industries, loosely influenced by neoliberalism, moderate welfare system.FN: nationalisation of major industries, protectionism, and moderate re-distribution of wealth, with pro-market minority faction.  Mixture of neoliberalism, protectionism, low taxation, opposition to wealth taxes  Mixture of state regulation and market freedoms, nationalisation only of strategic industries, low taxation, moderate re-distribution of wealth, rejection of communism.  Mixture of statism and market reforms. Moderate taxation, moderate re-distribution of wealth.\nInternational government  LR: supportive of the United Nations and NATO. Supportive of the European Union.FN, DLR, and MPF: sceptical about the United Nations, NATO, and the European Union.  FI, NCR, and CR: supportive of NATO, various factions are moderately supportive or sceptical about the EU.LN and FdI: sceptical about the EU and NATO.Supportive of Commonwealth of Independent States and the Eurasian Economic Union.Sceptical about the United Nations and the European Union, and critical of NATO.  Atlanticism. Mostly supportive of NATO, various factions are soft- and strong-eurosceptic.  Supportive of the United Nations, NATO, and the Commonwealth. Sceptical about the European Union.  Supportive of NATO and the so-called \"regime change\".Critical of the United Nations.  Critical of the United Nations and sceptical of the European Union.\nMilitary Issues  Opposed to nuclear disarmament.  Opposed to nuclear disarmament.  Opposed to nuclear disarmament.  In favour of nuclear disarmament.  Opposed to nuclear disarmament.  Opposed to nuclear disarmament.  Opposed to nuclear disarmament.\nInternational affairs  LR: interventionist, favor closer ties with the United States. FN, MPF, and DLR: non-interventionist, strong scepticism in relations with the United States.All support closer ties with Russia.  Factions are variously interventionist or non-interventionist. Support closer ties with the United States, Israel, and Russia. Interventionist, strong scepticism in relations with the United States, Georgia, and Ukraine. Support strong relations with other CIS countries, India, Syria, Iran, and China.  Strong scepticism in relations with Germany and Russia, majority support strong relations with the United States. Conservatives, UUP, and DUP: interventionist, favour closer ties with Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Indonesia, Georgia and Ukraine.UKIP: non-interventionis.All favour closer ties with the United States, Indonesia, other Anglosphere states, and Israel. Factions are variously interventionist or non-interventionist. Strong scepticism in relations with China, Cuba, Russia, and Iran. Favor close ties with Israel, the United Kingdom, and Saudi Arabia.  Interventionist. Strong scepticism in relations with Iran, Turkey, and Palestine. Favors closer ties with the United States, India, and Russia.\n\nFollowing the Second World War, psychologists conducted research into the different motives and tendencies that account for ideological differences between left and right. The early studies focused on conservatives, beginning with Theodor W. Adorno's \"The Authoritarian Personality\" (1950) based on the F-scale personality test. This book has been heavily criticized on theoretical and methodological grounds, but some of its findings have been confirmed by further empirical research.\n\nIn 1973, British psychologist Glenn Wilson published an influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying conservative beliefs is \"fear of uncertainty\". A meta-analysis of research literature by Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski and Sulloway in 2003 found that many factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure, contribute to the degree of one's political conservatism and its manifestations in decision-making. A study by Kathleen Maclay stated these traits \"might be associated with such generally valued characteristics as personal commitment and unwavering loyalty\". The research also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, liberals are more tolerant of it.\n\nAccording to psychologist Bob Altemeyer, individuals who are politically conservative tend to rank high in right-wing authoritarianism (RWA) on his RWA scale. This finding was echoed by Adorno. A study done on Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party supporters. However, a 2005 study by H. Michael Crowson and colleagues suggested a moderate gap between RWA and other conservative positions: \"The results indicated that conservatism is not synonymous with RWA\".\n\nPsychologist Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the idea that a high social dominance orientation (SDO) is strongly correlated with conservative political views and opposition to social engineering to promote equality, though Pratto's findings have been highly controversial as Pratto and her colleagues found that high SDO scores were highly correlated with measures of prejudice. However, David J. Schneider argued for a more complex relationships between the three factors, writing \"correlations between prejudice and political conservative are reduced virtually to zero when controls for SDO are instituted, suggesting that the conservatism–prejudice link is caused by SDO\". Conservative political theorist Kenneth Minogue criticized Pratto's work, saying: \"It is characteristic of the conservative temperament to value established identities, to praise habit and to respect prejudice, not because it is irrational, but because such things anchor the darting impulses of human beings in solidities of custom which we do not often begin to value until we are already losing them. Radicalism often generates youth movements, while conservatism is a condition found among the mature, who have discovered what it is in life they most value\".\n\nA 1996 study on the relationship between racism and conservatism found that the correlation was stronger among more educated individuals, though \"anti-Black affect had essentially no relationship with political conservatism at any level of educational or intellectual sophistication\". They also found that the correlation between racism and conservatism could be entirely accounted for by their mutual relationship with social dominance orientation.\n\nA 2008 research report found that conservatives are happier than liberals and that—as income inequality increases—this difference in relative happiness increases because conservatives (more than liberals) possess an ideological buffer against the negative hedonic effects of economic inequality.\n\nBULLET::::- Hainsworth, Paul. \"The extreme right in Western Europe\", Abingdon, OXON: Routledge, 2008 .\nBULLET::::- Osterling, Jorge P. \"Democracy in Colombia: Clientelist Politics and Guerrilla Warfare\". New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1989 .\nBULLET::::- Winthrop, Norman and Lovell, David W. \"Varieties of Conservative Theory\". In Winthrop, Norman. \"Liberal Democratic Theory and Its Critics\". Beckenham, Kent: Croom Helm Ltd., 1983 .\n\nBULLET::::- Blee, Kathleen M. and Sandra McGee Deutsch, eds. \"Women of the Right: Comparisons and Interplay Across Borders\" (Penn State University Press; 2012) 312 pages; scholarly essays giving a global perspective on women in right-wing politics.\nBULLET::::- Blinkhorn, Martin. \"Fascists and Conservatives: The Radical Right and the Establishment in Twentieth-Century Europe\". 1990.\nBULLET::::- Crowson, N. J. \"Facing Fascism: The Conservative Party and the European Dictators, 1935–1940\". 1997.\nBULLET::::- Crunden, Robert Morse. \"The Superfluous Men: Critics of American Culture, 1900–1945\". 1999.\nBULLET::::- Dalrymple, Theodore. \"Our Culture, What's Left of It: The Mandarins and the Masses\". 2005.\nBULLET::::- Fryer, Russell G. \"Recent Conservative Political Thought: American Perspectives\". 1979.\nBULLET::::- Gottfried, Paul E. \"The Conservative Movement\". 1993.\nBULLET::::- Nugent, Neill. \"The British Right: Conservative and Right Wing Politics in Britain\". 1977.\nBULLET::::- Sunic, Sunic and de Benoist, Alain. \"Against Democracy and Equality: The European New Right\". 2011.\nBULLET::::- Honderich, Ted. \"Conservatism\". 1990.\nBULLET::::- Kirl, Russell. \"The Conservative Mind\". 2001.\nBULLET::::- Bacchetta, Paola. \"Right-Wing Women: From Conservatives to Extremists Around the World\". 2002.\nBULLET::::- Nisbet, Robert. \"Conservatism: Dream and Reality\". 2001.\nBULLET::::- O'Sullivan, Noel. \"Conservatism\". 1976.\nBULLET::::- Scruton, Roger. \"The Meaning of Conservatism\". 1980.\nBULLET::::- Woodwards, E.L. \"Three Studies In European Conservatism. Mettenich: Guizot: The Catholic Church In The Nineteenth Century\" (1923) online\n\nBULLET::::- Schneider, Gregory L. ed. \"Conservatism in America Since 1930: A Reader\". 2003.\nBULLET::::- Witonski, Peter, ed. \"The Wisdom of Conservatism\". (4 vol. Arlington House; 1971). 2396 pages; worldwide sources.\n\nBULLET::::- Conservatism an article by \"Encyclopædia Britannica\".\nBULLET::::- \"Conservatism\". Kieron O'Hara. Reaktion Books. 2011 (reviewed in \"The Montreal Review\").\n"}
{"id": "6677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6677", "title": "Classical liberalism", "text": "Classical liberalism\n\nClassical liberalism is a political ideology and a branch of liberalism which advocates civil liberties under the rule of law with an emphasis on economic freedom. Closely related to economic liberalism, it developed in the early 19th century, building on ideas from the previous century as a response to urbanisation and to the Industrial Revolution in Europe and the United States. Notable individuals whose ideas contributed to classical liberalism include John Locke, Jean-Baptiste Say, Thomas Robert Malthus and David Ricardo. It drew on the classical economic ideas espoused by Adam Smith in Book One of \"The Wealth of Nations\" and on a belief in natural law, utilitarianism and progress. The term classical liberalism has often been applied in retrospect to distinguish earlier 19th-century liberalism from social liberalism.\n\nCore beliefs of classical liberals included new ideas—which departed from both the older conservative idea of society as a family and from the later sociological concept of society as a complex set of social networks. Classical liberals believe that individuals are \"egoistic, coldly calculating, essentially inert and atomistic\" and that society is no more than the sum of its individual members.\n\nClassical liberals agreed with Thomas Hobbes that government had been created by individuals to protect themselves from each other and that the purpose of government should be to minimize conflict between individuals that would otherwise arise in a state of nature. These beliefs were complemented by a belief that laborers could be best motivated by financial incentive. This belief led to the passage of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834, which limited the provision of social assistance, based on the idea that markets are the mechanism that most efficiently leads to wealth. Adopting Thomas Robert Malthus's population theory, they saw poor urban conditions as inevitable, believed population growth would outstrip food production and thus regarded that consequence desirable because starvation would help limit population growth. They opposed any income or wealth redistribution, believing it would be dissipated by the lowest orders.\n\nDrawing on ideas of Adam Smith, classical liberals believed that it is in the common interest that all individuals be able to secure their own economic self-interest. They were critical of what would come to be the idea of the welfare state as interfering in a free market. Despite Smith’s resolute recognition of the importance and value of labor and of laborers, classical liberals selectively criticized labour's group rights being pursued at the expense of individual rights while accepting corporations' rights, which led to inequality of bargaining power. Classical liberals argued that individuals should be free to obtain work from the highest-paying employers while the profit motive would ensure that products that people desired were produced at prices they would pay. In a free market, both labor and capital would receive the greatest possible reward while production would be organized efficiently to meet consumer demand. Classical liberals argued for what they called a minimal state, limited to the following functions:\nBULLET::::- A government to protect individual rights and to provide services that cannot be provided in a free market.\nBULLET::::- A common national defense to provide protection against foreign invaders.\nBULLET::::- Laws to provide protection for citizens from wrongs committed against them by other citizens, which included protection of private property, enforcement of contracts and common law.\nBULLET::::- Building and maintaining public institutions.\nBULLET::::- Public works that included a stable currency, standard weights and measures and building and upkeep of roads, canals, harbors, railways, communications and postal services.\n\nClassical liberals asserted that rights are of a negative nature and therefore stipulate that other individuals and governments are to refrain from interfering with the free market, opposing social liberals who assert that individuals have positive rights, such as the right to vote, the right to an education, the right to health care and the right to a living wage. For society to guarantee positive rights, it requires taxation over and above the minimum needed to enforce negative rights.\n\nCore beliefs of classical liberals did not necessarily include democracy nor government by a majority vote by citizens because \"there is nothing in the bare idea of majority rule to show that majorities will always respect the rights of property or maintain rule of law\". For example, James Madison argued for a constitutional republic with protections for individual liberty over a pure democracy, reasoning that in a pure democracy a \"common passion or interest will, in almost every case, be felt by a majority of the whole [...] and there is nothing to check the inducements to sacrifice the weaker party\".\n\nIn the late 19th century, classical liberalism developed into neo-classical liberalism, which argued for government to be as small as possible to allow the exercise of individual freedom. In its most extreme form, neo-classical liberalism advocated social Darwinism. Right-libertarianism is a modern form of neo-classical liberalism.\n\nFriedrich Hayek identified two different traditions within classical liberalism, namely the British tradition and the French tradition. Hayek saw the British philosophers Bernard Mandeville, David Hume, Adam Smith, Adam Ferguson, Josiah Tucker and William Paley as representative of a tradition that articulated beliefs in empiricism, the common law and in traditions and institutions which had spontaneously evolved but were imperfectly understood. The French tradition included Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Marquis de Condorcet, the Encyclopedists and the Physiocrats. This tradition believed in rationalism and sometimes showed hostility to tradition and religion. Hayek conceded that the national labels did not exactly correspond to those belonging to each tradition since he saw the Frenchmen Montesquieu, Benjamin Constant and Alexis de Tocqueville as belonging to the British tradition and the British Thomas Hobbes, Joseph Priestley, Richard Price and Thomas Paine as belonging to the French tradition. Hayek also rejected the label \"laissez-faire\" as originating from the French tradition and alien to the beliefs of Hume and Smith.\n\nGuido De Ruggiero also identified differences between \"Montesquieu and Rousseau, the English and the democratic types of liberalism\" and argued that there was a \"profound contrast between the two Liberal systems\". He claimed that the spirit of \"authentic English Liberalism\" had \"built up its work piece by piece without ever destroying what had once been built, but basing upon it every new departure\". This liberalism had \"insensibly adapted ancient institutions to modern needs\" and \"instinctively recoiled from all abstract proclamations of principles and rights\". Ruggiero claimed that this liberalism was challenged by what he called the \"new Liberalism of France\" that was characterised by egalitarianism and a \"rationalistic consciousness\".\n\nIn 1848, Francis Lieber distinguished between what he called \"Anglican and Gallican Liberty\". Lieber asserted that \"independence in the highest degree, compatible with safety and broad national guarantees of liberty, is the great aim of Anglican liberty, and self-reliance is the chief source from which it draws its strength\". On the other hand, Gallican liberty \"is sought in government [...]. [T]he French look for the highest degree of political civilization in organizational, that is, in the highest degree of interference by public power\".\n\nClassical liberalism in Britain began under Whigs and radicals, and was heavily influenced by French physiocracy. It was a new political ideology that stressed both rights and obligations. Whiggery had become a dominant ideology following the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and was associated with supporting the British Parliament, upholding the rule of law, and defending landed property. The origins of rights were seen as being in an ancient constitution, which had existed from time immemorial. These rights, which some Whigs considered to include freedom of the press and freedom of speech, were justified by custom rather than as natural rights. These Whigs believed that the power of the executive had to be constrained. While they supported limited suffrage, they saw voting as a privilege rather than as a right. However, there was no consistency in Whig ideology and diverse writers including John Locke, David Hume, Adam Smith and Edmund Burke were all influential among Whigs, although none of them was universally accepted.\n\nFrom the 1790s to the 1820s, British radicals concentrated on parliamentary and electoral reform, emphasising natural rights and popular sovereignty. Richard Price and Joseph Priestley adapted the language of Locke to the ideology of radicalism. The radicals saw parliamentary reform as a first step toward dealing with their many grievances, including the treatment of Protestant Dissenters, the slave trade, high prices, and high taxes.\n\nThere was greater unity among classical liberals than there had been among Whigs. Classical liberals were committed to individualism, liberty, and equal rights. They believed these goals required a free economy with minimal government interference. Some elements of Whiggery were uncomfortable with the commercial nature of classical liberalism. These elements became associated with conservatism.\nClassical liberalism was the dominant political theory in Britain from the early 19th century until the First World War. Its notable victories were the Catholic Emancipation Act of 1829, the Reform Act of 1832 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. The Anti-Corn Law League brought together a coalition of liberal and radical groups in support of free trade under the leadership of Richard Cobden and John Bright, who opposed aristocratic privilege, militarism, and public expenditure and believed that the backbone of Great Britain was the yeoman farmer. Their policies of low public expenditure and low taxation were adopted by William Ewart Gladstone when he became Chancellor of the Exchequer and later Prime Minister. Classical liberalism was often associated with religious dissent and nonconformism.\n\nAlthough classical liberals aspired to a minimum of state activity, they accepted the principle of government intervention in the economy from the early 19th century on, with passage of the Factory Acts. From around 1840 to 1860, \"laissez-faire\" advocates of the Manchester School and writers in \"The Economist\" were confident that their early victories would lead to a period of expanding economic and personal liberty and world peace, but would face reversals as government intervention and activity continued to expand from the 1850s. Jeremy Bentham and James Mill, although advocates of \"laissez-faire\", non-intervention in foreign affairs, and individual liberty, believed that social institutions could be rationally redesigned through the principles of utilitarianism. The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli rejected classical liberalism altogether and advocated Tory democracy. By the 1870s, Herbert Spencer and other classical liberals concluded that historical development was turning against them. By the First World War, the Liberal Party had largely abandoned classical liberal principles.\n\nThe changing economic and social conditions of the 19th century led to a division between neo-classical and social (or welfare) liberals, who while agreeing on the importance of individual liberty differed on the role of the state. Neo-classical liberals, who called themselves \"true liberals\", saw Locke's \"Second Treatise\" as the best guide and emphasised \"limited government\" while social liberals supported government regulation and the welfare state. Herbert Spencer in Britain and William Graham Sumner were the leading neo-classical liberal theorists of the 19th century. Neo-classical liberalism has continued into the contemporary era, with writers such as John Rawls. The evolution from classical to social/welfare liberalism is for example reflected in Britain in the evolution of the thought of John Maynard Keynes.\n\nIn the United States, liberalism took a strong root because it had little opposition to its ideals, whereas in Europe liberalism was opposed by many reactionary or feudal interests such as the nobility, the aristocracy, the landed gentry, the established church and the aristocratic army officers.\n\nThomas Jefferson adopted many of the ideals of liberalism, but in the Declaration of Independence changed Locke's \"life, liberty and property\" to the more socially liberal \"Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness\". As the United States grew, industry became a larger and larger part of American life; and during the term of its first populist President, Andrew Jackson, economic questions came to the forefront. The economic ideas of the Jacksonian era were almost universally the ideas of classical liberalism. Freedom, according to classical liberals, was maximised when the government took a \"hands off\" attitude toward the economy. \n\nHistorian Kathleen G. Donohue argues:\n\nLeading magazine \"The Nation\" espoused liberalism every week starting in 1865 under the influential editor Edwin Lawrence Godkin (1831–1902).\n\nThe ideas of classical liberalism remained essentially unchallenged until a series of depressions, thought to be impossible according to the tenets of classical economics, led to economic hardship from which the voters demanded relief. In the words of William Jennings Bryan, \"You shall not crucify the American farmer on a cross of gold\". Classical liberalism remained the orthodox belief among American businessmen until the Great Depression.\n\nThe Great Depression of the 1930s saw a sea change in liberalism, with priority shifting from the producers to consumers. Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal represented the dominance of modern liberalism in politics for decades. In the words of Arthur Schlesinger Jr.: \n\nAlan Wolfe summarizes the viewpoint that there is a continuous liberal understanding that includes both Adam Smith and John Maynard Keynes: \n\nThe view that modern liberalism is a continuation of classical liberalism is not universally shared. James Kurth, Robert E. Lerner, John Micklethwait, Adrian Wooldridge and several other political scholars have argued that classical liberalism still exists today, but in the form of American conservatism. According to Deepak Lal, only in the United States does classical liberalism—through American conservatives—continue to be a significant political force.\n\nCentral to classical liberal ideology was their interpretation of John Locke's \"Second Treatise of Government\" and \"A Letter Concerning Toleration\", which had been written as a defence of the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Although these writings were considered too radical at the time for Britain's new rulers, they later came to be cited by Whigs, radicals and supporters of the American Revolution. However, much of later liberal thought was absent in Locke's writings or scarcely mentioned and his writings have been subject to various interpretations. For example, there is little mention of constitutionalism, the separation of powers and limited government.\n\nJames L. Richardson identified five central themes in Locke's writing: individualism, consent, the concepts of the rule of law and government as trustee, the significance of property and religious toleration. Although Locke did not develop a theory of natural rights, he envisioned individuals in the state of nature as being free and equal. The individual, rather than the community or institutions, was the point of reference. Locke believed that individuals had given consent to government and therefore authority derived from the people rather than from above. This belief would influence later revolutionary movements.\n\nAs a trustee, government was expected to serve the interests of the people, not the rulers; and rulers were expected to follow the laws enacted by legislatures. Locke also held that the main purpose of men uniting into commonwealths and governments was for the preservation of their property. Despite the ambiguity of Locke's definition of property, which limited property to \"as much land as a man tills, plants, improves, cultivates, and can use the product of\", this principle held great appeal to individuals possessed of great wealth.\n\nLocke held that the individual had the right to follow his own religious beliefs and that the state should not impose a religion against Dissenters, but there were limitations. No tolerance should be shown for atheists, who were seen as amoral, or to Catholics, who were seen as owing allegiance to the Pope over their own national government.\n\nAdam Smith's \"The Wealth of Nations\", published in 1776, was to provide most of the ideas of economics, at least until the publication of John Stuart Mill's \"Principles of Political Economy\" in 1848. Smith addressed the motivation for economic activity, the causes of prices and the distribution of wealth and the policies the state should follow to maximise wealth.\n\nSmith wrote that as long as supply, demand, prices and competition were left free of government regulation, the pursuit of material self-interest, rather than altruism, would maximise the wealth of a society through profit-driven production of goods and services. An \"invisible hand\" directed individuals and firms to work toward the public good as an unintended consequence of efforts to maximise their own gain. This provided a moral justification for the accumulation of wealth, which had previously been viewed by some as sinful.\n\nHe assumed that workers could be paid wages as low as was necessary for their survival, which was later transformed by David Ricardo and Thomas Robert Malthus into the \"iron law of wages\". His main emphasis was on the benefit of free internal and international trade, which he thought could increase wealth through specialisation in production. He also opposed restrictive trade preferences, state grants of monopolies and employers' organisations and trade unions. Government should be limited to defence, public works and the administration of justice, financed by taxes based on income.\n\nSmith's economics was carried into practice in the nineteenth century with the lowering of tariffs in the 1820s, the repeal of the Poor Relief Act that had restricted the mobility of labour in 1834 and the end of the rule of the East India Company over India in 1858.\n\nIn addition to Smith's legacy, Say's law, Thomas Robert Malthus' theories of population and David Ricardo's iron law of wages became central doctrines of classical economics. The pessimistic nature of these theories provided a basis for criticism of capitalism by its opponents and helped perpetuate the tradition of calling economics the \"dismal science\".\n\nJean-Baptiste Say was a French economist who introduced Smith's economic theories into France and whose commentaries on Smith were read in both France and Britain. Say challenged Smith's labour theory of value, believing that prices were determined by utility and also emphasised the critical role of the entrepreneur in the economy. However, neither of those observations became accepted by British economists at the time. His most important contribution to economic thinking was Say's law, which was interpreted by classical economists that there could be no overproduction in a market and that there would always be a balance between supply and demand. This general belief influenced government policies until the 1930s. Following this law, since the economic cycle was seen as self-correcting, government did not intervene during periods of economic hardship because it was seen as futile.\n\nMalthus wrote two books, \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\" (published in 1798) and \"Principles of Political Economy\" (published in 1820). The second book which was a rebuttal of Say's law had little influence on contemporary economists. However, his first book became a major influence on classical liberalism. In that book, Malthus claimed that population growth would outstrip food production because population grew geometrically while food production grew arithmetically. As people were provided with food, they would reproduce until their growth outstripped the food supply. Nature would then provide a check to growth in the forms of vice and misery. No gains in income could prevent this and any welfare for the poor would be self-defeating. The poor were in fact responsible for their own problems which could have been avoided through self-restraint.\n\nRicardo, who was an admirer of Smith, covered many of the same topics, but while Smith drew conclusions from broadly empirical observations he used deduction, drawing conclusions by reasoning from basic assumptions While Ricardo accepted Smith's labour theory of value, he acknowledged that utility could influence the price of some rare items. Rents on agricultural land were seen as the production that was surplus to the subsistence required by the tenants. Wages were seen as the amount required for workers' subsistence and to maintain current population levels. According to his iron law of wages, wages could never rise beyond subsistence levels. Ricardo explained profits as a return on capital, which itself was the product of labour, but a conclusion many drew from his theory was that profit was a surplus appropriated by capitalists to which they were not entitled.\n\nUtilitarianism provided the political justification for implementation of economic liberalism by British governments, which was to dominate economic policy from the 1830s. Although utilitarianism prompted legislative and administrative reform and John Stuart Mill's later writings on the subject foreshadowed the welfare state, it was mainly used as a justification for \"laissez-faire\".\n\nThe central concept of utilitarianism, which was developed by Jeremy Bentham, was that public policy should seek to provide \"the greatest happiness of the greatest number\". While this could be interpreted as a justification for state action to reduce poverty, it was used by classical liberals to justify inaction with the argument that the net benefit to all individuals would be higher.\n\nClassical liberals saw utility as the foundation for public policies. This broke both with conservative \"tradition\" and Lockean \"natural rights\", which were seen as irrational. Utility, which emphasises the happiness of individuals, became the central ethical value of all liberalism. Although utilitarianism inspired wide-ranging reforms, it became primarily a justification for \"laissez-faire\" economics. However, classical liberals rejected Smith's belief that the \"invisible hand\" would lead to general benefits and embraced Malthus' view that population expansion would prevent any general benefit and Ricardo's view of the inevitability of class conflict. \"Laissez-faire\" was seen as the only possible economic approach and any government intervention was seen as useless and harmful. The Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 was defended on \"scientific or economic principles\" while the authors of the Elizabethan Poor Law of 1601 were seen as not having had the benefit of reading Malthus.\n\nHowever, commitment to \"laissez-faire\" was not uniform and some economists advocated state support of public works and education. Classical liberals were also divided on free trade as Ricardo expressed doubt that the removal of grain tariffs advocated by Richard Cobden and the Anti-Corn Law League would have any general benefits. Most classical liberals also supported legislation to regulate the number of hours that children were allowed to work and usually did not oppose factory reform legislation.\n\nDespite the pragmatism of classical economists, their views were expressed in dogmatic terms by such popular writers as Jane Marcet and Harriet Martineau. The strongest defender of \"laissez-faire\" was \"The Economist\" founded by James Wilson in 1843. \"The Economist\" criticised Ricardo for his lack of support for free trade and expressed hostility to welfare, believing that the lower orders were responsible for their economic circumstances. \"The Economist\" took the position that regulation of factory hours was harmful to workers and also strongly opposed state support for education, health, the provision of water and granting of patents and copyrights.\n\n\"The Economist\" also campaigned against the Corn Laws that protected landlords in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland against competition from less expensive foreign imports of cereal products. A rigid belief in \"laissez-faire\" guided the government response in 1846–1849 to the Great Famine in Ireland, during which an estimated 1.5 million people died. The minister responsible for economic and financial affairs, Charles Wood, expected that private enterprise and free trade, rather than government intervention, would alleviate the famine. The Corn Laws were finally repealed in 1846 by the removal of tariffs on grain which kept the price of bread artificially high, but it came too late to stop the Irish famine, partly because it was done in stages over three years.\n\nSeveral liberals, including Smith and Cobden, argued that the free exchange of goods between nations could lead to world peace. Erik Gartzke states: \"Scholars like Montesquieu, Adam Smith, Richard Cobden, Norman Angell, and Richard Rosecrance have long speculated that free markets have the potential to free states from the looming prospect of recurrent warfare\". American political scientists John R. Oneal and Bruce M. Russett, well known for their work on the democratic peace theory, state: \n\nIn \"The Wealth of Nations\", Smith argued that as societies progressed from hunter gatherers to industrial societies the spoils of war would rise, but that the costs of war would rise further and thus making war difficult and costly for industrialised nations: \nCobden believed that military expenditures worsened the welfare of the state and benefited a small, but concentrated elite minority, summing up British imperialism, which he believed was the result of the economic restrictions of mercantilist policies. To Cobden and many classical liberals, those who advocated peace must also advocate free markets. The belief that free trade would promote peace was widely shared by English liberals of the 19th and early 20th century, leading the economist John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), who was a classical liberal in his early life, to say that this was a doctrine on which he was \"brought up\" and which he held unquestioned only until the 1920s. In his review of a book on Keynes, Michael S. Lawlor argues that it may be in large part due to Keynes' contributions in economics and politics, as in the implementation of the Marshall Plan and the way economies have been managed since his work, \"that we have the luxury of not facing his unpalatable choice between free trade and full employment\". A related manifestation of this idea was the argument of Norman Angell (1872–1967), most famously before World War I in \"The Great Illusion\" (1909), that the interdependence of the economies of the major powers was now so great that war between them was futile and irrational; and therefore unlikely.\n\nBULLET::::- Austrian School\nBULLET::::- Bourbon Democrat\nBULLET::::- Classical economics\nBULLET::::- Classical republicanism\nBULLET::::- Constitutionalism\nBULLET::::- Constitutional liberalism\nBULLET::::- Conservative liberalism\nBULLET::::- Economic liberalism\nBULLET::::- Fiscal conservatism\nBULLET::::- Georgism\nBULLET::::- Jeffersonian democracy\nBULLET::::- Liberal conservatism\nBULLET::::- Liberal democracy\nBULLET::::- Libertarian conservatism\nBULLET::::- Libertarianism\nBULLET::::- List of liberal theorists\nBULLET::::- Modern liberalism\nBULLET::::- Neoclassical liberalism\nBULLET::::- Neoliberalism\nBULLET::::- Night-watchman state\nBULLET::::- Physiocracy\nBULLET::::- Political individualism\nBULLET::::- Rule of law\nBULLET::::- Separation of powers\n\nBULLET::::- Alan Bullock and Maurice Shock, ed. (1967). \"The Liberal Tradition: From Fox to Keynes\". Oxford. Clarendon Press.\nBULLET::::- Katherine Henry (2011). \"Liberalism and the Culture of Security: The Nineteenth-Century Rhetoric of Reform\". University of Alabama Press; draws on literary and other writings to study the debates over liberty and tyranny).\nBULLET::::- Donald Markwell (2006). \"John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace\". Oxford, England. Oxford University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Alan James Mayne (1999). \"From Politics Past to Politics Future: An Integrated Analysis of Current and Emergent Paradigmss\". Westport, Connecticut. Greenwood Publishing Group. .\nBULLET::::- Gustav Pollak, ed. (1915). \"Fifty Years of American Idealism: 1865-1915\"; short history of \"The Nation\" plus numerous excerpts, most by Edwin Lawrence Godkin.\n"}
{"id": "6678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6678", "title": "Cat", "text": "Cat\n\nThe cat (\"Felis catus\") is a small carnivorous mammal. It is the only domesticated species in the family Felidae and often referred to as the domestic cat to distinguish it from wild members of the family. The cat is either a house cat or a farm cat, which are pets, or a feral cat, which ranges freely and avoids human contact.\nHouse cats are valued by humans for companionship and for their ability to hunt rodents. About 60 cat breeds are recognized by various cat registries.\n\nThe cat is similar in anatomy to the other felid species, has a strong flexible body, quick reflexes, sharp teeth and retractable claws adapted to killing small prey. Its night vision and sense of smell are well developed. Cat communication includes vocalizations like meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling and grunting as well as cat-specific body language. It is a solitary hunter, but a social species. It can hear sounds too faint or too high in frequency for human ears, such as those made by mice and other small mammals. It is a predator that is most active at dawn and dusk. It secretes and perceives pheromones.\n\nFemale domestic cats can have kittens from spring to late autumn, with litter sizes ranging from two to five kittens. \nDomestic cats are bred and shown as registered pedigreed cats, a hobby known as cat fancy. Failure to control breeding of pet cats by spaying and neutering, as well as abandonment of pets, resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide, contributing to the extinction of entire bird species, and evoking population control.\n\nIt was long thought that cat domestication was initiated in Egypt, because cats in ancient Egypt were venerated since around 3100 BC.\nHowever, the earliest indication for the taming of an African wildcat (\"F. lybica\") was found in Cyprus, where a cat skeleton was excavated close by a human Neolithic grave dating to around 7500 BC. African wildcats were probably first domesticated in the Near East.\nAs of 2017, the domestic cat was the second-most popular pet in the United States by number of pets owned, after freshwater fish, with 95 million cats owned. In the United Kingdom, around 7.3 million cats lived in more than 4.8 million households as of 2019.\n\nThe origin of the English word 'cat', Old English , is thought to be the Late Latin word , which was first used at the beginning of the 6th century. It was suggested that the word 'cattus' is derived from an Egyptian precursor of Coptic , \"tomcat\", or its feminine form suffixed with .\nThe Late Latin word is also thought to be derived from Afro-Asiatic languages. The Nubian word \"wildcat\" and Nobiin are possible sources or cognates. The Nubian word may be a loan from Arabic ~ . It is \"equally likely that the forms might derive from an ancient Germanic word, imported into Latin and thence to Greek and to Syriac and Arabic\". The word may be derived from Germanic and Northern European languages, and ultimately be borrowed from Uralic, cf. Northern Sami , \"female stoat\", and Hungarian , \"stoat\"; from Proto-Uralic \"*käďwä\", \"female (of a furred animal)\".\n\nThe English \"puss\", extended as \"pussy\" and \"pussycat\", is attested from the 16th century and may have been introduced from Dutch or from Low German , related to Swedish , or Norwegian , . Similar forms exist in Lithuanian and Irish or . The etymology of this word is unknown, but it may have simply arisen from a sound used to attract a cat.\n\nThe scientific name \"Felis catus\" was proposed by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 for a domestic cat.\n\"Felis catus domesticus\" was the scientific name proposed by Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben in 1777.\n\"Felis daemon\" proposed by Konstantin Alekseevich Satunin in 1904 was a black cat specimen from the Transcaucasus, later identified as a domestic cat.\n\nIn 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN) fixed the scientific name for the wildcat as \"F. silvestris\". The same commission ruled that the domestic cat is a distinct taxon \"Felis catus\".\nIt was considered \"F. silvestris catus\", a subspecies of the European wildcat in 2007, following results of phylogenetic research.\n\nIn 2017, the IUCN Cat Classification Taskforce followed the recommendation of the ICZN in regarding the domestic cat as a distinct species.\n\nThe domestic cat is a member of the Felidae, a family that had a common ancestor about 10–15 million years ago.\nThe genus \"Felis\" diverged from the Felidae around 6–7 million years ago.\nResults of phylogenetic research confirm that the wild \"Felis\" species evolved through sympatric or parapatric speciation, whereas the domestic cat evolved through artificial selection. The domesticated cat and its closest wild ancestor are both diploid organisms that possess 38 chromosomes and roughly 20,000 genes.\nThe leopard cat (\"Prionailurus bengalensis\") was tamed independently in China around 5500 BC. This line of partially domesticated cats leaves no trace in the domestic cat populations of today.\n\nThe earliest known indication for a tamed African wildcat was excavated close by a human grave in Shillourokambos, southern Cyprus, dating to about 9,200 to 9,500 years before present. As there is no evidence of native mammalian fauna on Cyprus, the inhabitants of this Neolithic village most likely brought the cat and other wild mammals to the island from the Middle Eastern mainland. Scientists therefore assume that African wildcats were attracted to early human settlements in the Fertile Crescent by rodents, in particular the house mouse (\"Mus musculus\"), and were tamed by Neolithic farmers. This commensal relationship between early farmers and tamed cats lasted thousands of years. As agricultural practices spread, so did tame and domesticated cats. Wildcats of Egypt contributed to the maternal gene pool of the domestic cat at a later time.\nThe earliest known evidence for the occurrence of the domestic cat in Greece dates to around 1200 BC. Greek, Phoenician, Carthaginian and Etruscan traders introduced domestic cats to southern Europe.\nDuring the Roman Empire they were introduced to Corsica and Sardinia before the beginning of the 1st millennium.\nBy the 5th century BC, they were familiar animals around settlements in Magna Graecia and Etruria.\nBy the end of the Roman Empire in the 5th century, the Egyptian domestic cat lineage had arrived in a Baltic Sea port in northern Germany.\n\nDuring domestication, cats have undergone only minor changes in anatomy and behavior, and they are still capable of surviving in the wild. Several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have preadapted them for domestication as pets. These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language, love of play and relatively high intelligence. Captive \"Leopardus\" cats may also display affectionate behavior toward humans, but were not domesticated. House cats often mate with feral cats, producing hybrids such as the Kellas cat in Scotland. Hybridisation between domestic and other Felinae species is also possible.\n\nDevelopment of cat breeds started in the mid 19th century.\nAn analysis of the domestic cat genome revealed that the ancestral wildcat genome was significantly altered in the process of domestication as specific mutations were selected to develop cat breeds. Most breeds are founded on random-bred domestic cats. Genetic diversity of these breeds varies between regions, and is lowest in purebred populations, which show more than 20 deleterious genetic disorders.\n\nThe domestic cat has a smaller skull and shorter bones than the European wildcat.\nIt averages about in head-to-body length and in height, with about long tails. Males are larger than females.\nAdult domestic cats typically weigh between .\n\nCats have seven cervical vertebrae (as do most mammals); 13 thoracic vertebrae (humans have 12); seven lumbar vertebrae (humans have five); three sacral vertebrae (as do most mammals, but humans have five); and a variable number of caudal vertebrae in the tail (humans have only vestigial caudal vertebrae, fused into an internal coccyx). The extra lumbar and thoracic vertebrae account for the cat's spinal mobility and flexibility. Attached to the spine are 13 ribs, the shoulder, and the pelvis. Unlike human arms, cat forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by free-floating clavicle bones which allow them to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their head.\n\nThe cat skull is unusual among mammals in having very large eye sockets and a powerful specialized jaw. Within the jaw, cats have teeth adapted for killing prey and tearing meat. When it overpowers its prey, a cat delivers a lethal neck bite with its two long canine teeth, inserting them between two of the prey's vertebrae and severing its spinal cord, causing irreversible paralysis and death. Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth relative to the size of their jaw, which is an adaptation to their preferred prey of small rodents, which have small vertebrae. The premolar and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently shears meat into small pieces, like a pair of scissors. These are vital in feeding, since cats' small molars cannot chew food effectively, and cats are largely incapable of mastication. Although cats tend to have better teeth than most humans, with decay generally less likely because of a thicker protective layer of enamel, a less damaging saliva, less retention of food particles between teeth, and a diet mostly devoid of sugar, they are nonetheless subject to occasional tooth loss and infection.\n\nThe cat is digitigrade. It walks on the toes, with the bones of the feet making up the lower part of the visible leg. Unlike most mammals, it uses a \"pacing\" gait and moves both legs on one side of the body before the legs on the other side. It registers directly by placing each hind paw close to the track of the corresponding fore paw, minimizing noise and visible tracks. This also provides sure footing for hind paws when navigating rough terrain. As it speeds up walking to trotting, its gait changes to a \"diagonal\" gait: the diagonally opposite hind and fore legs move simultaneously.\n\nCats have protractable and retractable claws. In their normal, relaxed position, the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw's toe pads. This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey. The claws on the fore feet are typically sharper than those on the hind feet. Cats can voluntarily extend their claws on one or more paws. They may extend their claws in hunting or self-defense, climbing, kneading, or for extra traction on soft surfaces. Most cats have five claws on their front paws, and four on their rear paws. The dewclaw is proximal to the other claws. More proximally is a protrusion which appears to be a sixth \"finger\". This special feature of the front paws, on the inside of the wrists has no function in normal walking, but is thought to be an antiskidding device used while jumping. Some breeds of cats are prone to polydactyly. Polydactyly is a mutation of the forelimb. Polydactylous cats occur along North America's northeast coast and in Great Britain.\n\nCats have excellent night vision and can see at only one-sixth the light level required for human vision. This is partly the result of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye's sensitivity to dim light. Large pupils are an adaptation to dim light. The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus bright light without chromatic aberration. At low light, a cat's pupils expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its eyes. However, the domestic cat has rather poor color vision and only two types of cone cells, optimized for sensitivity to blue and yellowish green; its ability to distinguish between red and green is limited. A response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rod cells might be due to a third type of cone. However, this appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision.\n\nThe domestic cat's hearing is most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz. It can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies ranging from 55 Hz to 79,000 Hz. It can hear a range of 10.5 octaves, while humans and dogs can hear ranges of about 9 octaves.\nIts hearing sensitivity is enhanced by its large movable outer ears, the pinnae, which amplify sounds and help detect the location of a noise. It can detect ultrasound, which enables it to detect ultrasonic calls made by rodent prey.\n\nCats have an acute sense of smell, due in part to their well-developed olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa, about in area, which is about twice that of humans. Cats and many other animals have a Jacobson's organ in their mouths that is used in the behavioral process of flehmening. It allows them to sense certain aromas in a way that humans cannot. Cats are sensitive to pheromones such as 3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol, which they use to communicate through urine spraying and marking with scent glands. Many cats also respond strongly to plants that contain nepetalactone, especially catnip, as they can detect that substance at less than one part per billion. About 70–80% of cats are affected by nepetalactone. This response is also produced by other plants, such as silver vine (\"Actinidia polygama\") and the herb valerian; it may be caused by the smell of these plants mimicking a pheromone and stimulating cats' social or sexual behaviors.\n\nCats have relatively few taste buds compared to humans (470 or so versus more than 9,000 on the human tongue). Domestic and wild cats share a gene mutation that keeps their sweet taste buds from binding to sugary molecules, leaving them with no ability to taste sweetness. Their taste buds instead respond to acids, amino acids like protein, and bitter tastes. Cats also have a distinct temperature preference for their food, preferring food with a temperature around which is similar to that of a fresh kill and routinely rejecting food presented cold or refrigerated (which would signal to the cat that the \"prey\" item is long dead and therefore possibly toxic or decomposing).\nTo aid with navigation and sensation, cats have dozens of movable whiskers (vibrissae) over their body, especially their faces. These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents; they also trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage.\n\nMost breeds of cat have a noted fondness for sitting in high places, or perching. A higher place may serve as a concealed site from which to hunt; domestic cats strike prey by pouncing from a perch such as a tree branch. Another possible explanation is that height gives the cat a better observation point, allowing it to survey its territory. A cat falling from heights of up to 3 meters can right itself and land on its paws.\nDuring a fall from a high place, a cat reflexively twists its body and rights itself to land on its feet using its acute sense of balance and flexibility. This reflex is known as the cat righting reflex.\nAn individual cat always rights itself in the same way during a fall, provided it has sufficient time to do so. The height required for this to occur is around .\nCats without a tail also have this reflex.\nSeveral explanations have been proposed for this phenomenon since the late 19th century:\nBULLET::::- Cats rely on conservation of angular momentum.\nBULLET::::- The rotation angle of the front body is larger than that of the rear body.\nBULLET::::- The dynamics of the falling cat have been explained using the Udwadia–Kalaba equation.\n\nOutdoor cats are active both day and night, although they tend to be slightly more active at night. Domestic cats spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their homes, but can range many hundreds of meters from this central point. They establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging from . The timing of cats' activity is quite flexible and varied, which means house cats may be more active in the morning and evening, as a response to greater human activity at these times.\n\nCats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals, especially as they grow older. The daily duration of sleep varies, usually between 12 and 16 hours, with 13 and 14 being the average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours. The term \"cat nap\" for a short rest refers to the cat's tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period. While asleep, cats experience short periods of rapid eye movement sleep often accompanied by muscle twitches, which suggests they are dreaming.\n\nThe social behavior of the domestic cat ranges from widely dispersed individuals to feral cat colonies that gather around a food source, based on groups of co-operating females. Within such groups, one cat is usually dominant over the others. Each cat in a colony holds a distinct territory, with sexually active males having the largest territories, which are about 10 times larger than those of female cats and may overlap with several females' territories. These territories are marked by urine spraying, by rubbing objects at head height with secretions from facial glands, and by defecation. Between these territories are neutral areas where cats watch and greet one another without territorial conflicts. Outside these neutral areas, territory holders usually chase away stranger cats, at first by staring, hissing, and growling and, if that does not work, by short but noisy and violent attacks. Despite some cats cohabiting in colonies, they do not have a social survival strategy, or a pack mentality and always hunt alone.\n\nHowever, some pet cats are poorly socialized. In particular, older cats show aggressiveness towards newly arrived kittens, which include biting and scratching; this type of behavior is known as feline asocial aggression.\n\nLife in proximity to humans and other domestic animals has led to a symbiotic social adaptation in cats, and cats may express great affection toward humans or other animals. Ethologically, the human keeper of a cat functions as a sort of surrogate for the cat's mother. Adult cats live their lives in a kind of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny. Their high-pitched sounds may mimic the cries of a hungry human infant, making them particularly difficult for humans to ignore.\n\nDomestic cats' scent rubbing behavior towards humans or other cats is thought to be a feline means for social bonding.\n\nDomestic cats use many vocalizations for communication, including purring, trilling, hissing, growling/snarling, grunting, and several different forms of meowing. Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood. The tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms in cats. A raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicates hostility. Tail-raising also indicates the cat's position in the group's social hierarchy, with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate ones. Feral cats are generally silent. Nose-to-nose touching is also a common greeting and may be followed by social grooming, which is solicited by one of the cats raising and tilting its head.\n\nPurring may have developed as an evolutionary advantage as a signalling mechanism of reassurance between mother cats and nursing kittens. Post-nursing cats often purr as a sign of contentment: when being petted, becoming relaxed, or eating. The mechanism by which cats purr is elusive. The cat has no unique anatomical feature that is clearly responsible for the sound.\n\nCats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coats to keep them clean. The cat's tongue has backwards-facing spines about 500 μm long, which are called papillae. These contain keratin which makes them rigid so the papillae act like a hairbrush. Some cats, particularly longhaired cats, occasionally regurgitate hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming. These clumps of fur are usually sausage-shaped and about long. Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination of the hair through the gut, as well as regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush.\n\nAmong domestic cats, males are more likely to fight than females. Among feral cats, the most common reason for cat fighting is competition between two males to mate with a female. In such cases, most fights are won by the heavier male. Another common reason for fighting in domestic cats is the difficulty of establishing territories within a small home. Female cats also fight over territory or to defend their kittens. Neutering will decrease or eliminate this behavior in many cases, suggesting that the behavior is linked to sex hormones.\n\nWhen cats become aggressive, they try to make themselves appear larger and more threatening by raising their fur, arching their backs, turning sideways and hissing or spitting. Often, the ears are pointed down and back to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward. They may also vocalize loudly and bare their teeth in an effort to further intimidate their opponent. Fights usually consist of grappling and delivering powerful slaps to the face and body with the forepaws as well as bites. Cats also throw themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponent's belly with their powerful hind legs.\n\nSerious damage is rare, as the fights are usually short in duration, with the loser running away with little more than a few scratches to the face and ears. However, fights for mating rights are typically more severe and injuries may include deep puncture wounds and lacerations. Normally, serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections of scratches and bites, though these can occasionally kill cats if untreated. In addition, bites are probably the main route of transmission of feline immunodeficiency virus. Sexually active males are usually involved in many fights during their lives, and often have decidedly battered faces with obvious scars and cuts to their ears and nose.\n\nThe shape and structure of cats' cheeks is insufficient to suck. They lap with the tongue to draw liquid upwards into their mouths. Lapping at a rate of four times a second, the cat touches the smooth tip of its tongue to the surface of the water, and quickly retracts it like a corkscrew, drawing water upwards.\n\nFree-fed feral cats and house cats consume several small meals in a day. The frequency and size of meals varies between individuals. They select food based on its temperature, smell and texture; they dislike chilled foods and respond most strongly to moist foods rich in amino acids, which are similar to meat. Cats reject novel flavors (a response termed neophobia) and learn quickly to avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant in the past. They also avoid sweet food and milk. Most adult cats are lactose intolerant; the sugar in milk is not easily digested and may cause soft stools or diarrhea. Some also develop odd eating habits and like to eat or chew on things like wool, plastic, cables, paper, string, aluminum foil, or even coal. This condition, pica, can threaten their health, depending on the amount and toxicity of the items eaten.\n\nCats hunt small prey, primarily birds and rodents. and are often used as a form of pest control. Cats use two hunting strategies, either stalking prey actively, or waiting in ambush until an animal comes close enough to be captured. The strategy used depends on the prey species in the area, with cats waiting in ambush outside burrows, but tending to actively stalk birds. Domestic cats are a major predator of wildlife in the United States, killing an estimated 1.4 to 3.7 billion birds and 6.9 to 20.7 billion mammals annually.\nCertain species appear more susceptible than others; for example, 30% of house sparrow mortality is linked to the domestic cat. In the recovery of ringed robins (\"Erithacus rubecula\") and dunnocks (\"Prunella modularis\"), 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation. In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes which prey on cats and other small predators reduces the effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.\nPerhaps the best known element of cats' hunting behavior, which is commonly misunderstood and often appals cat owners because it looks like torture, is that cats often appear to \"play\" with prey by releasing it after capture. This cat and mouse behavior is due to an instinctive imperative to ensure that the prey is weak enough to be killed without endangering the cat.\nAnother poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians. One explanation is that cats adopt humans into their social group and share excess kill with others in the group according to the dominance hierarchy, in which humans are reacted to as if they are at, or near, the top. Another explanation is that they attempt to teach their guardians to hunt or to help their human as if feeding \"an elderly cat, or an inept kitten\". This hypothesis is inconsistent with the fact that male cats also bring home prey, despite males having negligible involvement in raising kittens.\n\nOn islands, birds can contribute as much as 60% of a cat's diet. In nearly all cases, however, the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds, and in some instances, eradication of cats has caused a \"mesopredator release\" effect; where the suppression of top carnivores creates an abundance of smaller predators that cause a severe decline in their shared prey. Domestic cats are, however, known to be a contributing factor to the decline of many species, a factor that has ultimately led, in some cases, to extinction. The South Island piopio, Chatham rail, and the New Zealand merganser are a few from a long list, with the most extreme case being the flightless Lyall's wren, which was driven to extinction only a few years after its discovery.\n\nDomestic cats, especially young kittens, are known for their love of play. This behavior mimics hunting and is important in helping kittens learn to stalk, capture, and kill prey. Cats also engage in play fighting, with each other and with humans. This behavior may be a way for cats to practice the skills needed for real combat, and might also reduce any fear they associate with launching attacks on other animals.\n\nCats also tend to play with toys more when they are hungry. Owing to the close similarity between play and hunting, cats prefer to play with objects that resemble prey, such as small furry toys that move rapidly, but rapidly lose interest. They become habituated to a toy they have played with before. String is often used as a toy, but if it is eaten, it can become caught at the base of the cat's tongue and then move into the intestines, a medical emergency which can cause serious illness, even death. Owing to the risks posed by cats eating string, it is sometimes replaced with a laser pointer's dot, which cats may chase.\n\nFemale cats called queens are polyestrous with several estrus cycles during a year, lasting usually 21 days. They are usually ready to mate between early February and August.\n\nSeveral males called tomcat are attracted to a female in heat. They fight over her, and the victor wins the right to mate. At first, the female rejects the male, but eventually the female allows the male to mate. The female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her because a male cat's penis has a band of about 120–150 backwards-pointing penile spines, which are about long; upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina, which acts to induce ovulation. This act also occurs to clear the vagina of other sperm in the context of a second (or more) mating, thus giving the later males a larger chance of conception.\nAfter mating, the female cleans her vulva thoroughly. If a male attempts to mate with her at this point, the female attacks him. After about 20 to 30 minutes, once the female is finished grooming, the cycle will repeat.\nBecause ovulation is not always triggered by a single mating, females may not be impregnated by the first male with which they mate. Furthermore, cats are superfecund; that is, a female may mate with more than one male when she is in heat, with the result that different kittens in a litter may have different fathers.\n\nThe morula forms 124 hours after conception. At 148 hours, early blastocysts form. At 10–12 days, implantation occurs.\nThe gestation of queens lasts between 64 and 67 days, with an average of 65 days.\nData on reproductive capacity of more than 2,300 free-ranging queens were collected during a study between May 1998 and October 2000. They had one to six kittens per litter, with an average of three kittens. They produced a mean of 1.4 litters per year, but a maximum of three litters in a year. Of 169 kittens, 127 died before they were six months old due to a trauma caused in most cases by dog attacks and road accidents.\nThe first litter is usually smaller than subsequent litters. Kittens are weaned between six and seven weeks of age. Queens normally reach sexual maturity at 5–10 months, and males at 5–7 months. This varies depending on breed. Kittens reach puberty at the age of 9–10 months.\n\nCats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks of age, when they are ready to leave their mother. They can be surgically sterilized (spayed or castrated) as early as seven weeks to limit unwanted reproduction. This surgery also prevents undesirable sex-related behavior, such as aggression, territory marking (spraying urine) in males and yowling (calling) in females. Traditionally, this surgery was performed at around six to nine months of age, but it is increasingly being performed before puberty, at about three to six months. In the United States, about 80% of household cats are neutered.\n\nThe average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades. In the early 1980s, it was about seven years, rising to 9.4 years in 1995 and 15.1 years in 2018. Some cats have been reported as surviving into their 30s, with the oldest known cat, Creme Puff, dying at a verified age of 38.\n\nSpaying or neutering increases life expectancy: one study found neutered male cats live twice as long as intact males, while spayed female cats live 62% longer than intact females. Having a cat neutered confers health benefits, because castrated males cannot develop testicular cancer, spayed females cannot develop uterine or ovarian cancer, and both have a reduced risk of mammary cancer.\n\nDespite widespread concern about the welfare of free-roaming cats, the lifespans of neutered feral cats in managed colonies compare favorably with those of pet cats.\n\nAbout 250 heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats, many similar to human Inborn error of metabolism. The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans, as well as the use of cats as animal models in the study of the human diseases.\nDiseases affecting domestic cats include acute infections, parasitic infestations, injuries, and chronic diseases such as kidney disease, thyroid disease, and arthritis. Vaccinations are available for many infectious diseases, as are treatments to eliminate parasites such as worms and fleas.\n\nThe domestic cat is a cosmopolitan species and occurs across much of the world. It is adaptable and now present on all continents except Antarctica, and on 118 of the 131 main groups of islands—even on isolated islands such as the Kerguelen Islands.\nDue to its ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat, it is among the world's most invasive species.\nAs it is little altered from the wildcat, it can readily interbreed with the wildcat. This hybridization poses a danger to the genetic distinctiveness of some wildcat populations, particularly in Scotland and Hungary and possibly also the Iberian Peninsula. It lives on small islands with no human inhabitants.\nFeral cats can live in forests, grasslands, tundra, coastal areas, agricultural land, scrublands, urban areas, and wetlands.\n\nFeral cats are domestic cats that were born in or have reverted to a wild state. They are unfamiliar with and wary of humans and roam freely in urban and rural areas. The numbers of feral cats is not known, but estimates of the United States feral population range from 25 to 60 million. Feral cats may live alone, but most are found in large colonies, which occupy a specific territory and are usually associated with a source of food. Famous feral cat colonies are found in Rome around the Colosseum and Forum Romanum, with cats at some of these sites being fed and given medical attention by volunteers.\n\nPublic attitudes towards feral cats vary widely, ranging from seeing them as free-ranging pets, to regarding them as vermin. One common approach to reducing the feral cat population is termed \"trap-neuter-return\", where the cats are trapped, neutered, immunized against diseases such as rabies and the feline Panleukopenia and Leukemia viruses, and then released. Before releasing them back into their feral colonies, the attending veterinarian often nips the tip off one ear to mark it as neutered and inoculated, since these cats may be trapped again. Volunteers continue to feed and give care to these cats throughout their lives. Given this support, their lifespans are increased, and behavior and nuisance problems caused by competition for food are reduced.\n\nCats are common pets throughout the world, and their worldwide population exceeds 500 million as of 2007. Although cat guardianship has commonly been associated with women, a 2007 Gallup poll reported that men and women in the United States were equally likely to own a cat.\n\nAs well as being kept as pets, cats are also used in the international fur and leather industries for making coats, hats, blankets, and stuffed toys; and shoes, gloves, and musical instruments respectively (about 24 cats are needed to make a cat-fur coat). This use has been outlawed in the United States, Australia, and the European Union in 2007. Cat pelts have been used for superstitious purposes as part of the practise of witchcraft, and are still made into blankets in Switzerland as folk remedies believed to help rheumatism. In the Western intellectual tradition, the idea of cats as everyday objects have served to illustrate problems of quantum mechanics in the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment.\n\nA few attempts to build a cat census have been made over the years, both through associations or national and international organizations (such as the Canadian Federation of Humane Societies's one) and over the Internet, but such a task does not seem simple to achieve. General estimates for the global population of domestic cats range widely from anywhere between 200 million to 600 million.\nWalter Chandoha made his career photographing cats after his 1949 images of \"Loco\", an especially charming stray taken in, were published around the world. He is reported to have photographed 90,000 cats during his career and maintained an archive of 225,000 images that he drew from for publications during his lifetime.\n\nWhile cat meat is largely taboo in most of the western world, cats are killed for consumption around the world. Countries where people eat cats include Korea, China, Vietnam (though it is an illegal practice there), Switzerland, Peru, Cameroon, and Australia. Cats were eaten in Japan until the 19th century, and cats have historically been consumed during times of famine or warfare in many countries, including France, Spain, and Italy. Killing cats for consumption has been partially outlawed in the United States under the Dog and Cat Meat Trade Prohibition Act of 2018, and it is illegal in South Australia.\n\nA cat show is a judged event in which the owners of cats compete to win titles in various cat-registering organizations by entering their cats to be judged after a breed standard. Both pedigreed and companion (or moggy) cats are admissible, although the rules differ from organization to organization. Cats are compared to a breed standard, and the owners of those judged to be closest to it are awarded a prize. Moggies are judged based on their temperament. Often, at the end of the year, all of the points accrued at various shows are added up and more national and regional titles are awarded.\n\nCats can be infected or infested with viruses, bacteria, fungus, protozoans, arthropods or worms that can transmit diseases to humans. In some cases, the cat exhibits no symptoms of the disease, However, the same disease can then become evident in a human. The likelihood that a person will become diseased depends on the age and immune status of the person. Humans who have cats living in their home or in close association are more likely to become infected, however, those who do not keep cats as pets might also acquire infections from cat feces and parasites exiting the cat's body. Some of the infections of most concern include salmonella, cat-scratch disease and toxoplasmosis.\n\nIn ancient Egypt, cats were worshipped, and the goddess Bastet often depicted in cat form, sometimes taking on the war-like aspect of a lioness. The Greek historian Herodotus reported that killing a cat was forbidden, and when a household cat died, the entire family mourned and shaved their eyebrows. Families took their dead cats to the sacred city of Bubastis, where they were embalmed and buried in sacred repositories. Herodotus expressed astonishment at the domestic cats in Egypt, because he had only ever seen wildcats.\nAncient Greeks and Romans kept weasels as pets, which were seen as the ideal rodent-killers. The earliest unmistakable evidence of the Greeks having domestic cats comes from two coins from Magna Graecia dating to the mid-fifth century BC showing Iokastos and Phalanthos, the legendary founders of Rhegion and Taras respectively, playing with their pet cats. The usual ancient Greek word for 'cat' was \"ailouros\", meaning \"thing with the waving tail\". Cats are rarely mentioned in ancient Greek literature. Aristotle remarked in his \"History of Animals\" that \"female cats are naturally lecherous.\" The Greeks later syncretized their own goddess Artemis with the Egyptian goddess Bastet, adopting Bastet's associations with cats and ascribing them to Artemis. In Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", when the deities flee to Egypt and take animal forms, the goddess Diana turns into a cat. Cats eventually displaced ferrets as the pest control of choice because they were more pleasant to have around the house and were more enthusiastic hunters of mice. During the Middle Ages, many of Artemis's associations with cats were grafted onto the Virgin Mary. Cats are often shown in icons of Annunciation and of the Holy Family and, according to Italian folklore, on the same night that Mary gave birth to Jesus, a cat in Bethlehem gave birth to a kitten. Domestic cats were spread throughout much of the rest of the world during the Age of Discovery, as ships' cats were carried on sailing ships to control shipboard rodents and as good-luck charms.\n\nSeveral ancient religions believed cats are exalted souls, companions or guides for humans, that are all-knowing but mute so they cannot influence decisions made by humans. In Japan, the cat is a symbol of good fortune. In Norse mythology, Freyja, the goddess of love, beauty, and fertility, is depicted as riding a chariot drawn by cats. In Jewish legend, the first cat was living in the house of the first man Adam as a pet that got rid of mice. The cat was once partnering with the first dog before the latter broke an oath they had made which resulted in enmity between the descendants of these two animals. It is also written that neither cats nor foxes are represented in the water, while every other animal has an incarnation species in the water. Although no species are sacred in Islam, cats are revered by Muslims. Some Western writers have stated Muhammad had a favorite cat, Muezza. He is reported to have loved cats so much, \"he would do without his cloak rather than disturb one that was sleeping on it\". The story has no origin in early Muslim writers, and seems to confuse a story of a later Sufi saint, Ahmed ar-Rifa'i, centuries after Muhammad. One of the companions of Muhammad was known as \"Abu Hurayrah\" (Father of the kitten), in reference to his documented affection to cats.\n\nMany cultures have negative superstitions about cats. An example would be the belief that a black cat \"crossing one's path\" leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches' familiars used to augment a witch's powers and skills. The killing of cats in Medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade). In medieval France, cats would be burnt alive as a form of entertainment. According to Norman Davies, the assembled people \"shrieked with laughter as the animals, howling with pain, were singed, roasted, and finally carbonized\".\n\n\"It was the custom to burn a basket, barrel, or sack full of live cats, which was hung from a tall mast in the midst of the bonfire; sometimes a fox was burned. The people collected the embers and ashes of the fire and took them home, believing that they brought good luck. The French kings often witnessed these spectacles and even lit the bonfire with their own hands. In 1648 Louis XIV, crowned with a wreath of roses and carrying a bunch of roses in his hand, kindled the fire, danced at it and partook of the banquet afterwards in the town hall. But this was the last occasion when a monarch presided at the midsummer bonfire in Paris. At Metz midsummer fires were lighted with great pomp on the esplanade, and a dozen cats, enclosed in wicker cages, were burned alive in them, to the amusement of the people. Similarly at Gap, in the department of the Hautes-Alpes, cats used to be roasted over the midsummer bonfire.\"\n\nAccording to a myth in many cultures, cats have multiple lives. In many countries, they are believed to have nine lives, but in Italy, Germany, Greece, Brazil and some Spanish-speaking regions, they are said to have seven lives, while in Turkish and Arabic traditions, the number of lives is six. The myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness cats exhibit to escape life-threatening situations. Also lending credence to this myth is the fact that falling cats often land on their feet, using an instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around. Nonetheless, cats can still be injured or killed by a high fall.\n\nBULLET::::- Aging in cats\nBULLET::::- Ailurophobia\nBULLET::::- Animal testing on cats\nBULLET::::- Animal track\nBULLET::::- Cancer in cats\nBULLET::::- Cat and mouse (cat-and-mouse game)\nBULLET::::- Cat bite\nBULLET::::- Cat burning\nBULLET::::- Cat café\nBULLET::::- Cat intelligence\nBULLET::::- Cat lady\nBULLET::::- Cat lover culture\nBULLET::::- Cats and the Internet\nBULLET::::- Dog–cat relationship\nBULLET::::- Dried cat\nBULLET::::- List of cat documentaries\nBULLET::::- List of cats\nBULLET::::- List of fictional cats and felines\nBULLET::::- Pet door including cat flap\nBULLET::::- Pet first aid\nBULLET::::- Popular cat names\nBULLET::::- Big cat\n\nBULLET::::- Cats in ancient Egypt\nBULLET::::- Cats in Australia\nBULLET::::- Cats in New Zealand\nBULLET::::- Cats in the United States\nBULLET::::- High-Resolution Images of the Cat Brain\nBULLET::::- Biodiversity Heritage Library bibliography for \"Felis catus\"\nBULLET::::- Catpert. The Cat Expert – Cat articles\nBULLET::::- View the cat genome in Ensembl\n"}
{"id": "6681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6681", "title": "Crank", "text": "Crank\n\nCrank may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Crank (mechanism), in mechanical engineering, a bent portion of an axle or shaft, or an arm keyed at right angles to the end of a shaft, by which motion is imparted to or received from it\nBULLET::::- Crankset, the component of a bicycle drivetrain that converts the reciprocating motion of the rider's legs into rotational motion\nBULLET::::- Crankshaft, the part of a piston engine which translates reciprocating linear piston motion into rotation\nBULLET::::- Crank machine, a machine used to deliver hard labour in early Victorian prisons in the United Kingdom\n\nBULLET::::- Crank, Merseyside, a village near Rainford, England\nBULLET::::- Crank Halt railway station in the village of Crank, Merseyside\nBULLET::::- Cranks, Kentucky, United States\n\nBULLET::::- \"Crank\" (film), a 2006 film starring Jason Statham\nBULLET::::- \"\", the 2009 sequel\nBULLET::::- \"Crank\" (Hoodoo Gurus album), 1994\nBULLET::::- \"Crank\" (novel), a 2004 book written by Ellen Hopkins\nBULLET::::- \"Crank\" (song), a 1993 song by the alternative rock band Catherine Wheel\nBULLET::::- \"Crank\" (The Almighty album), the fourth studio album released by Scottish heavy metal band The Almighty\nBULLET::::- Crank! A Record Company, a record label that released albums by indie bands Mineral, The Gloria Record, and Bright Eyes\n\nBULLET::::- Crank (person), a pejorative term used for a person who holds an unshakable belief that most of his or her contemporaries consider to be false.\nBULLET::::- Prank call or crank call, a false telephone call\nBULLET::::- Crank, slang term for powdered substituted amphetamines, especially methamphetamine\n\nBULLET::::- Cranks (restaurant), a chain of English wholefood vegetarian restaurants\nBULLET::::- Crank (surname), a surname, notable people with the surname see there\nBULLET::::- Crank conjecture, a term coined by Freeman Dyson to explain congruence patterns in integer partitions\nBULLET::::- Crank of a partition, of a partition of an integer is a certain integer associated with the partition\n\nBULLET::::- Cranky (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Krank (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "6682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6682", "title": "Clade", "text": "Clade\n\nA clade (from , \"klados\", \"branch\"), also known as monophyletic group, is a group of organisms that consists of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants, and represents a single \"branch\" on the \"tree of life\". Rather than the English term, the equivalent Latin term \"cladus\" (plural \"cladi\") is often used in taxonomical literature.\n\nThe common ancestor may be an individual, a population, a species (extinct or extant), and so on right up to a kingdom and further. Clades are nested, one in another, as each branch in turn splits into smaller branches. These splits reflect evolutionary history as populations diverged and evolved independently. Clades are termed monophyletic (Greek: \"one clan\") groups.\n\nOver the last few decades, the cladistic approach has revolutionized biological classification and revealed surprising evolutionary relationships among organisms. Increasingly, taxonomists try to avoid naming taxa that are not clades; that is, taxa that are not monophyletic. Some of the relationships between organisms that the molecular biology arm of cladistics has revealed are that fungi are closer relatives to animals than they are to plants, archaea are now considered different from bacteria, and multicellular organisms may have evolved from archaea.\n\nThe term \"clade\" was coined in 1957 by the biologist Julian Huxley to refer to the result of cladogenesis, a concept Huxley borrowed from Bernhard Rensch.\n\nMany commonly named groups, rodents and insects for example, are clades because, in each case, the group consists of a common ancestor with all its descendant branches. Rodents, for example, are a branch of mammals that split off after the end of the period when the clade Dinosauria stopped being the dominant terrestrial vertebrates 66 million years ago. The original population and all its descendants are a clade. The rodent clade corresponds to the order Rodentia, and insects to the class Insecta. These clades include smaller clades, such as chipmunk or ant, each of which consists of even smaller clades. The clade \"rodent\" is in turn included in the mammal, vertebrate and animal clades.\n\nThe idea of a clade did not exist in pre-Darwinian Linnaean taxonomy, which was based by necessity only on internal or external morphological similarities between organisms – although as it happens, many of the better known animal groups in Linnaeus' original Systema Naturae (notably among the vertebrate groups) do represent clades. The phenomenon of convergent evolution is, however, responsible for many cases where there are misleading similarities in the morphology of groups that evolved from different lineages.\n\nWith the increasing realization in the first half of the 19th century that species had changed and split through the ages, classification increasingly came to be seen as branches on the evolutionary tree of life. The publication of Darwin's theory of evolution in 1859 gave this view increasing weight. Thomas Henry Huxley, an early advocate of evolutionary theory, proposed a revised taxonomy based on clades.<ref name=\"original text w/ figures\">Huxley, T.H. (1876): Lectures on Evolution. \"New York Tribune\". Extra. no 36. In Collected Essays IV: pp 46-138 original text w/ figures</ref> For example, he grouped birds with reptiles, based on fossil evidence.\n\nGerman biologist Emil Hans Willi Hennig (1913 – 1976) is considered to be the founder of cladistics.\nHe proposed a classification system that represented repeated branchings of the family tree, as opposed to the previous systems, which put organisms on a \"ladder\", with supposedly more \"advanced\" organisms at the top.\n\nTaxonomists have increasingly worked to make the taxonomic system reflect evolution. When it comes to naming, however, this principle is not always compatible with the traditional rank-based nomenclature. In the latter, only taxa associated with a rank can be named, yet there are not enough ranks to name a long series of nested clades. For these and other reasons, phylogenetic nomenclature has been developed; it is still controversial.\n\nA clade is by definition monophyletic, meaning that it contains one ancestor (which can be an organism, a population, or a species) and all its descendants. The ancestor can be known or unknown; any and all members of a clade can be extant or extinct.\n\nThe science that tries to reconstruct phylogenetic trees and thus discover clades is called phylogenetics or cladistics, the latter term coined by Ernst Mayr (1965), derived from \"clade\". The results of phylogenetic/cladistic analyses are tree-shaped diagrams called \"cladograms\"; they, and all their branches, are phylogenetic hypotheses.\n\nThree methods of defining clades are featured in phylogenetic nomenclature: node-, stem-, and apomorphy-based (see here for detailed definitions).\n\nThe relationship between clades can be described in several ways:\n\nBULLET::::- A clade located within a clade is said to be \"nested\" within that clade. In the diagram, the hominoid clade, i.e. the apes and humans, is nested within the primate clade.\nBULLET::::- Two clades are \"sisters\" if they have an immediate common ancestor. In the diagram, lemurs and lorises are sister clades, while humans and tarsiers are not.\nBULLET::::- A clade \"A\" is \"basal\" to a clade \"B\" if \"A\" branches off the lineage leading to \"B\" before the first branch leading only to members of \"B\". In the adjacent diagram, the strepsirrhine/prosimian clade, is basal to the hominoids/ape clade. However, in this example, both Haplorrhine as prosimians should be considered as most basal groupings. It is better to say that the prosimians are the sister group to the rest of the primates. This way one also avoids unintended and misconceived connotations about evolutionary advancement, complexity, diversity, ancestor status, and ancienity e.g. due to impact of sampling diversity and extinction. Basal clades should not be confused with stem groupings, as the latter is associated with paraphyletic or unresolved groupings.\n\n\"Clade\" is the title of a novel by James Bradley, who chose it both because of its biological meaning and also because of the larger implications of the word.\n\nAn episode of \"Elementary\" was titled \"Dead Clade Walking\" and dealt with a case involving a rare fossil.\n\nBULLET::::- Adaptive radiation\nBULLET::::- Binomial nomenclature\nBULLET::::- Biological classification\nBULLET::::- Cladistics\nBULLET::::- Crown group\nBULLET::::- Monophyly\nBULLET::::- Paraphyly\nBULLET::::- Phylogenetic network\nBULLET::::- Phylogenetic nomenclature\nBULLET::::- Phylogenetics\nBULLET::::- Polyphyly\n\nBULLET::::- Evolving Thoughts: \"Clade\"\nBULLET::::- DM Hillis, D Zwickl & R Gutell. \"Tree of life\". An unrooted cladogram depicting around 3000 species.\nBULLET::::- \"Phylogenetic systematics, an introductory slide-show on evolutionary trees\"—University of California, Berkeley\n"}
{"id": "6684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6684", "title": "Communications in Afghanistan", "text": "Communications in Afghanistan\n\nCommunications in Afghanistan is under the control of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT). It has rapidly expanded after the Karzai administration took over in late 2001, and has embarked on wireless companies, internet, radio stations and television channels.\n\nThe Afghan government signed a $64.5 billion agreement in 2006 with China's ZTE on the establishment of a countrywide optical fiber cable network. The project began to improve telephone, internet, television and radio broadcast services throughout Afghanistan. About 90% of the country's population had access to communication services in 2014.\n\nAfghanistan uses its own space satellite called Afghansat 1. There are about 18 million mobile phone users in the country. Telecom companies include Afghan Telecom, Afghan Wireless, Etisalat, MTN, Roshan, Salaam and a few others. Over 50% of the population have access to the internet.\n\nThere are about 32 million GSM mobile phone subscribers in Afghanistan as of 2016, with over 114,192 fixed-telephone-lines and over 264,000 CDMA subscribers. Mobile communications have improved because of the introduction of wireless carriers into this developing country. The first was Afghan Wireless, which is US based that was founded by Ehsan Bayat. The second was Roshan, which began providing services to all major cities within Afghanistan. There are also a number of VSAT stations in major cities such as Kabul, Kandahar, Herat, Mazari Sharif, and Jalalabad, providing international and domestic voice/data connectivity. The international calling code for Afghanistan is +93. The following is a partial list of mobile phone companies in the country:\n\nBULLET::::- Afghan Telecom\nBULLET::::- Afghan Wireless, provides 4G services\nBULLET::::- Etisalat, provides 4G services\nBULLET::::- MTN Group\nBULLET::::- Roshan, provides 4G services\nBULLET::::- Salaam Network\nBULLET::::- Wasel Telecom\n\nAll the companies providing communication services are obligated to deliver 2.5% of their income to the communication development fund annually. According to the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology there are 4760 active towers throughout the country which covers 85% of the population. The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology plans to expand its services in remote parts of the country where the remaining 15% of the population will be covered with the installation of 700 new towers.\n\nPhone calls in Afghanistan have been monitored by the National Security Agency according to WikiLeaks.\n\nMTN 21 According to a three-year duopoly agreement between the MCIT and mobile operators AWCC and Roshan, no mobile operator could enter the Afghan telecom market until July 2006. The third GSM license was awarded to Areeba in September 2005 for a period of 15 years, and a total license fee of $40.1 million. Areeba was a subsidiary of the Lebanon-based firm Investcom in consortium with Alokozai-FZE. After commencing services in July 2006, Areeba had an estimated subscribership of 200,000 by the end of that year. Areeba was later acquired by the South African-based Mobile Telephone Network (MTN) in mid-2007 as part of a $5.53 billion global merger between the two companies. MTN-Afghanistan is a subsidiary of the South African-based MTN Group, a multinational telecommunications company operating across the Middle East and Africa. MTN is the majority (90%) shareholder, while International Finance Corporation (IFC) at 9% is also a debt and equity shareholder of MTN-Afghanistan. MTN operates at 900-1800 MHz GSM band, and as of 2012 has 4.5 million subscribers and service coverage in most major cities, 464 districts, and all 34 provincial capitals. With over $400 million in total investment, MTN offers mobile voice, SMS, MMS, SRS, GPRS, fax, voicemail and PCO services through prepaid, postpaid and corporate tariffs.\n\nMTN has interconnection agreements with all national telecom operators and provides international voice and SMS roaming in 121 countries and across 227 operators through prepaid and postpaid roaming tariffs. MTN also has a national ISP license which the company received in November 2008. MTN was the first company to introduce the popular per-second billing system in the country (also known as \"pay as you talk\") allowing its subscribers to transparently track their talk-time and receive billing summaries via SMS. The scheme was so popular that other GSM companies quickly adopted this method.\n\nAfghanistan was given legal control of the \".af\" domain in 2003, and the Afghanistan Network Information Center (AFGNIC) was established to administer domain names. As of 2016, there are at least 55 internet service providers (ISPs) in the country. Internet in Afghanistan is also at the peak with over 5 million users as of 2016.\n\nAccording to the Ministry of Communications, the following are some of the different ISPs operating in Afghanistan:\nBULLET::::- TiiTACS Internet Services\nBULLET::::- AfSat\nBULLET::::- Afghan Telecom\nBULLET::::- Neda\nBULLET::::- CeReTechs\nBULLET::::- Insta Telecom\nBULLET::::- Global Services (P) Limited\nBULLET::::- Rana Technologies\nBULLET::::- Global Entourage Services\nBULLET::::- LiwalNet\nBULLET::::- Vizocom\n\nThere are over 106 television operators in Afghanistan and 320 television transmitters, many of which are based Kabul, while others are broadcast from other provinces. Selected foreign channels are also shown to the public in Afghanistan, but with the use of the internet, over 3,500 international TV channels may be accessed in Afghanistan.\n\nThere are an estimated 150 FM radio operators throughout the country. Broadcasts are in Dari, Pashto, English, Uzbeki and a number of other languages.\n\nRadio listeners are generally decreasing and are being slowly outnumbered by television. Of Afghanistan's 6 main cities, Kandahar and Khost have the maximum number of radio listeners. Kabul and Jalalabad have moderate number of listeners. However, Mazar-e-Sharif and especially Herat have very few radio listeners.\n\nIn 1870, a central post office was established at Bala Hissar in Kabul and a post office in the capital of each province. The service was slowly being expanded over the years as more postal offices were established in each large city by 1918. Afghanistan became a member of the Universal Postal Union in 1928, and the postal administration elevated to the Ministry of Communication in 1934. Civil war caused a disruption in issuing official stamps during the 1980s-90s war but in 1999 postal service was operating again. Postal services to/from Kabul worked remarkably well all throughout the war years. Postal services to/from Herat resumed in 1997. The Afghan government has reported to the UPU several times about illegal stamps being issued and sold in 2003 and 2007.\n\nAfghanistan Post has been reorganizing the postal service in 2000s with assistance from Pakistan Post. The Afghanistan Postal commission was formed to prepare a written policy for the development of the postal sector, which will form the basis of a new postal services law governing licensing of postal services providers. The project was expected to finish by 2008.\n\nIn January 2014 the Afghan Ministry of Communications and Information Technology signed an agreement with Eutelsat for the use of satellite resources to enhance deployment of Afghanistan's national broadcasting and telecommunications infrastructure as well as its international connectivity. Afghansat 1 was officially launched in May 2014, with expected service for at least seven years in Afghanistan. The Afghan government plans to launch Afghansat 2 after the lease of Afghansat 1 ends.\n\nBULLET::::- Afghanistan's Ministry of Communications - Official website\n"}
{"id": "6689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6689", "title": "Christian of Oliva", "text": "Christian of Oliva\n\nChristian of Oliva (), also Christian of Prussia () (died 4 December(?) 1245) was the first missionary bishop of Prussia. \n\nChristian was born about 1180 in the Duchy of Pomerania, possibly in the area of Chociwel (according to Johannes Voigt). Probably as a juvenile he joined the Cistercian Order at newly established Kołbacz (\"Kolbatz\") Abbey and in 1209 entered Oliwa Abbey near Gdańsk, founded in 1178 by the Samboride dukes of Pomerelia. At this time the Piast duke Konrad I of Masovia with the consent of Pope Innocent III had started the first of several unsuccessful Prussian Crusades into the adjacent Chełmno Land and Christian acted as a missionary among the Prussians east of the Vistula River.\nIn 1209, Christian was commissioned by the Pope to be responsible for the Prussian missions between the Vistula and Neman Rivers and in 1212 he was appointed bishop. In 1215 he went to Rome in order to report to the Curia on the condition and prospects of his mission, and was consecrated first \"Bishop of Prussia\" at the Fourth Council of the Lateran. His seat as a bishop remained at Oliwa Abbey on the western side of the Vistula, whereas the pagan Prussian (later East Prussian) territory was on the eastern side of it.\n\nThe attempts by Konrad of Masovia to subdue the Prussian lands had picked long-term and intense border quarrels, whereby the Polish lands of Masovia, Cuyavia and even Greater Poland became subject to continuous Prussian raids. Bishop Christian asked the new Pope Honorius III for the consent to start another Crusade, however a first campaign in 1217 proved a failure and even the joint efforts by Duke Konrad with the Polish High Duke Leszek I the White and Duke Henry I the Bearded of Silesia in 1222/23 only led to the reconquest of Chełmno Land but did not stop the Prussian invasions. At least Christian was able to establish the Diocese of Chełmno east of the Vistula, adopting the episcopal rights from the Masovian Bishop of Płock, confirmed by both Duke Konrad and the Pope.\n\nDuke Konrad of Masovia still was not capable to end the Prussian attacks on his territory and in 1224 began to conduct negotiations with the Teutonic Knights under Grand Master Hermann von Salza in order to strengthen his forces. As von Salza initially hesitated to offer his services, Christian created the military Order of Dobrzyń (\"Fratres Milites Christi\") in 1228, however to little avail.\n\nMeanwhile, von Salza had to abandon his hope to establish an Order's State in the Burzenland region of Transylvania, which had led to an éclat with King Andrew II of Hungary. He obtained a charter by Emperor Frederick II issued in the 1226 Golden Bull of Rimini, whereby Chełmno Land would be the unshared possession of the Teutonic Knights, which was confirmed by Duke Konrad of Masovia in the 1230 Treaty of Kruszwica. Christian ceded his possessions to the new State of the Teutonic Order and in turn was appointed Bishop of Chełmno the next year.\n\nBishop Christian continued his mission in Sambia (\"Samland\"), where from 1233 to 1239 he was held captive by pagan Prussians, and freed in trade for five other hostages who then in turn were released for a ransom of 800 Marks, granted to him by Pope Gregory IX. He had to deal with the constant cut-back of his autonomy by the Knights and asked the Roman Curia for mediation. In 1243, the Papal legate William of Modena divided the Prussian lands of the Order's State into four dioceses, whereby the bishops retained the secular rule over about on third of the diocesan territory:\nBULLET::::- Bishopric of Chełmno (Chełmno Land, Ziemia Chełminska)\nBULLET::::- Bishopric of Pomesania (Pomesania)\nBULLET::::- Bishopric of Warmia (Ermland) (state)/ Diocese of Warmia (ecclesiastical ambit)\nBULLET::::- Bishopric of Samland (Sambia)\nall suffragan dioceses under the Archbishopric of Riga. Christian was supposed to choose one of them, but did not agree to the division. He possibly retired to the Cistercians Abbey in Sulejów, where he died before the conflict was solved.\nBULLET::::- Baldwin of Alna\n\nBULLET::::- Article in Catholic Encyclopedia at newadvent.org\n"}
{"id": "6690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6690", "title": "Coca-Cola", "text": "Coca-Cola\n\nCoca-Cola, or Coke, is a carbonated soft drink manufactured by The Coca-Cola Company. Originally marketed as a temperance drink and intended as a patent medicine, it was invented in the late 19th century by John Stith Pemberton and was bought out by businessman Asa Griggs Candler, whose marketing tactics led Coca-Cola to its dominance of the world soft-drink market throughout the 20th century. The drink's name refers to two of its original ingredients: coca leaves, and kola nuts (a source of caffeine). The current formula of Coca-Cola remains a trade secret, although a variety of reported recipes and experimental recreations have been published.\n\nThe Coca-Cola Company produces concentrate, which is then sold to licensed Coca-Cola bottlers throughout the world. The bottlers, who hold exclusive territory contracts with the company, produce the finished product in cans and bottles from the concentrate, in combination with filtered water and sweeteners. A typical can contains of sugar (usually in the form of high fructose corn syrup). The bottlers then sell, distribute, and merchandise Coca-Cola to retail stores, restaurants, and vending machines throughout the world. The Coca-Cola Company also sells concentrate for soda fountains of major restaurants and foodservice distributors.\n\nThe Coca-Cola Company has on occasion introduced other cola drinks under the Coke name. The most common of these is Diet Coke, along with others including Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola, Diet Coke Caffeine-Free, Coca-Cola Zero Sugar, Coca-Cola Cherry, Coca-Cola Vanilla, and special versions with lemon, lime, and coffee. Based on Interbrand's \"best global brand\" study of 2015, Coca-Cola was the world's third most valuable brand, after Apple and Google. In 2013, Coke products were sold in over 200 countries worldwide, with consumers drinking more than 1.8 billion company beverage servings each day. Coca-Cola ranked No. 87 in the 2018 \"Fortune\" 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue.\n\nConfederate Colonel John Pemberton, who was wounded in the American Civil War and became addicted to morphine, began a quest to find a substitute for the problematic drug. In 1885 at Pemberton's Eagle Drug and Chemical House, a drugstore in Columbus, Georgia, he registered Pemberton's French Wine Coca nerve tonic. Pemberton's tonic may have been inspired by the formidable success of Vin Mariani, a French-Corsican coca wine, but his recipe additionally included the African kola nut, the beverage's source of caffeine.\n\nIt is also worth noting that a Spanish drink called \"Kola Coca\" was presented at a contest in Philadelphia in 1885, a year before the official birth of Coca-Cola. The rights for this Spanish drink were bought by Coca-Cola in 1953.\n\nIn 1886, when Atlanta and Fulton County passed prohibition legislation, Pemberton responded by developing Coca-Cola, a nonalcoholic version of Pemberton's French Wine Coca. It was marketed as \"Coca-Cola: The temperance drink\", which appealed to many people as the temperance movement enjoyed wide support during this time. The first sales were at Jacob's Pharmacy in Atlanta, Georgia, on May 8, 1886, where it initially sold for five cents a glass. Drugstore soda fountains were popular in the United States at the time due to the belief that carbonated water was good for the health, and Pemberton's new drink was marketed and sold as a patent medicine, Pemberton claiming it a cure for many diseases, including morphine addiction, indigestion, nerve disorders, headaches, and impotence. Pemberton ran the first advertisement for the beverage on May 29 of the same year in the \"Atlanta Journal\".\n\nBy 1888, three versions of Coca-Cola – sold by three separate businesses – were on the market. A co-partnership had been formed on January 14, 1888, between Pemberton and four Atlanta businessmen: J.C. Mayfield, A.O. Murphey, C.O. Mullahy, and E.H. Bloodworth. Not codified by any signed document, a verbal statement given by Asa Candler years later asserted under testimony that he had acquired a stake in Pemberton's company as early as 1887. John Pemberton declared that the \"name\" \"Coca-Cola\" belonged to his son, Charley, but the other two manufacturers could continue to use the \"formula\".\n\nCharley Pemberton's record of control over the \"Coca-Cola\" name was the underlying factor that allowed for him to participate as a major shareholder in the March 1888 Coca-Cola Company incorporation filing made in his father's place. Charley's exclusive control over the \"Coca-Cola\" name became a continual thorn in Asa Candler's side.\nCandler's oldest son, Charles Howard Candler, authored a book in 1950 published by Emory University. In this definitive biography about his father, Candler specifically states: \"..., on April 14, 1888, the young druggist Asa Griggs Candler purchased a one-third interest in the formula of an almost completely unknown proprietary elixir known as Coca-Cola.\"\nThe deal was actually between John Pemberton's son Charley and Walker, Candler & Co. – with John Pemberton acting as cosigner for his son. For $50 down and $500 in 30 days, Walker, Candler & Co. obtained all of the one-third interest in the Coca-Cola Company that Charley held, all while Charley still held on to the name. After the April 14 deal, on April 17, 1888, one-half of the Walker/Dozier interest shares were acquired by Candler for an additional $750.\n\nIn 1892, Candler set out to incorporate a second company; \"The Coca-Cola Company\" (the current corporation). When Candler had the earliest records of the \"Coca-Cola Company\" destroyed in 1910, the action was claimed to have been made during a move to new corporation offices around this time.\n\nAfter Candler had gained a better foothold on Coca-Cola in April 1888, he nevertheless was forced to sell the beverage he produced with the recipe he had under the names \"Yum Yum\" and \"Koke\". This was while Charley Pemberton was selling the elixir, although a cruder mixture, under the name \"Coca-Cola\", all with his father's blessing. After both names failed to catch on for Candler, by the middle of 1888, the Atlanta pharmacist was quite anxious to establish a firmer legal claim to Coca-Cola, and hoped he could force his two competitors, Walker and Dozier, completely out of the business, as well.\n\nJohn Pemberton died suddenly on August 16, 1888. Asa Candler then decided to move swiftly forward to attain full control of the entire Coca-Cola operation.\n\nCharley Pemberton, an alcoholic and opium addict unnerved Asa Candler more than anyone else. Candler is said to have quickly maneuvered to purchase the exclusive rights to the name \"Coca-Cola\" from Pemberton's son Charley immediately after he learned of Dr. Pemberton's death. One of several stories states that Candler approached Charley's mother at John Pemberton's funeral and offered her $300 in cash for the title to the name. Charley Pemberton was found on June 23, 1894, unconscious, with a stick of opium by his side. Ten days later, Charley died at Atlanta's Grady Hospital at the age of 40.\n\nIn Charles Howard Candler's 1950 book about his father, he stated: \"On August 30 [1888], he Asa Candler became sole proprietor of Coca-Cola, a fact which was stated on letterheads, invoice blanks and advertising copy.\"\n\nWith this action on August 30, 1888, Candler's sole control became technically all true. Candler had negotiated with Margaret Dozier and her brother Woolfolk Walker a full payment amounting to $1,000, which all agreed Candler could pay off with a series of notes over a specified time span. By May 1, 1889, Candler was now claiming full ownership of the Coca-Cola beverage, with a total investment outlay by Candler for the drink enterprise over the years amounting to $2,300.\n\nIn 1914, Margaret Dozier, as co-owner of the original Coca-Cola Company in 1888, came forward to claim that her signature on the 1888 Coca-Cola Company bill of sale had been forged. Subsequent analysis of other similar transfer documents had also indicated John Pemberton's signature had most likely been forged as well, which some accounts claim was precipitated by his son Charley.\n\nOn September 12, 1919, Coca-Cola Co. was purchased by a group of investors for $25 million and reincorporated. The company publicly offered 500,000 shares of the company for $40 a share.\n\nIn 1986, The Coca-Cola Company merged with two of their bottling operators (owned by JTL Corporation and BCI Holding Corporation) to form Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. (CCE).\n\nIn December 1991, Coca-Cola Enterprises merged with the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group, Inc.\n\nThe first bottling of Coca-Cola occurred in Vicksburg, Mississippi, at the Biedenharn Candy Company on March 12, 1894. The proprietor of the bottling works was Joseph A. Biedenharn. The original bottles were Hutchinson bottles, very different from the much later hobble-skirt design of 1915 now so familiar.\n\nA few years later two entrepreneurs from Chattanooga, Tennessee, namely Benjamin F. Thomas and Joseph B. Whitehead, proposed the idea of bottling and were so persuasive that Candler signed a contract giving them control of the procedure for only one dollar. Candler never collected his dollar, but in 1899, Chattanooga became the site of the first Coca-Cola bottling company. Candler remained very content just selling his company's syrup. The loosely termed contract proved to be problematic for The Coca-Cola Company for decades to come. Legal matters were not helped by the decision of the bottlers to subcontract to other companies, effectively becoming parent bottlers. This contract specified that bottles would be sold at 5¢ each and had no fixed duration, leading to the fixed price of Coca-Cola from 1886 to 1959.\n\nThe first outdoor wall advertisement that promoted the Coca-Cola drink was painted in 1894 in Cartersville, Georgia. Cola syrup was sold as an over-the-counter dietary supplement for upset stomach. By the time of its 50th anniversary, the soft drink had reached the status of a national icon in the US. In 1935, it was certified kosher by Atlanta Rabbi Tobias Geffen, after the company made minor changes in the sourcing of some ingredients.\n\nThe longest running commercial Coca-Cola soda fountain anywhere was Atlanta's Fleeman's Pharmacy, which first opened its doors in 1914. Jack Fleeman took over the pharmacy from his father and ran it until 1995; closing it after 81 years. On July 12, 1944, the one-billionth gallon of Coca-Cola syrup was manufactured by The Coca-Cola Company. Cans of Coke first appeared in 1955.\n\nOn April 23, 1985, Coca-Cola, amid much publicity, attempted to change the formula of the drink with \"New Coke\". Follow-up taste tests revealed most consumers preferred the taste of New Coke to both Coke and Pepsi but Coca-Cola management was unprepared for the public's nostalgia for the old drink, leading to a backlash. The company gave in to protests and returned to the old formula under the name Coca-Cola Classic, on July 10, 1985.\n\nOn July 5, 2005, it was revealed that Coca-Cola would resume operations in Iraq for the first time since the Arab League boycotted the company in 1968.\n\nIn April 2007, in Canada, the name \"Coca-Cola Classic\" was changed back to \"Coca-Cola\". The word \"Classic\" was removed because \"New Coke\" was no longer in production, eliminating the need to differentiate between the two. The formula remained unchanged. In January 2009, Coca-Cola stopped printing the word \"Classic\" on the labels of bottles sold in parts of the southeastern United States. The change is part of a larger strategy to rejuvenate the product's image. The word \"Classic\" was removed from all Coca-Cola products by 2011.\n\nIn November 2009, due to a dispute over wholesale prices of Coca-Cola products, Costco stopped restocking its shelves with Coke and Diet Coke for two months; a separate pouring rights deal in 2013 saw Coke products removed from Costco food courts in favor of Pepsi. Some Costco locations (such as the ones in Tucson, Arizona) additionally sell imported Coca-Cola from Mexico with cane sugar instead of corn syrup from separate distributors. Coca-Cola introduced the 7.5-ounce mini-can in 2009, and on September 22, 2011, the company announced price reductions, asking retailers to sell eight-packs for $2.99. That same day, Coca-Cola announced the 12.5-ounce bottle, to sell for 89 cents. A 16-ounce bottle has sold well at 99 cents since being re-introduced, but the price was going up to $1.19.\n\nIn 2012, Coca-Cola resumed business in Myanmar after 60 years of absence due to U.S.-imposed investment sanctions against the country. Coca-Cola's bottling plant will be located in Yangon and is part of the company's five-year plan and $200 million investment in Myanmar. Coca-Cola with its partners is to invest US$5 billion in its operations in India by 2020. In 2013, it was announced that Coca-Cola Life would be introduced in Argentina and other parts of the world that would contain stevia and sugar. However, the drink was discontinued in Britain on June 2017.\n\nBULLET::::- Carbonated water\nBULLET::::- Sugar (sucrose or high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) depending on country of origin)\nBULLET::::- Caffeine\nBULLET::::- Phosphoric acid\nBULLET::::- Caramel color (E150d)\nBULLET::::- Natural flavorings\nA typical can of Coca-Cola (12 fl ounces/355 ml) contains 38 grams of sugar (usually in the form of HFCS), 50 mg of sodium, 0 grams fat, 0 grams potassium, and 140 calories.\n\nThe exact formula of Coca-Cola's natural flavorings (but not its other ingredients, which are listed on the side of the bottle or can) is a trade secret. The original copy of the formula was held in SunTrust Bank's main vault in Atlanta for 86 years. Its predecessor, the Trust Company, was the underwriter for the Coca-Cola Company's initial public offering in 1919. On December 8, 2011, the original secret formula was moved from the vault at SunTrust Banks to a new vault containing the formula which will be on display for visitors to its World of Coca-Cola museum in downtown Atlanta.\n\nAccording to Snopes, a popular myth states that only two executives have access to the formula, with each executive having only half the formula. However, several sources state that while Coca-Cola does have a rule restricting access to only two executives, each knows the entire formula and others, in addition to the prescribed duo, have known the formulation process.\n\nOn February 11, 2011, Ira Glass said on his PRI radio show, \"This American Life\", that \"TAL\" staffers had found a recipe in \"Everett Beal's Recipe Book\", reproduced in the February 28, 1979, issue of \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", that they believed was either Pemberton's original formula for Coca-Cola, or a version that he made either before or after the product hit the market in 1886. The formula basically matched the one found in Pemberton's diary. Coca-Cola archivist Phil Mooney acknowledged that the recipe \"could ... be a precursor\" to the formula used in the original 1886 product, but emphasized that Pemberton's original formula is not the same as the one used in the current product.\n\nWhen launched, Coca-Cola's two key ingredients were cocaine and caffeine. The cocaine was derived from the coca leaf and the caffeine from kola nut (also spelled \"cola nut\" at the time), leading to the name Coca-Cola.\n\nAlthough Coca-Cola denies usage of cocaine, Pemberton called for five ounces of coca leaf per gallon of syrup (approximately 37 g/L), a significant dose; in 1891, Candler claimed his formula (altered extensively from Pemberton's original) contained only a tenth of this amount. Coca-Cola once contained an estimated nine milligrams of cocaine per glass. (For comparison, a typical dose or \"line\" of cocaine is 50–75 mg.) In 1903, it was removed.\n\nAfter 1904, instead of using fresh leaves, Coca-Cola started using \"spent\" leaves – the leftovers of the cocaine-extraction process with trace levels of cocaine. Since then, Coca-Cola has used a cocaine-free coca leaf extract prepared at a Stepan Company plant in Maywood, New Jersey.\n\nIn the United States, the Stepan Company is the only manufacturing plant authorized by the Federal Government to import and process the coca plant, which it obtains mainly from Peru and, to a lesser extent, Bolivia. Besides producing the coca flavoring agent for Coca-Cola, the Stepan Company extracts cocaine from the coca leaves, which it sells to Mallinckrodt, a St. Louis, Missouri, pharmaceutical manufacturer that is the only company in the United States licensed to purify cocaine for medicinal use.\n\nLong after the syrup had ceased to contain any significant amount of cocaine, in the southeastern U.S., \"dope\" remained a common colloquialism for Coca-Cola, and \"dope-wagons\" were trucks that transported it.\n\nKola nuts act as a flavoring and the source of caffeine in Coca-Cola. In Britain, for example, the ingredient label states \"Flavourings (Including Caffeine).\" Kola nuts contain about 2.0 to 3.5% caffeine, are of bitter flavor, and are commonly used in cola soft drinks. In 1911, the U.S. government initiated \"United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola\", hoping to force Coca-Cola to remove caffeine from its formula. The case was decided in favor of Coca-Cola. Subsequently, in 1912, the U.S. Pure Food and Drug Act was amended, adding caffeine to the list of \"habit-forming\" and \"deleterious\" substances which must be listed on a product's label.\n\nCoca-Cola contains 34 mg of caffeine per 12 fluid ounces (9.8 mg per 100 ml).\n\nThe actual production and distribution of Coca-Cola follows a franchising model. The Coca-Cola Company only produces a syrup concentrate, which it sells to bottlers throughout the world, who hold Coca-Cola franchises for one or more geographical areas. The bottlers produce the final drink by mixing the syrup with filtered water and sweeteners, putting the mixture into cans and bottles, and carbonating it, which the bottlers then sell and distribute to retail stores, vending machines, restaurants, and food service distributors.\n\nThe Coca-Cola Company owns minority shares in some of its largest franchises, such as Coca-Cola Enterprises, Coca-Cola Amatil, Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling Company, and Coca-Cola FEMSA, but fully independent bottlers produce almost half of the volume sold in the world.\nIndependent bottlers are allowed to sweeten the drink according to local tastes.\n\nThe bottling plant in Skopje, Macedonia, received the 2009 award for \"Best Bottling Company\".\n\nSince it announced its intention to begin distribution in Myanmar in June 2012, Coca-Cola has been officially available in every country in the world except Cuba and North Korea. However, it is reported to be available in both countries as a grey import.\n\nCoca-Cola has been a point of legal discussion in the Middle East. In the early 20th century, a fatwa was created in Egypt to discuss the question of \"whether Muslims were permitted to drink Coca-Cola and Pepsi cola.\" The fatwa states: \"According to the Muslim Hanefite, Shafi'ite, etc., the rule in Islamic law of forbidding or allowing foods and beverages is based on the presumption that such things are permitted unless it can be shown that they are forbidden on the basis of the Qur'an.\" The Muslim jurists stated that, unless the Qu'ran specifically prohibits the consumption of a particular product, it is permissible to consume. Another clause was discussed, whereby the same rules apply if a person is unaware of the condition or ingredients of the item in question.\n\nThis is a list of variants of Coca-Cola introduced around the world. In addition to the caffeine-free version of the original, additional fruit flavors have been included over the years. Not included here are versions of Diet Coke and Coca-Cola Zero Sugar; variant versions of those no-calorie colas can be found at their respective articles.\nBULLET::::- Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola (1983–present) – Coca-Cola without the caffeine.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Cherry (1985–present) – Coca-Cola with a cherry flavor. Was available in Canada starting in 1996. Originally marketed as Cherry Coke (Cherry Coca-Cola) in North America until 2006.\nBULLET::::- New Coke / Coca-Cola II (1985–2002) – An unpopular formula change, remained after the original formula quickly returned and was later rebranded as Coca-Cola II until its full discontinuation in 2002. In 2019, New Coke was re-introduced to the market to promote the third season of the Netflix original series, \"Stranger Things.\"\nBULLET::::- Golden Coca-Cola (2001) was a limited edition produced by Beijing Coca-Cola company to celebrate Beijing's successful bid to host the Olympics.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola with Lemon (2001–05) – Coca-Cola with a lemon flavor. Available in: Australia, American Samoa, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, China, Denmark, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Iceland, Korea, Luxembourg, Macau, Malaysia, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Réunion, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tunisia, United Kingdom, United States and West Bank-Gaza\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Vanilla (2002–05; 2007–present) – Coca-Cola with a vanilla flavor. Available in: Austria, Australia, China, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Malaysia, Slovakia, South-Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. It was reintroduced in June 2007 by popular demand.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola with Lime (2005–present) – Coca-Cola with a lime flavor. Available in Belgium, Netherlands, Singapore, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Raspberry (2005; 2009–present) – Coca-Cola with a raspberry flavor. Originally only available in New Zealand. Available in: Australia, United States and the United Kingdom in Coca-Cola Freestyle fountain since 2009.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Black Cherry Vanilla (2006–07) – Coca-Cola with a combination of black cherry and vanilla flavor. It replaced and was replaced by Vanilla Coke in June 2007.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Blāk (2006–08) – Coca-Cola with a rich coffee flavor, formula depends on country. Only available in the United States, France, Canada, Czech Republic, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria and Lithuania\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Citra (2005–present) – Coca-Cola with a citrus flavor. Only available in Bosnia and Herzegovina, New Zealand and Japan.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Orange (2007) – Coca-Cola with an orange flavor. Was available in the United Kingdom and Gibraltar for a limited time. In Germany, Austria, and Switzerland it is sold under the label Mezzo Mix. Currently available in Coca-Cola Freestyle fountain outlets in the United States since 2009 and in the United Kingdom since 2014.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Life (2013–present) – A version of Coca-Cola with stevia and sugar as sweeteners rather than simply sugar.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Ginger (2016–present) – A version that mixes in the taste of ginger beer. Available in Australia, New Zealand and as a limited edition in Vietnam.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Orange Vanilla (2019–present) – Coca-Cola with an orange vanilla flavor (intended to imitate the flavor of an orange Creamsicle). Made available nationwide in the United States on February 25, 2019.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Energy (2019–present) – Coca-Cola with extra caffeine. Currently available in the United Kingdom, and scheduled for release in the United States in January 2020.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Cinnamon (2019–present) – Coca-Cola with cinnamon flavor. Released in October 2019 in the United States as a limited release for the 2019 holiday season.\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Cherry Vanilla (launching in 2020) – Coca-Cola with cherry vanilla flavor. Scheduled for launch in the United States in February 2020.\n\nThe Coca-Cola logo was created by John Pemberton's bookkeeper, Frank Mason Robinson, in 1885. Robinson came up with the name and chose the logo's distinctive cursive script. The writing style used, known as Spencerian script, was developed in the mid-19th century and was the dominant form of formal handwriting in the United States during that period.\n\nRobinson also played a significant role in early Coca-Cola advertising. His promotional suggestions to Pemberton included giving away thousands of free drink coupons and plastering the city of Atlanta with publicity banners and streetcar signs.\n\nCoca-Cola came under scrutiny in Egypt in 1951 because of a conspiracy that the Coca-Cola logo, when reflected in a mirror, spells out \"No Mohammed no Mecca\" in Arabic.\n\nThe Coca-Cola bottle, called the \"contour bottle\" within the company, was created by bottle designer Earl R. Dean and Coca-Cola's general counsel, Harold Hirsch. In 1915, The Coca-Cola Company was represented by their general counsel to launch a competition among its bottle suppliers as well as any competition entrants to create a new bottle for their beverage that would distinguish it from other beverage bottles, \"a bottle which a person could recognize even if they felt it in the dark, and so shaped that, even if broken, a person could tell at a glance what it was.\"\n\nChapman J. Root, president of the Root Glass Company of Terre Haute, Indiana, turned the project over to members of his supervisory staff, including company auditor T. Clyde Edwards, plant superintendent Alexander Samuelsson, and Earl R. Dean, bottle designer and supervisor of the bottle molding room. Root and his subordinates decided to base the bottle's design on one of the soda's two ingredients, the coca leaf or the kola nut, but were unaware of what either ingredient looked like. Dean and Edwards went to the Emeline Fairbanks Memorial Library and were unable to find any information about coca or kola. Instead, Dean was inspired by a picture of the gourd-shaped cocoa pod in the Encyclopædia Britannica. Dean made a rough sketch of the pod and returned to the plant to show Root. He explained to Root how he could transform the shape of the pod into a bottle. Root gave Dean his approval.\n\nFaced with the upcoming scheduled maintenance of the mold-making machinery, over the next 24 hours Dean sketched out a concept drawing which was approved by Root the next morning. Dean then proceeded to create a bottle mold and produced a small number of bottles before the glass-molding machinery was turned off.\n\nChapman Root approved the prototype bottle and a design patent was issued on the bottle in November 1915. The prototype never made it to production since its middle diameter was larger than its base, making it unstable on conveyor belts. Dean resolved this issue by decreasing the bottle's middle diameter. During the 1916 bottler's convention, Dean's contour bottle was chosen over other entries and was on the market the same year. By 1920, the contour bottle became the standard for The Coca-Cola Company. A revised version was also patented in 1923. Because the Patent Office releases the \"Patent Gazette\" on Tuesday, the bottle was patented on December 25, 1923, and was nicknamed the \"Christmas bottle.\" Today, the contour Coca-Cola bottle is one of the most recognized packages on the planet...\"even in the dark!\".\n\nAs a reward for his efforts, Dean was offered a choice between a $500 bonus or a lifetime job at the Root Glass Company. He chose the lifetime job and kept it until the Owens-Illinois Glass Company bought out the Root Glass Company in the mid-1930s. Dean went on to work in other Midwestern glass factories.\n\nRaymond Loewy updated the design in 1955 to accommodate larger formats.\n\nOthers have attributed inspiration for the design not to the cocoa pod, but to a Victorian hooped dress.\n\nIn 1944, Associate Justice Roger J. Traynor of the Supreme Court of California took advantage of a case involving a waitress injured by an exploding Coca-Cola bottle to articulate the doctrine of strict liability for defective products. Traynor's concurring opinion in \"Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co.\" is widely recognized as a landmark case in U.S. law today.\n\nKarl Lagerfeld is the latest designer to have created a collection of aluminum bottles for Coca-Cola. Lagerfeld is not the first fashion designer to create a special version of the famous Coca-Cola Contour bottle. A number of other limited edition bottles by fashion designers for Coca-Cola Light soda have been created in the last few years.\n\nIn 2009, in Italy, Coca-Cola Light had a Tribute to Fashion to celebrate 100 years of the recognizable contour bottle. Well known Italian designers Alberta Ferretti, Blumarine, Etro, Fendi, Marni, Missoni, Moschino, and Versace each designed limited edition bottles.\n\nIn 2019, Coca-Cola shared the first beverage bottle made with ocean plastic.\n\nPepsi, the flagship product of PepsiCo, The Coca-Cola Company's main rival in the soft drink industry, is usually second to Coke in sales, and outsells Coca-Cola in some markets. RC Cola, now owned by the Dr Pepper Snapple Group, the third largest soft drink manufacturer, is also widely available.\n\nAround the world, many local brands compete with Coke. In South and Central America Kola Real, known as Big Cola in Mexico, is a growing competitor to Coca-Cola. On the French island of Corsica, Corsica Cola, made by brewers of the local Pietra beer, is a growing competitor to Coca-Cola. In the French region of Brittany, Breizh Cola is available. In Peru, Inca Kola outsells Coca-Cola, which led The Coca-Cola Company to purchase the brand in 1999. In Sweden, Julmust outsells Coca-Cola during the Christmas season. In Scotland, the locally produced Irn-Bru was more popular than Coca-Cola until 2005, when Coca-Cola and Diet Coke began to outpace its sales. In the former East Germany, Vita Cola, invented during Communist rule, is gaining popularity.\n\nIn India, Coca-Cola ranked third behind the leader, Pepsi-Cola, and local drink Thums Up. The Coca-Cola Company purchased Thums Up in 1993. , Coca-Cola held a 60.9% market-share in India. Tropicola, a domestic drink, is served in Cuba instead of Coca-Cola, due to a United States embargo. French brand Mecca Cola and British brand Qibla Cola are competitors to Coca-Cola in the Middle East.\n\nIn Turkey, Cola Turka, in Iran and the Middle East, Zamzam Cola and Parsi Cola, in some parts of China, China Cola, in Czech Republic and Slovakia, Kofola, in Slovenia, Cockta, and the inexpensive Mercator Cola, sold only in the country's biggest supermarket chain, Mercator, are some of the brand's competitors. Classiko Cola, made by Tiko Group, the largest manufacturing company in Madagascar, is a competitor to Coca-Cola in many regions.\n\nCoca-Cola's advertising has significantly affected American culture, and it is frequently credited with inventing the modern image of Santa Claus as an old man in a red-and-white suit. Although the company did start using the red-and-white Santa image in the 1930s, with its winter advertising campaigns illustrated by Haddon Sundblom, the motif was already common. Coca-Cola was not even the first soft drink company to use the modern image of Santa Claus in its advertising: White Rock Beverages used Santa in advertisements for its ginger ale in 1923, after first using him to sell mineral water in 1915. Before Santa Claus, Coca-Cola relied on images of smartly dressed young women to sell its beverages. Coca-Cola's first such advertisement appeared in 1895, featuring the young Bostonian actress Hilda Clark as its spokeswoman.\n\n1941 saw the first use of the nickname \"Coke\" as an official trademark for the product, with a series of advertisements informing consumers that \"Coke means Coca-Cola\". In 1971, a song from a Coca-Cola commercial called \"I’d Like to Teach the World to Sing\", produced by Billy Davis, became a hit single.\n\nCoke's advertising is pervasive, as one of Woodruff's stated goals was to ensure that everyone on Earth drank Coca-Cola as their preferred beverage. This is especially true in southern areas of the United States, such as Atlanta, where Coke was born.\n\nSome Coca-Cola television commercials between 1960 through 1986 were written and produced by former Atlanta radio veteran Don Naylor (WGST 1936–1950, WAGA 1951–1959) during his career as a producer for the McCann Erickson advertising agency. Many of these early television commercials for Coca-Cola featured movie stars, sports heroes, and popular singers.\n\nDuring the 1980s, Pepsi-Cola ran a series of television advertisements showing people participating in taste tests demonstrating that, according to the commercials, \"fifty percent of the participants who said they preferred Coke \"actually\" chose the Pepsi.\" Statisticians pointed out the problematic nature of a 50/50 result: most likely, the taste tests showed that in blind tests, most people cannot tell the difference between Pepsi and Coke. Coca-Cola ran ads to combat Pepsi's ads in an incident sometimes referred to as the \"cola wars\"; one of Coke's ads compared the so-called Pepsi challenge to two chimpanzees deciding which tennis ball was furrier. Thereafter, Coca-Cola regained its leadership in the market.\n\nSelena was a spokesperson for Coca-Cola from 1989 until the time of her death. She filmed three commercials for the company. During 1994, to commemorate her five years with the company, Coca-Cola issued special Selena coke bottles.\n\nThe Coca-Cola Company purchased Columbia Pictures in 1982, and began inserting Coke-product images into many of its films. After a few early successes during Coca-Cola's ownership, Columbia began to under-perform, and the studio was sold to Sony in 1989.\n\nCoca-Cola has gone through a number of different advertising slogans in its long history, including \"The pause that refreshes\", \"I had like to buy the world a Coke\", and \"Coke is it\".\n\nIn 2006, Coca-Cola introduced My Coke Rewards, a customer loyalty campaign where consumers earn points by entering codes from specially marked packages of Coca-Cola products into a website. These points can be redeemed for various prizes or sweepstakes entries.\n\nIn Australia in 2011, Coca-Cola began the \"share a Coke\" campaign, where the Coca-Cola logo was replaced on the bottles and replaced with first names. Coca-Cola used the 150 most popular names in Australia to print on the bottles. The campaign was paired with a website page, Facebook page, and an online \"share a virtual Coke\". The same campaign was introduced to Coca-Cola, Diet Coke & Coke Zero bottles and cans in the UK in 2013.\n\nCoca-Cola has also advertised its product to be consumed as a breakfast beverage, instead of coffee or tea for the morning caffeine.\n\nFrom 1886 to 1959, the price of Coca-Cola was fixed at five cents, in part due to an advertising campaign.\n\nThroughout the years, Coca-Cola has released limited time collector bottles for Christmas.\n\nThe \"Holidays are coming!\" advertisement features a train of red delivery trucks, emblazoned with the Coca-Cola name and decorated with Christmas lights, driving through a snowy landscape and causing everything that they pass to light up and people to watch as they pass through.\n\nThe advertisement fell into disuse in 2001, as the Coca-Cola company restructured its advertising campaigns so that advertising around the world was produced locally in each country, rather than centrally in the company's headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. In 2007, the company brought back the campaign after, according to the company, many consumers telephoned its information center saying that they considered it to mark the beginning of Christmas. The advertisement was created by U.S. advertising agency Doner, and has been part of the company's global advertising campaign for many years.\n\nKeith Law, a producer and writer of commercials for Belfast CityBeat, was not convinced by Coca-Cola's reintroduction of the advertisement in 2007, saying that \"I do not think there's anything Christmassy about HGVs and the commercial is too generic.\"\n\nIn 2001, singer Melanie Thornton recorded the campaign's advertising jingle as a single, \"Wonderful Dream (Holidays are Coming)\", which entered the pop-music charts in Germany at no. 9. In 2005, Coca-Cola expanded the advertising campaign to radio, employing several variations of the jingle.\n\nIn 2011, Coca-Cola launched a campaign for the Indian holiday Diwali. The campaign included commercials, a song, and an integration with Shah Rukh Khan's film \"Ra.One\".\n\nCoca-Cola was the first commercial sponsor of the Olympic games, at the 1928 games in Amsterdam, and has been an Olympics sponsor ever since. This corporate sponsorship included the 1996 Summer Olympics hosted in Atlanta, which allowed Coca-Cola to spotlight its hometown. Most recently, Coca-Cola has released localized commercials for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver; one Canadian commercial referred to Canada's hockey heritage and was modified after Canada won the gold medal game on February 28, 2010 by changing the ending line of the commercial to say \"Now they know whose game they're playing\".\n\nSince 1978, Coca-Cola has sponsored the FIFA World Cup, and other competitions organized by FIFA. One FIFA tournament trophy, the FIFA World Youth Championship from Tunisia in 1977 to Malaysia in 1997, was called \"FIFA – Coca-Cola Cup\". In addition, Coca-Cola sponsors NASCAR's annual Coca-Cola 600 and Coke Zero Sugar 400 at Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord, North Carolina and Daytona International Speedway in Daytona, Florida; since 2020, Coca-Cola has served as a premier partner of the NASCAR Cup Series, which includes holding the naming rights to the series' regular season championship trophy.\n\nCoca-Cola has a long history of sports marketing relationships, which over the years have included Major League Baseball, the National Football League, the National Basketball Association, and the National Hockey League, as well as with many teams within those leagues. Coca-Cola has had a longtime relationship with the NFL's Pittsburgh Steelers, due in part to the now-famous 1979 television commercial featuring \"Mean Joe\" Greene, leading to the two opening the Coca-Cola Great Hall at Heinz Field in 2001 and a more recent Coca-Cola Zero commercial featuring Troy Polamalu.\n\nCoca-Cola is the official soft drink of many collegiate football teams throughout the nation, partly due to Coca-Cola providing those schools with upgraded athletic facilities in exchange for Coca-Cola's sponsorship. This is especially prevalent at the high school level, which is more dependent on such contracts due to tighter budgets.\n\nCoca-Cola was one of the official sponsors of the 1996 Cricket World Cup held on the Indian subcontinent. Coca-Cola is also one of the associate sponsors of Delhi Daredevils in the Indian Premier League.\n\nIn England, Coca-Cola was the main sponsor of The Football League between 2004 and 2010, a name given to the three professional divisions below the Premier League in soccer (football). In 2005, Coca-Cola launched a competition for the 72 clubs of The Football League – it was called \"Win a Player\". This allowed fans to place one vote per day for their favorite club, with one entry being chosen at random earning £250,000 for the club; this was repeated in 2006. The \"Win A Player\" competition was very controversial, as at the end of the 2 competitions, Leeds United A.F.C. had the most votes by more than double, yet they did not win any money to spend on a new player for the club. In 2007, the competition changed to \"Buy a Player\". This competition allowed fans to buy a bottle of Coca-Cola or Coca-Cola Zero and submit the code on the wrapper on the Coca-Cola website. This code could then earn anything from 50p to £100,000 for a club of their choice. This competition was favored over the old \"Win a Player\" competition, as it allowed all clubs to win some money. Between 1992 and 1998, Coca-Cola was the title sponsor of the Football League Cup (Coca-Cola Cup), the secondary cup tournament of England.\n\nBetween 1994 and 1997, Coca-Cola was also the title sponsor of the Scottish League Cup, renaming it the Coca-Cola Cup like its English counterpart. From 1998 to 2001, the company were the title sponsor of the Irish League Cup in Northern Ireland, where it was named the Coca-Cola League Cup.\n\nCoca-Cola is the presenting sponsor of the Tour Championship, the final event of the PGA Tour held each year at East Lake Golf Club in Atlanta, GA.\n\nIntroduced March 1, 2010, in Canada, to celebrate the 2010 Winter Olympics, Coca-Cola sold gold colored cans in packs of 12 each, in select stores.\n\nCoca-Cola has been prominently featured in many films and television programs. It was a major plot element in films such as One, Two, Three, The Coca-Cola Kid, and The Gods Must Be Crazy, among many others. In music, in the Beatles' song, \"Come Together\", the lyrics say, \"He shoot Coca-Cola\", he say... The Beach Boys also referenced Coca-Cola in their 1964 song \"All Summer Long\" (i.e. Member when you spilled Coke all over your blouse?)\n\nThe best selling artist of all time Elvis Presley, promoted Coca-Cola during his last tour of 1977. The Coca-Cola Company used Elvis' image to promote the product. For example, the company used a song performed by Presley, A Little Less Conversation, in a Japanese Coca-Cola commercial.\n\nOther artists that promoted Coca-Cola include David Bowie, George Michael, Elton John, and Whitney Houston, who appeared in the Diet Coke commercial, among many others.\n\nNot all musical references to Coca-Cola went well. A line in \"Lola\" by the Kinks was originally recorded as \"You drink champagne and it tastes just like Coca-Cola.\" When the British Broadcasting Corporation refused to play the song because of the commercial reference, lead singer Ray Davies re-recorded the lyric as \"it tastes just like cherry cola\" to get airplay for the song.\n\nPolitical cartoonist Michel Kichka satirized a famous Coca-Cola billboard in his 1982 poster \"And I Love New York.\" On the billboard, the Coca-Cola wave is accompanied by the words \"Enjoy Coke.\" In Kichka's poster, the lettering and script above the Coca-Cola wave instead read \"Enjoy Cocaine.\"\n\nCoca-Cola is sometimes used for the treatment of gastric phytobezoars. In about 50% of cases studied, Coca-Cola alone was found to be effective in gastric phytobezoar dissolution. Unfortunately, this treatment can result in the potential of developing small bowel obstruction in a minority of cases, necessitating surgical intervention.\n\nCriticism of Coca-Cola has arisen from various groups around the world, concerning a variety of issues, including health effects, environmental issues, and business practices. The drink's coca flavoring, and the nickname \"Coke\", remain a common theme of criticism due to the relationship with the illegal drug cocaine. In 1911, the US government seized 40 barrels and 20 kegs of Coca-Cola syrup in Chattanooga, Tennessee, alleging the caffeine in its drink was \"injurious to health\", leading to amended food safety legislation.\n\nBeginning in the 1940s, Pepsi started marketing their drinks to African Americans, a niche market that was largely ignored by white-owned manufacturers in the US, and was able to use its anti-racism stance as a selling point, attacking Coke's reluctance to hire blacks and support by the chairman of The Coca-Cola Company for segregationist Governor of Georgia Herman Talmadge. As a result of this campaign, Pepsi's market share as compared to Coca-Cola's shot up dramatically in the 1950s with African American soft-drink consumers three times more likely to purchase Pepsi over Coke.\n\nThe Coca-Cola Company, its subsidiaries and products have been subject to sustained criticism by consumer groups, environmentalists, and watchdogs, particularly since the early 2000s.\n\nCoca-Cola Classic is rich in sugar (or sweetners in some countries) especially sucrose, which causes dental caries when consumed regularly. Besides this, the high caloric value of the sugars themselves can contribute to obesity. Both are major health issues in the developed world.\n\nCoca-Cola produces over 3 million tonnes of plastic packaging every year.\n\nIn July 2001, the Coca-Cola company was sued over its alleged use of political far-right wing death squads (the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia) to kidnap, torture, and kill Colombian bottler workers that were linked with trade union activity. Coca-Cola was sued in a US federal court in Miami by the Colombian food and drink union Sinaltrainal. The suit alleged that Coca-Cola was indirectly responsible for having \"contracted with or otherwise directed paramilitary security forces that utilized extreme violence and murdered, tortured, unlawfully detained or otherwise silenced trade union leaders\". This sparked campaigns to boycott Coca-Cola in the UK, US, Germany, Italy, and Australia. Javier Correa, the president of Sinaltrainal, said the campaign aimed to put pressure on Coca-Cola \"to mitigate the pain and suffering\" that union members had suffered.\n\nSpeaking from the Coca-Cola company's headquarters in Atlanta, company spokesperson Rafael Fernandez Quiros said \"Coca-Cola denies any connection to any human-rights violation of this type\" and added \"We do not own or operate the plants\".\n\nCoca-Cola has a high degree of identification with the United States, being considered by some an \"American Brand\" or as an item representing America. During World War II, this gave rise to the brief production of White Coke by the request of and for Soviet Marshall Georgy Zhukov, who did not want to be seen drinking an American imperial symbol. The drink is also often a metonym for the Coca-Cola Company.\n\nCoca-Cola was introduced to China in 1927, and was very popular until 1949. After the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949, the beverage was no longer imported into China, as it was perceived to be a symbol of decadent Western culture and the capitalist lifestyle. Importation and sales of the beverage resumed in 1979, after diplomatic relations between the United States and China were restored.\n\nThere are some consumer boycotts of Coca-Cola in Arab countries due to Coke's early investment in Israel during the Arab League boycott of Israel (its competitor Pepsi stayed out of Israel). Mecca-Cola and Pepsi are popular alternatives in the Middle East.\n\nA Coca-Cola fountain dispenser (officially a Fluids Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus or FGBA) was developed for use on the Space Shuttle as a test bed to determine if carbonated beverages can be produced from separately stored carbon dioxide, water, and flavored syrups and determine if the resulting fluids can be made available for consumption without bubble nucleation and resulting foam formation. FGBA-1 flew on STS-63 in 1995 and dispensed pre-mixed beverages, followed by FGBA-2 on STS-77 the next year. The latter mixed CO₂, water, and syrup to make beverages. It supplied 1.65 liters each of Coca-Cola and Diet Coke.\n\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola HBC AG\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola treatment of phytobezoars\nBULLET::::- Coca Colla\nBULLET::::- Colalife\nBULLET::::- Fanta\nBULLET::::- List of Coca-Cola brands\nBULLET::::- Mexican Coke\nBULLET::::- Neiman Marcus\nBULLET::::- OpenCola (drink)\nBULLET::::- Premix and postmix\n\nBULLET::::- Allen, Frederick. \"Secret Formula: How Brilliant Marketing and Relentless Salesmanship Made Coca-Cola the Best-Known Product in the World\". New York: Harper Business, 1994.\nBULLET::::- Blanding, Michael. \"The Coke Machine: The Dirty Truth Behind the World's Favorite Soft Drink.\" New York: Avery, 2010.\nBULLET::::- Elmore, Bartow J. \"Citizen Coke: An Environmental and Political History of the Coca-Cola Company,\" \"Enterprise & Society\" (2013) 14#4 pp 717–731 online\nBULLET::::- Hays, Constance L. \"The Real Thing: Truth and Power at the Coca-Cola Company.\" New York: Random House, 2004.\nBULLET::::- Kahn, Ely J., Jr. \"The Big Drink: The Story of Coca-Cola.\" New York: Random House, 1960.\nBULLET::::- Louis, Jill Chen and Harvey Z. Yazijian. \"The Cola Wars.\" New York: Everest House Publishers, 1980.\nBULLET::::- Oliver, Thomas. \"The Real Coke, The Real Story.\" New York: Random House, 1986.\nBULLET::::- Pendergrast, Mark. \"For God, Country, and Coca-Cola: The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink And the Company That Makes It.\" New York: Basic Books, 2000.\n\nBULLET::::- Isdell, Neville. \"Inside Coca-Cola: A CEO's Life Story of Building the World's Most Popular Brand. With the assistance of David Beasley.\" New York: St. Martin's Press, 2011\n\nBULLET::::- Kinescope of a live 1954 TV commercial for Coca-Cola (Internet Archive)\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola Advertising History\nBULLET::::- The Contour Bottle\nBULLET::::- Coca-Cola: Refreshing Memories – slideshow by \"Life magazine\"\nBULLET::::- China Advisory: Avoiding the Wax Tadpole – Effective Chinese Language Trademark Strategy Chinese language trademark for Coca-Cola\n"}
{"id": "6693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6693", "title": "Cofinality", "text": "Cofinality\n\nIn mathematics, especially in order theory, the cofinality cf(\"A\") of a partially ordered set \"A\" is the least of the cardinalities of the cofinal subsets of \"A\".\n\nThis definition of cofinality relies on the axiom of choice, as it uses the fact that every non-empty set of cardinal numbers has a least member. The cofinality of a partially ordered set \"A\" can alternatively be defined as the least ordinal \"x\" such that there is a function from \"x\" to \"A\" with cofinal image. This second definition makes sense without the axiom of choice. If the axiom of choice is assumed, as will be the case in the rest of this article, then the two definitions are equivalent.\n\nCofinality can be similarly defined for a directed set and is used to generalize the notion of a subsequence in a net.\n\nBULLET::::- The cofinality of a partially ordered set with greatest element is 1 as the set consisting only of the greatest element is cofinal (and must be contained in every other cofinal subset).\nBULLET::::- In particular, the cofinality of any nonzero finite ordinal, or indeed any finite directed set, is 1, since such sets have a greatest element.\nBULLET::::- Every cofinal subset of a partially ordered set must contain all maximal elements of that set. Thus the cofinality of a finite partially ordered set is equal to the number of its maximal elements.\nBULLET::::- In particular, let \"A\" be a set of size \"n\", and consider the set of subsets of \"A\" containing no more than \"m\" elements. This is partially ordered under inclusion and the subsets with \"m\" elements are maximal. Thus the cofinality of this poset is \"n\" choose \"m\".\nBULLET::::- A subset of the natural numbers N is cofinal in N if and only if it is infinite, and therefore the cofinality of ℵ is ℵ. Thus ℵ is a regular cardinal.\nBULLET::::- The cofinality of the real numbers with their usual ordering is ℵ, since N is cofinal in R. The usual ordering of R is not order isomorphic to \"c\", the cardinality of the real numbers, which has cofinality strictly greater than ℵ. This demonstrates that the cofinality depends on the order; different orders on the same set may have different cofinality.\n\nIf \"A\" admits a totally ordered cofinal subset, then we can find a subset \"B\" which is well-ordered and cofinal in \"A\". Any subset of \"B\" is also well-ordered. If two cofinal subsets of \"B\" have minimal cardinality (i.e. their cardinality is the cofinality of \"B\"), then they are order isomorphic to each other.\n\nThe cofinality of an ordinal α is the smallest ordinal δ which is the order type of a cofinal subset of α. The cofinality of a set of ordinals or any other well-ordered set is the cofinality of the order type of that set.\n\nThus for a limit ordinal α, there exists a δ-indexed strictly increasing sequence with limit α. For example, the cofinality of ω² is ω, because the sequence ω·\"m\" (where \"m\" ranges over the natural numbers) tends to ω²; but, more generally, any countable limit ordinal has cofinality ω. An uncountable limit ordinal may have either cofinality ω as does ω or an uncountable cofinality.\n\nThe cofinality of 0 is 0. The cofinality of any successor ordinal is 1. The cofinality of any nonzero limit ordinal is an infinite regular cardinal.\n\nA regular ordinal is an ordinal which is equal to its cofinality. A singular ordinal is any ordinal which is not regular.\n\nEvery regular ordinal is the initial ordinal of a cardinal. Any limit of regular ordinals is a limit of initial ordinals and thus is also initial but need not be regular. Assuming the axiom of choice, formula_1 is regular for each α. In this case, the ordinals 0, 1, formula_2, formula_3, and formula_4 are regular, whereas 2, 3, formula_5, and ω are initial ordinals which are not regular.\n\nThe cofinality of any ordinal \"α\" is a regular ordinal, i.e. the cofinality of the cofinality of \"α\" is the same as the cofinality of \"α\". So the cofinality operation is idempotent.\n\nIf κ is an infinite cardinal number, then cf(κ) is the least cardinal such that there is an unbounded function from cf(κ) to κ; cf(κ) is also the cardinality of the smallest set of strictly smaller cardinals whose sum is κ; more precisely\n\nThat the set above is nonempty comes from the fact that\n\ni.e. the disjoint union of κ singleton sets. This implies immediately that cf(κ) ≤ κ.\nThe cofinality of any totally ordered set is regular, so one has cf(κ) = cf(cf(κ)).\n\nUsing König's theorem, one can prove κ < κ and κ < cf(2) for any infinite cardinal κ.\n\nThe last inequality implies that the cofinality of the cardinality of the continuum must be uncountable. On the other hand,\n\nthe ordinal number ω being the first infinite ordinal, so that the cofinality of formula_9 is card(ω) = formula_10. (In particular, formula_9 is singular.) Therefore,\n\nGeneralizing this argument, one can prove that for a limit ordinal δ\n\nOn the other hand, if the axiom of choice holds, then for a successor or zero ordinal δ\n\nBULLET::::- Initial ordinal\n\nBULLET::::- Jech, Thomas, 2003. \"Set Theory: The Third Millennium Edition, Revised and Expanded\". Springer. .\nBULLET::::- Kunen, Kenneth, 1980. \"Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs\". Elsevier. .\n"}
{"id": "6695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6695", "title": "Citadel", "text": "Citadel\n\nA citadel is the core fortified area of a town or city. It may be a castle, fortress, or fortified center. The term is a diminutive of \"city\" and thus means \"little city\", so called because it is a smaller part of the city of which it is the defensive core. Ancient Sparta had a citadel, as did many other Greek cities and towns.\n\nIn a fortification with bastions, the citadel is the strongest part of the system, sometimes well inside the outer walls and bastions, but often forming part of the outer wall for the sake of economy. It is positioned to be the last line of defense, should the enemy breach the other components of the fortification system. The functions of the police and the army, as well as the army barracks were developed in the citadel.\n\nSome of the oldest known structures which have served as citadels were built by the Indus Valley Civilisation, where the citadel represented a centralised authority. The main citadel in Indus Valley was almost 12 meters tall. The purpose of these structures, however, remains debated. Though the structures found in the ruins of Mohenjo-daro were walled, it is far from clear that these structures were defensive against enemy attacks. Rather, they may have been built to divert flood waters.\n\nSeveral settlements in Anatolia, including the Assyrian city of Kaneš in modern-day Kültepe, featured citadels. Kaneš' citadel contained the city's palace, temples, and official buildings. The citadel of the Greek city of Mycenae was built atop a highly-defensible rectangular hill and was later surrounded by walls in order to increase its defensive capabilities.\n\nIn Ancient Greece, the Acropolis (literally: \"high city\"), placed on a commanding eminence, was important in the life of the people, serving as a refuge and stronghold in peril and containing military and food supplies, the shrine of the god and a royal palace. The most well known is the Acropolis of Athens, but nearly every Greek city-state had one – the Acrocorinth famed as a particularly strong fortress. In a much later period, when Greece was ruled by the Latin Empire, the same strong points were used by the new feudal rulers for much the same purpose.\n\nIn the first millennium BCE, the Castro culture emerged in northwestern Portugal and Spain in the region extending from the Douro river up to the Minho, but soon expanding north along the coast, and east following the river valleys. It was an autochthonous evolution of Atlantic Bronze Age communities. In 2008, the origins of the Celts were attributed to this period by John T. Koch and supported by Barry Cunliffe. The Ave River Valley in Portugal was the core region of this culture, with a large number of small settlements (the \"castros\"), but also settlements known as citadels or oppida by the Roman conquerors. These had several rings of walls and the Roman conquest of the citadels of Abobriga, Lambriaca and Cinania around 138 B.C. was possible only by prolonged siege. Ruins of notable citadels still exist, and are known by archaeologists as Citânia de Briteiros, Citânia de Sanfins, Cividade de Terroso and Cividade de Bagunte.\n\nRebels who took power in the city but with the citadel still held by the former rulers could by no means regard their tenure of power as secure. One such incident played an important part in the history of the Maccabean Revolt against the Seleucid Empire. The Hellenistic garrison of Jerusalem and local supporters of the Seleucids held out for many years in the Acra citadel, making Maccabean rule in the rest of Jerusalem precarious. When finally gaining possession of the place, the Maccabeans pointedly destroyed and razed the Acra, though they constructed another citadel for their own use in a different part of Jerusalem.\n\nAt various periods, and particularly during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, the citadel – having its own fortifications, independent of the city walls – was the last defence of a besieged army, often held after the town had been conquered. Locals and defending armies have often held out citadels long after the city had fallen. For example, in the 1543 Siege of Nice the Ottoman forces led by Barbarossa conquered and pillaged the town and took many captives, but the citadel held out.\n\nIn the Philippines, the Ivatan people of the northern islands of Batanes often built fortifications to protect themselves during times of war. They built their so-called \"idjangs\" on hills and elevated areas. These fortifications were likened to European castles because of their purpose. Usually, the only entrance to the castles would be via a rope ladder that would only be lowered for the villagers and could be kept away when invaders arrived.\n\nIn time of war the citadel in many cases afforded retreat to the people living in the areas around the town. However, citadels were often used also to protect a garrison or political power from the inhabitants of the town where it was located, being designed to ensure loyalty from the town that they defended.\nFor example, during the Dutch Wars of 1664-1667, King Charles II of England constructed a Royal Citadel at Plymouth, an important channel port which needed to be defended from a possible naval attack. However, due to Plymouth's support for the Parliamentarians in the then-recent English Civil War, the Plymouth Citadel was so designed that its guns could fire on the town as well as on the sea approaches.\n\nBarcelona had a great citadel built in 1714 to intimidate the Catalans against repeating their mid-17th- and early-18th-century rebellions against the Spanish central government. In the 19th century, when the political climate had liberalized enough to permit it, the people of Barcelona had the citadel torn down, and replaced it with the city's main central park, the Parc de la Ciutadella. A similar example is the Citadella in Budapest, Hungary.\n\nThe attack on the Bastille in the French Revolution – though afterwards remembered mainly for the release of the handful of prisoners incarcerated there – was to considerable degree motivated by the structure's being a Royal citadel in the midst of revolutionary Paris.\n\nSimilarly, after Garibaldi's overthrow of Bourbon rule in Palermo, during the 1860 Unification of Italy, Palermo's Castellamare Citadel – symbol of the hated and oppressive former rule – was ceremoniously demolished.\n\nFollowing Belgium declaring independence in 1830, a Dutch garrison under General David Hendrik Chassé held out in Antwerp Citadel between 1830 and 1832, while the city had already become part of the independent Belgium.\n\nThe Siege of the Alcázar in the Spanish Civil War, in which the Nationalists held out against a much larger Republican force for two months until relieved, shows that in some cases a citadel can be effective even in modern warfare; a similar case is the Battle of Huế during the Vietnam war, where a North Vietnamese Army division held the citadel of Huế for 26 days against roughly their own numbers of much better-equipped US and South Vietnamese troops.\n\nThe Citadelle of Québec (construction started 1673, completed 1820) still survives as the largest citadel still in official military operation in North America. It is home to the Royal 22nd Regiment of the Canadian Army and forms part of the Ramparts of Quebec City dating back to 1620s.\n\nSince the mid 20th century, citadels commonly enclose military command and control centres, rather than cities or strategic points of defense on the boundaries of a country. These modern citadels are built to protect the command center from heavy attacks, such as aerial or nuclear bombardment. The military citadels under London in the UK, including the massive underground complex Pindar beneath the Ministry of Defence, are examples, as is the Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker in the US.\n\nOn armored warships, the heavily armored section of the ship that protects the ammunition and machinery spaces is called the armored citadel.\n\nA modern naval interpretation refers to the heaviest protected part of the hull as \"the vitals\", and the citadel is the semi-armoured freeboard above the vitals. Generally Anglo-American and German language follow this while Russian sources/language refer to \"the vitals\" as цитадел \"tsitadel\". Likewise Russian literature often refers to the turret of a tank as the 'tower'.\n\nThe safe room on a ship is also called a citadel.\n\nBULLET::::- Acra, Jerusalem (ruins)\nBULLET::::- Antwerp Citadel, Belgium (demolished)\nBULLET::::- Ark of Bukhara, Uzbekistan\nBULLET::::- Bab Ksiba, Morocco\nBULLET::::- Bam Citadel, Iran\nBULLET::::- Beijing city fortifications, China (mostly demolished)\nBULLET::::- Brest Fortress, Belarus\nBULLET::::- Cadmea, Greece (ruins)\nBULLET::::- Cairo Citadel, Egypt\nBULLET::::- Castillo San Felipe del Morro, United States\nBULLET::::- Citadel of Aleppo, Syria (partly destroyed, getting rebuilt)\nBULLET::::- Castle of Kars, Turkey\nBULLET::::- Citadel Hill, Canada\nBULLET::::- Citadel of Erbil, Iraq (partially ruined)\nBULLET::::- Citadel of Ghazni, Afghanistan\nBULLET::::- Citadel of Liège, Belgium (partially demolished)\nBULLET::::- Citadel Počitelj, Bosnia and Herzegovina\nBULLET::::- Citadel Prins Frederik, Indonesia (demolished)\nBULLET::::- Citadel of Salah Ed-Din, Syria (partially ruined)\nBULLET::::- Citadella, Hungary\nBULLET::::- Cittadella of Gozo, Malta\nBULLET::::- Citadelle Laferrière, Haiti\nBULLET::::- Citadelle of Quebec, Canada\nBULLET::::- City Wall of Nanjing, China\nBULLET::::- City Wall of Suzhou, China (partially demolished)\nBULLET::::- Dublin Castle, Ireland\nBULLET::::- Edinburgh Castle, United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Fort Santiago, Philippines\nBULLET::::- Fortifications of Xi'an, China\nBULLET::::- Fortress of Louisbourg, Canada\nBULLET::::- Fortress of Ulm, Germany (partially demolished)\nBULLET::::- Garrison Border Town of Elvas and its Fortifications, Portugal\nBULLET::::- Goryōkaku, Japan\nBULLET::::- Gradačac Castle, Bosnia and Herzegovina\nBULLET::::- Hamina Fortress, Finland\nBULLET::::- Herat Citadel, Afghanistan\nBULLET::::- Hwaseong Fortress, South Korea\nBULLET::::- Kaunas Fortress, Lithuania\nBULLET::::- Lahore Fort, Pakistan\nBULLET::::- Mainz Citadel, Germany\nBULLET::::- Moscow Kremlin, Russia\nBULLET::::- \"Commune\" of Neuf-Brisach, France\nBULLET::::- \"Comune\" of Palmanova, Italy\nBULLET::::- Petersberg Citadel, Germany\nBULLET::::- Prague Castle, Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- The Royal Citadel, United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Samuel's Fortress, North Macedonia\nBULLET::::- Spandau Citadel, Germany\nBULLET::::- Stone City, China\nBULLET::::- Suomenlinna, Finland\nBULLET::::- Špilberk Castle, Czech Republic\nBULLET::::- Tower of David, Jerusalem\nBULLET::::- Tower of London, United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Uzhhorod Castle, Ukraine\nBULLET::::- Verne Citadel, United Kingdom\nBULLET::::- Walls of Constantinople, Turkey (partially ruined)\nBULLET::::- Walls of Dubrovnik, Croatia\nBULLET::::- Walls of Genoa, Italy\nBULLET::::- Walls of Nicosia, Cyprus\nBULLET::::- Walls of Tallinn, Estonia\nBULLET::::- Acropolis\nBULLET::::- Alcazaba a term for Moorish citadels in Spain\nBULLET::::- Alcázar\nBULLET::::- Arx (Roman)\nBULLET::::- Fujian Tulou\nBULLET::::- Kasbah a synonym\nBULLET::::- Presidio\nBULLET::::- Rocca (architecture)\n"}
{"id": "6696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6696", "title": "Chain mail", "text": "Chain mail\n\nMail or maille (also chain mail(le) or chainmail(le)) is a type of armour consisting of small metal rings linked together in a pattern to form a mesh. It was generally in common military use between the 3rd century BC and the 14th century AD. A coat of this armour is often referred to as a hauberk, and sometimes a byrnie.\n\nThe earliest examples of surviving mail were found in the Carpathian Basin at a burial in Horný Jatov, Slovakia dated at 3rd century BC, and in a chieftain's burial located in Ciumești, Romania. Its invention is commonly credited to the Celts, but there are examples of Etruscan pattern mail dating from at least the 4th century BCE. Mail may have been inspired by the much earlier scale armour. Mail spread to North Africa, West Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia, India, Tibet, South East Asia, and Japan.\n\nHerodotus wrote that the ancient Persians wore scale armour, but mail is also distinctly mentioned in the Avesta, the ancient holy scripture of the Persian religion of Zoroastrianism that was founded by the prophet Zoroaster in the 5th century BC.\n\nMail continues to be used in the 21st century as a component of stab-resistant body armour, cut-resistant gloves for butchers and woodworkers, shark-resistant wetsuits for defense against shark bites, and a number of other applications.\n\nThe origins of the word \"mail\" are not fully known. One theory is that it originally derives from the Latin word \"macula\", meaning \"spot\" or \"opacity\" (as in macula of retina). Another theory relates the word to the old French \"maillier\", meaning \"to hammer\" (related to the modern English word \"malleable\"). In modern French, \"maille\" refers to a loop or stitch. The Arabic words \"burnus\", , a burnoose; a hooded cloak, also a chasuble (worn by Coptic priests) and \"barnaza\", , to bronze, suggest an Arabic influence for the Carolingian armour known as \"byrnie\" (see below).\n\nThe first attestations of the word \"mail\" are in Old French and Anglo-Norman: \"maille\", \"maile\", or \"male\" or other variants, which became \"mailye\", \"maille\", \"maile\", \"male\", or \"meile\" in Middle English.\nThe modern usage of terms for mail armour is highly contested in popular and, to a lesser degree, academic culture. Medieval sources referred to armour of this type simply as \"mail\"; however, \"chain-mail\" has become a commonly used, if incorrect, neologism coined no latter than 1786, appearing in Francis Grose's \"A Treatise on Ancient Armour and Weapons\", and brought to popular attention no latter than 1822 in Sir Walter Scott's novel \"The Fortunes of Nigel\". Since then the word \"mail\" has been commonly, if incorrectly, applied to other types of armour, such as in \"plate-mail\" (first attested in 1835). The more correct term is \"plate armour\".\n\nCivilizations that used mail invented specific terms for each garment made from it. The standard terms for European mail armour derive from French: leggings are called chausses, a hood is a mail coif, and mittens, mitons. A mail collar hanging from a helmet is a camail or aventail. A shirt made from mail is a hauberk if knee-length and a haubergeon if mid-thigh length. A layer (or layers) of mail sandwiched between layers of fabric is called a jazerant.\n\nA waist-length coat in medieval Europe was called a byrnie, although the exact construction of a byrnie is unclear, including whether it was constructed of mail or other armour types. Noting that the byrnie was the \"most highly valued piece of armour\" to the Carolingian soldier, Bennet, Bradbury, DeVries, Dickie, and Jestice indicate that:\n\nThere is some dispute among historians as to what exactly constituted the Carolingian byrnie. Relying... only on artistic and some literary sources because of the lack of archaeological examples, some believe that it was a heavy leather jacket with metal scales sewn onto it. It was also quite long, reaching below the hips and covering most of the arms. Other historians claim instead that the Carolingian byrnie was nothing more than a coat of mail, but longer and perhaps heavier than traditional early medieval mail. Without more certain evidence, this dispute will continue.\n\nThe use of mail as battlefield armour was common during the Iron Age and the Middle Ages, becoming less common over the course of the 16th and 17th centuries when plate armor and more advanced firearms were developed. It is believed that the Roman Republic first came into contact with mail fighting the Gauls in Cisalpine Gaul, now Northern Italy, but a different pattern of mail was already in use among the Etruscans. The Roman army adopted the technology for their troops in the form of the lorica hamata which was used as a primary form of armour through the Imperial period.\nAfter the fall of the Western Empire, much of the infrastructure needed to create plate armour diminished. Eventually the word \"mail\" came to be synonymous with armour. It was typically an extremely prized commodity, as it was expensive and time-consuming to produce and could mean the difference between life and death in a battle. Mail from dead combatants was frequently looted and was used by the new owner or sold for a lucrative price. As time went on and infrastructure improved, it came to be used by more soldiers. The oldest intact mail hauberk still in existence is thought to have been worn by Leopold III, Duke of Austria, who died in 1386 during the Battle of Sempach. Eventually with the rise of the lanced cavalry charge, impact warfare, and high-powered crossbows, mail came to be used as a secondary armour to plate for the mounted nobility.\n\nBy the 14th century, articulated plate armour was commonly used to supplement mail. Eventually mail was supplanted by plate for the most part, as it provided greater protection against windlass crossbows, bludgeoning weapons, and lance charges while maintaining most of the mobility of mail. However, it was still widely used by many soldiers as well as brigandines and padded jacks. These three types of armour made up the bulk of the equipment used by soldiers, with mail being the most expensive. It was sometimes more expensive than plate armour. Mail typically persisted longer in less technologically advanced areas such as Eastern Europe but was in use everywhere into the 16th century.\n\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th century, mail was used as a material for bulletproof vests, most notably by the Wilkinson Sword Company. Results were unsatisfactory; Wilkinson mail worn by the Khedive of Egypt's regiment of \"Iron Men\" was manufactured from split rings which proved to be too brittle, and the rings would fragment when struck by bullets and aggravate the injury. The riveted mail armour worn by the opposing Sudanese Madhists did not have the same problem but also proved to be relatively useless against the firearms of British forces at the battle of Omdurman. During World War I, Wilkinson Sword transitioned from mail to a lamellar design which was the precursor to the flak jacket.\n\nAlso during World War I, a mail fringe, designed by Captain Cruise of the British Infantry, was added to helmets to protect the face. This proved unpopular with soldiers, in spite of being proven to defend against a three-ounce (100 g) shrapnel round fired at a distance of . A protective face mask or splatter mask had a mail veil and was used by early tank crews as a measure against flying steel fragments (spalling) inside the vehicle.\n\nMail armour was introduced to the Middle East and Asia through the Romans and was adopted by the Sassanid Persians starting in the 3rd century AD, where it was supplemental to the scale and lamellar armour already used. \n\nMail was commonly also used as horse armour for cataphracts and heavy cavalry as well as armour for the soldiers themselves. Asian mail could be just as heavy as the European variety and sometimes had prayer symbols stamped on the rings as a sign of their craftsmanship as well as for divine protection. Indeed, mail armour is mentioned in the Quran as being a gift revealed by Allah to David:\n\n21:80 It was We Who taught him the making of coats of mail for your benefit, to guard you from each other's violence: will ye then be grateful? (Yusuf Ali's translation)\nFrom the Abbasid Caliphate, mail was quickly adopted in Central Asia by Timur (Tamerlane) and the Sogdians and by India's Delhi Sultanate. Mail armour was introduced by the Turks in late 12th century and commonly used by Turk and the Mughal and Suri armies where it eventually became the armour of choice in India. Indian mail was constructed with alternating rows of solid links and round riveted links and it was often integrated with plate protection (mail and plate armour). Mail and plate armour was commonly used in India until the Battle of Plassey by the Nawabs of Bengal and the subsequent British conquest of the sub-continent.\n\nThe Ottoman Empire and the other Islamic Gunpowders used mail armour as well as mail and plate armour, and it was used in their armies until the 18th century by heavy cavalry and elite units such as the Janissaries. They spread its use into North Africa where it was adopted by Mamluk Egyptians and the Sudanese who produced it until the early 20th century. Ottoman mail was constructed with alternating rows of solid links and round riveted links. The Persians used mail armour as well as mail and plate armour. Persian mail and Ottoman mail were often quite similar in appearance.\n\nMail was introduced to China when its allies in Central Asia paid tribute to the Tang Emperor in 718 by giving him a coat of \"link armour\" assumed to be mail. China first encountered the armour in 384 when its allies in the nation of Kuchi arrived wearing \"armour similar to chains\". Once in China, mail was imported but was not produced widely. Due to its flexibility, comfort, and rarity, it was typically the armour of high-ranking guards and those who could afford the exotic import (to show off their social status) rather than the armour of the rank and file, who used more common brigandine, scale, and lamellar types. However, it was one of the only military products that China imported from foreigners. Mail spread to Korea slightly later where it was imported as the armour of imperial guards and generals.\n\nIn Japan mail is called \"\" which means chain. When the word \"kusari\" is used in conjunction with an armoured item it usually means that mail makes up the majority of the armour composition. An example of this would be \"kusari gusoku\" which means chain armour. \"Kusari\" \"\", \"\", \"\", \"\", \"\", shoulder, \"\", and other armoured clothing were produced, even \"\" socks.\n\n\"\" was used in samurai armour at least from the time of the Mongol invasion (1270s) but particularly from the Nambokucho Period (1336–1392). The Japanese used many different weave methods including a square 4-in-1 pattern (\"so gusari\"), a hexagonal 6-in-1 pattern (\"hana gusari\") and a European 4-in-1 (\"nanban gusari\"). The rings of Japanese mail were much smaller than their European counterparts; they would be used in patches to link together plates and to drape over vulnerable areas such as the armpits.\n\nRiveted kusari was known and used in Japan. On page 58 of the book \"Japanese Arms & Armor: Introduction\" by H. Russell Robinson, there is a picture of Japanese riveted kusari, and\nthis quote from the translated reference of 1800 book, \"The Manufacture of Armour and Helmets in Sixteenth-Century Japan\", shows that the Japanese not only knew of and used riveted kusari but that they manufactured it as well.\n\n... karakuri-namban (riveted namban), with stout links each closed by a rivet. Its invention is credited to Fukushima Dembei Kunitaka, pupil, of Hojo Awa no Kami Ujifusa, but it is also said to be derived directly from foreign models. It is heavy because the links are tinned (biakuro-nagashi) and these are also sharp-edged because they are punched out of iron plate\n\nButted and or split (twisted) links made up the majority of \"kusari\" links used by the Japanese. Links were either \"butted\" together meaning that the ends touched each other and were not riveted, or the \"kusari\" was constructed with links where the wire was turned or twisted two or more times; these split links are similar to the modern split ring commonly used on keychains. The rings were lacquered black to prevent rusting, and were always stitched onto a backing of cloth or leather. The kusari was sometimes concealed entirely between layers of cloth.\n\nKusari gusoku or chain armour was commonly used during the Edo period 1603 to 1868 as a stand-alone defense. According to George Cameron Stone\n\nEntire suits of mail \"kusari gusoku\" were worn on occasions, sometimes under the ordinary clothing\n\nIan Bottomley in his book \"Arms and Armor of the Samurai: The History of Weaponry in Ancient Japan\" shows a picture of a kusari armour and mentions \"\" (chain jackets) with detachable arms being worn by samurai police officials during the Edo period. The end of the samurai era in the 1860s, along with the 1876 ban on wearing swords in public, marked the end of any practical use for mail and other armour in Japan. Japan turned to a conscription army and uniforms replaced armour.\n\nMail armour provided an effective defense against slashing blows by edged weapons and some forms of penetration by many thrusting and piercing weapons; in fact, a study conducted at the Royal Armouries at Leeds concluded that \"it is almost impossible to penetrate using any conventional medieval weapon\". Generally speaking, mail's resistance to weapons is determined by four factors: linkage type (riveted, butted, or welded), material used (iron versus bronze or steel), weave density (a tighter weave needs a thinner weapon to surpass), and ring thickness (generally ranging from 18 to 14 gauge (1.02–1.63 mm diameter) wire in most examples). Mail, if a warrior could afford it, provided a significant advantage when combined with competent fighting techniques.\n\nWhen the mail was not riveted, a thrust from most sharp weapons could penetrate it. However, when mail was riveted, only a strong well-placed thrust from certain spears, or thin or dedicated mail-piercing swords like the estoc could penetrate, and a pollaxe or halberd blow could break through the armour. Strong projectile weapons such as stronger self bows, recurve bows, and crossbows could also penetrate riveted mail. Some evidence indicates that during armoured combat, the intention was to actually get around the armour rather than through it—according to a study of skeletons found in Visby, Sweden, a majority of the skeletons showed wounds on less well protected legs. Although mail was a formidable protection, due to longswords getting more tapered as time progressed, mail worn under plate armor (and stand-alone mail as well) could be penetrated by the conventional weaponry of another knight.\n\nThe flexibility of mail meant that a blow would often injure the wearer, potentially causing serious bruising or fractures, and it was a poor defence against head trauma. Mail-clad warriors typically wore separate rigid helms over their mail coifs for head protection. Likewise, blunt weapons such as maces and warhammers could harm the wearer by their impact without penetrating the armour; usually a soft armour, such as gambeson, was worn under the hauberk. Medieval surgeons were very well capable of setting and caring for bone fractures resulting from blunt weapons. With the poor understanding of hygiene, however, cuts that could get infected were much more of a problem. Thus mail armour proved to be sufficient protection in most situations.\n\nSeveral patterns of linking the rings together have been known since ancient times, with the most common being the 4-to-1 pattern (where each ring is linked with four others). In Europe, the 4-to-1 pattern was completely dominant. Mail was also common in East Asia, primarily Japan, with several more patterns being utilised and an entire nomenclature developing around them.\n\nHistorically, in Europe, from the pre-Roman period on, the rings composing a piece of mail would be riveted closed to reduce the chance of the rings splitting open when subjected to a thrusting attack or a hit by an arrow.\n\nUp until the 14th century European mail was made of alternating rows of round riveted rings and solid rings. Sometime during the 14th century European mail makers started to transition from round rivets to wedge shaped rivets but continued using alternating rows of solid rings. Eventually European mail makers stopped using solid rings and almost all European mail was made from wedge riveted rings only with no solid rings. Both were commonly made of wrought iron, but some later pieces were made of heat-treated steel. Wire for the riveted rings was formed by either of two methods. One was to hammer out wrought iron into plates and cut or slit the plates. These thin pieces were then pulled through a draw plate repeatedly until the desired diameter was achieved. Waterwheel powered drawing mills are pictured in several period manuscripts. Another method was to simply forge down an iron billet into a rod and then proceed to draw it out into wire. The solid links would have been made by punching from a sheet. Guild marks were often stamped on the rings to show their origin and craftsmanship. Forge welding was also used to create solid links, but there are few possible examples known; the only well documented example from Europe is that of the camail (mail neck-defence) of the 7th century Coppergate helmet. Outside of Europe this practice was more common such as \"theta\" links from India. Very few examples of historic butted mail have been found and it is generally accepted that butted mail was never in wide use historically except in Japan where mail (\"kusari\") was commonly made from \"butted\" links. Butted link mail was also used by the Moros of the Philippines in their mail and plate armors.\n\nMail is used as protective clothing for butchers against meat-packing equipment. Workers may wear up to of mail under their white coats. Butchers also commonly wear a single mail glove to protect themselves from self-inflicted injury while cutting meat, as do many oyster shuckers.\n\nWoodcarvers sometimes use similar mail gloves to protect their hands from cuts and punctures.\n\nScuba divers use mail to protect them from sharkbite, as do animal control officers for protection against the animals they handle. Shark expert and underwater filmmaker Valerie Taylor was among the first to develop and test shark suits in 1979 while diving with sharks.\n\nMail is widely used in industrial settings as shrapnel guards and splash guards in metal working operations.\n\nElectrical applications for mail include RF leakage testing and being worn as a faraday cage suit by tesla coil enthusiasts and high voltage electrical workers.\n\nConventional textile-based ballistic vests are designed to stop soft-nosed bullets but offer little defense from knife attacks. Knife-resistant armour is designed to defend against knife attacks; some of these use layers of metal plates, mail and metallic wires.\n\nMany historical reenactment groups, especially those whose focus is Antiquity or the Middle Ages, commonly use mail both as practical armour and for costuming. Mail is especially popular amongst those groups which use steel weapons. A modern hauberk made from 1.5 mm diameter wire with 10 mm inner diameter rings weighs roughly and contains 15,000–45,000 rings.\n\nOne of the drawbacks of mail is the uneven weight distribution; the stress falls mainly on shoulders. Weight can be better distributed by wearing a belt over the mail, which provides another point of support.\n\nMail worn today for re-enactment and recreational use can be made in a variety of styles and materials. Most recreational mail today is made of butted links which are galvanized or stainless steel. This is historically inaccurate but is much less expensive to procure and especially to maintain than historically accurate reproductions. Mail can also be made of titanium, aluminium, bronze, or copper. Riveted mail offers significantly better protection ability as well as historical accuracy than mail constructed with butted links. Riveted mail can be more labour-intensive and expensive to manufacture. Japanese mail (\"kusari\") is one of the few historically correct examples of mail being constructed with such \"butted links\".\n\nMail remained in use as a decorative and possibly high-status symbol with military overtones long after its practical usefulness had passed. It was frequently used for the epaulettes of military uniforms. It is still used in this form by the British Territorial Army.\n\nMail has applications in sculpture and jewellery, especially when made out of precious metals or colourful anodized metals. Mail artwork includes headdresses, decorative wall hangings, ornaments, chess sets, macramé, and jewelry. For these non-traditional applications, hundreds of patterns (commonly referred to as \"weaves\") have been invented.\n\nLarge-linked mail is occasionally used as a fetish clothing material, with the large links intended to reveal – in part – the body beneath them.\n\nIn some films, knitted string spray-painted with a metallic paint is used instead of actual mail in order to cut down on cost (an example being \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", which was filmed on a very small budget). Films more dedicated to costume accuracy often use ABS plastic rings, for the lower cost and weight. Such ABS mail coats were made for \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy, in addition to many metal coats. The metal coats are used rarely because of their weight, except in close-up filming where the appearance of ABS rings is distinguishable. A large scale example of the ABS mail used in the \"Lord of the Rings\" can be seen in the entrance to the Royal Armouries museum in Leeds in the form of a large curtain bearing the logo of the museum. It was acquired from the makers of the film's armour, Weta Workshop, when the museum hosted an exhibition of WETA armour from their films. For the film \"Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome\", Tina Turner is said to have worn actual mail and she complained how heavy this was. \"Game of Thrones\" makes use of mail, notably during the \"Red Wedding\" scene.\n\nBULLET::::- Banded mail\nBULLET::::- Hauberk\nBULLET::::- Mail and plate armour\nBULLET::::- Kusari (Japanese mail armour)\nBULLET::::- Lorica hamata\nBULLET::::- Lorica plumata with scales attached to a backing of mail\nBULLET::::- Tatami (Japanese armour)\n\nTypically worn under mail armour:\nBULLET::::- Gambeson (also known as quilted armour or a padded jack)\n\nCan be worn over mail armour:\nBULLET::::- Brigandine\nBULLET::::- Coat of plates\nBULLET::::- Lamellar armour\nBULLET::::- Mirror armour (supplementary plates worn over mail)\nBULLET::::- Scale armour\nBULLET::::- Splint armour\nBULLET::::- Transitional armour\n\nOthers:\nBULLET::::- Cataphract\nBULLET::::- Proofing (armour)\nBULLET::::- Ring armour\n\nBULLET::::- Erik D. Schmid/The Mail Research Society\nBULLET::::- The Treatment of Mail on an Arm Guard from the Armoury of the Shah Shuja: Ethical Repair and in situ Documentation in Miniature\nBULLET::::- Excavated lorica hamata\nBULLET::::- Maillers Worldwide - weaves/tutorials/articles, and gallery photos\nBULLET::::- The Maille Artisans International League (MAIL) – Hundreds of weaves/tutorials/articles, and gallery pictures\nBULLET::::- \"Mail: Unchained\", an article taking an in-depth look at the construction and usage of European chain mail\nBULLET::::- Construction tips\nBULLET::::- Butted mail: A Mailmaker's Guide\nBULLET::::- The Ringinator - Tool for making jump rings\nBULLET::::- The Apprentice Armorer's Illustrated Handbook For Making Mail\nBULLET::::- The Ring Lord Chainmail Discussion Forum\nBULLET::::- Phong's Chainmaille Tutorials\nBULLET::::- Ring Guide – Sizing Specialty Square Rings to Round Weaves\nBULLET::::- Ancient Roman originals can be seen on the pages of the Roman Military Equipment Web museum, Romancoins.info\nBULLET::::- http://artofchainmail.com/patterns/european/index.html\nBULLET::::- http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/armor-ii\nBULLET::::- Chain Mail 101: Learn all about making Chain Mail\n"}
{"id": "6697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6697", "title": "Cerberus", "text": "Cerberus\n\nIn Greek mythology, Cerberus (; \"Kérberos\" ), often called the \"hound of Hades\", is a multi-headed dog that guards the gates of the Underworld to prevent the dead from leaving. Cerberus was the offspring of the monsters Echidna and Typhon, and is usually described as having three heads, a serpent for a tail, and snakes protruding from multiple parts of his body. Cerberus is primarily known for his capture by Heracles, one of Heracles' twelve labours.\n\nDescriptions of Cerberus vary, including the number of his heads. Cerberus was usually three-headed, though not always. Cerberus had several multi-headed relatives. His father was the multi snake-headed Typhon, and Cerberus was the brother of three other multi-headed monsters, the multi-snake-headed Lernaean Hydra; Orthrus, the two-headed dog who guarded the Cattle of Geryon; and the Chimera, who had three heads: that of a lion, a goat, and a snake. And, like these close relatives, Cerberus was, with only the rare iconographic exception, multi-headed.\n\nIn the earliest description of Cerberus, Hesiod's \"Theogony\" (c. 8th – 7th century BC), Cerberus has fifty heads, while Pindar (c. 522 – c. 443 BC) gave him one hundred heads. However, later writers almost universally give Cerberus three heads. An exception is the Latin poet Horace's Cerberus which has a single dog head, and one hundred snake heads. Perhaps trying to reconcile these competing traditions, Apollodorus's Cerberus has three dog heads and the heads of \"all sorts of snakes\" along his back, while the Byzantine poet John Tzetzes (who probably based his account on Apollodorus) gives Cerberus fifty heads, three of which were dog heads, the rest being the \"heads of other beasts of all sorts\".\n\nIn art Cerberus is most commonly depicted with two dog heads (visible), never more than three, but occasionally with only one. On one of the two earliest depictions (c. 590–580 BC), a Corinthian cup from Argos (see below), now lost, Cerberus was shown as a normal single-headed dog. The first appearance of a three-headed Cerberus occurs on a mid-sixth-century BC Laconian cup (see below).\n\nHorace's many snake-headed Cerberus followed a long tradition of Cerberus being part snake. This is perhaps already implied as early as in Hesiod's \"Theogony\", where Cerberus' mother is the half-snake Echidna, and his father the snake-headed Typhon. In art Cerberus is often shown as being part snake, for example the lost Corinthian cup showed snakes protruding from Cerberus' body, while the mid sixth-century BC Laconian cup gives Cerberus a snake for a tail. In the literary record, the first certain indication of Cerberus' serpentine nature comes from the rationalized account of Hecataeus of Miletus (fl. 500–494 BC), who makes Cerberus a large poisonous snake. Plato refers to Cerberus' composite nature, and Euphorion of Chalcis (3rd century BC) describes Cerberus as having multiple snake tails, and presumably in connection to his serpentine nature, associates Cerberus with the creation of the poisonous aconite plant. Virgil has snakes writhe around Cerberus' neck, Ovid's Cerberus has a venomous mouth, necks \"vile with snakes\", and \"hair inwoven with the threatening snake\", while Seneca gives Cerberus a mane consisting of snakes, and a single snake tail.\n\nCerberus was given various other traits. According to Euripides, Cerberus not only had three heads but three bodies, and according to Virgil he had multiple backs. Cerberus ate raw flesh (according to Hesiod), had eyes which flashed fire (according to Euphorion), a three-tongued mouth (according to Horace), and acute hearing (according to Seneca).\n\nCerberus' only mythology concerns his capture by Heracles. As early as Homer we learn that Heracles was sent by Eurystheus, the king of Tiryns, to bring back Cerberus from Hades the king of the underworld. According to Apollodorus, this was the twelfth and final labour imposed on Heracles. In a fragment from a lost play \"Pirithous\", (attributed to either Euripides or Critias) Heracles says that, although Eurystheus commanded him to bring back Cerberus, it was not from any desire to see Cerberus, but only because Eurystheus thought that the task was impossible.\n\nHeracles was aided in his mission by his being an initiate of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Euripides has his initiation being \"lucky\" for Heracles in capturing Cerberus. And both Diodorus Siculus and Apollodorus say that Heracles was initiated into the Mysteries, in preparation for his descent into the underworld. According to Diodorus, Heracles went to Athens, where Musaeus, the son of Orpheus, was in charge of the initiation rites, while according to Apollodorus, he went to Eumolpus at Eleusis.\n\nHeracles also had the help of Hermes, the usual guide of the underworld, as well as Athena. In the \"Odyssey\", Homer has Hermes and Athena as his guides. And Hermes and Athena are often shown with Heracles on vase paintings depicting Cerberus' capture. By most accounts, Heracles made his descent into the underworld through an entrance at Tainaron, the most famous of the various Greek entrances to the underworld. The place is first mentioned in connection with the Cerberus story in the rationalized account of Hecataeus of Miletus (fl. 500–494 BC), and Euripides, Seneca, and Apolodorus, all have Heracles descend into the underworld there. However Xenophon reports that Heracles was said to have descended at the Acherusian Chersonese near Heraclea Pontica, on the Black Sea, a place more usually associated with Heracles' exit from the underworld (see below). Heraclea, founded c. 560 BC, perhaps took its name from the association of its site with Heracles' Cerberian exploit.\n\nWhile in the underworld, Heracles met the heroes Theseus and Pirithous, where the two companions were being held prisoner by Hades for attempting to carry off Hades' wife Persephone. Along with bringing back Cerberus, Heracles also managed (usually) to rescue Theseus, and in some versions Pirithous as well. According to Apollodorus, Heracles found Theseus and Pirithous near the gates of Hades, bound to the \"Chair of Forgetfulness, to which they grew and were held fast by coils of serpents\", and when they saw Heracles, \"they stretched out their hands as if they should be raised from the dead by his might\", and Heracles was able to free Theseus, but when he tried to raise up Pirithous, \"the earth quaked and he let go.\"\n\nThe earliest evidence for the involvement of Theseus and Pirithous in the Cerberus story, is found on a shield-band relief (c. 560 BC) from Olympia, where Theseus and Pirithous (named) are seated together on a chair, arms held out in supplication, while Heracles approaches, about to draw his sword. The earliest literary mention of the rescue occurs in Euripides, where Heracles saves Theseus (with no mention of Pirithous). In the lost play \"Pirithous\", both heroes are rescued, while in the rationalized account of Philochorus, Heracles was able to rescue Theseus, but not Pirithous. In one place Diodorus says Heracles brought back both Theseus and Pirithous, by the favor of Persephone, while in another he says that Pirithous remained in Hades, or according to \"some writers of myth\" that neither Theseus, nor Pirithous returned. Both are rescued in Hyginus.\n\nThere are various versions of how Heracles accomplished Cerberus' capture. According to Apollodorus, Heracles asked Hades for Cerberus, and Hades told Heracles he would allow him to take Cerberus only if he \"mastered him without the use of the weapons which he carried\", and so, using his lion-skin as a shield, Heracles squeezed Cerberus around the head until he submitted.\n\nIn some early sources Cerberus' capture seems to involve Heracles fighting Hades. Homer (\"Iliad\" 5.395–397) has Hades injured by an arrow shot by Heracles. A scholium to the \"Iliad\" passage, explains that Hades had commanded that Heracles \"master Cerberus without shield or Iron\". Heracles did this, by (as in Apollodorus) using his lion-skin instead of his shield, and making stone points for his arrows, but when Hades still opposed him, Heracles shot Hades in anger. Consistent with the no iron requirement, on an early-sixth-century BC lost Corinthian cup, Heracles is shown attacking Hades with a stone, while the iconographic tradition, from c. 560 BC, often shows Heracles using his wooden club against Cerberus.\n\nEuripides, has Amphitryon ask Heracles: \"Did you conquer him in fight, or receive him from the goddess [i.e. Persephone]? To which, Heracles answers: \"In fight\", and the \"Pirithous\" fragment says that Heracles \"overcame the beast by force\". However, according to Diodorus, Persephone welcomed Heracles \"like a brother\" and gave Cerberus \"in chains\" to Heracles. Aristophanes, has Heracles seize Cerberus in a stranglehold and run off, while Seneca has Heracles again use his lion-skin as shield, and his wooden club, to subdue Cerberus, after which a quailing Hades and Persephone, allow Heracles to lead a chained and submissive Cerberus away. Cerberus is often shown being chained, and Ovid tells that Heracles dragged the three headed Cerberus with chains of adamant.\n\nThere were several locations which were said to be the place where Heracles brought up Cerberus from the underworld. The geographer Strabo (63/64 BC – c. AD 24) reports that \"according to the myth writers\" Cerberus was brought up at Tainaron, the same place where Euripides has Heracles enter the underworld. Seneca has Heracles enter and exit at Tainaron. Apollodorus, although he has Heracles enter at Tainaron, has him exit at Troezen. The geographer Pausanias tells us that there was a temple at Troezen with \"altars to the gods said to rule under the earth\", where it was said that, in addition to Cerberus being \"dragged\" up by Heracles, Semele was supposed to have been brought up out of the underworld by Dionysus.\n\nAnother tradition had Cerberus brought up at Heraclea Pontica (the same place which Xenophon had earlier associated with Heracles' descent) and the cause of the poisonous plant aconite which grew there in abundance. Herodorus of Heraclea and Euphorion said that when Heracles brought Cerberus up from the underworld at Heraclea, Cerberus \"vomited bile\" from which the aconite plant grew up. Ovid, also makes Cerberus the cause of the poisonous aconite, saying that on the \"shores of Scythia\", upon leaving the underworld, as Cerberus was being dragged by Heracles from a cave, dazzled by the unaccustomed daylight, Cerberus spewed out a \"poison-foam\", which made the aconite plants growing there poisonous. Seneca's Cerberus too, like Ovid's, reacts violently to his first sight of daylight. Enraged, the previously submissive Cerberus struggles furiously, and Heracles and Theseus must together drag Cerberus into the light.\n\nPausanias reports that according to local legend Cerberus was brought up through a chasm in the earth dedicated to Clymenus (Hades) next to the sanctuary of Chthonia at Hermione, and in Euripides' \"Heracles\", though Euripides does not say that Cerberus was brought out there, he has Cerberus kept for a while in the \"grove of Chthonia\" at Hermione. Pausanias also mentions that at Mount Laphystion in Boeotia, that there was a statue of Heracles Charops (\"with bright eyes\"), where the Boeotians said Heracles brought up Cerberus. Other locations which perhaps were also associated with Cerberus being brought out of the underworld include, Hierapolis, Thesprotia, and Emeia near Mycenae.\n\nIn some accounts, after bringing Cerberus up from the underworld, Heracles paraded the captured Cerberus through Greece. Euphorion has Heracles lead Cerberus through Midea in Argolis, as women and children watch in fear, and Diodorus Siculus says of Cerberus, that Heracles \"carried him away to the amazement of all and exhibited him to men.\" Seneca has Juno complain of Heracles \"highhandedly parading the black hound through Argive cities\" and Heracles greeted by laurel-wreathed crowds, \"singing\" his praises.\n\nThen, according to Apollodorus, Heracles showed Cerberus to Eurystheus, as commanded, after which he returned Cerberus to the underworld. However, according to Hesychius of Alexandria, Cerberus escaped, presumably returning to the underworld on his own.\n\nThe earliest mentions of Cerberus (c. 8th – 7th century BC) occur in Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", and Hesiod's \"Theogony\". Homer does not name or describe Cerberus, but simply refers to Heracles being sent by Eurystheus to fetch the \"hound of Hades\", with Hermes and Athena as his guides, and, in a possible reference to Cerberus' capture, that Heracles shot Hades with an arrow. According to Hesiod, Cerberus was the offspring of the monsters Echidna and Typhon, was fifty-headed, ate raw flesh, and was the \"brazen-voiced hound of Hades\", who fawns on those that enter the house of Hades, but eats those who try to leave.\n\nStesichorus (c. 630 – 555 BC) apparently wrote a poem called \"Cerberus\", of which virtually nothing remains. However the early-sixth-century BC-lost Corinthian cup from Argos, which showed a single head, and snakes growing out from many places on his body, was possibly influenced by Stesichorus' poem. The mid-sixth-century BC cup from Laconia gives Cerberus three heads and a snake tail, which eventually becomes the standard representation.\n\nPindar (c. 522 – c. 443 BC) apparently gave Cerberus one hundred heads. Bacchylides (5th century BC) also mentions Heracles bringing Cerberus up from the underworld, with no further details. Sophocles (c. 495 – c. 405 BC), in his \"Women of Trachis\", makes Cerberus three-headed, and in his \"Oedipus at Colonus\", the Chorus asks that Oedipus be allowed to pass the gates of the underworld undisturbed by Cerberus, called here the \"untamable Watcher of Hades\". Euripides (c. 480 – 406 BC) describes Cerberus as three-headed, and three-bodied, says that Heracles entered the underworld at Tainaron, has Heracles say that Cerberus was not given to him by Persephone, but rather he fought and conquered Cerberus, \"for I had been lucky enough to witness the rites of the initiated\", an apparent reference to his initiation into the Eleusinian Mysteries, and says that the capture of Cerberus was the last of Heracles' labors. The lost play \"Pirthous\" (attributed to either Euripides or his late contemporary Critias) has Heracles say that he came to the underworld at the command of Eurystheus, who had ordered him to bring back Cerberus alive, not because he wanted to see Cerberus, but only because Eurystheus thought Heracles would not be able to accomplish the task, and that Heracles \"overcame the beast\" and \"received favour from the gods\".\nPlato (c. 425 – 348 BC) refers to Cerberus' composite nature, citing Cerberus, along with Scylla and the Chimera, as an example from \"ancient fables\" of a creature composed of many animal forms \"grown together in one\". Euphorion of Chalcis (3rd century BC) describes Cerberus as having multiple snake tails, and eyes that flashed, like sparks from a blacksmith's forge, or the volcaninc Mount Etna. From Euphorion, also comes the first mention of a story which told that at Heraclea Pontica, where Cerberus was brought out of the underworld, by Heracles, Cerberus \"vomited bile\" from which the poisonous aconite plant grew up.\n\nAccording to Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), the capture of Cerberus was the eleventh of Heracles' labors, the twelfth and last being stealing the Apples of the Hesperides. Diodorus says that Heracles thought it best to first go to Athens to take part in the Eleusinian Mysteries, \"Musaeus, the son of Orpheus, being at that time in charge of the initiatory rites\", after which, he entered into the underworld \"welcomed like a brother by Persephone\", and \"receiving the dog Cerberus in chains he carried him away to the amazement of all and exhibited him to men.\"\n\nIn Virgil's \"Aeneid\" (1st century BC), Aeneas and the Sibyl encounter Cerberus in a cave, where he \"lay at vast length\", filling the cave \"from end to end\", blocking the entrance to the underworld. Cerberus is described as \"triple-throated\", with \"three fierce mouths\", multiple \"large backs\", and serpents writhing around his neck. The Sybyl throws Cerberus a loaf laced with honey and herbs to induce sleep, enabling Aeneas to enter the underworld, and so apparently for Virgil—contradicting Hesiod—Cerberus guarded the underworld against entrance. Later Virgil describes Cerberus, in his bloody cave, crouching over half-gnawed bones. In his \"Georgics\", Virgil refers to Cerberus, his \"triple jaws agape\" being tamed by Orpheus' playing his lyre.\n\nHorace (65 – 8 BC) also refers to Cerberus yielding to Orphesus' lyre, here Cerberus has a single dog head, which \"like a Fury's is fortified by a hundred snakes\", with a \"triple-tongued mouth\" oozing \"fetid breath and gore\".\n\nOvid (43 BC – AD 17/18) has Cerberus' mouth produce venom, and like Euphorion, makes Cerberus the cause of the poisonous plant aconite. According to Ovid, Heracles dragged Cerberus from the underworld, emerging from a cave \"where 'tis fabled, the plant grew / on soil infected by Cerberian teeth\", and dazzled by the daylight, Cerberus spewed out a \"poison-foam\", which made the aconite plants growing there poisonous.\nSeneca, in his tragedy \"Hercules Furens\" gives a detailed description of Cerberus and his capture.\nSeneca's Cerberus has three heads, a mane of snakes, and a snake tail, with his three heads being covered in gore, and licked by the many snakes which surround them, and with hearing so acute that he can hear \"even ghosts\". Seneca has Heracles use his lion-skin as shield, and his wooden club, to beat Cerberus into submission, after which Hades and Persephone, quailing on their thrones, let Heracles lead a chained and submissive Cerberus away. But upon leaving the underworld, at his first sight of daylight, a frightened Cerberus struggles furiously, and Heracles, with the help of Theseus (who had been held captive by Hades, but released, at Heracles' request) drag Cerberus into the light. Seneca, like Diodorus, has Heracles parade the captured Cerberus through Greece.\n\nApollodorus' Cerberus has three dog-heads, a serpent for a tail, and the heads of many snakes on his back. According to Apollodorus, Heracles' twelfth and final labor was to bring back Cerberus from Hades. Heracles first went to Eumolpus to be initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries. Upon his entering the underworld, all the dead flee Heracles except for Meleager and the Gorgon Medusa. Heracles drew his sword against Medusa, but Hermes told Heracles that the dead are mere \"empty phantoms\". Heracles asked Hades (here called Pluto) for Cerberus, and Hades said that Heracles could take Cerberus provided he was able to subdue him without using weapons. Heracles found Cerberus at the gates of Acheron, and with his arms around Cerberus, though being bitten by Cerberus' serpent tail, Heracles squeezed until Cerberus submitted. Heracles carried Cerberus away, showed him to Eurystheus, then returned Cerberus to the underworld.\n\nIn an apparently unique version of the story, related by the sixth-century AD Pseudo-Nonnus, Heracles descended into Hades to abduct Persephone, and killed Cerberus on his way back up.\n\nThe capture of Cerberus was a popular theme in ancient Greek and Roman art. The earliest depictions date from the beginning of the sixth century BC. One of the two earliest depictions, a Corinthian cup (c. 590–580 BC) from Argos (now lost), shows a naked Heracles, with quiver on his back and bow in his right hand, striding left, accompanied by Hermes. Heracles threatens Hades with a stone, who flees left, while a goddess, perhaps Persephone or possibly Athena, standing in front of Hades' throne, prevents the attack. Cerberus, with a single canine head and snakes rising from his head and body, flees right. On the far right a column indicates the entrance to Hades' palace. Many of the elements of this scene— Hermes, Athena, Hades, Persephone, and a column or portico— are common occurrences in later works. The other earliest depiction, a relief \"pithos\" fragment from Crete (c. 590–570 BC), is thought to show a single lion-headed Cerberus with a snake (open-mouthed) over his back being led to the right.\n\nA mid-sixth-century BC Laconian cup by the Hunt Painter adds several new features to the scene which also become common in later works: three heads, a snake tail, Cerberus' chain and Heracles' club. Here Cerberus has three canine heads, is covered by a shaggy coat of snakes, and has a tail which ends in a snake head. He is being held on a chain leash by Heracles who holds his club raised over head.\n\nIn Greek art, the vast majority of depictions of Heracles and Cerberus occur on Attic vases. Although the lost Corinthian cup shows Cerberus with a single dog head, and the relief \"pithos\" fragment (c. 590–570 BC) apparently shows a single lion-headed Cerberus, in Attic vase painting Cerberus usually has two dog heads. In other art, as in the Laconian cup, Cerberus is usually three-headed. Occasionally in Roman art Cerberus is shown with a large central lion head and two smaller dog heads on either side.\n\nAs in the Corinthian and Laconian cups (and possibly the relief \"pithos\" fragment), Cerberus is often depicted as part snake. In Attic vase painting, Cerberus is usually shown with a snake for a tail or a tail which ends in the head of a snake. Snakes are also often shown rising from various parts of his body including snout, head, neck, back, ankles, and paws.\n\nTwo Attic amphoras from Vulci, one (c. 530–515 BC) by the Bucci Painter (Munich 1493), the other (c. 525–510 BC) by the Andokides painter (Louvre F204), in addition to the usual two heads and snake tail, show Cerberus with a mane down his necks and back, another typical Cerberian feature of Attic vase painting. Andokides' amphora also has a small snake curling up from each of Cerberus' two heads.\n\nBesides this lion-like mane and the occasional lion-head mentioned above, Cerberus was sometimes shown with other leonine features. A pitcher (c. 530–500) shows Cerberus with mane and claws, while a first-century BC sardonyx cameo shows Cerberus with leonine body and paws. In addition, a limestone relief fragment from Taranto (c. 320–300 BC) shows Cerberus with three lion-like heads.\n\nDuring the second quarter of the 5th century BC the capture of Cerberus disappears from Attic vase painting. After the early third century BC, the subject becomes rare everywhere until the Roman period. In Roman art the capture of Cerberus is usually shown together with other labors. Heracles and Cerberus are usually alone, with Heracles leading Cerberus.\n\nThe etymology of Cerberus' name is uncertain. Ogden refers to attempts to establish an Indo-European etymology as \"not yet successful\". It has been claimed to be related to the Sanskrit word सर्वरा \"sarvarā\", used as an epithet of one of the dogs of Yama, from a Proto-Indo-European word *\"k̑érberos\", meaning \"spotted\". Lincoln (1991), among others, critiques this etymology. Lincoln notes a similarity between Cerberus and the Norse mythological dog Garmr, relating both names to a Proto-Indo-European root \"*ger-\" \"to growl\" (perhaps with the suffixes \"-*m/*b\" and \"-*r\"). However, as Ogden observes, this analysis actually requires \"Kerberos\" and \"Garmr\" to be derived from two \"different\" Indo-European roots (*\"ker-\" and *\"gher-\" respectively), and so does not actually establish a relationship between the two names.\n\nThough probably not Greek, Greek etymologies for Cerberus have been offered. An etymology given by Servius (the late-fourth-century commentator on Virgil)—but rejected by Ogden—derives Cerberus from the Greek word \"creoboros\" meaning \"flesh-devouring\". Another suggested etymology derives Cerberus from \"Ker berethrou\", meaning \"evil of the pit\".\n\nAt least as early as the 6th century BC, some ancient writers attempted to explain away various fantastical features of Greek mythology; included in these are various rationalized accounts of the Cerberus story. The earliest such account (late 6th century BC) is that of Hecataeus of Miletus. In his account Cerberus was not a dog at all, but rather simply a large poisonous snake, which lived on Tainaron. The serpent was called the \"hound of Hades\" only because anyone bitten by it died immediately, and it was this snake that Heracles brought to Eurystheus. The geographer Pausanias (who preserves for us Hecataeus' version of the story) points out that, since Homer does not describe Cerberus, Hecataeus' account does not necessarily conflict with Homer, since Homer's \"Hound of Hades\" may not in fact refer to an actual dog.\n\nOther rationalized accounts make Cerberus out to be a normal dog. According to Palaephatus (4th century BC) Cerberus was one of the two dogs who guarded the cattle of Geryon, the other being Orthrus. Geryon lived in a city named Tricranium (in Greek \"Tricarenia,\" \"Three-Heads\"), from which name both Cerberus and Geryon came to be called \"three-headed\". Heracles killed Orthus, and drove away Geryon's cattle, with Cerberus following along behind. Molossus, a Mycenaen, offered to buy Cerberus from Eurystheus (presumably having received the dog, along with the cattle, from Heracles). But when Eurystheus refused, Molossus stole the dog and penned him up in a cave in Tainaron. Eurystheus commanded Heracles to find Cerberus and bring him back. After searching the entire Peloponnesus, Heracles found where it was said Cerberus was being held, went down into the cave, and brought up Cerberus, after which it was said: \"Heracles descended through the cave into Hades and brought up Cerberus.\"\n\nIn the rationalized account of Philochorus, in which Heracles rescues Theseus, Perithous is eaten by Cerberus. In this version of the story, Aidoneus (i.e., \"Hades\") is the mortal king of the Molossians, with a wife named Persephone, a daughter named Kore (another name for the goddess Persephone) and a large mortal dog named Cerberus, with whom all suiters of his daughter were required to fight. After having stolen Helen, to be Theseus' wife, Theseus and Perithous, attempt to abduct Kore, for Perithous, but Aidoneus catches the two heroes, imprisons Theseus, and feeds Perithous to Cerberus. Later, while a guest of Aidoneus, Heracles asks Aidoneus to release Theseus, as a favor, which Aidoneus grants.\n\nA 2nd-century AD Greek known as Heraclitus the paradoxographer (not to be confused with the 5th-century BC Greek philosopher Heraclitus) – claimed that Cerberus had two pups that were never away from their father, which made Cerberus appear to be three-headed.\n\nServius, a medieval commentator on Virgil's \"Aeneid\", derived Cerberus' name from the Greek word \"creoboros\" meaning \"flesh-devouring\" (see above), and held that Cerberus symbolized the corpse-consuming earth, with Heracles' triumph over Cerberus representing his victory over earthly desires. Later the mythographer Fulgentius, allegorizes Cerberus' three heads as representing the three origins of human strife: \"nature, cause, and accident\", and (drawing on the same flesh-devouring etymology as Servius) as symbolizing \"the three ages—infancy, youth, old age, at which death enters the world.\"\n\nThe later Vatican Mythographers repeat and expand upon the traditions of Servius and Fulgentius. All three Vatican Mythographers repeat Servius' derivation of Cerberus' name from \"creoboros\". The Second Vatican Mythographer repeats (nearly word for word) what Fulgentius had to say about Cerberus, while the Third Vatican Mythographer, in another very similar passage to Fugentius', says (more specifically than Fugentius), that for \"the philosophers\" Cerberus represented hatred, his three heads symbolizing the three kinds of human hatred: natural, causal, and casual (i.e. accidental).\n\nThe Second and Third Vatican Mythographers, note that the three brothers Zeus, Poseidon and Hades each have tripartite insignia, associating Hades' three headed Cerberus, with Zeus' three-forked thunderbolt, and Poseidon's three-pronged trident, while the Third Vatican Mythographer adds that \"some philosophers think of Cerberus as the tripartite earth: Asia, Africa, and Europe. This earth, swallowing up bodies, sends souls to Tartarus.\"\n\nVirgil described Cerberus as \"ravenous\" (\"fame rabida\"), and a rapacious Cerberus became proverbial. Thus Cerberus came to symbolize avarice, and so, for example, in Dante's \"Inferno,\" Cerberus is placed in the Third Circle of Hell, guarding over the gluttons, where he \"rends the spirits, flays and quarters them,\" and Dante (perhaps echoing Servius' association of Cerbeus with earth) has his guide Virgil take up handfuls of earth and throw them into Cerberus' \"rapacious gullets.\"\n\nIn the constellation Cerberus introduced by Johannes Hevelius in 1687, Cerberus is drawn as a three-headed snake, held in Hercules' hand (previously these stars had been depicted as a branch of the tree on which grew the Apples of the Hesperides).\n\nIn 1829 French naturalist Georges Cuvier gave the name \"Cerberus\" to a genus of Asian snakes, which are commonly called \"dog-faced water snakes\" in English.\n\nBULLET::::- Dormarch – part of the Cwn Annwn\nBULLET::::- Hellhound\nBULLET::::- Orthrus\n\nBULLET::::- Apollodorus, \"Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.\" Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Apuleius, \"Metamorphoses (The Golden Ass)\", Volume I: Books 1–6. Edited and translated by J. Arthur Hanson. Loeb Classical Library No. 44. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1996. Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Aristophanes, \"Frogs\", Matthew Dillon, Ed., Perseus Digital Library, Tufts University, 1995. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Bacchylides, \"Odes\", translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1991. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Bloomfield, Maurice, \"Cerberus, the Dog of Hades: The History of an Idea\", Open Court publishing Company, 1905. Online version at Google Books\nBULLET::::- Bowra, C. M., \"Greek Lyric Poetry: From Alcman to Simonides\", Clarendon Press, 2001. .\nBULLET::::- Diodorus Siculus, \"Diodorus Siculus: The Library of History\". Translated by C. H. Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989.\nBULLET::::- Euripides. \"Fragments: Oedipus-Chrysippus. Other Fragments.\" Edited and translated by Christopher Collard, Martin Cropp. Loeb Classical Library No. 506. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2009.\nBULLET::::- Euripides, \"Heracles\", translated by E. P. Coleridge in \"The Complete Greek Drama\", edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O'Neill, Jr. Volume 1. New York. Random House. 1938. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Fowler, R. L. (2001), \"Early Greek Mythography: Volume 1: Text and Introduction\", Oxford University Press, 2013. .* Freeman, Kathleen, \"Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers: A Complete Translation of the Fragments in Diels, Fragmente Der Vorsokratiker\", Harvard University Press, 1983. .\nBULLET::::- Fowler, R. L. (2013), \"Early Greek Mythography: Volume 2: Commentary\", Oxford University Press, 2013. .\nBULLET::::- Gantz, Timothy, \"Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources\", Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).\nBULLET::::- Hard, Robin, \"The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's \"Handbook of Greek Mythology\"\", Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.\nBULLET::::- Harding, Phillip, \"The Story of Athens: The Fragments of the Local Chronicles of Attika\", Routledge, 2007. .\nBULLET::::- Hawes, Greta, \"Rationalizing Myth in Antiquity\", OUP Oxford, 2014. .\nBULLET::::- Hesiod, \"Theogony\", in \"The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White\", Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Homer, \"The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes\". Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Homer; \"The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes\". Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Hopman, Marianne Govers, \"Scylla: Myth, Metaphor, Paradox\", Cambridge University Press, 2013. .\nBULLET::::- Horace, \"The Odes and Carmen Saeculare of Horace\". John Conington. trans. London. George Bell and Sons. 1882. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Hyginus, Gaius Julius, \"The Myths of Hyginus\". Edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.\nBULLET::::- Kirk, G. S. 1990 \"The Iliad: A Commentary: Volume 2, Books 5–8\", .\nBULLET::::- Lansing, Richard (editor), \"The Dante Encyclopedia\", Routledge, 2010. .\nBULLET::::- Lightfoot, J. L. \"Hellenistic Collection: Philitas. Alexander of Aetolia. Hermesianax. Euphorion. Parthenius.\" Edited and translated by J. L. Lightfoot. Loeb Classical Library No. 508. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2010. . Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Lucan, \"Pharsalia\", Sir Edward Ridley. London. Longmans, Green, and Co. 1905. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Markantonatos, Andreas, \"Tragic Narrative: A Narratological Study of Sophocles' Oedipus at Colonus\", Walter de Gruyter, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- Nimmo Smith, Jennifer, \"A Christian's Guide to Greek Culture: The Pseudo-nonnus Commentaries on Sermons 4, 5, 39 and 43\". Liverpool University Press, 2001. .\nBULLET::::- Ogden, Daniel (2013a), \"Drakōn: Dragon Myth and Serpent Cult in the Greek and Roman Worlds\", Oxford University Press, 2013. .\nBULLET::::- Ogden, Daniel (2013b), \"Dragons, Serpents, and Slayers in the Classical and early Christian Worlds: A sourcebook\", Oxford University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Ovid. \"Heroides. Amores.\" Translated by Grant Showerman. Revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library 41. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1977. . Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Ovid, \"Metamorphoses\", Brookes More. Boston. Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Papadopoulou, Thalia, \"Heracles and Euripidean Tragedy\", Cambridge University Press, 2005. .\nBULLET::::- Pausanias, \"Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.\" Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Pepin, Ronald E., \"The Vatican Mythographers\", Fordham University Press, 2008.\nBULLET::::- Pindar, \"Odes\", Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Pipili, Maria, \"Laconian Iconography of the Sixth Century B.C.\", Oxford University, 1987.\nBULLET::::- Plato, \"Republic Books 6–10\", Translated by Paul Shorey, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1969. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library\nBULLET::::- Plutarch. \"Lives, Volume I: Theseus and Romulus. Lycurgus and Numa. Solon and Publicola.\" Translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb Classical Library No. 46. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1914. . \"Theseus\" at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Propertius \"Elegies\" Edited and translated by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library 18. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1990. Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Quintus Smyrnaeus, \"Quintus Smyrnaeus: The Fall of Troy\", Translator: A.S. Way; Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, 1913. Internet Archive\nBULLET::::- Room, Adrian, \"Who's Who in Classical Mythology\", Gramercy Books, 2003. .\nBULLET::::- Schefold, Karl (1966), \"Myth and Legend in Early Greek Art\", London, Thames and Hudson.\nBULLET::::- Schefold, Karl (1992) \"Gods and Heroes in Late Archaic Greek Art\", assisted by Luca Giuliani, Cambridge University Press, 1992. .\nBULLET::::- Seneca, \"Tragedies, Volume I: Hercules. Trojan Women. Phoenician Women. Medea. Phaedra.\" Edited and translated by John G. Fitch. Loeb Classical Library No. 62. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2002. . Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Seneca, \"Tragedies, Volume II: Oedipus. Agamemnon. Thyestes. Hercules on Oeta. Octavia.\" Edited and translated by John G. Fitch. Loeb Classical Library No. 78. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2004. . Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Smallwood, Valerie, \"M. Herakles and Kerberos (Labour XI)\" in \"Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC)\" V.1 Artemis Verlag, Zürich and Munich, 1990. . pp. 85–100.\nBULLET::::- Sophocles, \"Women of Trachis\", Translated by Robert Torrance. Houghton Mifflin. 1966. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Statius, \"Statius with an English Translation by J. H. Mozley\", Volume I, \"Silvae\", \"Thebaid\", Books I–IV, Loeb Classical Library No. 206, London: William Heinemann, Ltd., New York: G. P. Putnamm's Sons, 1928. . Internet Archive\nBULLET::::- Statius, \"Statius with an English Translation by J. H. Mozley\", Volume II, \"Thebaid\", Books V–XII, \"Achilleid\", Loeb Classical Library No. 207, London: William Heinemann, Ltd., New York: G. P. Putnamm's Sons, 1928. . Internet Archive\nBULLET::::- Stern, Jacob, \"Palaephatus Πεπὶ Ὰπίστων, On Unbelievable Tales\", Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers, 1996. .\nBULLET::::- Trypanis, C. A., Gelzer, Thomas; Whitman, Cedric, \"CALLIMACHUS, MUSAEUS, Aetia, Iambi, Hecale and Other Fragments. Hero and Leander\", Harvard University Press, 1975. .\nBULLET::::- Tzetzes, \"Chiliades\", editor Gottlieb Kiessling, F.C.G. Vogel, 1826. (English translation, Books II–IV, by Gary Berkowitz. Internet Archive).\nBULLET::::- Virgil, \"Aeneid\", Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library\nBULLET::::- Virgil, \"Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics of Vergil\". J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn & Co. 1900. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library\nBULLET::::- West, David, \"Horace, Odes 3\", Oxford University Press, 2002. .\nBULLET::::- West, M. L. (2003), \"Greek Epic Fragments: From the Seventh to the Fifth Centuries BC\". Edited and translated by Martin L. West. Loeb Classical Library No. 497. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2003. Online version at Harvard University Press.\nBULLET::::- Whitbread, Leslie George, \"Fulgentius the Mythographer\". Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1971.\nBULLET::::- Woodford, Susan, Spier, Jeffrey, \"Kerberos\", in \"Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC)\" VI.1 Artemis Verlag, Zürich and Munich, 1992. . pp. 24–32.\nBULLET::::- Xenophon, \"Anabasis\" in \"Xenophon in Seven Volumes\", 3. Carleton L. Brownson. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts; William Heinemann, Ltd., London. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\n"}
{"id": "6698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6698", "title": "Camel case", "text": "Camel case\n\nCamel case (stylized as camelCase; also known as camel caps or more formally as medial capitals) is the practice of writing phrases such that each word or abbreviation in the middle of the phrase begins with a capital letter, with no intervening spaces or punctuation. Common examples include \"iPhone\" and \"eBay\". It is also sometimes used in online usernames such as \"johnSmith\", and to make multi-word domain names more legible, for example in advertisements.\n\nCamel case is often used for variable names in computer programming. Some programming styles prefer camel case with the first letter capitalised, others not. For clarity, this article calls the two alternatives upper camel case (initial uppercase letter, also known as Pascal case) and lower camel case (initial lowercase letter, also known as Dromedary case). Some people and organizations, notably Microsoft, use the term \"camel case\" only for lower camel case. \"Pascal case\" means only upper camel case.\n\nCamel case is distinct from Title Case, which capitalises all words but retains the spaces between them, and from Tall Man lettering, which uses capitals to emphasize the differences between similar-looking words such as \"predniSONE\" and \"predniSOLONE\". Camel case is also distinct from snake case, which uses underscores interspersed with lowercase letters (sometimes with the first letter capitalized). The combination of \"upper camel case\" and \"snake case\" is known as \"Darwin case\". Darwin case uses underscores between words with initial uppercase letters, as in \"Sample_Type\".\n\nThe original name of the practice, used in media studies, grammars and the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", was \"medial capitals\". Other synonyms include:\n\nBULLET::::- BumpyCaps\nBULLET::::- NerdCaps\nBULLET::::- camelBack (or camel-back) notation or CamelCaps\nBULLET::::- CapitalizedWords or CapWords for upper camel case in Python\nBULLET::::- compoundNames\nBULLET::::- Embedded Caps (or Embedded Capitals)\nBULLET::::- HumpBack (or hump-back) notation\n\nBULLET::::- InterCaps or intercapping (abbreviation of \"Internal Capitalization\")\nBULLET::::- mixedCase for lower camel case in Python\nBULLET::::- PascalCase for upper camel case (after the Pascal programming language)\nBULLET::::- Smalltalk case\nBULLET::::- WikiWord or WikiCase (especially in older wikis)\nBULLET::::- StudlyCaps includes even randomly mixed capitalization, as in \"MiXeD CaPitALiZaTioN\" (typically a stereotyped allusion to online culture), and thus encompasses both styles of camel case.\nThe earliest known occurrence of the term \"InterCaps\" on Usenet is in an April 1990 post to the group alt.folklore.computers by Avi Rappoport. The earliest use of the name \"Camel Case\" occurs in 1995, in a post by Newton Love. Love has since said, \"With the advent of programming languages having these sorts of constructs, the humpiness of the style made me call it HumpyCase at first, before I settled on CamelCase. I had been calling it CamelCase for years. ... The citation above was just the first time I had used the name on USENET.\"\n\nThe use of medial capitals as a convention in the regular spelling of everyday texts is rare, but is used in some languages as a solution to particular problems which arise when two words or segments are combined.\n\nIn Italian, pronouns can be suffixed to verbs, and because the honorific form of second-person pronouns is capitalized, this can produce a sentence like \"non ho trovato il tempo di risponderLe\" (\"I have not found time to answer you\" – where \"Le\" means \"to you\").\n\nIn German, the medial capital letter I, called \"Binnen-I\", is sometimes used in a word like \"StudentInnen\" (\"students\") to indicate that both \"Studenten\" (\"male students\") and \"Studentinnen\" (\"female students\") are intended simultaneously. However, mid-word capitalisation does not conform to German orthography; the previous example could be correctly written using parentheses as \"Student(inn)en\", analogous to \"congress(wo)man\" in English.\n\nIn Irish, camel case is used when an inflectional prefix is attached to a proper noun, for example (\"in Galway\"), from (\"Galway\"); (\"the Scottish person\"), from (\"Scottish person\"); and (\"to Ireland\"), from (\"Ireland\"). In recent Scots Gaelic orthography, a hyphen has been inserted: .\n\nThis convention is also used by several written Bantu languages (e.g., \"kiSwahili\", \"Swahili language\"; \"isiZulu\", \"Zulu language\") and several indigenous languages of Mexico (e.g. Nahuatl, Totonacan, Mixe–Zoque, and some Oto-Manguean languages).\n\nIn Dutch, when capitalizing the digraph \"ij\", both the letter \"I\" and the letter \"J\" are capitalized, for example in the countryname \"IJsland\".\n\nIn English, medial capitals are usually only found in Scottish or Irish \"Mac-\" or \"Mc-\" names, where for example \"MacDonald, McDonald,\" and \"Macdonald\" are common spelling variants of the same name, and in Anglo-Norman \"Fitz-\" names, where for example both \"FitzGerald\" and \"Fitzgerald\" are found.\n\nIn their English style guide \"The King's English\", first published in 1906, H. W. and F. G. Fowler suggested that medial capitals could be used in triple compound words where hyphens would cause ambiguity—the examples they give are \"KingMark-like\" (as against \"King Mark-like\") and \"Anglo-SouthAmerican\" (as against \"Anglo-South American\"). However, they described the system as \"too hopelessly contrary to use at present.\"\n\nIn the scholarly transliteration of languages written in other scripts, medial capitals are used in similar situations. For example, in transliterated Hebrew, \"ha'Ivri\" means \"the Hebrew person\" or \"the Jew\" and \"b'Yerushalayim\" means \"in Jerusalem\". In Tibetan proper names like \"rLobsang\", the \"r\" stands for a prefix glyph in the original script that functions as tone marker rather than a normal letter. Another example is \"tsIurku\", a Latin transcription of the Chechen term for the capping stone of the characteristic Medieval defensive towers of Chechenia and Ingushetia; the capital letter \"I\" here denoting a phoneme distinct from the one transcribed as \"i\".\n\nMedial capitals are traditionally used in abbreviations to reflect the capitalization that the words would have when written out in full, for example in the academic titles PhD or BSc. In German, the names of statutes are abbreviated using embedded capitals, e.g. StGB (Strafgesetzbuch) for Criminal Code, PatG (Patentgesetz) for Patent Act, BVerfG (Bundesverfassungsgericht) for Federal Constitutional Court, or the very common GmbH (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung) for Company with Limited Liability. In this context, there can even be three or more camel case capitals, e.g. in TzBfG for Teilzeit- und Befristungsgesetz (Act on Part-Time and Limited Term Occupations). In French, camel case acronyms such as OuLiPo (1960) were favored for a time as alternatives to initialisms.\n\nCamel case is often used to transliterate initialisms into alphabets where two letters may be required to represent a single character of the original alphabet, e.g., DShK from Cyrillic ДШК. \n\nThe first systematic and widespread use of medial capitals for technical purposes was the notation for chemical formulae invented by the Swedish chemist Jacob Berzelius in 1813. To replace the multitude of naming and symbol conventions used by chemists until that time, he proposed to indicate each chemical element by a symbol of one or two letters, the first one being capitalized. The capitalization allowed formulae like \"NaCl\" to be written without spaces and still be parsed without ambiguity.\n\nBerzelius' system continues to be used, augmented with three-letter symbols such as \"Uue\" for unconfirmed or unknown elements and abbreviations for some common substituents (especially in the field of organic chemistry, for instance \"Et\" for \"ethyl-\"). This has been further extended to describe the amino acid sequences of proteins and other similar domains.\n\nSince the early 20th century, medial capitals have occasionally been used for corporate names and product trademarks, such as\nBULLET::::- DryIce Corporation (1925) marketed the solid form of carbon dioxide (CO) as \"Dry Ice\", thus leading to its common name.\nBULLET::::- CinemaScope and VistaVision, rival widescreen movie formats (1953)\nBULLET::::- ShopKo (1962), retail stores, later renamed Shopko\nBULLET::::- \"MisteRogers\", the Canadian (1962) version of \"Mister Rogers' Neighborhood\"\nBULLET::::- ChemGrass (1965), later renamed AstroTurf (1967)\nBULLET::::- ConAgra (1971), formerly Consolidated Mills\nBULLET::::- MasterCraft (1968), a sports boat manufacturer\nBULLET::::- AeroVironment (1971)\nBULLET::::- PolyGram (1972), formerly Grammophon-Philips Group.\nBULLET::::- United HealthCare (1977)\nBULLET::::- MasterCard (1979), formerly Master Charge\nBULLET::::- SportsCenter (1979)\n\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, medial capitals were adopted as a standard or alternative naming convention for multi-word identifiers in several programming languages. The precise origin of the convention in computer programming has not yet been settled. A 1954 conference proceedings occasionally informally referred to IBM's Speedcoding system as \"SpeedCo\". Christopher Strachey's paper on GPM (1965), shows a program that includes some medial capital identifiers, including \"codice_1\" and \"codice_2\".\n\nMultiple-word descriptive identifiers with embedded spaces such as codice_3 or codice_4 cannot be used in most programming languages because the spaces between the words would be parsed as delimiters between tokens. The alternative of running the words together as in codice_5 or codice_6 is difficult to understand and possibly misleading; for example, codice_6 is an English word (able to be charted).\n\nSome early programming languages, notably Lisp (1958) and COBOL (1959), addressed this problem by allowing a hyphen (\"-\") to be used between words of compound identifiers, as in \"END-OF-FILE\": Lisp because it worked well with prefix notation (a Lisp parser would not treat a hyphen in the middle of a symbol as a subtraction operator) and COBOL because its operators were individual English words. This convention remains in use in these languages, and is also common in program names entered on a command line, as in Unix.\n\nHowever, this solution was not adequate for mathematically-oriented languages such as FORTRAN (1955) and ALGOL (1958), which used the hyphen as an infix subtraction operator. FORTRAN ignored blanks altogether, so programmers could use embedded spaces in variable names. However, this feature was not very useful since the early versions of the language restricted identifiers to no more than six characters.\n\nExacerbating the problem, common punched card character sets of the time were uppercase only and lacked other special characters. It was only in the late 1960s that the widespread adoption of the ASCII character set made both lowercase and the underscore character codice_8 universally available. Some languages, notably C, promptly adopted underscores as word separators, and identifiers such as codice_9 are still prevalent in C programs and libraries (as well as in later languages influenced by C, such as Perl and Python). However, some languages and programmers chose to avoid underscores—among other reasons to prevent confusing them with whitespace—and adopted camel case instead.\n\nCharles Simonyi, who worked at Xerox PARC in the 1970s and later oversaw the creation of Microsoft's Office suite of applications, invented and taught the use of Hungarian Notation, one version of which uses the lowercase letter(s) at the start of a (capitalized) variable name to denote its type. One account claims that the camel case style first became popular at Xerox PARC around 1978, with the Mesa programming language developed for the Xerox Alto computer. This machine lacked an underscore key (whose place was taken by a left arrow \"←\"), and the hyphen and space characters were not permitted in identifiers, leaving camel case as the only viable scheme for readable multiword names. The PARC Mesa Language Manual (1979) included a coding standard with specific rules for upper and lower camel case that was strictly followed by the Mesa libraries and the Alto operating system. Niklaus Wirth, the inventor of Pascal, came to appreciate camel case during a sabbatical at PARC and used it in Modula, his next programming language.\n\nThe Smalltalk language, which was developed originally on the Alto, also uses camel case instead of underscores. This language became quite popular in the early 1980s, and thus may also have been instrumental in spreading the style outside PARC.\n\nWhatever its origins in the computing field, the convention was used in the names of computer companies and their commercial brands, since the late 1970s — a trend that continues to this day:\n\nBULLET::::- (1977) CompuServe\nBULLET::::- (1978) WordStar\nBULLET::::- (1979) VisiCalc\nBULLET::::- (1982) MicroProse, WordPerfect\nBULLET::::- (1983) NetWare\nBULLET::::- (1984) LaserJet, MacWorks, PostScript\nBULLET::::- (1985) PageMaker\nBULLET::::- (1987) ClarisWorks, HyperCard, PowerPoint\nBULLET::::- (1990) WorldWideWeb, later renamed Nexus\n\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, after the advent of the personal computer exposed hacker culture to the world, camel case then became fashionable for corporate trade names in non-computer fields as well. Mainstream usage was well established by 1990:\n\nBULLET::::- (1980) EchoStar\nBULLET::::- (1984) BellSouth\nBULLET::::- (1985) \"EastEnders\"\nBULLET::::- (1986) \"SpaceCamp\"\nBULLET::::- (1990) HarperCollins, SeaTac\nBULLET::::- (1998) PricewaterhouseCoopers, merger of Price Waterhouse and Coopers\n\nDuring the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, the lowercase prefixes \"e\" (for \"electronic\") and \"i\" (for \"Internet\", \"information\", \"intelligent\", etc.) became quite common, giving rise to names like Apple's iMac and the eBox software platform.\n\nIn 1998, Dave Yost suggested that chemists use medial capitals to aid readability of long chemical names, e.g. write AmidoPhosphoRibosylTransferase instead of amidophosphoribosyltransferase. This usage was not widely adopted.\n\nCamel case is sometimes used for abbreviated names of certain neighborhoods, e.g. New York City neighborhoods \"SoHo\" (\"So\"uth of \"Ho\"uston Street) and \"TriBeCa\" (\"Tri\"angle \"Be\"low \"Ca\"nal Street) and San Francisco's \"SoMa\" (\"So\"uth of \"Ma\"rket). Such usages erode quickly, so the neighborhoods are now typically rendered as \"Soho\", \"Tribeca\", and \"Soma\".\n\nInternal capitalization has also been used for other technical codes like HeLa (1983).\n\nThe use of medial caps for compound identifiers is recommended by the coding style guidelines of many organizations or software projects. For some languages (such as Mesa, Pascal, Modula, Java and Microsoft's .NET) this practice is recommended by the language developers or by authoritative manuals and has therefore become part of the language's \"culture\".\n\nStyle guidelines often distinguish between upper and lower camel case, typically specifying which variety should be used for specific kinds of entities: variables, record fields, methods, procedures, types, etc. These rules are sometimes supported by static analysis tools that check source code for adherence.\n\nThe original Hungarian notation for programming, for example, specifies that a lowercase abbreviation for the \"usage type\" (not data type) should prefix all variable names, with the remainder of the name in upper camel case; as such it is a form of lower camel case.\n\nProgramming identifiers often need to contain acronyms and initialisms that are already in uppercase, such as \"old HTML file\". By analogy with the title case rules, the natural camel case rendering would have the abbreviation all in uppercase, namely \"oldHTMLFile\". However, this approach is problematic when two acronyms occur together (e.g., \"parse DBM XML\" would become \"parseDBMXML\") or when the standard mandates lower camel case but the name begins with an abbreviation (e.g. \"SQL server\" would become \"sQLServer\"). For this reason, some programmers prefer to treat abbreviations as if they were lowercase words and write \"oldHtmlFile\", \"parseDbmXml\" or \"sqlServer\". However, this can make it harder to recognise that a given word is intended as an acronym.\n\nCamel case is used in some wiki markup languages for terms that should be automatically linked to other wiki pages. This convention was originally used in Ward Cunningham's original wiki software, WikiWikiWeb, and can be activated in most other wikis. Some wiki engines such as TiddlyWiki, Trac and PmWiki make use of it in the default settings, but usually also provide a configuration mechanism or plugin to disable it. Wikipedia formerly used camel case linking as well, but switched to explicit link markup using square brackets and many other wiki sites have done the same. Some wikis that do not use camel case linking may still use the camel case as a naming convention, such as AboutUs.\n\nThe NIEM registry requires that XML data elements use upper camel case and XML attributes use lower camel case.\n\nMost popular command-line interfaces and scripting languages cannot easily handle file names that contain embedded spaces (usually requiring the name to be put in quotes). Therefore, users of those systems often resort to camel case (or underscores, hyphens and other \"safe\" characters) for compound file names like MyJobResume.pdf.\n\nMicroblogging and social networking sites that limit the number of characters in a message are potential outlets for medial capitals. Using camel case between words reduces the number of spaces, and thus the number of characters, in a given message, allowing more content to fit into the limited space. Hashtags, especially long ones, often use camel case to maintain readability (e.g. #CollegeStudentProblems is easier to read than #collegestudentproblems).\n\nIn website URLs, spaces are percent-encoded as \"%20\", making the address longer and less human readable. By omitting spaces, camel case does not have this problem.\n\nCamel case has been criticised as negatively impacting readability due to the removal of spaces and uppercasing of every word.\n\nA 2009 study comparing snake case to camel case found that camel case identifiers could be recognised with higher accuracy among both programmers and non-programmers, and that programmers already trained in camel case were able to recognise those identifiers faster than underscored snake-case identifiers.\n\nA 2010 follow-up study, under the same conditions but using an improved measurement method with use of eye-tracking equipment, indicates: \"While results indicate no difference in accuracy between the two styles, subjects recognize identifiers in the underscore style more quickly.\"\n\nBULLET::::- All caps\nBULLET::::- Capitalization\nBULLET::::- Caps lock\nBULLET::::- Shift key\nBULLET::::- Small caps\nBULLET::::- Unicase\n\nBULLET::::- Examples and history of CamelCase, also WordsSmashedTogetherLikeSo\nBULLET::::- .NET Framework General Reference Capitalization Styles\nBULLET::::- What's in a nAME(cq)?, by Bill Walsh, at The Slot\nBULLET::::- The Science of Word Recognition, by Kevin Larson, Advanced Reading Technology, Microsoft Corporation\nBULLET::::- Convert text\nBULLET::::- Convert text to CamelCase\nBULLET::::- OASIS Cover Pages: CamelCase for Naming XML-Related Components\nBULLET::::- Convert text to CamelCase, Title Case, Uppercase and lowercase\n"}
{"id": "6700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6700", "title": "Cereal", "text": "Cereal\n\nA cereal is any grass cultivated (grown) for the edible components of its grain (botanically, a type of fruit called a caryopsis), composed of the endosperm, germ, and bran. The term may also refer to the resulting grain itself (specifically \"cereal grain\"). Cereal grain crops are grown in greater quantities and provide more food energy worldwide than any other type of crop and are therefore staple crops. Edible grains from other plant families, such as buckwheat (Polygonaceae), quinoa (Amaranthaceae) and chia (Lamiaceae), are referred to as pseudocereals.\n\nIn their natural, unprocessed, \"whole grain\" form, cereals are a rich source of vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats, oils, and protein. When processed by the removal of the bran, and germ, the remaining endosperm is mostly carbohydrate. In some developing countries, grain in the form of rice, wheat, millet, or maize constitutes a majority of daily sustenance. In developed countries, cereal consumption is moderate and varied but still substantial.\n\nThe word \"cereal\" is derived from \"Ceres\", the Roman goddess of harvest and agriculture.\n\nAgriculture allowed for the support of an increased population, leading to larger societies and eventually the development of cities. It also created the need for greater organization of political power (and the creation of social stratification), as decisions had to be made regarding labor and harvest allocation and access rights to water and land. Agriculture bred immobility, as populations settled down for long periods of time, which led to the accumulation of material goods.\n\nEarly Neolithic villages show evidence of the development of processing grain. The Levant is the ancient home of the ancestors of wheat, barley and peas, in which many of these villages were based. There is evidence of the cultivation of cereals in Syria approximately 9,000 years ago. During the same period, farmers in China began to farm rice and millet, using human-made floods and fires as part of their cultivation regimen. Fiber crops were domesticated as early as food crops, with China domesticating hemp, cotton being developed independently in Africa and South America, and Western Asia domesticating flax. The use of soil amendments, including manure, fish, compost and ashes, appears to have begun early, and developed independently in several areas of the world, including Mesopotamia, the Nile Valley and Eastern Asia.\n\nThe first cereal grains were domesticated by early primitive humans. About 8,000 years ago, they were domesticated by ancient farming communities in the Fertile Crescent region. Emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, and barley were three of the so-called Neolithic founder crops in the development of agriculture. Around the same time, millets and rices were starting to become domesticated in East Asia. Sorghum and millets were also being domesticated in sub-Saharan West Africa.\n\nDuring the second half of the 20th century there was a significant increase in the production of high-yield cereal crops worldwide, especially wheat and rice, due to an initiative known as the Green Revolution. The strategies developed by the Green Revolution focused on fending off starvation and increasing yield-per-plant, and were very successful in raising overall yields of cereal grains, but did not give sufficient relevance to nutritional quality. These modern high yield-cereal crops tend have low quality proteins, with essential amino acid deficiencies, are high in carbohydrates, and lack balanced essential fatty acids, vitamins, minerals and other quality factors. So-called ancient grains and heirloom varieties have seen an increase in popularity with the \"organic\" movements of the early 21st century, but there is a tradeoff in yield-per-plant, putting pressure on resource-poor areas as food crops are replaced with cash crops.\n\nWhile each individual species has its own peculiarities, the cultivation of all cereal crops is similar. Most are annual plants; consequently one planting yields one harvest. Wheat, rye, triticale, oats, barley, and spelt are the \"cool-season\" cereals. These are hardy plants that grow well in moderate weather and cease to grow in hot weather (approximately , but this varies by species and variety). The \"warm-season\" cereals are tender and prefer hot weather. Barley and rye are the hardiest cereals, able to overwinter in the subarctic and Siberia. Many cool-season cereals are grown in the tropics. However, some are only grown in cooler highlands, where it may be possible to grow multiple crops per year.\n\nFor the past few decades, there has also been increasing interest in perennial grain plants. This interest developed due to advantages in erosion control, reduced need for fertiliser, and potential lowered costs to the farmer. Though research is still in early stages, The Land Institute in Salina, Kansas has been able to create a few cultivars that produce a fairly good crop yield.\n\nThe warm-season cereals are grown in tropical lowlands year-round and in temperate climates during the frost-free season. Rice is commonly grown in flooded fields, though some strains are grown on dry land. Other warm climate cereals, such as sorghum, are adapted to arid conditions.\n\nCool-season cereals are well-adapted to temperate climates. Most varieties of a particular species are either winter or spring types. Winter varieties are sown in the autumn, germinate and grow vegetatively, then become dormant during winter. They resume growing in the springtime and mature in late spring or early summer. This cultivation system makes optimal use of water and frees the land for another crop early in the growing season.\n\nWinter varieties do not flower until springtime because they require vernalization: exposure to low temperatures for a genetically determined length of time. Where winters are too warm for vernalization or exceed the hardiness of the crop (which varies by species and variety), farmers grow spring varieties. Spring cereals are planted in early springtime and mature later that same summer, without vernalization. Spring cereals typically require more irrigation and yield less than winter cereals.\n\nOnce the cereal plants have grown their seeds, they have completed their life cycle. The plants die, become brown, and dry. As soon as the parent plants and their seed kernels are reasonably dry, harvest can begin.\n\nIn developed countries, cereal crops are universally machine-harvested, typically using a combine harvester, which cuts, threshes, and winnows the grain during a single pass across the field. In developing countries, a variety of harvesting methods are in use, depending on the cost of labor, from combines to hand tools such as the scythe or grain cradle.\n\nIf a crop is harvested during humid weather, the grain may not dry adequately in the field to prevent spoilage during its storage. In this case, the grain is sent to a dehydrating facility, where artificial heat dries it.\n\nIn North America, farmers commonly deliver their newly harvested grain to a grain elevator, a large storage facility that consolidates the crops of many farmers. The farmer may sell the grain at the time of delivery or maintain ownership of a share of grain in the pool for later sale. Storage facilities should be protected from small grain pests, rodents and birds.\n\nThe following table shows the annual production of cereals in 1961, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013 ranked by 2013 production.\n\n! rowspan=2  Grain\n! colspan=5 nowrap  Worldwide production (millions of metric tons)\n! rowspan=2  Notes\n! 1961 !! 2010 !! 2011 !! 2012 !! 2013\n\nMaize, wheat, and rice together accounted for 89% of all cereal production worldwide in 2012, and 43% of all food calories in 2009, while the production of oats and triticale have drastically fallen from their 1960s levels.\n\nOther cereals worthy of notice, but not included in FAO statistics, include:\nBULLET::::- Teff, an ancient grain that is a staple in Ethiopia. It is high in fiber and protein. Its flour is often used to make injera. It can also be eaten as a warm breakfast cereal similar to farina with a chocolate or nutty flavor. Its flour and whole grain products can usually be found in natural foods stores.\nBULLET::::- Wild rice, grown in small amounts in North America.\n\nSeveral other species of wheat have also been domesticated, some very early in the history of agriculture:\nBULLET::::- Spelt, a close relative of common wheat.\nBULLET::::- Einkorn, a wheat species with a single grain.\nBULLET::::- Emmer, one of the first crops domesticated in the Fertile Crescent.\nBULLET::::- Durum, the only tetraploid species of wheat currently cultivated, used to make semolina.\nBULLET::::- Kamut, an ancient relative of durum with an unknown history.\n\nIn 2013 global cereal production reached a record 2,521 million tonnes. A slight dip to 2,498 million tonnes was forecasted for 2014 by the FAO in July 2014.\n\nSome grains are deficient in the essential amino acid, lysine. That is why many vegetarian cultures, in order to get a balanced diet, combine their diet of grains with legumes. Many legumes, however, are deficient in the essential amino acid methionine, which grains contain. Thus, a combination of legumes with grains forms a well-balanced diet for vegetarians. Common examples of such combinations are dal (lentils) with rice by South Indians and Bengalis, dal with wheat in Pakistan and North India, beans with corn tortillas, tofu with rice, and peanut butter with wheat bread (as sandwiches) in several other cultures, including the Americas. The amount of crude protein measured in grains is expressed as grain crude protein concentration.\n\nCereals contain exogenous opioid peptides called exorphins and include opioid food peptides like Gluten exorphin. They mimic the actions of endorphines because they bind to the same opioid receptors in the brain.\n\nThe ISO has published a series of standards regarding cereal products which are covered by ICS 67.060.\n\nBULLET::::- Breakfast cereal\nBULLET::::- Chillcuring, grain ventilating process\nBULLET::::- Food price crisis\nBULLET::::- Food quality\nBULLET::::- Food safety\nBULLET::::- Lists of foods\nBULLET::::- Nutrition\nBULLET::::- Post-harvest losses\nBULLET::::- Pseudocereal\nBULLET::::- Pulse\nBULLET::::- Push–pull technology\nBULLET::::- Zadoks scale\n"}
{"id": "6704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6704", "title": "Christendom", "text": "Christendom\n\nChristendom has several meanings. In one contemporary sense, as used in a secular or Protestant context, it may refer to the \"Christian world\": Christian-majority countries and the countries in which Christianity dominates or prevails, or, in the historic, Catholic sense of the word, the nations in which Catholic Christianity is the established religion, having a Catholic Christian polity.\n\nSince the spread of Christianity from the Levant to Europe and North Africa during the early Roman Empire, Christendom has been divided in the pre-existing Greek East and Latin West. Consequently, different versions of the Christian religion arose with their own beliefs and practices, centred around the cities of Rome (Western Christianity, whose community was called Western or Latin Christendom) and Constantinople (Eastern Christianity, whose community was called Eastern Christendom). From the 11th to 13th centuries, Latin Christendom rose to the central role of the Western world.\n\nIn its historical sense, the term usually refers to the Middle Ages and to the Early Modern period during which the Christian world represented a geopolitical power that was juxtaposed with both the pagan and especially the Muslim world. In the traditional Roman Catholic sense of the word, it refers to the sum total of nations in which the Catholic Church is the established religion of the state or to those with ecclesiastical concordats with the Holy See.\n\nThe Anglo-Saxon term \"cristendom\" appears to have been invented in the 9th century by a scribe somewhere in southern England, possibly at the court of king Alfred the Great of Wessex. The scribe was translating Paulus Orosius' book \"History Against the Pagans\" (c. 416) and in need for a term to express the concept of the universal culture focused on Jesus Christ. It had the sense now taken by \"Christianity\" (as is still the case with the cognate Dutch \"christendom\", where it denotes mostly the religion itself, just like the German \"Christentum\").\n\nThe current sense of the word of \"lands where Christianity is the dominant religion\" emerged in Late Middle English (by c. 1400).This semantic development happened independently in the languages of late medieval Europe, which leads to the confusing semantics of English \"Christendom\" equalling German \"Christenheit\", Dutch \"christenheid\", French \"chrétienté\" vs. English \"Christianity\" equalling German \"Christentum\", Dutch \"christendom\", French \"christianisme\". The reason is the increasing fragmentation of Western Christianity at that time both theologically and politically.\n\"Christendom\" as a geopolitical term is thus meaningful in the context of the Middle Ages, and arguably during the European wars of religion and the Ottoman wars in Europe.\n\nCanadian theology professor Douglas John Hall stated (1997) that \"Christendom\" [...] means literally the dominion or sovereignty of the Christian religion.\" Thomas John Curry, Roman Catholic auxiliary bishop of Los Angeles, defined (2001) Christendom as \"the system dating from the fourth century by which governments upheld and promoted Christianity.\" Curry states that the end of Christendom came about because modern governments refused to \"uphold the teachings, customs, ethos, and practice of Christianity.\" British church historian Diarmaid MacCulloch described (2010) Christendom as \"the union between Christianity and secular power.\"\n\nThe \"Christian world\" is also collectively known as the Corpus Christianum, translated as \"the Christian body\", meaning the community of all Christians. The Christian polity, embodying a less secular meaning, can be compatible with the idea of both a religious and a temporal body: \"Corpus Christianum\". The \"Corpus Christianum\" can be seen as a Christian equivalent of the Muslim \"Ummah\".\n\nThe word \"Christendom\" is also used with its other meaning to frame-true Christianity. A more secular meaning can denote the fact that the term \"Christendom\" refers to Christians as a group, the \"political Christian world\", as an informal cultural hegemony that Christianity has traditionally enjoyed in the West.\nIn its most broad term, it refers to the world's Christian-majority countries, which, share little in common aside from the predominance of the faith. Unlike the Muslim world, which has a geo-political and cultural definition that provides a primary identifier for a large swath of the world, Christendom is more complex.\nThere is a common and nonliteral sense of the word that is much like the terms \"Western world\", \"known world\" or \"Free World\". When Thomas F. Connolly said, \"There isn't enough power in all Christendom to make that airplane what we want!\", he was simply using a figure of speech, although it is true that during the Cold War, just as the totalitarianism of the Communist Bloc presented a contrast to the liberty of the Free World, the state atheism of the Communist Bloc contrasted with the religious freedom and the powerful religious institutions in North America and Western Europe. The notion of \"Europe\" and the \"Western World\" has been intimately connected with the concept of \"Christianity and Christendom\"; many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.\n\nIn the beginning of Christendom, early Christianity was a religion spread in the Greek/Roman world and beyond as a 1st-century Jewish sect, which historians refer to as Jewish Christianity. It may be divided into two distinct phases: the apostolic period, when the first apostles were alive and organizing the Church, and the post-apostolic period, when an early episcopal structure developed, whereby bishoprics were governed by bishops (overseers).\n\nThe post-apostolic period concerns the time roughly after the death of the apostles when bishops emerged as overseers of urban Christian populations. The earliest recorded use of the terms \"Christianity\" (Greek ) and \"catholic\" (Greek ), dates to this period, the 2nd century, attributed to Ignatius of Antioch \"c.\" 107. Early Christendom would close at the end of imperial persecution of Christians after the ascension of Constantine the Great and the Edict of Milan in AD 313 and the First Council of Nicaea in 325.\n\nAccording to Malcolm Muggeridge (1980), Christ founded Christianity, but Constantine founded Christendom. Canadian theology professor Douglas John Hall dates the 'inauguration of Christendom' to the 4th century, with Constantine playing the primary role (so much so that he equates Christendom with \"Constantinianism\") and Theodosius I (Edict of Thessalonica, 380) and Justinian I secondary roles.\n\n\"Christendom\" has referred to the medieval and renaissance notion of the \"Christian world\" as a sociopolitical polity. In essence, the earliest vision of Christendom was a vision of a Christian theocracy, a government founded upon and upholding Christian values, whose institutions are spread through and over with Christian doctrine. In this period, members of the Christian clergy wield political authority. The specific relationship between the political leaders and the clergy varied but, in theory, the national and political divisions were at times subsumed under the leadership of the church as an institution. This model of church-state relations was accepted by various Church leaders and political leaders in European history.\n\nThe Church gradually became a defining institution of the Empire. Emperor Constantine issued the Edict of Milan in 313 proclaiming toleration for the Christian religion, and convoked the First Council of Nicaea in 325 whose Nicene Creed included belief in \"one holy catholic and apostolic Church\". Emperor Theodosius I made Nicene Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire with the Edict of Thessalonica of 380.\n\nAs the Western Roman Empire disintegrated into feudal kingdoms and principalities, the concept of Christendom changed as the western church became one of five patriarchates of the Pentarchy and the Christians of the Eastern Roman Empire developed. The Byzantine Empire was the last bastion of Christendom. Christendom would take a turn with the rise of the Franks, a Germanic tribe who converted to the Christian faith and entered into communion with Rome.\n\nOn Christmas Day 800 AD, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne resulting in the creation of another Christian king beside the Christian emperor in the Byzantine state. The Carolingian Empire created a definition of \"Christendom\" in juxtaposition with the Byzantine Empire, that of a distributed versus centralized culture respectively.\n\nThe classical heritage flourished throughout the Middle Ages in both the Byzantine Greek East and the Latin West. In the Greek philosopher Plato's ideal state there are three major classes, which was representative of the idea of the “tripartite soul”, which is expressive of three functions or capacities of the human soul: “reason”, “the spirited element”, and “appetites” (or “passions”). Will Durant made a convincing case that certain prominent features of Plato's ideal community where discernible in the organization, dogma and effectiveness of \"the\" Medieval Church in Europe:\n\n... For a thousand years Europe was ruled by an order of guardians considerably like that which was visioned by our philosopher. During the Middle Ages it was customary to classify the population of Christendom into \"laboratores\" (workers), \"bellatores\" (soldiers), and \"oratores\" (clergy). The last group, though small in number, monopolized the instruments and opportunities of culture, and ruled with almost unlimited sway half of the most powerful continent on the globe. The clergy, like Plato's guardians, were placed in authority... by their talent as shown in ecclesiastical studies and administration, by their disposition to a life of meditation and simplicity, and ... by the influence of their relatives with the powers of state and church. In the latter half of the period in which they ruled [800 AD onwards], the clergy were as free from family cares as even Plato could desire [for such guardians]... [Clerical] Celibacy was part of the psychological structure of the power of the clergy; for on the one hand they were unimpeded by the narrowing egoism of the family, and on the other their apparent superiority to the call of the flesh added to the awe in which lay sinners held them...\" \"In the latter half of the period in which they ruled, the clergy were as free from family cares as even Plato could desire.\n\nAfter the collapse of Charlemagne's empire, the southern remnants of the Holy Roman Empire became a collection of states loosely connected to the Holy See of Rome. Tensions between Pope Innocent III and secular rulers ran high, as the pontiff exerted control over their temporal counterparts in the west and vice versa. The pontificate of Innocent III is considered the height of temporal power of the papacy. The \"Corpus Christianum\" described the then-current notion of the community of all Christians united under the Roman Catholic Church. The community was to be guided by Christian values in its politics, economics and social life. Its legal basis was the \"corpus iuris canonica\" (body of canon law).\n\nIn the East, Christendom became more defined as the Byzantine Empire's gradual loss of territory to an expanding Islam and the muslim conquest of Persia. This caused Christianity to become important to the Byzantine identity. Before the East–West Schism which divided the Church religiously, there had been the notion of a \"universal Christendom\" that included the East and the West. After the East–West Schism, hopes of regaining religious unity with the West were ended by the Fourth Crusade, when Crusaders conquered the Byzantine capital of Constantinople and hastened the decline of the Byzantine Empire on the path to its destruction. With the breakup of the Byzantine Empire into individual nations with nationalist Orthodox Churches, the term Christendom described Western Europe, Catholicism, Orthodox Byzantines, and other Eastern rites of the Church.\n\nThe Catholic Church's peak of authority over all European Christians and their common endeavours of the Christian community — for example, the Crusades, the fight against the Moors in the Iberian Peninsula and against the Ottomans in the Balkans — helped to develop a sense of communal identity against the obstacle of Europe's deep political divisions. The popes, formally just the bishops of Rome, claimed to be the focus of all Christendom, which was largely recognised in Western Christendom from the 11th century until the Reformation, but not in Eastern Christendom. Moreover, this authority was also sometimes abused, and fostered the Inquisition and anti-Jewish pogroms, to root out divergent elements and create a religiously uniform community. Ultimately, the Inquisition was done away with by order of Pope Innocent III.\n\nChristendom ultimately was led into specific crisis in the late Middle Ages, when the kings of France managed to establish a French national church during the 14th century and the papacy became ever more aligned with the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation. Known as the Western Schism, western Christendom was a split between three men, who were driven by politics rather than any real theological disagreement for simultaneously claiming to be the true pope. The Avignon Papacy developed a reputation for corruption that estranged major parts of Western Christendom. The Avignon schism was ended by the Council of Constance.\n\nBefore the modern period, Christendom was in a general crisis at the time of the Renaissance Popes because of the moral laxity of these pontiffs and their willingness to seek and rely on temporal power as secular rulers did. Many in the Catholic Church's hierarchy in the Renaissance became increasingly entangled with insatiable greed for material wealth and temporal power, which led to many reform movements, some merely wanting a moral reformation of the Church's clergy, while others repudiated the Church and separated from it in order to form new sects. The Italian Renaissance produced ideas or institutions by which men living in society could be held together in harmony. In the early 16th century, Baldassare Castiglione (The Book of the Courtier) laid out his vision of the ideal gentleman and lady, while Machiavelli cast a jaundiced eye on \"la verità effetuale delle cose\" — the actual truth of things — in \"The Prince\", composed, humanist style, chiefly of parallel ancient and modern examples of Virtù. Some Protestant movements grew up along lines of mysticism or renaissance humanism (cf. Erasmus). The Catholic Church fell partly into general neglect under the Renaissance Popes, whose inability to govern the Church by showing personal example of high moral standards set the climate for what would ultimately become the Protestant Reformation. During the Renaissance, the papacy was mainly run by the wealthy families and also had strong secular interests. To safeguard Rome and the connected Papal States the popes became necessarily involved in temporal matters, even leading armies, as the great patron of arts Pope Julius II did. It during these intermediate times popes strove to make Rome the capital of Christendom while projecting it, through art, architecture, and literature, as the center of a Golden Age of unity, order, and peace.\n\nProfessor Frederick J. McGinness described Rome as essential in understanding the legacy the Church and its representatives encapsulated best by The Eternal City: No other city in Europe matches Rome in its traditions, history, legacies, and influence in the Western world. Rome in the Renaissance under the papacy not only acted as guardian and transmitter of these elements stemming from the Roman Empire but also assumed the role as artificer and interpreter of its myths and meanings for the peoples of Europe from the Middle Ages to modern times... Under the patronage of the popes, whose wealth and income were exceeded only by their ambitions, the city became a cultural center for master architects, sculptors, musicians, painters, and artisans of every kind...In its myth and message, Rome had become the sacred city of the popes, the prime symbol of a triumphant Catholicism, the center of orthodox Christianity, a new Jerusalem.\n\nIt is clearly noticeable that the popes of the Italian Renaissance have been subjected by many writers with an overly harsh tone. Pope Julius II, for example, was not only an effective secular leader in military affairs, a deviously effective politician but foremost one of the greatest patron of the Renaissance period and person who also encouraged open criticism from noted humanists.\n\nThe blossoming of renaissance humanism was made very much possible due to the universality of the institutions of Catholic Church and represented by personalities such as Pope Pius II, Nicolaus Copernicus, Leon Battista Alberti, Desiderius Erasmus, sir Thomas More, Bartolomé de Las Casas, Leonardo da Vinci and Teresa of Ávila. George Santayana in his work \"The Life of Reason\" postulated the tenets of the all encompassing order the Church had brought and as the repository of the legacy of classical antiquity:\n\nThe enterprise of individuals or of small aristocratic bodies has meantime sown the world which we call civilised with some seeds and nuclei of order. There are scattered about a variety of churches, industries, academies, and governments. But the universal order once dreamt of and nominally almost established, the empire of universal peace, all-permeating rational art, and philosophical worship, is mentioned no more. An unformulated conception, the prerational ethics of private privilege and national unity, fills the background of men's minds. It represents feudal traditions rather than the tendency really involved in contemporary industry, science, or philanthropy. Those dark ages, from which our political practice is derived, had a political theory which we should do well to study; for their theory about a universal empire and a Catholic church was in turn the echo of a former age of reason, when a few men conscious of ruling the world had for a moment sought to survey it as a whole and to rule it justly.\n\nDevelopments in western philosophy and European events brought change to the notion of the \"Corpus Christianum\". The Hundred Years' War accelerated the process of transforming France from a feudal monarchy to a centralized state. The rise of strong, centralized monarchies denoted the European transition from feudalism to capitalism. By the end of the Hundred Years' War, both France and England were able to raise enough money through taxation to create independent standing armies. In the Wars of the Roses, Henry Tudor took the crown of England. His heir, the absolute king Henry VIII establishing the English church.\n\nIn modern history, the Reformation and rise of modernity in the early 16th century entailed a change in the \"Corpus Christianum\". In the Holy Roman Empire, the Peace of Augsburg of 1555 officially ended the idea among secular leaders that all Christians must be united under one church. The principle of \"cuius regio, eius religio\" (\"whose the region is, his religion\") established the religious, political and geographic divisions of Christianity, and this was established with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which legally ended the concept of a single Christian hegemony in the territories of the Holy Roman Empire, despite the Catholic Church's doctrine that it alone is the one true Church founded by Christ.\nSubsequently, each government determined the religion of their own state. Christians living in states where their denomination was \"not\" the established one were guaranteed the right to practice their faith in public during allotted hours and in private at their will. At times there were mass expulsions of dissenting faiths as happened with the Salzburg Protestants. Some people passed as adhering to the official church, but instead lived as Nicodemites or crypto-protestants.\n\nThe European wars of religion are usually taken to have ended with the Treaty of Westphalia (1648), or arguably, including the Nine Years' War and the War of the Spanish Succession in this period, with the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713. In the 18th century, the focus shifts away from religious conflicts, either between Christian factions or against the external threat of Islamic factions.\n\nThe European Miracle, the Age of Enlightenment and the formation of the great colonial empires together with the beginning decline of the Ottoman Empire mark the end of the geopolitical \"history of Christendom\". Instead, the focus of Western history shifts to the development of the nation-state, accompanied by increasing atheism and secularism, culminating with the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars at the turn of the 19th century.\n\nWriting in 1997, Canadian theology professor Douglas John Hall argued that Christendom had either fallen already or was in its death throes; although its end was gradual and not as clear to pin down as its 4th-century establishment, the \"transition to the post-Constantinian, or post-Christendom, situation (...) has already been in process for a century or two,\" beginning with the 18th-century rationalist Enlightenment and the French Revolution (the first attempt to topple the Christian establishment). American Catholic bishop Thomas John Curry stated (2001) that the end of Christendom came about because modern governments refused to \"uphold the teachings, customs, ethos, and practice of Christianity.\" He argued the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (1791) and the Second Vatican Council's Declaration on Religious Freedom (1965) are two of the most important documents setting the stage for its end. According to British historian Diarmaid MacCulloch (2010), Christendom was 'killed' by the First World War (1914–18), which led to the fall of the three main Christian empires (Russian, German and Austrian) of Europe, as well as the Ottoman Empire, rupturing the Eastern Christian communities that had existed on its territory. The Christian empires were replaced by secular, even anti-clerical republics seeking to definitively keep the churches out of politics. The only surviving monarchy with an established church, Britain, was severely damaged by the war, lost most of Ireland due to Catholic–Protestant infighting, and was starting to lose grip on its colonies.\n\nWestern culture, throughout most of its history, has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture, and many of the population of the Western hemisphere could broadly be described as cultural Christians. The notion of \"Europe\" and the \"Western World\" has been intimately connected with the concept of \"Christianity and Christendom\"; many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity. Historian Paul Legutko of Stanford University said the Catholic Church is \"at the center of the development of the values, ideas, science, laws, and institutions which constitute what we call Western civilization.\"\n\nThough Western culture contained several polytheistic religions during its early years under the Greek and Roman Empires, as the centralized Roman power waned, the dominance of the Catholic Church was the only consistent force in Western Europe. Until the Age of Enlightenment, Christian culture guided the course of philosophy, literature, art, music and science. Christian disciplines of the respective arts have subsequently developed into Christian philosophy, Christian art, Christian music, Christian literature etc. Art and literature, law, education, and politics were preserved in the teachings of the Church, in an environment that, otherwise, would have probably seen their loss. The Church founded many cathedrals, universities, monasteries and seminaries, some of which continue to exist today. Medieval Christianity created the first modern universities. The Catholic Church established a hospital system in Medieval Europe that vastly improved upon the Roman \"valetudinaria\". These hospitals were established to cater to \"particular social groups marginalized by poverty, sickness, and age,\" according to historian of hospitals, Guenter Risse. Christianity also had a strong impact on all other aspects of life: marriage and family, education, the humanities and sciences, the political and social order, the economy, and the arts.\n\nChristianity had a significant impact on education and science and medicine as the church created the bases of the Western system of education, and was the sponsor of founding universities in the Western world as the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting. Many clerics throughout history have made significant contributions to science and Jesuits in particular have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science. The cultural influence of Christianity includes social welfare, founding hospitals, economics (as the Protestant work ethic), natural law (which would later influence the creation of international law), politics, architecture, literature, personal hygiene, and family life. Christianity played a role in ending practices common among pagan societies, such as human sacrifice, slavery, infanticide and polygamy.\n\nChristian literature is writing that deals with Christian themes and incorporates the Christian world view. This constitutes a huge body of extremely varied writing. Christian poetry is any poetry that contains Christian teachings, themes, or references. The influence of Christianity on poetry has been great in any area that Christianity has taken hold. Christian poems often directly reference the Bible, while others provide allegory.\n\nChristian art is art produced in an attempt to illustrate, supplement and portray in tangible form the principles of Christianity. Virtually all Christian groupings use or have used art to some extent. The prominence of art and the media, style, and representations change; however, the unifying theme is ultimately the representation of the life and times of Jesus and in some cases the Old Testament. Depictions of saints are also common, especially in Anglicanism, Roman Catholicism, and Eastern Orthodoxy.\n\nAn illuminated manuscript is a manuscript in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration. The earliest surviving substantive illuminated manuscripts are from the period AD 400 to 600, primarily produced in Ireland, Constantinople and Italy. The majority of surviving manuscripts are from the Middle Ages, although many illuminated manuscripts survive from the 15th century Renaissance, along with a very limited number from Late Antiquity.\n\nMost illuminated manuscripts were created as codices, which had superseded scrolls; some isolated single sheets survive. A very few illuminated manuscript fragments survive on papyrus. Most medieval manuscripts, illuminated or not, were written on parchment (most commonly of calf, sheep, or goat skin), but most manuscripts important enough to illuminate were written on the best quality of parchment, called vellum, traditionally made of unsplit calfskin, though high quality parchment from other skins was also called \"parchment\".\n\nChristian art began, about two centuries after Christ, by borrowing motifs from Roman Imperial imagery, classical Greek and Roman religion and popular art. Religious images are used to some extent by the Abrahamic Christian faith, and often contain highly complex iconography, which reflects centuries of accumulated tradition. In the Late Antique period iconography began to be standardised, and to relate more closely to Biblical texts, although many gaps in the canonical Gospel narratives were plugged with matter from the apocryphal gospels. Eventually the Church would succeed in weeding most of these out, but some remain, like the ox and ass in the Nativity of Christ.\n\nAn icon is a religious work of art, most commonly a painting, from Eastern Christianity. Christianity has used symbolism from its very beginnings. In both East and West, numerous iconic types of Christ, Mary and saints and other subjects were developed; the number of named types of icons of Mary, with or without the infant Christ, was especially large in the East, whereas Christ Pantocrator was much the commonest image of Christ.\n\nChristian symbolism invests objects or actions with an inner meaning expressing Christian ideas. Christianity has borrowed from the common stock of significant symbols known to most periods and to all regions of the world. Religious symbolism is effective when it appeals to both the intellect and the emotions. Especially important depictions of Mary include the Hodegetria and Panagia types. Traditional models evolved for narrative paintings, including large cycles covering the events of the Life of Christ, the Life of the Virgin, parts of the Old Testament, and, increasingly, the lives of popular saints. Especially in the West, a system of attributes developed for identifying individual figures of saints by a standard appearance and symbolic objects held by them; in the East they were more likely to identified by text labels.\n\nEach saint has a story and a reason why he or she led an exemplary life. Symbols have been used to tell these stories throughout the history of the Church. A number of Christian saints are traditionally represented by a symbol or iconic motif associated with their life, termed an attribute or emblem, in order to identify them. The study of these forms part of iconography in Art history. They were particularly\n\nChristian architecture encompasses a wide range of both secular and religious styles from the foundation of Christianity to the present day, influencing the design and construction of buildings and structures in Christian culture.\n\nBuildings were at first adapted from those originally intended for other purposes but, with the rise of distinctively ecclesiastical architecture, church buildings came to influence secular ones which have often imitated religious architecture. In the 20th century, the use of new materials, such as concrete, as well as simpler styles has had its effect upon the design of churches and arguably the flow of influence has been reversed. From the birth of Christianity to the present, the most significant period of transformation for Christian architecture in the west was the Gothic cathedral. In the east, Byzantine architecture was a continuation of Roman architecture.\n\nChristian philosophy is a term to describe the fusion of various fields of philosophy with the theological doctrines of Christianity. Scholasticism, which means \"that [which] belongs to the school\", and was a method of learning taught by the academics (or \"school people\") of medieval universities c. 1100–1500. Scholasticism originally started to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with medieval Christian theology. Scholasticism is not a philosophy or theology in itself but a tool and method for learning which places emphasis on dialectical reasoning.\n\nThe Byzantine Empire, which was the most sophisticated culture during antiquity, suffered under Muslim conquests limiting its scientific prowess during the Medieval period. Christian Western Europe had suffered a catastrophic loss of knowledge following the fall of the Western Roman Empire. But thanks to the Church scholars such as Aquinas and Buridan, the West carried on at least the spirit of scientific inquiry which would later lead to Europe's taking the lead in science during the Scientific Revolution using translations of medieval works.\n\nMedieval technology refers to the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule. After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth. The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder and the astrolabe, the invention of spectacles, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques, agriculture in general, clocks, and ships. The latter advances made possible the dawn of the Age of Exploration. The development of water mills was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone, probably derived from Roman technology. By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages in Britain had mills. They also were widely used in mining, as described by Georg Agricola in De Re Metallica for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.\n\nSignificant in this respect were advances within the fields of navigation. The compass and astrolabe along with advances in shipbuilding, enabled the navigation of the World Oceans and thus domination of the worlds economic trade. Gutenberg’s printing press made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.\n\nDuring the Renaissance, great advances occurred in geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, math, manufacturing, and engineering. The rediscovery of ancient scientific texts was accelerated after the Fall of Constantinople, and the invention of printing which would democratize learning and allow a faster propagation of new ideas. \"Renaissance technology\" is the set of artifacts and customs, spanning roughly the 14th through the 16th century. The era is marked by such profound technical advancements like the printing press, linear perspectivity, patent law, double shell domes or Bastion fortresses. Draw-books of the Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola and Leonardo da Vinci give a deep insight into the mechanical technology then known and applied.\n\nRenaissance science spawned the Scientific Revolution; science and technology began a cycle of mutual advancement. The \"Scientific Renaissance\" was the early phase of the Scientific Revolution. In the two-phase model of early modern science: a \"Scientific Renaissance\" of the 15th and 16th centuries, focused on the restoration of the natural knowledge of the ancients; and a \"Scientific Revolution\" of the 17th century, when scientists shifted from recovery to innovation.\n\nIn 2009, according to the \"Encyclopædia Britannica\", Christianity was the majority religion in Europe (including Russia) with 80%, Latin America with 92%, North America with 81%, and Oceania with 79%. There are also large Christian communities in other parts of the world, such as China, India and Central Asia, where Christianity is the second-largest religion after Islam. The United States is home to the world's largest Christian population, followed by Brazil and Mexico.\nMany Christians not only live under, but also have an official status in, a state religion of the following nations: Armenia (Armenian Apostolic Church), Costa Rica (Roman Catholic Church), Denmark (Church of Denmark), El Salvador (Roman Catholic Church), England (Church of England), Georgia (Georgian Orthodox church), Greece (Church of Greece), Iceland (Church of Iceland), Liechtenstein (Roman Catholic Church), Malta (Roman Catholic Church), Monaco (Roman Catholic Church), Romania (Romanian Orthodox Church), Norway (Church of Norway), Vatican City (Roman Catholic Church), Switzerland (Roman Catholic Church, Swiss Reformed Church and Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland).\n\nThe estimated number of Christians in the world ranges from 2.2 billion to 2.4 billion people. The faith represents approximately one-third of the world's population and is the largest religion in the world, with the three largest groups of Christians being the Catholic Church, Protestantism, and the Eastern Orthodox Church. The largest Christian denomination is the Catholic Church, with an estimated 1.2 billion adherents.\n+ Demographics of major traditions within Christianity (Pew Research Center, 2010 data)\n! cyrus=\"col\"  Tradition\n! scope=\"col\"  Followers\n! scope=\"col\"  % of the Christian population\n! scope=\"col\"  % of the world population\n! scope=\"col\"  Follower dynamics\n! scope=\"col\"  Dynamics in- and outside Christianity\n! Christianity\n! 2,184,060,000\n! 100\n! 31.7\n! Growing\n! Stable\n\nA religious order is a lineage of communities and organizations of people who live in some way set apart from society in accordance with their specific religious devotion, usually characterized by the principles of its founder's religious practice. In contrast, the term Holy Orders is used by many Christian churches to refer to ordination or to a group of individuals who are set apart for a special role or ministry. Historically, the word \"order\" designated an established civil body or corporation with a hierarchy, and ordinatio meant legal incorporation into an ordo. The word \"holy\" refers to the Church. In context, therefore, a holy order is set apart for ministry in the Church. Religious orders are composed of initiates (laity) and, in some traditions, ordained clergies.\n\nVarious organizations include:\nBULLET::::- In the Roman Catholic Church, religious institutes and secular institutes are the major forms of institutes of consecrated life, similar to which are societies of apostolic life. They are organisations of laity or clergy who live a common life under the guidance of a fixed rule and the leadership of a superior. (ed., see for a particular listing.)\nBULLET::::- Anglican religious orders are communities of laity or clergy in the Anglican churches who live under a common rule of life. (ed., see for a particular listing)\n\nWithin the framework of Christianity, there are at least three possible definitions for Church law. One is the Torah/Mosaic Law (from what Christians consider to be the Old Testament) also called Divine Law or Biblical law. Another is the instructions of Jesus of Nazareth in the Gospel (sometimes referred to as the Law of Christ or the New Commandment or the New Covenant). A third is canon law which is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox churches, and the Anglican Communion of churches. The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was initially a rule adopted by a council (From Greek \"kanon\" / κανών, Hebrew kaneh / קנה, for rule, standard, or measure); these canons formed the foundation of canon law.\n\nChristian ethics in general has tended to stress the need for grace, mercy, and forgiveness because of human weakness and developed while Early Christians were subjects of the Roman Empire. From the time Nero blamed Christians for setting Rome ablaze (64 AD) until Galarius (311 AD), persecutions against Christians erupted periodically. Consequently, Early Christian ethics included discussions of how believers should relate to Roman authority and to the empire.\n\nUnder the Emperor Constantine I (312-337), Christianity became a legal religion. While some scholars debate whether Constantine's conversion to Christianity was authentic or simply matter of political expediency, Constantine's decree made the empire safe for Christian practice and belief. Consequently, issues of Christian doctrine, ethics and church practice were debated openly, see for example the First Council of Nicaea and the First seven Ecumenical Councils. By the time of Theodosius I (379-395), Christianity had become the state religion of the empire. With Christianity in power, ethical concerns broaden and included discussions of the proper role of the state.\n\nRender unto Caesar… is the beginning of a phrase attributed to Jesus in the synoptic gospels which reads in full, \"\"Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s\"\". This phrase has become a widely quoted summary of the relationship between Christianity and secular authority. The gospels say that when Jesus gave his response, his interrogators \"marvelled, and left him, and went their way.\" Time has not resolved an ambiguity in this phrase, and people continue to interpret this passage to support various positions that are poles apart. The traditional division, carefully determined, in Christian thought is the state and church have separate spheres of influence.\n\nThomas Aquinas thoroughly discussed that \"human law\" is positive law which means that it is natural law applied by governments to societies. All human laws were to be judged by their conformity to the natural law. An unjust law was in a sense no law at all. At this point, the natural law was not only used to pass judgment on the moral worth of various laws, but also to determine what the law said in the first place. This could result in some tension. Late ecclesiastical writers followed in his footsteps.\n\nChristian democracy is a political ideology that seeks to apply Christian principles to public policy. It emerged in 19th-century Europe, largely under the influence of Catholic social teaching. In a number of countries, the democracy's Christian ethos has been diluted by secularisation. In practice, Christian democracy is often considered conservative on cultural, social and moral issues and progressive on fiscal and economic issues. In places, where their opponents have traditionally been secularist socialists and social democrats, Christian democratic parties are moderately conservative, whereas in other cultural and political environments they can lean to the left.\n\nAttitudes and beliefs about the roles and responsibilities of women in Christianity vary considerably today as they have throughout the last two millennia — evolving along with or counter to the societies in which Christians have lived. The Bible and Christianity historically have been interpreted as excluding women from church leadership and placing them in submissive roles in marriage. Male leadership has been assumed in the church and within marriage, society and government.\n\nSome contemporary writers describe the role of women in the life of the church as having been downplayed, overlooked, or denied throughout much of Christian history. Paradigm shifts in gender roles in society and also many churches has inspired reevaluation by many Christians of some long-held attitudes to the contrary. Christian egalitarians have increasingly argued for equal roles for men and women in marriage, as well as for the ordination of women to the clergy. Contemporary conservatives meanwhile have reasserted what has been termed a \"complementarian\" position, promoting the traditional belief that the Bible ordains different roles and responsibilities for women and men in the Church and family.\n\nA Christian denomination is a distinct religious body within Christianity, identified by traits such as a name, organisation, leadership and doctrine. Worldwide, Christians are divided, often along ethnic and linguistic lines, into separate churches and traditions. Technically, divisions between one group and another are defined by church doctrine and church authority. Centering on language of \"professed Christianity\" and \"true Christianity\", issues that separate one group of followers of Jesus from another include:\nBULLET::::- Apostolic succession,\nBULLET::::- Biblical authority,\nBULLET::::- Biblical criticism,\nBULLET::::- Biblical inerrancy,\nBULLET::::- Biblical infallibility,\nBULLET::::- Biblical inspiration,\nBULLET::::- Biblical interpretation,\nBULLET::::- Papal primacy, and\nBULLET::::- Views of Jesus (Christology).\n\nChristianity is composed of, but not limited to, five major branches of Churches: Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, and Protestantism. Some listings include Anglicans among Protestants while others list the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox together as one group, thus the number of distinct major branches can vary between three and five depending on the listing. The Assyrian Church of the East (Nestorians) and the Old Catholic churches are also distinct Christian bodies of historic importance, but much smaller in adherents and geographic scope. Each of the branches has important subdivisions. Because the Protestant subdivisions do not maintain a common theology or earthly leadership, they are far more distinct than the subdivisions of the other four groupings. \"Denomination\" typically refers to one of the many Christian groupings including each of the multitude of Protestant subdivisions.\n\nIn Christendom, the largest denominations are:\nBULLET::::1. Roman Catholicism – 1.3 billion\nBULLET::::2. Protestantism – 540 million\nBULLET::::3. Eastern Orthodoxy – 300 million\nBULLET::::4. Anglicanism – 115 million\nBULLET::::5. Oriental Orthodoxy – 75 million\nBULLET::::6. Nontrinitarianism – 26 million\nBULLET::::7. Nestorianism – 1 million\nBULLET::::8. Old Catholicism – 0.4 million\n\nBULLET::::- Caesaropapism\nBULLET::::- Holy Roman Emperor\nBULLET::::- Christian republic\nBULLET::::- Constantine the Great and Christianity\nBULLET::::- Constantinian shift\nBULLET::::- Dominionism\nBULLET::::- Ecumenism (Catholic Church and ecumenism)\nBULLET::::- \"Res publica christiana\"\nBULLET::::- Role of Christianity in civilization\nBULLET::::- \"The City of God\"\nBULLET::::- Union of Christendom\n\nBULLET::::- 20th century sources\n\nBULLET::::- 19th century sources\n\nBULLET::::- Hull, Moses. Encyclopedia of Biblical Spiritualism; Or, A Concordance to the Principal Passages of the Old and New Testament Scriptures Which Prove or Imply Spiritualism; Together with a Brief History of the Origin of Many of the Important Books of the Bible. Chicago: M. Hull, 1895. (ed., reprint version is available)\nBULLET::::- Bosanquet, Bernard. The Civilization of Christendom, And Other Studies. London: S. Sonnenschein, 1893.\n\nBULLET::::- Bainton, Roland H. (1966). \"Christendom: a Short History of Christianity and Its Impact on Western Civilization\", in series, \"Harper Colophon Books\". New York: Harper & Row. 2 vol., ill.\nBULLET::::- Whalen, Brett Edward (2009). \"Dominion of God: Christendom and Apocalypse in the Middle Ages\". Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Websites\n"}
{"id": "6710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6710", "title": "Coyote", "text": "Coyote\n\nThe coyote (\"Canis latrans\") is a canine native to North America. It is smaller than its close relative, the gray wolf, and slightly smaller than the closely related eastern wolf and red wolf. It fills much of the same ecological niche as the golden jackal does in Eurasia, though it is larger and more predatory, and is sometimes called the \"American jackal\" by zoologists. Other names for the species, largely historical, include \"prairie wolf\" and \"brush wolf\".\n\nThe coyote is listed as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature due to its wide distribution and abundance throughout North America, southwards through Mexico, and into Central America. The species is versatile, able to adapt to and expand into environments modified by humans. It is enlarging its range, with coyotes moving into urban areas in the Eastern U.S., and was sighted in eastern Panama (across the Panama Canal from their home range) for the first time in 2013.\n\n19 coyote subspecies are recognized. The average male weighs and the average female . Their fur color is predominantly light gray and red or fulvous interspersed with black and white, though it varies somewhat with geography. It is highly flexible in social organization, living either in a family unit or in loosely knit packs of unrelated individuals. It has a varied diet consisting primarily of animal meat, including deer, rabbits, hares, rodents, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and invertebrates, though it may also eat fruits and vegetables on occasion. Its characteristic vocalization is a howl made by solitary individuals. Humans are the coyote's greatest threat, followed by cougars and gray wolves. In spite of this, coyotes sometimes mate with gray, eastern, or red wolves, producing \"coywolf\" hybrids. In the northeastern regions of North America, the eastern coyote (a larger subspecies, though still smaller than wolves) is the result of various historical and recent matings with various types of wolves. Genetic studies show that most North American wolves contain some level of coyote DNA.\n\nThe coyote is a prominent character in Native American folklore, mainly in Aridoamerica, usually depicted as a trickster that alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or a man. As with other trickster figures, the coyote uses deception and humor to rebel against social conventions. The animal was especially respected in Mesoamerican cosmology as a symbol of military might. After the European colonization of the Americas, it was seen in Anglo-American culture as a cowardly and untrustworthy animal. Unlike wolves (gray, eastern, or red), which have undergone an improvement of their public image, attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative.\n\nCoyote males average in weight, while females average , though size varies geographically. Northern subspecies, which average , tend to grow larger than the southern subspecies of Mexico, which average . Body length ranges on average from , and tail length , with females being shorter in both body length and height. The largest coyote on record was a male killed near Afton, Wyoming, on November19, 1937, which measured from nose to tail, and weighed . Scent glands are located at the upper side of the base of the tail and are a bluish-black color.\n\nThe color and texture of the coyote's fur varies somewhat geographically. The hair's predominant color is light gray and red or fulvous, interspersed around the body with black and white. Coyotes living at high elevations tend to have more black and gray shades than their desert-dwelling counterparts, which are more fulvous or whitish-gray. The coyote's fur consists of short, soft underfur and long, coarse guard hairs. The fur of northern subspecies is longer and denser than in southern forms, with the fur of some Mexican and Central American forms being almost hispid (bristly). Generally, adult coyotes (including coywolf hybrids) have a sable coat color, dark neonatal coat color, bushy tail with an active supracaudal gland, and a white facial mask. Albinism is extremely rare in coyotes; out of a total of 750,000 coyotes killed by federal and cooperative hunters between March22, 1938, and June30, 1945, only two were albinos.\n\nThe coyote is typically smaller than the gray wolf, but has longer ears and a relatively larger braincase, as well as a thinner frame, face, and muzzle. The scent glands are smaller than the gray wolf's, but are the same color. Its fur color variation is much less varied than that of a wolf. The coyote also carries its tail downwards when running or walking, rather than horizontally as the wolf does.\n\nCoyote tracks can be distinguished from those of dogs by their more elongated, less rounded shape. Unlike dogs, the upper canines of coyotes extend past the mental foramina.\n\nAt the time of the European colonization of the Americas, coyotes were largely confined to open plains and arid regions of the western half of the continent. In early post-Columbian historical records, distinguishing between coyotes and wolves is often difficult. One record from 1750 in Kaskaskia, Illinois, written by a local priest, noted that the \"wolves\" encountered there were smaller and less daring than European wolves. Another account from the early 1800s in Edwards County mentioned wolves howling at night, though these were likely coyotes. This species was encountered several times during the Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804–1806), though it was already well known to European traders on the upper Missouri. Lewis, writing on 5 May 1805, in northeastern Montana, described the coyote in these terms:\nThe coyote was first scientifically described by naturalist Thomas Say in September 1819, on the site of Lewis and Clark's Council Bluffs, up the Missouri River from the mouth of the Platte during a government-sponsored expedition with Major Stephen Long. He had the first edition of the Lewis and Clark journals in hand, which contained Biddle's edited version of Lewis's observations dated 5 May 1805. His account was published in 1823. Say was the first person to document the difference between a \"\"prairie wolf\"\" (coyote) and on the next page of his journal a wolf which he named \"Canis nubilus\" (Great Plains wolf). Say described the coyote as:\nThe earliest written reference to the species comes from the naturalist Francisco Hernández's \"Plantas y Animales de la Nueva España\" (1651), where it is described as a \"Spanish fox\" or \"jackal\". The first published usage of the word \"coyote\" (which is a Spanish borrowing of its Nahuatl name \"coyōtl\" ) comes from the historian Francisco Javier Clavijero's \"Historia de México\" in 1780. The first time it was used in English occurred in William Bullock's \"Six months' residence and travels in Mexico\" (1824), where it is variously transcribed as \"cayjotte\" and \"cocyotie\". The word's spelling was standardized as \"coyote\" by the 1880s. Alternative English names for the coyote include \"prairie wolf\", \"brush wolf\", \"cased wolf\", \"little wolf\" and \"American jackal\". Its binomial name \"Canis latrans\" translates to \"barking dog\", a reference to the many vocalizations they produce.\n\nBULLET::::- Local and indigenous names for \"Canis latrans\"\n{ class=\"wikitable sortable mw-collapsible mw-collapsed collapsed\"\n! Linguistic group or area\n! Indigenous name\n\nXiaoming Wang and Richard H. Tedford, one of the foremost authorities on carnivore evolution, proposed that the genus \"Canis\" was the descendant of the coyote-like \"Eucyon davisi\" and its remains first appeared in the Miocene 6million years ago (Mya) in the southwestern US and Mexico. By the Pliocene (5Mya), the larger \"Canis lepophagus\" appeared in the same region and by the early Pleistocene (1Mya) \"C.latrans\" (the coyote) was in existence. They proposed that the progression from \"Eucyon davisi\" to \"Clepophagus\" to the coyote was linear evolution. Additionally, \"C.latrans\" and \"C. aureus\" are closely related to \"C.edwardii\", a species that appeared earliest spanning the mid-Blancan (late Pliocene) to the close of the Irvingtonian (late Pleistocene), and coyote remains indistinguishable from \"C.latrans\" were contemporaneous with \"C.edwardii\" in North America. Johnston describes \"C.lepophagus\" as having a more slender skull and skeleton than the modern coyote. Ronald Nowak found that the early populations had small, delicate, narrowly proportioned skulls that resemble small coyotes and appear to be ancestral to \"C.latrans\".\n\n\"C. lepophagus\" was similar in weight to modern coyotes, but had shorter limb bones that indicates a less cursorial lifestyle. The coyote represents a more primitive form of \"Canis\" than the gray wolf, as shown by its relatively small size and its comparatively narrow skull and jaws, which lack the grasping power necessary to hold the large prey in which wolves specialize. This is further corroborated by the coyote's sagittal crest, which is low or totally flattened, thus indicating a weaker bite than the wolf's. The coyote is not a specialized carnivore as the wolf is, as shown by the larger chewing surfaces on the molars, reflecting the species' relative dependence on vegetable matter. In these respects, the coyote resembles the fox-like progenitors of the genus more so than the wolf.\n\nThe oldest fossils that fall within the range of the modern coyote date to 0.74–0.85 Ma (million years) in Hamilton Cave, West Virginia; 0.73 Ma in Irvington, California; 0.35–0.48 Ma in Porcupine Cave, Colorado and in Cumberland Cave, Pennsylvania. Modern coyotes arose 1,000 years after the Quaternary extinction event. Compared to their modern Holocene counterparts, Pleistocene coyotes (\"C.l. orcutti\") were larger and more robust, likely in response to larger competitors and prey. Pleistocene coyotes were likely more specialized carnivores than their descendants, as their teeth were more adapted to shearing meat, showing fewer grinding surfaces suited for processing vegetation. Their reduction in size occurred within 1000 years of the Quaternary extinction event, when their large prey died out. Furthermore, Pleistocene coyotes were unable to exploit the big-game hunting niche left vacant after the extinction of the dire wolf (\"C.dirus\"), as it was rapidly filled by gray wolves, which likely actively killed off the large coyotes, with natural selection favoring the modern gracile morph.\n\nIn 1993, a study proposed that the wolves of North America display skull traits more similar to the coyote than wolves from Eurasia. In 2010, a study found that the coyote was a basal member of the clade that included the Tibetan wolf, the domestic dog, the Mongolian wolf and the Eurasian wolf, with the Tibetan wolf diverging early from wolves and domestic dogs. In 2016, a whole-genome DNA study proposed, based on the assumptions made, that all of the North American wolves and coyotes diverged from a common ancestor less than 6,000–117,000 years ago. The study also indicated that all North American wolves have a significant amount of coyote ancestry and all coyotes some degree of wolf ancestry, and that the red wolf and eastern wolf are highly admixed with different proportions of gray wolf and coyote ancestry. The proposed timing of the wolf/coyote divergence conflicts with the finding of a coyote-like specimen in strata dated to 1 Mya.\n\nGenetic studies relating to wolves or dogs have inferred phylogenetic relationships based on the only reference genome available, that of the Boxer dog. In 2017, the first reference genome of the wolf \"Canis lupus lupus\" was mapped to aid future research. In 2018, a study looked at the genomic structure and admixture of North American wolves, wolf-like canids, and coyotes using specimens from across their entire range that mapped the largest dataset of nuclear genome sequences against the wolf reference genome. The study supports the findings of previous studies that North American gray wolves and wolf-like canids were the result of complex gray wolf and coyote mixing. A polar wolf from Greenland and a coyote from Mexico represented the purest specimens. The coyotes from\nAlaska, California, Alabama, and Quebec show almost no wolf ancestry. Coyotes from Missouri, Illinois, and Florida exhibit 5–10% wolf ancestry. There was 40%:60% wolf to coyote ancestry in red wolves, 60%:40% in Eastern timber wolves, and 75%:25% in the Great Lakes wolves. There was 10% coyote ancestry in Mexican wolves and the Atlantic Coast wolves, 5% in Pacific Coast and Yellowstone wolves, and less than 3% in Canadian archipelago wolves. If a third canid had been involved in the admixture of the North American wolf-like canids then its genetic signature would have been found in coyotes and wolves, which it has not.\n\nIn 2018, whole genome sequencing was used to compare members of genus \"Canis\". The study indicates that the common ancestor of the coyote and gray wolf has genetically admixed with a ghost population of an extinct unidentified canid. The canid was genetically close to the dhole and had evolved after the divergence of the African wild dog from the other canid species. The basal position of the coyote compared to the wolf is proposed to be due to the coyote retaining more of the mitochondrial genome of this unknown canid.\n\n, 19 subspecies are recognized. Geographic variation in coyotes is not great, though taken as a whole, the eastern subspecies (\"C. l. thamnos\" and \"C. l. frustor\") are large, dark-colored animals, with a gradual paling in color and reduction in size westward and northward (\"C. l. texensis\", \"C. l. latrans\", \"C. l. lestes\", and \"C. l. incolatus\"), a brightening of ochraceous tones–deep orange or brown–towards the Pacific coast (\"C. l. ochropus\", \"C. l. umpquensis\"), a reduction in size in Aridoamerica (\"C. l. microdon\", \"C. l. mearnsi\") and a general trend towards dark reddish colors and short muzzles in Mexican and Central American populations.\n\n!Subspecies\n!Trinomial authority\n!Description\n!Range\n!Synonyms\n!Image\nPlains coyote\"C. l. latrans\"<br>nominate subspecies\n\nSay, 1823\nThe largest subspecies, it has rather pale fur and bears large molars and carnassials.\nGreat Plains from Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan south to New Mexico and the Texas Panhandle \n\nMexican coyote\"C. l. cagottis\"\n\nC. E. H. Smith, 1839\nSimilar to \"C. l. peninsulae\", but larger and redder in color, it has shorter ears, larger teeth, and a broader muzzle.\nStates of Oaxaca, San Luis Potosi, Puebla, and Veracruz in Mexico \n\nSan Pedro Martir coyote\"C. l. clepticus\"\n\nElliot, 1903\nA small subspecies, it has reddish summer fur and a short, broad skull.\nNorthern Baja California and southwestern California \n\nEl Salvador coyote\"C. l. dickeyi\"\n\nNelson, 1932\nA large subspecies, it equals \"C. l. lestes\" in size, but has smaller teeth and darker fur.\nOriginally only known from Cerro Mogote, west of the Goascorán River in La Unión, El Salvador, in January 2013, it expanded its range southward to southern Panama.\n\nSoutheastern coyote\"C. l. frustor\"\n\nWoodhouse, 1851\nThis subspecies is similar to \"C. l. peninsulae\", but larger and paler, with shorter ears and a longer muzzle.\nSoutheastern and extreme eastern Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Missouri, and Arkansas \n\nBelize coyote\"C. l. goldmani\"\n\nMerriam, 1904\nThe largest of the Mexican coyotes, it approaches \"C. l. latrans\" in size, but has a shorter muzzle.\nKnown only from San Vicente, Chiapas, Mexico, near the Guatemalan border, though it could be the coyote of western Guatemala.\n\nHonduras coyote\"C. l. hondurensis\"\n\nGoldman, 1936\nA small, rufous-colored subspecies, it has coarse, thin fur and a broad skull.\nKnown only from the open country northeast of Archaga, north of Tegucigalpa \n\nDurango coyote\"C. l. impavidus\"\n\nAllen, 1903\nThis canid is similar to \"C. l. cagottis\" in color, but much larger.\nSouthern Sonora, extreme southwestern Chihuahua, western Durango, western Zacatecas, and Sinaloa \n\nNorthern coyote\"C. l. incolatus\"\n\nHall, 1934\nA medium-sized subspecies, it has cinnamon-colored fur and a more concave skull than \"C. l. latrans\".\nAlaska, the Yukon, Northwest Territories, northern British Columbia, and northern Alberta \n\nTiburón Island coyote\"C. l. jamesi\"\n\nTownsend, 1912\nMuch paler than \"C. l. mearnsi\", it has heavier teeth, a large skull, and long ears.\nTiburón Island \n\nMountain coyote\"C. l. lestes\"\n\nMerriam, 1897\nSimilar in size and color to \"C. l. latrans\", this subspecies has a large tail and ears.\nSouthern British Columbia and southeastern Alberta, Washington east of the Cascade Range, Oregon, northern California, western Montana, Wyoming, Colorado (except the southeastern corner), north-central Nevada, and north-central Utah \n\nMearns' coyote\"C. l. mearnsi\"\n\nMerriam, 1897\nA small subspecies with medium-sized ears, a small skull and small teeth, its fur is richly and brightly colored. The fulvous tints are exceedingly bright, and cover the hindfeet and forefeet.\nSouthwestern Colorado, extreme southern Utah and Nevada, southeastern California, northeastern Baja California, Arizona, west of the Rio Grande in New Mexico, northern Sonora and Chihuahua \n\nLower Rio Grande coyote\"C. l. microdon\"\n\nMerriam, 1897\nA small subspecies, it has small teeth and rather dark fur. The upper surface of the hind foot is whitish, while the belly is sprinkled with black-tipped hairs.\nSouthern Texas and northern Tamaulipas \n\nCalifornia valley coyote\"C. l. ochropus\"\n\nvon Eschscholtz, 1829\nSimilar to \"C. l. latrans\" and \"C. l. lestes\", but smaller, darker, more brightly colored, it has larger ears and smaller skull and teeth.\nCalifornia west of the Sierra Nevada \n\nPeninsula coyote\"C. l. peninsulae\"\n\nMerriam, 1897\nIt is similar to \"C. l. ochropus\" in size and features, but has darker, redder fur. The underside of the tail is blacker than that of \"C. l. ochropus\", and the belly has more black-tipped hairs.\nBaja California \n\nEastern coyote\"C. l. var.\"\n\nLawrence and Bossert, 1969\nIt is a hybrid of \"C. lupus\" and \"C. latrans\", smaller than the eastern wolf and holds smaller territories, but larger and holds more extensive home ranges than the typical western coyote. \nIt ranges in New England, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and Virginia. It also ranges in the eastern Canadian provinces of Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador.\n\nTexas plains coyote\"C. l. texensis\"\n\nBailey, 1905\nSmaller than \"C. l. latrans\", it has brighter, more fulvous fur closely approaching the richness found in \"C. l. ochropus\", though \"C. l. texensis\" lacks that subspecies' large ears.\nMost of Texas, eastern New Mexico, and northeastern Mexico \n\nNortheastern coyote\"C. l. thamnos\"\n\nJackson, 1949\nAbout the same size as \"C. l. latrans\", or larger, but darker in color, it has a broader skull.\nNorth-central Saskatchewan, Manitoba (except the extreme southwestern corner), east to southern Quebec, south to eastern North Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri (north of the Missouri River), Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois (except the extreme southern portion), and northern Indiana \n\nNorthwest coast coyote\"C. l. umpquensis\"\n\nJackson, 1949\nA small subspecies, it has dark, rufous-tinged fur, a comparatively small skull, and weak dentition.\nCoasts of British Columbia, Washington and Oregon \n\nColima coyote\"C. l. vigilis\"\n\nMerriam, 1897\nSimilar to \"C. l. peninsulae\", but darker and more extensively colored, it has more black on the forearms, and no black on the underside of the tail (excepting the tip).\nPacific coast of Mexico from Jalisco south to Guerrero \n\nCoyotes have occasionally mated with domestic dogs, sometimes producing crosses colloquially known as \"coydogs\". Such matings are rare in the wild, as the mating cycles of dogs and coyotes do not coincide, and coyotes are usually antagonistic towards dogs. Hybridization usually only occurs when coyotes are expanding into areas where conspecifics are few, and dogs are the only alternatives. Even then, pup survival rates are lower than normal, as dogs do not form pair bonds with coyotes, thus making the rearing of pups more difficult. In captivity, F hybrids (first generation) tend to be more mischievous and less manageable as pups than dogs, and are less trustworthy on maturity than wolf-dog hybrids. Hybrids vary in appearance, but generally retain the coyote's usual characteristics. F hybrids tend to be intermediate in form between dogs and coyotes, while F hybrids (second generation) are more varied. Both F and F hybrids resemble their coyote parents in terms of shyness and intrasexual aggression. Hybrids are fertile and can be successfully bred through four generations. Melanistic coyotes owe their black pelts to a mutation that first arose in domestic dogs. A population of nonalbino white coyotes in Newfoundland owe their coloration to a melanocortin 1 receptor mutation inherited from Golden Retrievers.\nCoyotes have hybridized with wolves to varying degrees, particularly in eastern North America. The so-called \"eastern coyote\" of northeastern North America probably originated in the aftermath of the extermination of gray and eastern wolves in the northeast, thus allowing coyotes to colonize former wolf ranges and mix with remnant wolf populations. This hybrid is smaller than either the gray or eastern wolf, and holds smaller territories, but is in turn larger and holds more extensive home ranges than the typical western coyote. , the eastern coyote's genetic makeup is fairly uniform, with minimal influence from eastern wolves or western coyotes. Adult eastern coyotes are larger than western coyotes, with female eastern coyotes weighing 21% more than male western coyotes. Physical differences become more apparent by the age of 35 days, with eastern coyote pups having longer legs than their western counterparts. Differences in dental development also occurs, with tooth eruption being later, and in a different order in the eastern coyote. Aside from its size, the eastern coyote is physically similar to the western coyote. The four color phases range from dark brown to blond or reddish blond, though the most common phase is gray-brown, with reddish legs, ears, and flanks. No significant differences exist between eastern and western coyotes in aggression and fighting, though eastern coyotes tend to fight less, and are more playful. Unlike western coyote pups, in which fighting precedes play behavior, fighting among eastern coyote pups occurs after the onset of play. Eastern coyotes tend to reach sexual maturity at two years of age, much later than in western coyotes.\n\nEastern and red wolves are also products of varying degrees of wolf-coyote hybridization. The eastern wolf probably was a result of a wolf-coyote admixture, combined with extensive backcrossing with parent gray wolf populations. The red wolf may have originated during a time of declining wolf populations in the Southeastern Woodlands, forcing a wolf-coyote hybridization, as well as backcrossing with local parent coyote populations to the extent that about 75–80% of the modern red wolf's genome is of coyote derivation.\n\nLike the Eurasian golden jackal, the coyote is gregarious, but not as dependent on conspecifics as more social canid species like wolves are. This is likely because the coyote is not a specialized hunter of large prey as the latter species is. The basic social unit of a coyote pack is a family containing a reproductive female. However, unrelated coyotes may join forces for companionship, or to bring down prey too large to attack singly. Such \"nonfamily\" packs are only temporary, and may consist of bachelor males, nonreproductive females and subadult young. Families are formed in midwinter, when females enter estrus. Pair bonding can occur 2–3 months before actual copulation takes place. The copulatory tie can last 5–45 minutes. A female entering estrus attracts males by scent marking and howling with increasing frequency. A single female in heat can attract up to seven reproductive males, which can follow her for as long as a month. Although some squabbling may occur among the males, once the female has selected a mate and copulates, the rejected males do not intervene, and move on once they detect other estrous females. Unlike the wolf, which has been known to practice both monogamous and bigamous matings, the coyote is strictly monogamous, even in areas with high coyote densities and abundant food. Females that fail to mate sometimes assist their sisters or mothers in raising their pups, or join their siblings until the next time they can mate. The newly mated pair then establishes a territory and either constructs their own den or cleans out abandoned badger, marmot, or skunk earths. During the pregnancy, the male frequently hunts alone and brings back food for the female. The female may line the den with dried grass or with fur pulled from her belly. The gestation period is 63 days, with an average litter size of six, though the number fluctuates depending on coyote population density and the abundance of food.\n\nCoyote pups are born in dens, hollow trees, or under ledges, and weigh at birth. They are altricial, and are completely dependent on milk for their first 10 days. The incisors erupt at about 12 days, the canines at 16, and the second premolars at 21. Their eyes open after 10 days, by which point the pups become increasingly more mobile, walking by 20 days, and running at the age of six weeks. The parents begin supplementing the pup's diet with regurgitated solid food after 12–15 days. By the age of four to six weeks, when their milk teeth are fully functional, the pups are given small food items such as mice, rabbits, or pieces of ungulate carcasses, with lactation steadily decreasing after two months. Unlike wolf pups, coyote pups begin seriously fighting (as opposed to play fighting) prior to engaging in play behavior. A common play behavior includes the coyote \"hip-slam\". By three weeks of age, coyote pups bite each other with less inhibition than wolf pups. By the age of four to five weeks, pups have established dominance hierarchies, and are by then more likely to play rather than fight. The male plays an active role in feeding, grooming, and guarding the pups, but abandons them if the female goes missing before the pups are completely weaned. The den is abandoned by June to July, and the pups follow their parents in patrolling their territory and hunting. Pups may leave their families in August, though can remain for much longer. The pups attain adult dimensions at eight months, and gain adult weight a month later.\n\nIndividual feeding territories vary in size from , with the general concentration of coyotes in a given area depending on food abundance, adequate denning sites, and competition with conspecifics and other predators. The coyote generally does not defend its territory outside of the denning season, and is much less aggressive towards intruders than the wolf is, typically chasing and sparring with them, but rarely killing them. Conflicts between coyotes can arise during times of food shortage. Coyotes mark their territories by raised-leg urination and ground-scratching.\n\nLike wolves, coyotes use a den (usually the deserted holes of other species) when gestating and rearing young, though they may occasionally give birth under sagebrushes in the open. Coyote dens can be located in canyons, washouts, coulees, banks, rock bluffs, or level ground. Some dens have been found under abandoned homestead shacks, grain bins, drainage pipes, railroad tracks, hollow logs, thickets, and thistles. The den is continuously dug and cleaned out by the female until the pups are born. Should the den be disturbed or infested with fleas, the pups are moved into another den. A coyote den can have several entrances and passages branching out from the main chamber. A single den can be used year after year.\n\nWhile the popular consensus is that olfaction is very important for hunting, two studies that experimentally investigated the role of olfactory, auditory, and visual cues found that visual cues are the most important ones for hunting in red foxes and coyotes.\n\nWhen hunting large prey, the coyote often works in pairs or small groups. Success in killing large ungulates depends on factors such as snow depth and crust density. Younger animals usually avoid participating in such hunts, with the breeding pair typically doing most of the work. Unlike the wolf, which attacks large prey from the rear, the coyote approaches from the front, lacerating its prey's head and throat. Like other canids, the coyote caches excess food. Coyotes catch mouse-sized rodents by pouncing, whereas ground squirrels are chased. Although coyotes can live in large groups, small prey is typically caught singly. Coyotes have been observed to kill porcupines in pairs, using their paws to flip the rodents on their backs, then attacking the soft underbelly. Only old and experienced coyotes can successfully prey on porcupines, with many predation attempts by young coyotes resulting in them being injured by their prey's quills. Coyotes sometimes urinate on their food, possibly to claim ownership over it. Recent evidence demonstrates that at least some coyotes have become more nocturnal in hunting, presumably to avoid humans.\n\nCoyotes may occasionally form mutualistic hunting relationships with American badgers, assisting each other in digging up rodent prey. The relationship between the two species may occasionally border on apparent \"friendship\", as some coyotes have been observed laying their heads on their badger companions or licking their faces without protest. The amicable interactions between coyotes and badgers were known to pre-Columbian civilizations, as shown on a Mexican jar dated to 1250–1300 CE depicting the relationship between the two.\n\nBeing both a gregarious and solitary animal, the variability of the coyote's visual and vocal repertoire is intermediate between that of the solitary foxes and the highly social wolf. The aggressive behavior of the coyote bears more similarities to that of foxes than it does that of wolves and dogs. An aggressive coyote arches its back and lowers its tail. Unlike dogs, which solicit playful behavior by performing a \"play-bow\" followed by a \"play-leap\", play in coyotes consists of a bow, followed by side-to-side head flexions and a series of \"spins\" and \"dives\". Although coyotes will sometimes bite their playmates' scruff as dogs do, they typically approach low, and make upward-directed bites. Pups fight each other regardless of sex, while among adults, aggression is typically reserved for members of the same sex. Combatants approach each other waving their tails and snarling with their jaws open, though fights are typically silent. Males tend to fight in a vertical stance, while females fight on all four paws. Fights among females tend to be more serious than ones among males, as females seize their opponents' forelegs, throat, and shoulders.\n\nThe coyote has been described as \"the most vocal of all [wild] North American mammals\". Its loudness and range of vocalizations was the cause for its binomial name \"Canis latrans\", meaning \"barking dog\". At least 11 different vocalizations are known in adult coyotes. These sounds are divided into three categories: agonistic and alarm, greeting, and contact. Vocalizations of the first category include woofs, growls, huffs, barks, bark howls, yelps, and high-frequency whines. Woofs are used as low-intensity threats or alarms, and are usually heard near den sites, prompting the pups to immediately retreat into their burrows. Growls are used as threats at short distances, but have also been heard among pups playing and copulating males. Huffs are high-intensity threat vocalizations produced by rapid expiration of air. Barks can be classed as both long-distance threat vocalizations and as alarm calls. Bark howls may serve similar functions. Yelps are emitted as a sign of submission, while high-frequency whines are produced by dominant animals acknowledging the submission of subordinates. Greeting vocalizations include low-frequency whines, 'wow-oo-wows', and group yip howls. Low-frequency whines are emitted by submissive animals, and are usually accompanied by tail wagging and muzzle nibbling. The sound known as 'wow-oo-wow' has been described as a \"greeting song\". The group yip howl is emitted when two or more pack members reunite, and may be the final act of a complex greeting ceremony. Contact calls include lone howls and group howls, as well as the previously mentioned group yip howls. The lone howl is the most iconic sound of the coyote, and may serve the purpose of announcing the presence of a lone individual separated from its pack. Group howls are used as both substitute group yip howls and as responses to either lone howls, group howls, or group yip howls.\n\nPrior to the near extermination of wolves and cougars, the coyote was most numerous in grasslands inhabited by bison, pronghorn, elk, and other deer, doing particularly well in short-grass areas with prairie dogs, though it was just as much at home in semiarid areas with sagebrush and jackrabbits or in deserts inhabited by cactus, kangaroo rats, and rattlesnakes. As long as it was not in direct competition with the wolf, the coyote ranged from the Sonoran Desert to the alpine regions of adjoining mountains or the plains and mountainous areas of Alberta. With the extermination of the wolf, the coyote's range expanded to encompass broken forests from the tropics of Guatemala and the northern slope of Alaska.\n\nCoyotes walk around per day, often along trails such as logging roads and paths; they may use iced-over rivers as travel routes in winter. They are often crepuscular, being more active around evening and the beginning of the night than during the day. Like many canids, coyotes are competent swimmers, reported to be able to travel at least across water.\n\nThe coyote is roughly the North American equivalent of the Eurasian golden jackal. Likewise, the coyote is highly versatile in its choice of food, but is primarily carnivorous, with 90% of its diet consisting of meat. Prey species include bison (largely as carrion), deer, sheep, rabbits, hares, rodents, birds (especially galliforms, young water birds and pigeons and doves), amphibians (except toads), lizards, snakes, turtles and tortoises, fish, crustaceans, and insects. Coyotes may be picky over the prey they target, as animals such as shrews, moles, and brown rats do not occur in their diet in proportion to their numbers. However, terrestrial and/or burrowing small mammals such as ground squirrels and associated species (marmots, prairie dogs, chipmunks) as well as voles, pocket gophers, kangaroo rats and other ground-favoring rodents may be quite common foods, especially for lone coyotes. More unusual prey include fishers, young black bear cubs, harp seals and rattlesnakes. Coyotes kill rattlesnakes mostly for food (but also to protect their pups at their dens) by teasing the snakes until they stretch out and then biting their heads and snapping and shaking the snakes. Birds taken by coyotes may range in size from thrashers, larks and sparrows to adult wild turkeys and, possibly, brooding adult swans and pelicans. If working in packs or pairs, coyotes may have access to larger prey than lone individuals normally take, such as various prey weighing more than . In some cases, packs of coyotes have dispatched much larger prey such as adult \"Odocoileus\" deer, cow elk, pronghorns and wild sheep, although the young fawn, calves and lambs of these animals are considerably more often taken even by packs, as well as domestic sheep and domestic cattle. In some cases, coyotes can bring down prey weighing up to or more. When it comes to adult ungulates such as wild deer, they often exploit them when vulnerable such as those that are infirm, stuck in snow or ice, otherwise winter-weakened or heavily pregnant, whereas less wary domestic ungulates may be more easily exploited.\n\nAlthough coyotes prefer fresh meat, they will scavenge when the opportunity presents itself. Excluding the insects, fruit, and grass eaten, the coyote requires an estimated of food daily, or annually. The coyote readily cannibalizes the carcasses of conspecifics, with coyote fat having been successfully used by coyote hunters as a lure or poisoned bait. The coyote's winter diet consists mainly of large ungulate carcasses, with very little plant matter. Rodent prey increases in importance during the spring, summer, and fall.\n\nThe coyote feeds on a variety of different produce, including blackberries, blueberries, peaches, pears, apples, prickly pears, chapotes, persimmons, peanuts, watermelons, cantaloupes, and carrots. During the winter and early spring, the coyote eats large quantities of grass, such as green wheat blades. It sometimes eats unusual items such as cotton cake, soybean meal, domestic animal droppings, beans, and cultivated grain such as maize, wheat, and sorghum.\n\nIn coastal California, coyotes now consume a higher percentage of marine-based food than their ancestors, which is thought to be due to the extirpation of the grizzly bear from this region. In Death Valley, coyotes may consume great quantities of hawkmoth caterpillars or beetles in the spring flowering months.\n\nIn areas where the ranges of coyotes and gray wolves overlap, interference competition and predation by wolves has been hypothesized to limit local coyote densities. Coyote ranges expanded during the 19th and 20th centuries following the extirpation of wolves, while coyotes were driven to extinction on Isle Royale after wolves colonized the island in the 1940s. One study conducted in Yellowstone National Park, where both species coexist, concluded that the coyote population in the Lamar River Valley declined by 39% following the reintroduction of wolves in the 1990s, while coyote populations in wolf inhabited areas of the Grand Teton National Park are 33% lower than in areas where they are absent. Wolves have been observed to not tolerate coyotes in their vicinity, though coyotes have been known to trail wolves to feed on their kills.\n\nCoyotes may compete with cougars in some areas. In the eastern Sierra Nevadas, coyotes compete with cougars over mule deer. Cougars normally outcompete and dominate coyotes, and may kill them occasionally, thus reducing coyote predation pressure on smaller carnivores such as foxes and bobcats. Coyotes that are killed are sometimes not eaten, perhaps indicating that these compromise competitive interspecies interactions, however there are multiple confirmed cases of cougars also eating coyotes. In northeastern Mexico, cougar predation on coyotes continues apace but coyotes were absent from the prey spectrum of sympatric jaguars, apparently due to differing habitat usages.\n\nOther than by gray wolves and cougars, predation on adult coyotes is relatively rare but multiple other predators can be occasional threats. In some cases, adult coyotes have been preyed upon by both American black and grizzly bears, American alligators, large Canada lynx and golden eagles. At kill sites and carrion, coyotes, especially if working alone, tend to be dominated by wolves, cougars, bears, wolverines and, usually but not always, eagles (i.e., bald and golden). When such larger, more powerful and/or more aggressive predators such as these come to a shared feeding site, a coyote may either try to fight, wait until the other predator is done or occasionally share a kill, but if a major danger such as wolves or an adult cougar is present, the coyote will tend to flee.\n\nCoyotes rarely kill healthy adult red foxes, and have been observed to feed or den alongside them, though they often kill foxes caught in traps. Coyotes may kill fox kits, but this is not a major source of mortality. In southern California, coyotes frequently kill gray foxes, and these smaller canids tend to avoid areas with high coyote densities.\n\nIn some areas, coyotes share their ranges with bobcats. These two similarly-sized species rarely physically confront one another, though bobcat populations tend to diminish in areas with high coyote densities. However, several studies have demonstrated interference competition between coyotes and bobcats, and in all cases coyotes dominated the interaction. Multiple researchers reported instances of coyotes killing bobcats, whereas bobcats killing coyotes is more rare. Coyotes attack bobcats using a bite-and-shake method similar to what is used on medium-sized prey. Coyotes (both single individuals and groups) have been known to occasionally kill bobcats – in most cases, the bobcats were relatively small specimens, such as adult females and juveniles. However, coyote attacks (by an unknown number of coyotes) on adult male bobcats have occurred. In California, coyote and bobcat populations are not negatively correlated across different habitat types, but predation by coyotes is an important source of mortality in bobcats. Biologist Stanley Paul Young noted that in his entire trapping career, he had never successfully saved a captured bobcat from being killed by coyotes, and wrote of two incidents wherein coyotes chased bobcats up trees. Coyotes have been documented to directly kill Canada lynx on occasion, and compete with them for prey, especially snowshoe hares. In some areas, including central Alberta, lynx are more abundant where coyotes are few, thus interactions with coyotes appears to influence lynx populations more than the availability of snowshoe hares.\n\nDue to the coyote's wide range and abundance throughout North America, it is listed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The coyote's pre-Columbian range was limited to the Southwest and Plains regions of North America, and northern and central Mexico. By the 19th century, the species expanded north and east, expanding further after 1900, coinciding with land conversion and the extirpation of wolves. By this time, its range encompassed the entire North American continent, including all of the United States and Mexico, southward into Central America, and northward into most of Canada and Alaska. This expansion is ongoing, and the species now occupies the majority of areas between 8°N (Panama) and 70°N (northern Alaska).\n\nAlthough it was once widely believed that coyotes are recent immigrants to southern Mexico and Central America, aided in their expansion by deforestation, Pleistocene and Early Holocene records, as well as records from the pre-Columbian period and early European colonization show that the animal was present in the area long before modern times. Nevertheless, range expansion did occur south of Costa Rica during the late 1970s and northern Panama in the early 1980s, following the expansion of cattle-grazing lands into tropical rain forests. The coyote is predicted to appear in northern Belize in the near future, as the habitat there is favorable to the species. Concerns have been raised of a possible expansion into South America through the Panamanian Isthmus, should the Darién Gap ever be closed by the Pan-American Highway. This fear was partially confirmed in January 2013, when the species was recorded in eastern Panama's Chepo District, beyond the Panama Canal.\n\nA recent genetic study proposes that coyotes were originally not found in the area of the eastern United States. From the 1890s, dense forests were transformed into agricultural land and wolf control implemented on a large scale, leaving a niche for coyotes to disperse into. There were two major dispersals from two populations of genetically distinct coyotes. The first major dispersal to the northeast came in the early 20th century from those coyotes living in the northern Great Plains. These came to New England via the northern Great Lakes region and southern Canada, and to Pennsylvania via the southern Great Lakes region, meeting together in the 1940s in New York and Pennsylvania. These coyotes have hybridized with the remnant gray wolf and eastern wolf populations, which has added to coyote genetic diversity and may have assisted adaptation to the new niche. The second major dispersal to the southeast came in the mid-20th century from Texas and reached the Carolinas in the 1980s. These coyotes have hybridized with the remnant red wolf populations before the 1970s when the red wolf was extirpated in the wild, which has also added to coyote genetic diversity and may have assisted adaptation to this new niche as well. Both of these two major coyote dispersals have experienced rapid population growth and are forecast to meet along the mid-Atlantic coast. The study concludes that for coyotes the long range dispersal, gene flow from local populations, and rapid population growth may be inter-related.\n\nAmong large North American carnivores, the coyote probably carries the largest number of diseases and parasites, likely due to its wide range and varied diet. Viral diseases known to infect coyotes include rabies, canine distemper, infectious canine hepatitis, four strains of equine encephalitis, and oral papillomatosis. By the late 1970s, serious rabies outbreaks in coyotes had ceased to be a problem for over 60 years, though sporadic cases every 1–5 years did occur. Distemper causes the deaths of many pups in the wild, though some specimens can survive infection. \"Tularemia\", a bacterial disease, infects coyotes from tick bites and through their rodent and lagomorph prey, and can be deadly for pups.\n\nCoyotes can be infected by both demodectic and sarcoptic mange, the latter being the most common. Mite infestations are rare and incidental in coyotes, while tick infestations are more common, with seasonal peaks depending on locality (May–August in the Northwest, March–November in Arkansas). Coyotes are only rarely infested with lice, while fleas infest coyotes from puphood, though they may be more a source of irritation than serious illness. \"Pulex simulans\" is the most common species to infest coyotes, while \"Ctenocephalides canis\" tends to occur only in places where coyotes and dogs (its primary host) inhabit the same area. Although coyotes are rarely host to flukes, they can nevertheless have serious effects on coyotes, particularly \"Nanophyetus salmincola\", which can infect them with salmon poisoning disease, a disease with a 90% mortality rate. Trematode \"Metorchis conjunctus\" can also infect coyotes. Tapeworms have been recorded to infest 60–95% of all coyotes examined. The most common species to infest coyotes are \"Taenia pisiformis\" and \"Taenia crassiceps\", which uses cottontail rabbits as intermediate hosts. The largest species known in coyotes is \"T. hydatigena\", which enters coyotes through infected ungulates, and can grow to lengths of . Although once largely limited to wolves, \"Echinococcus granulosus\" has expanded to coyotes since the latter began colonizing former wolf ranges. The most frequent ascaroid roundworm in coyotes is \"Toxascaris leonina\", which dwells in the coyote's small intestine and has no ill effects, except for causing the host to eat more frequently. Hookworms of the genus \"Ancylostoma\" infest coyotes throughout their range, being particularly prevalent in humid areas. In areas of high moisture, such as coastal Texas, coyotes can carry up to 250 hookworms each. The blood-drinking \"A. caninum\" is particularly dangerous, as it damages the coyote through blood loss and lung congestion. A 10-day-old pup can die from being host to as few as 25 \"A. caninum\" worms.\n\nCoyote features as a trickster figure and skin-walker in the folktales of some Native Americans, notably several nations in the Southwestern and Plains regions, where he alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or that of a man. As with other trickster figures, Coyote acts as a picaresque hero who rebels against social convention through deception and humor. Folklorists such as Harris believe coyotes came to be seen as tricksters due to the animal's intelligence and adaptability. After the European colonization of the Americas, Anglo-American depictions of Coyote are of a cowardly and untrustworthy animal. Unlike the gray wolf, which has undergone a radical improvement of its public image, Anglo-American cultural attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative.\n\nIn the Maidu creation story, Coyote introduces work, suffering, and death to the world. Zuni lore has Coyote bringing winter into the world by stealing light from the kachinas. The Chinook, Maidu, Pawnee, Tohono O'odham, and Ute portray the coyote as the companion of The Creator. A Tohono O'odham flood story has Coyote helping Montezuma survive a global deluge that destroys humanity. After The Creator creates humanity, Coyote and Montezuma teach people how to live. The Crow creation story portrays Old Man Coyote as The Creator. In The Dineh creation story, Coyote was present in the First World with First Man and First Woman, though a different version has it being created in the Fourth World. The Navajo Coyote brings death into the world, explaining that without death, too many people would exist, thus no room to plant corn.\nPrior to the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, Coyote played a significant role in Mesoamerican cosmology. The coyote symbolized military might in Classic era Teotihuacan, with warriors dressing up in coyote costumes to call upon its predatory power. The species continued to be linked to Central Mexican warrior cults in the centuries leading up to the post-Classic Aztec rule. In Aztec mythology, Huehuecóyotl (meaning \"old coyote\"), the god of dance, music and carnality, is depicted in several codices as a man with a coyote's head. He is sometimes depicted as a womanizer, responsible for bringing war into the world by seducing Xochiquetzal, the goddess of love. Epigrapher David H. Kelley argued that the god Quetzalcoatl owed its origins to pre-Aztec Uto-Aztecan mythological depictions of the coyote, which is portrayed as mankind's \"Elder Brother\", a creator, seducer, trickster, and culture hero linked to the morning star.\n\nCoyote attacks on humans are uncommon and rarely cause serious injuries, due to the relatively small size of the coyote, but have been increasingly frequent, especially in California. There have been only two confirmed fatal attacks: one on a three-year-old named Kelly Keen in Glendale, California and another on a nineteen-year-old named Taylor Mitchell in Nova Scotia, Canada. In the 30 years leading up to March 2006, at least 160 attacks occurred in the United States, mostly in the Los Angeles County area. Data from United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Wildlife Services, the California Department of Fish and Game, and other sources show that while 41 attacks occurred during the period of 1988–1997, 48 attacks were verified from 1998 through 2003. The majority of these incidents occurred in Southern California near the suburban-wildland interface.\n\nIn the absence of the harassment of coyotes practiced by rural people, urban coyotes are losing their fear of humans, which is further worsened by people intentionally or unintentionally feeding coyotes. In such situations, some coyotes have begun to act aggressively toward humans, chasing joggers and bicyclists, confronting people walking their dogs, and stalking small children. Non-rabid coyotes in these areas sometimes target small children, mostly under the age of 10, though some adults have been bitten.\n\nAlthough media reports of such attacks generally identify the animals in question as simply \"coyotes\", research into the genetics of the eastern coyote indicates those involved in attacks in northeast North America, including Pennsylvania, New York, New England, and eastern Canada, may have actually been coywolves, hybrids of \"Canis latrans\" and \"C. lupus,\" not fully coyotes.\n\nCoyotes are presently the most abundant livestock predators in western North America, causing the majority of sheep, goat, and cattle losses. For example, according to the National Agricultural Statistics Service, coyotes were responsible for 60.5% of the 224,000 sheep deaths attributed to predation in 2004. The total number of sheep deaths in 2004 comprised 2.22% of the total sheep and lamb population in the United States, which, according to the National Agricultural Statistics Service USDA report, totaled 4.66 million and 7.80 million heads respectively as of July 1, 2005. Because coyote populations are typically many times greater and more widely distributed than those of wolves, coyotes cause more overall predation losses. United States government agents routinely shoot, poison, trap, and kill about 90,000 coyotes each year to protect livestock. An Idaho census taken in 2005 showed that individual coyotes were 5% as likely to attack livestock as individual wolves. In Utah, more than 11,000 coyotes were killed for bounties totaling over $500,000 in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2017.\n\nLivestock guardian dogs are commonly used to aggressively repel predators and have worked well in both fenced pasture and range operations. A 1986 survey of sheep producers in the USA found that 82% reported the use of dogs represented an economic asset.\n\nRe-wilding cattle, which involves increasing the natural protective tendencies of cattle, is a method for controlling coyotes discussed by Temple Grandin of Colorado State University. This method is gaining popularity among producers who allow their herds to calve on the range and whose cattle graze open pastures throughout the year.\n\nCoyotes typically bite the throat just behind the jaw and below the ear when attacking adult sheep or goats, with death commonly resulting from suffocation. Blood loss is usually a secondary cause of death. Calves and heavily fleeced sheep are killed by attacking the flanks or hindquarters, causing shock and blood loss. When attacking smaller prey, such as young lambs, the kill is made by biting the skull and spinal regions, causing massive tissue and bone damage. Small or young prey may be completely carried off, leaving only blood as evidence of a kill. Coyotes usually leave the hide and most of the skeleton of larger animals relatively intact, unless food is scarce, in which case they may leave only the largest bones. Scattered bits of wool, skin, and other parts are characteristic where coyotes feed extensively on larger carcasses.\n\nTracks are an important factor in distinguishing coyote from dog predation. Coyote tracks tend to be more oval-shaped and compact than those of domestic dogs, and their claw marks are less prominent and the tracks tend to follow a straight line more closely than those of dogs. With the exception of sighthounds, most dogs of similar weight to coyotes have a slightly shorter stride. Coyote kills can be distinguished from wolf kills by less damage to the underlying tissues in the former. Also, coyote scat tends to be smaller than wolf scat.\n\nCoyotes are often attracted to dog food and animals that are small enough to appear as prey. Items such as garbage, pet food, and sometimes feeding stations for birds and squirrels attract coyotes into backyards. About three to five pets attacked by coyotes are brought into the Animal Urgent Care hospital of South Orange County (California) each week, the majority of which are dogs, since cats typically do not survive the attacks. Scat analysis collected near Claremont, California, revealed that coyotes relied heavily on pets as a food source in winter and spring. At one location in Southern California, coyotes began relying on a colony of feral cats as a food source. Over time, the coyotes killed most of the cats, and then continued to eat the cat food placed daily at the colony site by people who were maintaining the cat colony.\nCoyotes usually attack smaller-sized dogs, but they have been known to attack even large, powerful breeds such as the Rottweiler in exceptional cases. Dogs larger than coyotes, such as greyhounds, are generally able to drive them off, and have been known to kill coyotes. Smaller breeds are more likely to suffer injury or death.\n\nPrior to the mid-19th century, coyote fur was considered worthless. This changed with the diminution of beavers, and by 1860, the hunting of coyotes for their fur became a great source of income (75 cents to $1.50 per skin) for wolfers in the Great Plains. Coyote pelts were of significant economic importance during the early 1950s, ranging in price from $5 to $25 per pelt, depending on locality. The coyote's fur is not durable enough to make rugs, but can be used for coats and jackets, scarves, or muffs. The majority of pelts are used for making trimmings, such as coat collars and sleeves for women's clothing. Coyote fur is sometimes dyed black as imitation silver fox.\n\nCoyotes were occasionally eaten by trappers and mountain men during the western expansion. Coyotes sometimes featured in the feasts of the Plains Indians, and coyote pups were eaten by the indigenous people of San Gabriel, California. The taste of coyote meat has been likened to that of the wolf, and is more tender than pork when boiled. Coyote fat, when taken in the fall, has been used on occasion to grease leather or eaten as a spread.\n\nCoyotes were probably semidomesticated by various pre-Columbian cultures. Some 19th-century writers wrote of coyotes being kept in native villages in the Great Plains. The coyote is easily tamed as a pup, but can become destructive as an adult. Both full-blooded and hybrid coyotes can be playful and confiding with their owners, but are suspicious and shy of strangers, though coyotes being tractable enough to be used for practical purposes like retrieving and pointing have been recorded. A tame coyote named \"Butch\", caught in the summer of 1945, had a short-lived career in cinema, appearing in \"Smoky\" and \"Ramrod\" before being shot while raiding a henhouse.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Books\nBULLET::::- Dixon, J. S. (1920). \"Control of the coyote in California\". Berkeley, Cal. : Agricultural Experiment Station\nBULLET::::- Flores, D. (2016). \"Coyote America: A Natural and Supernatural History\". Basic Books.\nBULLET::::- Harding, A. R. (1909). \"Wolf and coyote trapping; an up-to-date wolf hunter's guide, giving the most successful methods of experienced \"wolfers\" for hunting and trapping these animals, also gives their habits in detail\". Columbus, Ohio, A. R. Harding pub. co.\nBULLET::::- Murie, A. (1940). \"Ecology of the coyote in the Yellowstone\". Washington, D.C. : U.S. G.P.O.\nBULLET::::- Parker, Gerry. (1995). \"Eastern Coyote: Story of Its Success\", Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.\nBULLET::::- Van Nuys, Frank (2015). \"Varmints and Victims: Predator Control in the American West.\" Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.\nBULLET::::- Wagner, M. M. (c. 1920). \"The autobiography of a tame coyote\". San Francisco, Harr Wagner pub. co.\n\nBULLET::::- Video\nBULLET::::- Shelly, Priya (June 2016). \"Living with Coyote\" (18 minutes). \"Aeon (digital magazine)\".\n\nBULLET::::- Audiobook\nBULLET::::- Olson, Jack (May 2015). \"The Last Coyote\" (8 hours). Narrated by Gary MacFadden. Originally published as \"Slaughter The Animals, Poison The Earth\", Simon & Schuster, Oct. 11, 1971.\n\nBULLET::::- Arizona Game & Fish Department, \"Living with Coyotes\"\nBULLET::::- Western coyote, Wolf and Coyote DNA Bank @ Trent University\nBULLET::::- View occurrences of \"Canis latrans\" in the Biodiversity Heritage Library.\n"}
{"id": "6711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6711", "title": "Compressor (disambiguation)", "text": "Compressor (disambiguation)\n\nA compressor is a mechanical device that increases the pressure of a gas by reducing its volume. \n\nCompressor may also refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- A device that performs Compression (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Compressor (audio signal processor), for dynamic range compression\nBULLET::::- Compressor (software), a video and audio media compression and encoding application\n\nBULLET::::- Compression (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Compaction (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Decompression (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Expansion (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Kompressor (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Compressor Hot Springs, a place in California, U.S.\nBULLET::::- Supercharger\nBULLET::::- Turbocharger\n"}
{"id": "6713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6713", "title": "Conan the Barbarian", "text": "Conan the Barbarian\n\nConan the Barbarian (also known as Conan the Cimmerian) is a fictional sword and sorcery hero who originated in pulp magazines and has since been adapted to books, comics, several films (including \"Conan the Barbarian\" and \"Conan the Destroyer\"), television programs (animated and live-action), video games, role-playing games, and other media. The character was created by writer Robert E. Howard in 1932 for a series of fantasy stories published in \"Weird Tales\" magazine.\n\nConan the Barbarian was created by Robert E. Howard in a series of fantasy stories published in \"Weird Tales\" in 1932. For months, Howard had been in search of a new character to market to the burgeoning pulp outlets of the early 1930s. In October 1931, he submitted the short story \"People of the Dark\" to Clayton Publications' new magazine, \"Strange Tales of Mystery and Terror\" (June 1932). \"People of the Dark\" is a remembrance story of \"past lives\", and in its first-person narrative the protagonist describes one of his previous incarnations; Conan is a black-haired barbarian hero who swears by a deity called Crom. Some Howard scholars believe this Conan to be a forerunner of the more famous character.\n\nIn February 1932, Howard vacationed at a border town on the lower Rio Grande. During this trip, he further conceived the character of Conan and also wrote the poem \"Cimmeria\", much of which echoes specific passages in Plutarch's \"Lives\". According to some scholars, Howard's conception of Conan and the Hyborian Age may have originated in Thomas Bulfinch's \"The Outline of Mythology\" (1913) which inspired Howard to \"coalesce into a coherent whole his literary aspirations and the strong physical, autobiographical elements underlying the creation of Conan\".\n\nHaving digested these prior influences after he returned from his trip, Howard rewrote a rejected story, \"By This Axe I Rule!\" (May 1929), replacing his existing character Kull of Atlantis with his new hero, and retitling it \"The Phoenix on the Sword\". Howard also wrote \"The Scarlet Citadel\" and \"The Frost-Giant's Daughter\", inspired by the Greek myth of Daphne, and submitted both stories to \"Weird Tales\" magazine. Although \"The Frost-Giant's Daughter\" was rejected, the magazine accepted \"The Phoenix on the Sword\" after it received the requested polishing, and published it in the December 1932 issue. \"The Scarlet Citadel\" was published the following month. .\n\n\"The Phoenix on the Sword\" appeared in \"Weird Tales\" cover-dated December 1932. Editor Farnsworth Wright subsequently prompted Howard to write an 8,000-word essay for personal use detailing \"the Hyborian Age\", the fictional setting for Conan. Using this essay as his guideline, Howard began plotting \"The Tower of the Elephant\", a new Conan story that was the first to truly integrate his new conception of the Hyborian world.\n\nThe publication and success of \"The Tower of the Elephant\" spurred Howard to write many more Conan stories for \"Weird Tales\". By the time of Howard's suicide in 1936, he had written 21 complete stories, 17 of which had been published, as well as a number of unfinished fragments.\n\nFollowing Howard's death, the copyright of the Conan stories passed through several hands. Eventually, under the guidance of L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter, the stories were edited, revised, and sometimes rewritten. For roughly 40 years, the original versions of Howard's Conan stories remained out of print. In 1977, the publisher Berkley Books issued three volumes using the earliest published form of the texts from \"Weird Tales\", but these failed to displace the edited versions. In the 1980s and 1990s, the copyright holders of the Conan franchise permitted Howard's stories to go out of print entirely, while continuing to sell Conan works by other authors.\n\nIn 2000, the British publisher Gollancz Science Fiction issued a two-volume, complete edition of Howard's Conan stories as part of its Fantasy Masterworks imprint, which included several stories that had never seen print in their original form. The Gollancz edition mostly used the versions of the stories as published in \"Weird Tales\".\n\nThe two volumes were combined and the stories resorted into chronological order as \"The Complete Chronicles of Conan: Centenary Edition\" (Gollancz Science Fiction, 2006; edited and with an Afterword by Steve Jones).\n\nIn 2003, another British publisher, Wandering Star Books, made an effort both to restore Howard's original manuscripts and to provide a more scholarly and historical view of the Conan stories. It published hardcover editions in England, which were republished in the United States by the Del Rey imprint of Ballantine Books. The first book, \"Conan of Cimmeria: Volume One (1932–1933)\" (2003; published in the US as \"The Coming of Conan the Cimmerian\") includes Howard's notes on his fictional setting, as well as letters and poems concerning the genesis of his ideas. This was followed by \"Conan of Cimmeria: Volume Two (1934)\" (2004; published in the US as \"The Bloody Crown of Conan\") and \"Conan of Cimmeria: Volume Three (1935–1936)\" (2005; published in the US as \"The Conquering Sword of Conan\"). These three volumes combined include all of the original, unedited Conan stories.\n\nThe various stories of Conan the Barbarian occur in the pseudo-historical \"Hyborian Age\", set after the destruction of Atlantis and before the rise of any known ancient civilization. This is a specific epoch in a fictional timeline created by Howard for many of the low fantasy tales of his artificial legendary.\n\nThe reasons behind the invention of the Hyborian Age were perhaps commercial: Howard had an intense love for history and historical dramas; however, at the same time, he recognized the difficulties and the time-consuming research work needed in maintaining historical accuracy—and moreover, the poorly-stocked libraries in the rural part of Texas where Howard lived just didn't have the material needed for such historical research. By conceiving a timeless setting—\"a \"vanished\" age\"—and by carefully choosing names that resembled human history, Howard shrewdly avoided the problem of historical anachronisms and his need for lengthy exposition.\n\nAccording to \"The Phoenix on the Sword\", the adventures of Conan take place \"Between the years when the oceans drank Atlantis and the gleaming cities, and the years of the rise of the Sons of Aryas.\"\n\nConan is a Cimmerian. From the writings of Robert E. Howard (The Hyborian Age among others) it is known that his Cimmerians are based on the Celts or perhaps the historic Cimmerians, based on the described geography and the existence of said people. He was born on a battlefield and is the son of a village blacksmith. Conan matured quickly as a youth and, by age fifteen, he was already a respected warrior who had participated in the destruction of the Aquilonian fortress of Venarium. After its demise, he was struck by wanderlust and began the adventures chronicled by Howard, encountering skulking monsters, evil wizards, tavern wenches, and beautiful princesses. He roamed throughout the Hyborian Age nations as a thief, outlaw, mercenary, and pirate. As he grew older, he began commanding vast units of warriors and escalating his ambitions. In his forties, he seized the crown from the tyrannical king of Aquilonia, the most powerful kingdom of the Hyborian Age, having strangled the previous ruler on the steps of his own throne. Conan's adventures often result in him performing heroic feats, though his motivation for doing so is largely to protect his own survival or for personal gain.\n\nA conspicuous element of Conan's character is his chivalry. He is extremely reluctant to fight women (even when they fight him) and has a strong tendency to save damsels in distress. In \"Jewels of Gwahlur\", he has to make a split-second decision whether to save the dancing girl Muriela or the chest of priceless gems which he spent months in search of. So, without hesitation, he rescues Muriela and allows for the treasure to be irrevocably lost. In \"The Black Stranger\", Conan saves the exile Zingaran Lady Belesa at considerable risk to himself, giving her as a parting gift his fortune in gems big enough to have a comfortable and wealthy life in Zingara, while asking for no sexual favors in return. Reviewer Jennifer Bard also noted that when Conan is in a pirate crew or a robber gang led by another male, his tendency is to subvert and undermine the leader's authority, and eventually supplant (and often, kill) him (e.g. \"Pool of the Black One\", \"A Witch Shall be Born\", \"Shadows in the Moonlight\"). Conversely, in \"Queen of the Black Coast\", it is noted that Conan \"generally agreed to Belit's plan. Hers was the mind that directed their raids, his the arm that carried out her ideas. It was a good life.\" And at the end of \"Red Nails\", Conan and Valeria seem to be headed towards a reasonably amicable piratical partnership.\n\nConan has \"sullen\", \"smoldering\", and \"volcanic\" blue eyes with a black \"square-cut mane\". Howard once describes him as having a hairy chest and, while comic book interpretations often portray Conan as wearing a loincloth or other minimalist clothing to give him a more barbaric image, Howard describes the character as wearing whatever garb is typical for the kingdom and culture in which Conan finds himself. Howard never gave a strict height or weight for Conan in a story, only describing him in loose terms like \"giant\" and \"massive\". In the tales, no human is ever described as being stronger than Conan, although several are mentioned as taller (such as the strangler Baal-pteor) or of larger bulk. In a letter to P. Schuyler Miller and John D. Clark in 1936, only three months before Howard's death, Conan is described as standing 6 ft/183 cm and weighing when he takes part in an attack on Venarium at only 14 years old, though being far from fully grown. Conan himself says in \"Beyond the Black River\" that he had \"...not yet seen 15 snows\".\nAlthough Conan is muscular, Howard frequently compares his agility and way of moving to that of a panther (see, for instance, \"Jewels of Gwahlur\", \"Beyond the Black River\", or \"Rogues in the House\"). His skin is frequently characterized as bronzed from constant exposure to the sun. In his younger years, he is often depicted wearing a light chain shirt and a horned helmet, though appearances vary with different stories.\n\nDuring his reign as king of Aquilonia, Conan was\n\nHoward imagined the Cimmerians as a pre-Celtic people with mostly black hair and blue or grey eyes. Ethnically, the Cimmerians to which Conan belongs are descendants of the Atlanteans, though they don't remember their ancestry. In his fictional historical essay \"The Hyborian Age\", Howard describes how the people of Atlantis—the land where his character King Kull originated—had to move east after a great cataclysm changed the face of the world and sank their island, settling where Ireland and Scotland would eventually be located. Thus they are (in Howard's work) the ancestors of the Irish and Scottish (the Celtic Gaels) and not the Picts, the other ancestor of modern Scots who also appear in Howard's work. In the same work, Howard also described how the Cimmerians eventually moved south and east after the age of Conan (presumably in the vicinity of the Black Sea, where the historical Cimmerians dwelt).\n\nDespite his brutish appearance, Conan uses his brains as well as his brawn. The Cimmerian is a highly skilled warrior, possibly without peer with a sword, but his travels have given him vast experience in other trades, especially as a thief. He's also a talented commander, tactician, and strategist, as well as a born leader. In addition, Conan has advanced knowledge of languages and codes and is able to recognize, or even decipher, certain ancient or secret signs and writings. For example, in \"Jewels of Gwahlur\" Howard states: \"In his roaming about the world the giant adventurer had picked up a wide smattering of knowledge, particularly including the speaking and reading of many alien tongues. Many a sheltered scholar would have been astonished at the Cimmerian's linguistic abilities.\" He also has incredible stamina, enabling him to go without sleep for a few days. In \"A Witch Shall be Born\", Conan fights armed men until he is overwhelmed, captured, and crucified, before going an entire night and day without water. However, Conan still possesses the strength to pull the nails from his feet, while hoisting himself into a horse's saddle and riding for ten miles.\n\nAnother noticeable trait is his sense of humor, largely absent in the comics and movies, but very much a part of Howard's original vision of the character (particularly apparent in \"Xuthal of the Dusk\", also known as \"The Slithering Shadow.\") His sense of humor can also be rather grimly ironic, as was demonstrated by how he unleashes his own version of justice on the treacherous—and ill-fated—innkeeper Aram Baksh in \"Shadows in Zamboula\".\n\nHe is a loyal friend to those true to him, with a barbaric code of conduct that often marks him as more honorable than the more sophisticated people he meets in his travels. Indeed, his straightforward nature and barbarism are constants in all the tales.\n\nConan is a formidable combatant both armed and unarmed. With his back to the wall, Conan is capable of engaging and killing opponents by the score. This is seen in several stories, such as \"Queen of the Black Coast\", \"The Scarlet Citadel\", and \"A Witch Shall Be Born\". Conan is not superhuman, though; he needed the providential help of Zelata's wolf to defeat four Nemedian soldiers in Howard's novel \"The Hour of the Dragon\". Some of his hardest victories have come from fighting single opponents of inhuman strength: one such as Thak, an ape-like humanoid from \"Rogues in the House\", or the strangler Baal-Pteor in \"Shadows in Zamboula\". Conan is far from untouchable and has been captured or defeated several times (on one occasion, knocking himself out drunkenly after running into a wall).\n\nHoward frequently corresponded with H. P. Lovecraft, and the two would sometimes insert references or elements of each other's settings in their works. Later editors reworked many of the original Conan stories by Howard, thus diluting this connection. Nevertheless, many of Howard's unedited Conan stories are arguably part of the Cthulhu Mythos. Additionally, many of the Conan stories by Howard, de Camp, and Carter used geographical place names from Clark Ashton Smith's Hyperborean Cycle.\n\nBULLET::::1. \"The Phoenix on the Sword\" (novelette; vol. 20, #6, December 1932)\nBULLET::::2. \"The Scarlet Citadel\" (novelette; vol. 21, #1, January 1, 1933)\nBULLET::::3. \"The Tower of the Elephant\" (novelette; vol. 21, #3, March 1933)\nBULLET::::4. \"Black Colossus\" (novelette; vol. 21, #6, June 1933)\nBULLET::::5. \"The Slithering Shadow\" (novelette; vol. 22, #3, September 1933, alternate title \"Xuthal of the Dusk\")\nBULLET::::6. \"The Pool of the Black One\" (novelette; vol. 22, #4, October 1933)\nBULLET::::7. \"Rogues in the House\" (novelette; vol. 23, #1, January 1934)\nBULLET::::8. \"Iron Shadows in the Moon\" (novelette; vol. 23, #4, April 1934, published as \"Shadows in the Moonlight\")\nBULLET::::9. \"Queen of the Black Coast\" (novelette; vol. 23, #5, May 1934)\nBULLET::::10. \"The Devil in Iron\" (novelette; vol. 24, #2, August 1934)\nBULLET::::11. \"The People of the Black Circle\" (novella; vol. 24, #3–5, September–November 1934)\nBULLET::::12. \"A Witch Shall Be Born\" (novelette; vol. 24, #6, December 1934)\nBULLET::::13. \"Jewels of Gwahlur\" (novelette; vol. 25, #3, March 1935, author's original title \"The Servants of Bit-Yakin\")\nBULLET::::14. \"Beyond the Black River\" (novella; vol. 25, #5–6, May–June 1935)\nBULLET::::15. \"Shadows in Zamboula\" (novelette; vol. 26, #5, November 1935, author's original title \"The Man-Eaters of Zamboula\")\nBULLET::::16. \"The Hour of the Dragon\" (novel; vol. 26, #6 & vol. 27, #1–4, December 1935, January–April 1936)\nBULLET::::17. \"Red Nails\" (novella; vol. 28, #1–3, July, September, October 1936)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Gods of the North\" (March 1934) – published as \"The Frost-Giant's Daughter\" in \"The Coming of Conan, 1953.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The God in the Bowl\" – Published in \"Space Science Fiction\", Sep. 1952.\nBULLET::::- \"The Black Stranger\" – Published in \"Fantasy Magazine\", Feb. 1953.\nBULLET::::- \"The Vale of Lost Women\" – Published in \"The Magazine of Horror\", Spring 1967.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Drums of Tombalku\" – Fragment. Published in \"Conan the Adventurer\", 1966.\nBULLET::::- \"The Hall of the Dead\" – Synopsis. Published in \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\", February 1967.\nBULLET::::- \"The Hand of Nergal\" – Fragment. Published in \"Conan\", 1967.\nBULLET::::- \"The Snout in the Dark\" – Fragment. Published in \"Conan of Cimmeria\", 1969.\n\nA number of untitled synopses for Conan stories also exist.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Wolves Beyond the Border\" – A non-Conan story set in Conan's world. Fragment. Published in 1967 in \"Conan the Usurper\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Hyborian Age\" – An essay written in 1932. Published in 1938 in \"The Hyborian Age\".\nBULLET::::- \"Cimmeria\" – A poem written in 1932. Published in 1965 in \"The Howard Collector\".\n\nThe character of Conan has proven durably popular, resulting in Conan stories by later writers such as Poul Anderson, Leonard Carpenter, Lin Carter, L. Sprague de Camp, Roland J. Green, John C. Hocking, Robert Jordan, Sean A. Moore, Björn Nyberg, Andrew J. Offutt, Steve Perry, John Maddox Roberts, Harry Turtledove, and Karl Edward Wagner. Some of these writers have finished incomplete Conan manuscripts by Howard. Others were created by rewriting Howard stories which originally featured entirely different characters from entirely different milieus. Most, however, are completely original works. In total, more than fifty novels and dozens of short stories featuring the Conan character have been written by authors other than Howard.\n\nThe Gnome Press edition (1950–1957) was the first hardcover collection of Howard's Conan stories, including all the original Howard material known to exist at the time, some left unpublished in his lifetime. The later volumes contain some stories rewritten by L. Sprague de Camp (like \"The Treasure of Tranicos\"), including several non-Conan Howard stories, mostly historical exotica situated in the Levant at the time of the Crusades, which he turned into Conan yarns. The Gnome edition also issued the first Conan story written by an author other than Howard—the final volume published, which is by Björn Nyberg and revised by de Camp.\n\nThe Lancer/Ace editions (1966–1977), under the direction of de Camp and Lin Carter, were the first comprehensive paperbacks, compiling the material from the Gnome Press series together in chronological order with all the remaining original Howard material, including that left unpublished in his lifetime and fragments and outlines. These were completed by de Camp and Carter. The series also included Howard stories originally featuring other protagonists that were rewritten by de Camp as Conan stories. New Conan stories written entirely by de Camp and Carter were added as well. Lancer Books went out of business before bringing out the entire series, the publication of which was completed by Ace Books. Eight of the eventual twelve volumes published featured dynamic cover paintings by Frank Frazetta that, for many fans, presented the definitive, iconic impression of Conan and his world. For decades to come, most other portrayals of the Cimmerian and his imitators were heavily influenced by the cover paintings of this series.\n\nMost editions after the Lancer/Ace series have been of either the original Howard stories or Conan material by others, but not both. The exception are the Ace Maroto editions (1978–1981), which include both new material by other authors and older material by Howard, though the latter are some of the non-Conan tales rewritten as Conan stories by de Camp. Notable later editions of the original Howard Conan stories include the Donald M. Grant editions (1974–1989, incomplete); Berkley editions (1977); Gollancz editions (2000–2006), and Wandering Star/Del Rey editions (2003–2005). Later series of new Conan material include the Bantam editions (1978–1982) and Tor editions (1982–2004).\n\nIn an attempt to provide a coherent timeline which fit the numerous adventures of Conan penned by Robert E. Howard and later writers, various \"Conan chronologies\" have been prepared by many people from the 1930s onward. Note that no consistent timeline has yet accommodated every single Conan story. The following are the principal theories that have been advanced over the years.\nBULLET::::- Miller/Clark chronology – \"A Probable Outline of Conan's Career\" (1936) was the first effort to put the tales in chronological order. Completed by P. Schuyler Miller and John Drury Clark, the chronology was later revised by Clark and L. Sprague de Camp in \"An Informal Biography of Conan the Cimmerian\" (1952).\nBULLET::::- Robert Jordan chronology – \"A Conan Chronology by Robert Jordan\" (1987) was a new chronology written by Conan writer Robert Jordan that included all written Conan material up to that point. It was heavily influenced by the Miller/Clark/de Camp chronologies, though it departed from them in a number of idiosyncratic instances.\nBULLET::::- William Galen Gray chronology – \"Timeline of Conan's Journeys\" (1997, rev. 2004), was fan William Galen Gray's attempt to create \"a chronology of all the stories, both Howard and pastiche.\" Drawing on the earlier Miller/Clark and Jordan chronologies, it represents the ultimate expression of their tradition to date.\nBULLET::::- Joe Marek chronology – Joe Marek's chronology is limited to stories written (or devised) by Howard, though within that context it is essentially a revision of the Miller/Clark tradition to better reflect the internal evidence of the stories and avoid forcing Conan into what he perceives as a \"mad dash\" around the Hyborian world within timeframes too rapid to be credible.\nBULLET::::- Dale Rippke chronology – \"The Darkstorm Conan Chronology\" (2003) was a completely revised and heavily researched chronology, radically repositioning a number of stories and including only those stories written or devised by Howard. The Dark Horse comic series follows this chronology.\n\nThe very first Conan cinematic project was planned by Edward Summer. Summer envisioned a series of Conan films, much like the James Bond franchise. He outlined six stories for this film series, but none were ever made. An original screenplay by Summer and Roy Thomas was written, but their lore-authentic screen story was never filmed. However, the resulting film, \"Conan the Barbarian\" (1982), was a combination of director John Milius' ideas and plots from Conan stories (written also by Howard's successors, notably Lin Carter and L. Sprague de Camp). The addition of Nietzschean motto and Conan's life philosophy were crucial for bringing the spirit of Howard's literature to the screen.\n\nThe plot of \"Conan the Barbarian\" (1982) begins with Conan being enslaved by the Vanir raiders of Thulsa Doom, a malevolent warlord who is responsible for the slaying of Conan's parents and the genocide of his people. Later, Thulsa Doom becomes a cult leader of a religion that worships Set, a Snake God. The vengeful Conan, the archer Subotai and the thief Valeria set out on a quest to rescue a princess held captive by Thulsa Doom. The film was directed by John Milius and produced by Dino De Laurentiis. The character of Conan was played by Arnold Schwarzenegger and was his break-through role as an actor.\n\nThis film was followed by a less popular sequel, \"Conan the Destroyer\" in 1984. This sequel was a more typical fantasy-genre film and was even less faithful to Howard's Conan stories, being just a picaresque story of an assorted bunch of adventurers.\n\nThe third film in the \"Conan\" trilogy was planned for 1987 to be titled \"Conan the Conqueror\". The director was to be either Guy Hamilton or John Guillermin. Since Arnold Schwarzenegger was committed to the film \"Predator\" and De Laurentiis's contract with the star had expired after his obligation to \"Red Sonja\" and \"Raw Deal\", he wasn't keen to negotiate a new one; thus the third Conan film sank into development hell. The script was eventually turned into \"Kull the Conqueror\".\n\nThere were rumors in the late 1990s of another Conan sequel, a story about an older Conan titled \"King Conan: Crown of Iron\", but Schwarzenegger's election in 2003 as governor of California ended this project. Warner Bros. spent seven years trying to get the project off the ground. However, in June 2007 the rights reverted to Paradox Entertainment, though all drafts made under Warner remained with them. In August 2007, it was announced that Millennium Films had acquired the rights to the project. Production was aimed for a Spring 2006 start, with the intention of having stories more faithful to the Robert E. Howard creation. In June 2009, Millennium hired Marcus Nispel to direct. In January 2010, Jason Momoa was selected for the role of Conan. The film was released in August 2011, and met poor critical reviews and box office results.\n\nIn 2012, producers Chris Morgan and Frederick Malmberg announced plans for a sequel to the 1982 \"Conan the Barbarian\" titled \"The Legend of Conan\", with Arnold Schwarzenegger reprising his role as Conan. A year later, \"Deadline\" reported that Andrea Berloff would write the script. Years passed since the initial announcement as Schwarzenegger worked on other films, but as late as 2016, Schwarzenegger affirmed his enthusiasm for making the film, saying, \"Interest is high ... but we are not rushing.\" The script was finished, and Schwarzenegger and Morgan were meeting with possible directors. In April 2017, producer Chris Morgan stated that Universal had dropped the project, although there was a possibility of a TV show. The story of the film was supposed to be set 30 years after the first, with some inspiration from Clint Eastwood's \"Unforgiven\".\n\nThere have been three television series related to Conan:\nBULLET::::- \"Conan the Adventurer\" is an animated television series produced by \"Jetlag Productions\" and \"Sunbow Productions\" that debuted on October 1, 1992, ran for 64 episodes and concluded exactly two years later, on October 1, 1994. The series involved Conan chasing Serpent Men across the world in an attempt to release his parents from eternal imprisonment as living statues.\nBULLET::::- Conan and the Young Warriors is an animated television series that premiered in 1994 and ran for 13 episodes. DiC Entertainment produced the show and CBS aired this series as a spin-off to the previous animated series. This cartoon took place after the finale of \"Conan the Adventurer\" with Wrath-Amon vanquished and Conan's family returned to life from living stone. Conan soon finds that the family of one of his friends are being turned into wolves by an evil sorceress and he must train three warriors in order to aid him in rescuing them.\nBULLET::::- \"Conan the Adventurer\" is a live-action television series that premiered on September 22, 1997, and ran for 22 episodes. It starred German bodybuilder Ralf Möller as Conan and Danny Woodburn as his sidekick Otli. The storyline was quite different from the Conan lore of Howard. In this adaptation, Conan is a pleasant and jovial person. Also in this version, Conan is not a loner but one member of a merry band of adventurers.\nBULLET::::- In February 2018, Deadline reported that a new Conan TV series was in the works at Amazon Prime with Ryan Condal, Miguel Sapochnik, Warren Littlefield, Pathfinder Media and Endeavor Content working on the project.\n\nConan the Barbarian has appeared in comics nearly non-stop since 1970. The comics are arguably, apart from the books, the vehicle that had the greatest influence on the longevity and popularity of the character. Aside from an earlier and unofficial Conan comic published in Mexico, the two main publishers of Conan comics have been Marvel Comics and Dark Horse Comics. Marvel Comics launched \"Conan the Barbarian\" (1970–1993) and the classic \"Savage Sword of Conan\" (1974–1995). Dark Horse launched their \"Conan\" series in 2003. Dark Horse Comics is currently publishing compilations of the 1970s Marvel Comics series in trade paperback format.\n\nBarack Obama, former President of the United States, is a collector of Conan the Barbarian comic books and a big fan of the character and appeared as a character in a comic book called \"Barack the Barbarian\" from Devil's Due.\n\nMarvel Comics introduced a relatively lore-faithful version of Conan the Barbarian in 1970 with \"Conan the Barbarian\", written by Roy Thomas and illustrated by Barry Windsor-Smith. Smith was succeeded by penciller John Buscema, while Thomas continued to write for many years. Later writers included J.M. DeMatteis, Bruce Jones, Michael Fleisher, Doug Moench, Jim Owsley, Alan Zelenetz, Chuck Dixon and Don Kraar. In 1974, \"Conan the Barbarian\" series spawned the more adult-oriented, black-and-white comics magazine \"Savage Sword of Conan\", written by Thomas with art mostly by Buscema or Alfredo Alcala. Marvel also published several graphic novels starring the character , and a handbook with detailed information about the Hyborian world. Conan the Barbarian is also officially considered to be part of the larger Marvel Universe and has interacted with heroes and villains alike.\n\nThe Marvel Conan stories were also adapted as a newspaper comic strip which appeared daily and Sunday from 4 September 1978 to 12 April 1981. Originally written by Roy Thomas and illustrated by John Buscema, the strip was continued by several different Marvel artists and writers.\n\nDark Horse Comics began their comic adaptation of the Conan saga in 2003. Entitled simply \"Conan\", the series was first written by Kurt Busiek and pencilled by Cary Nord. Tim Truman replaced Busiek when Busiek signed an exclusive contract with DC Comics; however, Busiek issues were sometimes used for filler. This series is an interpretation of the original Conan material by Robert E. Howard with no connection whatsoever to the earlier Marvel comics or any Conan story not written or envisioned by Howard supplemented by wholly original material.\n\nA second series, \"Conan the Cimmerian\" was released in 2008 by Tim Truman (writer) and Tomás Giorello (artist). The series ran for twenty-six issues, including an introductory \"zero\" issue.\n\nDark Horse's third series, \"\", began in December 2010 by Roy Thomas (writer) and Mike Hawthorne (artist) and ran for twelve issues.\n\nA fourth series, \"Conan the Barbarian\", began in February 2012 by Brian Wood (writer) and Becky Cloonan (artist). It ran for twenty-five issues, and expanded on Robert E. Howard's \"Queen of the Black Coast\".\n\nA fifth series, \"Conan the Avenger\", began in April 2014 by Fred Van Lente (writer) and Brian Ching (artist). It ran for twenty-five issues, and expanded on Robert E. Howard's The Snout in the Dark and A Witch Shall Be Born.\n\nDark Horse's sixth series, \"Conan the Slayer\", began in July 2016 by Cullen Bunn (writer) and Sergio Dávila (artist).\n\nIn 2018, Marvel reacquired the rights and started new runs of both Conan the Barbarian and Savage Sword of Conan in January/February 2019.\n\nSeven video games have been released based on the Conan mythos.\nBULLET::::- In 1984, Datasoft released \"\" for the Apple II, Atari 800, and the Commodore 64.\nBULLET::::- In 1991, Mindscape released \"\" for NES, a Commodore 64 port by System 3.\nBULLET::::- In 1991, Virgin Games and Synergistic released \"Conan: The Cimmerian\" for Amiga and DOS.\nBULLET::::- In 2004, TDK Mediactive released \"Conan\", a third-person action game for Windows and consoles.\nBULLET::::- In 2007, THQ and Nihilistic released \"Conan\", a third-person action game for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.\nBULLET::::- In 2008, Funcom released \"Age of Conan\", a MMORPG, on May 20 in the US and May 23 in Europe.\nBULLET::::- A RPG game titled \"Conan: The Tower of the Elephant\" was released for the iOS around the time of the release of the movie \"Conan the Barbarian\" as a promotion. The game is based on the short story of the same name.\nBULLET::::- On January 31, 2017, Funcom released \"Conan Exiles\" for PS4, Xbox One and PC. The title is an open world survival game. The game was released in early access, and was released on May 8, 2018.\nBULLET::::- In 2019, Funcom is to release a real time strategy game named Conan Unconquered.\n\nBULLET::::- In 2006, Comic Images released the Conan Collectible Card Game designed by Jason Robinette.\n\nBULLET::::- In 2009, Fantasy Flight Games released the \"Age of Conan\" strategy board game, depicting warfare between the Hyborian nations in the Conan's adventures.\nBULLET::::- In 2016, Monolith Board Games LLC will release a new boardgame with miniatures directly based on Howard's short stories. \"Conan\" (previously known as \"Conan: Hyborian Quests\") pits one player, controlling the evil forces, against 2-4 other players controlling Conan and his companions.\n\nTSR, Inc. signed a license agreement in 1984 to publish Conan-related gaming material:\nBULLET::::- Two modules for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons:\nBULLET::::- CB1 \"Conan Unchained!\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- CB2 \"Conan Against Darkness!\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- The \"Conan Role-Playing Game\" (1985), with 3 official game adventures:\nBULLET::::- CN1 \"Conan the Buccaneer\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- CN2 \"Conan the Mercenary\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- CN3 \"Conan Triumphant\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- Three Endless Quest books by TSR, published in the eighties, allow the reader to play the role of Conan (Conan the Undaunted, Conan and the Prophecy & Conan the Outlaw)\n\nIn 1988 Steve Jackson Games acquired a Conan license and started publishing Conan solo adventures for its \"GURPS\" generic system of rules as of 1988 and a \"GURPS Conan\" core rulebook in 1989:\nBULLET::::- \"GURPS Conan: Beyond Thunder River\" (1988, solo adventure)\nBULLET::::- \"GURPS Conan\" (1989, core rulebook)\nBULLET::::- \"GURPS Conan and the Queen of the Black Coast\" (1989, solo adventure)\nBULLET::::- \"GURPS Conan: Moon of Blood\" (1989, solo adventure)\nBULLET::::- \"GURPS Conan the Wyrmslayer\" (1989, solo adventure)\n\nIn 2003 the British company Mongoose Publishing bought a license and acquired in turn the rights to make use of the Conan gaming franchise, publishing a Conan role-playing game from 2004 until 2010. The game ran the OGL System of rules that Mongoose established for its \"OGL series\" of games:\nBULLET::::- \"\" (2004), with many supplements.\n\nIn 2010 Mongoose Publishing dropped the Conan license. In February 2015, another British company, Modiphius Entertainment, acquired the license, announcing plans to put out a new Conan role-playing game in August of that year. Actually, the core rulebook was not launched (via Kickstarter) until a whole year later, in February 2016, reaching by far all funds needed for publication. Long after the Kickstarter ended the core rulebook was launched in PDF format on January the 31st, 2017. The physical core rulebook finally started distribution in June 2017 :\nBULLET::::- \"\" (hardcover, 368 pages, 2017), with two hardcover supplements already published and at least 17 additional supplements in the works (as planned following the Kickstarter).\n\nBULLET::::- \"Hyborian War\", introduced by Reality Simulations, Inc. as of 1985, is a play-by-mail game set in the Hyborian Age.\n\nBULLET::::- Bêlit – A self-styled queen of the Black Coast, captain of the pirate ship \"Tigress\", and Conan's first serious lover (\"Queen of the Black Coast\").\nBULLET::::- Thoth-Amon – A Stygian wizard of great power who appeared in the first Conan story written (\"The Phoenix on the Sword\") and was mentioned in \"The God in the Bowl\" and \"The Hour of the Dragon\". L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter made Thoth-Amon the nemesis of Conan. In the Marvel comics, Thoth-Amon was also Conan's lifelong opponent and had a striking appearance designed by Barry Windsor-Smith; he wore a distinctive ram-horn ornamental headdress. In \"The Phoenix on the Sword\" though, where Thoth has been robbed of his magical ring, he does not at all seem very impressive, yet less admirable!He is portrayed by Pat Roach in \"Conan the Destroyer\".\nBULLET::::- Valeria – A female mercenary affiliated with the Red Brotherhood (\"Red Nails\").\nBULLET::::- Yara – An evil wizard and adversary of Conan (\"The Tower of the Elephant\") who enslaved Yag-Kosha, an extraterrestrial being resembling Hindu god Ganesh.\nBULLET::::- Zenobia – A seraglio concubine whom Conan promises to wed and make queen of Aquilonia (\"The Hour of the Dragon\").\nBULLET::::- Ctesphon - The king of Stygia is mentioned only once and in passing, in \"The Phoenix on the Sword\". He is a priest- king, like Thugra Khotan in the Stygian daughter-kingdom of Kutchemes.\nBULLET::::- Yasmina- Brave,proud,feisty, wise and warmhearted queen(devi)of wise, ancient Vendhya, homeland and stronghold of Asura-worship\n\nBULLET::::- Red Sonja – An Hyrkanian warrior created by Roy Thomas and Barry Windsor-Smith for the Conan comics. She was based on the Howard character, Red Sonya of Rogatino, who appeared in \"The Shadow of the Vulture\". A novella set in the 16th century.\nBULLET::::- Jenna – (Marvel comics character). A dancing girl from the city of Shadizar. She becomes Conan's girlfriend after he saves her from a monstrous bat, but later betrays him to the authorities. Conan gets his revenge by throwing her into a pool of sewage. Based on an unnamed character in the prose story \"Rogues in the House\".\nBULLET::::- Mikhal \"the Vulture\" Oglu – In Marvel comics' Conan the barbarian #23, Mikhal Oglu is Yezdigerd's enforcer and the greatest swordsman in Turan. He challenges Conan but is defeated and beheaded. He was inspired by a character in a non-Conan story by Robert E. Howard (\"The Shadow of the Vulture\")\nBULLET::::- Zukala – A character from the Conan comics published by Marvel, inspired by a poem by Robert E. Howard. Zukala is an evil sorcerer who gains his powers from a mask. His daughter Zephra falls in love with Conan\nBULLET::::- Yezdigerd – Ruler of Turan, a Turkish empire-based civilization. He employs Conan as a mercenary but betrays him after he outlived his usefulness\nBULLET::::- Fafnir – A mighty red-bearded Vanir warrior and pirate captain. At first he and Conan are enemies, but they soon become allies after being shipwrecked.\n\nBULLET::::- Thulsa Doom – A skull-faced necromancer from a King Kull story, a recurring villain in the Kull comics, and the antagonist in the 1982 film, played by James Earl Jones.\nBULLET::::- Rexor – In the 1982 movie, the chief priest of Thulsa Doom's snake cult, who stole the sword of Conan's father. Played by Ben Davidson.\nBULLET::::- Thorgrim – Hammer-wielding minion of Thulsa Doom in the 1982 film. Played by Sven-Ole Thorsen\nBULLET::::- Subotai – Hyrkanian thief and archer. He is Conan's companion in the 1982 film. Played by Gerry Lopez.\nBULLET::::- Akiro – A character from the two Schwarzenegger Conan movies. He's a powerful wizard who befriends Conan and Subotai. He is played by Japanese actor Mako Iwamatsu.\n\n\nBULLET::::- The Works of Robert E. Howard\nBULLET::::- Replica movie Swords\nBULLET::::- The Works of Robert E. Howard\nBULLET::::- Conan: The Official Website\nBULLET::::- Conan: Czech fanpage\nBULLET::::- Hyboria: Polish fanpage\n"}
{"id": "6715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6715", "title": "Chris Marker", "text": "Chris Marker\n\nChris Marker (; 29 July 1921 – 29 July 2012) was a French writer, photographer, documentary film director, multimedia artist and film essayist. His best known films are \"La Jetée\" (1962), \"A Grin Without a Cat\" (1977) and \"Sans Soleil\" (1983). Marker is usually associated with the Left Bank subset of the French New Wave, that occurred in the late 1950s and 1960s, and included such other filmmakers as Alain Resnais, Agnès Varda and Jacques Demy.\n\nHis friend and sometime collaborator Alain Resnais called him \"the prototype of the twenty-first-century man.\" Film theorist Roy Armes has said of him: \"Marker is unclassifiable because he is unique...The French Cinema has its dramatists and its poets, its technicians, and its autobiographers, but only has one true essayist: Chris Marker.\"\n\nMarker was born Christian François Bouche-Villeneuve. He was always elusive about his past and known to refuse interviews and not allow photographs to be taken of him; his place of birth is highly disputed. Some sources and Marker himself claim that he was born in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. Other sources say he was born in Belleville, Paris, and others, in Neuilly-sur-Seine. The 1949 edition of \"Le Cœur Net\" specifies his birthday as 22 July. Film critic David Thomson has stated: \"Marker told me himself that Mongolia is correct. I have since concluded that Belleville is correct – but that does not spoil the spiritual truth of Ulan Bator.\" When asked about his secretive nature, Marker has said \"My films are enough for them [the audience].\"\n\nMarker was a philosophy student in France prior to World War II. During the German occupation of France, he joined the Maquis (FTP), a part of the French Resistance. At some point during the war he left France and joined the United States Air Force as a paratrooper, although some sources claim that this is not true. After the war, he began a career as a journalist, first writing for the journal \"Esprit\", a neo-Catholic, Marxist magazine where he met fellow journalist André Bazin. At \"Esprit\", Marker wrote political commentaries, poems, short stories, and (with Bazin) film reviews. He would later become an early contributor to Bazin's \"Cahiers du cinéma\".\n\nDuring this time period, Marker began to travel around the world as a journalist and photographer, a vocation he would continue the rest of his life. He was hired by the French publishing company Éditions du Seuil as editor of the series \"Petite Planète\" (\"Small World\"). This collection devoted one edition to each country and included information and photographs. In 1949 Marker published his first novel, \"Le Coeur net\" (\"The Forthright Spirit\"), which was about aviation. In 1952 Marker published an illustrated essay on French writer Jean Giraudoux, \"Giraudoux Par Lui-Même\".\n\nDuring his early journalism career, Marker became increasingly interested in filmmaking and experimented with photography in the early 1950s. Around this time Marker met and befriended many members of what would be called the Left Bank Film Movement, including Alain Resnais, Agnès Varda, Henri Colpi, Armand Gatti and the novelists Marguerite Duras and Jean Cayrol. This group is often associated with the French New Wave directors who came to prominence during the same time period, and indeed both groups were often friends and journalistic co-workers. The term \"Left Bank\" was first coined by film critic Richard Roud, who has described them as having \"fondness for a kind of Bohemian life and an impatience with the conformity of the Right Bank, a high degree of involvement in literature and the plastic arts, and a consequent interest in experimental filmmaking\", as well as an identification with the political left. Many of Marker's earliest films were produced by Anatole Dauman.\n\nIn 1952 Marker made his first film, \"Olympia 52\", a 16mm feature documentary about the 1952 Helsinki Olympic Games. In 1953 Marker collaborated with Resnais on the documentary \"Statues Also Die\". The film examines traditional African art such as sculptures and masks, and its decline with coming of Western colonialism. The film won the 1954 Prix Jean Vigo, but was banned by French censors for its criticism of French colonialism.\n\nAfter working as assistant director on Resnais's \"Night and Fog\" in 1955, Marker made \"Sunday in Peking\", a short documentary \"film essay\" that would characterize Marker's unique film style for most of his career. The film was shot in two weeks by Marker while he was traveling through China with Armand Gatti in September 1955. In the film, Marker's commentary overlaps scenes from China, such as tombs which, contrary to Westernized understandings of Chinese legends, do not contain the remains of any Ming Dynasty emperors.\n\nAfter working on the commentary for Resnais' film \"Le mystère de l'atelier quinze\" in 1957, Marker continued to form his own cinematic style with the feature documentary \"Letter from Siberia\". An essay film on the narrativization of Siberia, it contains Marker's signature commentary, which takes the form of a letter from the director, in the long tradition of epistolary treatments by French explorers of the \"undeveloped\" world. \"Letter \" looks at the modernization of Siberia with its movement into the twentieth century, but with a look back at some of the tribal cultural practices now receding into the past. It combines footage that Marker shot in Siberia with old newsreel footage, cartoon sequences, stills, and even an illustration of Alfred E. Neuman from \"Mad Magazine\" as well as a fake TV commercial as part of a humorous attack on Western mass culture. In producing a meta-commentary on narrativity and film, Marker uses the same brief filmic sequence three times but with different commentary—the first one praising the Soviet Union, the second denouncing it, and the third taking an apparently neutral or \"objective\" stance.\n\nIn 1959 Marker made the animated film \"Les Astronautes\" with Walerian Borowczyk. The film was a combination of traditional drawings with still photography. In 1960 Marker made \"Description d'un combat\", a documentary on the State of Israel which reflects on the country's past and future. The film won the Golden Bear for Best Documentary at the 1961 Berlin Film Festival.\n\nIn January 1961, Marker traveled to Cuba and shot the film \"¡Cuba Sí!\" The film promotes and defends Fidel Castro and includes two interviews with the Comandante. The film ends with an anti-American epilogue in which the United States is embarrassed by the Bay of Pigs Invasion fiasco, and was subsequently banned. The banned essay was included in Marker's first volume of collected film commentaries, \"Commentaires I\", published in 1961. The following year Marker published \"Coréennes\", a collection of photographs and essays on the conditions of Korea.\n\nMarker became known internationally for the short film \"La Jetée\" (\"The Pier\") in 1962. It tells of a post-nuclear war experiment in time travel by using a series of filmed photographs developed as a photomontage of varying pace, with limited narration and sound effects. In the film, a survivor of a futuristic third World War is obsessed with distant and disconnected memories of a pier at the Orly Airport, the image of a mysterious woman, and a man's death. Scientists experimenting in time travel choose him for their studies, and the man travels back in time to contact the mysterious woman, and discovers that the man's death at the Orly Airport was his own. Except for one shot of the woman mentioned above sleeping and suddenly waking up, the film is composed entirely of photographs by Jean Chiabaud and stars Davos Hanich as the man, Hélène Chatelain as the woman and filmmaker William Klein as a man from the future.\n\n\"La Jetée\" was the inspiration for Mamoru Oshii's 1987 debut live action feature \"The Red Spectacles\" (and later for parts of Oshii's 2001 film \"Avalon\" as well) and also inspired Terry Gilliam's \"12 Monkeys\" (1995) and Jonás Cuarón's \"Year of the Nail\" (2007). It also inspired many of director Mira Nair's shots for the 2006 film \"The Namesake\".\n\nWhile making \"La Jetee\", Marker was simultaneously making the 150-minute documentary essay-film \"Le joli mai\", released in 1963. Beginning in the Spring of 1962, Marker and his camera operator Pierre Lhomme shot 55 hours of footage interviewing random people on the streets of Paris. The questions, asked by the unseen Marker, range from their personal lives, as well as social and political issues of relevance at that time. As he had with montages of landscapes and indigenous art, Marker created a film essay that contrasted and juxtaposeed a variety of lives with his signature commentary (spoken by Marker's friends, singer-actor Yves Montand in the French version and Simone Signoret in the English version). The film has been compared to the \"Cinéma vérité\" films of Jean Rouch, and criticized by its practitioners at the time. The term \"Cinéma vérité\" was itself anathema to Marker; he would never use it. It was shown in competition at the 1963 Venice Film Festival, where it won the award for Best First Work. It also won the Golden Dove Award at the Leipzig DOK Festival.\n\nAfter the documentary \"Le Mystère Koumiko\" in 1965, Marker made \"Si j'avais quatre dromadaires\", an essay-film that, like \"La jetée\", is a photomontage of over 800 photographs that Marker had taken over the past 10 years from 26 countries. The commentary takes on a slightly different dimension from his previous commentaries by using a conversation between a fictitious photographer and two friends, who discuss the photos. The film's title is an allusion to a poem by Guillaume Apollinaire. It was the last film in which Marker included \"travel footage\" for many years.\n\nIn 1967 Marker published his second volume of collected film essays, \"Commentaires II\". That same year, Marker organized the omnibus film \"Loin du Vietnam\", a protest against the Vietnam War with segments contributed by Marker, Jean-Luc Godard, Alain Resnais, Agnès Varda, Claude Lelouch, William Klein, Michele Ray and Joris Ivens. The film includes footage of the war, from both sides, as well as anti-war protests in New York and Paris and other anti-war activities.\n\nFrom this initial collection of filmmakers with left-wing political agendas, Marker created the group S.L.O.N. (\"Société pour le lancement des oeuvres nouvelles\",\"Society for launching new works\", but also the Russian word for \"elephant\"). SLON was a film collective whose objectives were to make films and to encourage industrial workers to create film collectives of their own. Its members included Valerie Mayoux, Jean-Claude Lerner, Alain Adair and John Tooker. Marker is usually credited as director or co-director of all of the films made by SLON.\n\nAfter the events of May 1968, Marker felt a moral obligation to abandon his own personal film career and devote himself to SLON and its activities. SLON's first film was about a strike at a Rhodiacéta factory in France, \"À bientôt, j'espère\" (\"Rhodiacéta\") in 1968. Later that year SLON made \"La Sixième face du pentagone\", about an anti-war protest in Washington, D.C. and was a reaction to what SLON considered to be the unfair and censored reportage of such events on mainstream television. The film was shot by François Reichenbach, who received co-director credit. \"La Bataille des dix millions\" was made in 1970 with Mayoux as co-director and Santiago Álvarez as cameraman and is about the 1970 sugar crop in Cuba and its disastrous effects on the country. In 1971, SLON made \"Le Train en marche\", a new prologue to Soviet filmmaker Aleksandr Medvedkin's 1935 film \"Schastye\", which had recently been re-released in France.\n\nIn 1974, SLON became I.S.K.R.A. (\"Images, Sons, Kinescope, Réalisations, Audiovisuelles\", but also the name of Vladimir Lenin's political newspaper \"Iskra,\" which also is a Russian word for \"spark\").\n\nIn 1974 returned to his personal work and made a film outside of ISKRA. \"La Solitude du chanteur de fond\" is a one-hour documentary about Marker's friend Yves Montand's benefit concert for Chilean refugees. The concert was Montand's first public performance in four years, and the documentary includes film clips from his long career as a singer and actor.\n\nMarker had been working on a film about Chile with ISKRA since 1973. Marker had collaborated with Belgian sociologist Armand Mattelart and ISKRA members Valérie Mayoux and Jacqueline Meppiel to shoot and collect the visual materials, which Marker then edited together and provided the commentary for. The resulting film was the two and a half-hour documentary \"La Spirale\", released in 1975. The film chronicles events in Chile, beginning with the 1970 election of socialist President Salvador Allende until his murder and the resulting coup in 1973.\n\nMarker then began work on one of his most ambitious films, \"A Grin Without a Cat\", released in 1977. The film's title refers to the Cheshire Cat from \"Alice in Wonderland\". The metaphor compares the promise of the global socialist movement before May 1968 (the grin) with its actual presence in the world after May 1968 (the cat). The film's original French title is \"Le fond de l'air est rouge\", which means \"the air is essentially red\", or \"revolution is in the air\", implying that the socialist movement was everywhere around the world.\n\nThe film was intended to be an all-encompassing portrait of political movements since May 1968, a summation of the work which he had taken part in for ten years. The film is divided into two parts: the first half focuses on the hopes and idealism before May 1968, and the second half on the disillusion and disappointments since those events. Marker begins the film with the Odessa Steps sequence from Sergei Eisenstein's film \"The Battleship Potemkin\", which Marker points out is a fictitious creation of Eisenstein which has still influenced the image of the historical event. Marker used very little commentary in this film, but the film's montage structure and preoccupation with memory make it a Marker film. Upon release, the film was criticized for not addressing many current issues of the New Left such as the woman's movement, sexual liberation and worker self-management. The film was re-released in the US in 2002.\n\nIn the late 1970s, Marker traveled extensively throughout the world, including an extended period in Japan. From this inspiration, he first published the photo-essay \"Le Dépays\" in 1982, and then used the experience for his next film \"Sans Soleil\", released in 1982.\n\n\"Sans Soleil\" stretches the limits of what could be called a documentary. It is an essay, a montage, mixing pieces of documentary with fiction and philosophical comments, creating an atmosphere of dream and science fiction. The main themes are Japan, Africa, memory and travel. A sequence in the middle of the film takes place in San Francisco, and heavily references Alfred Hitchcock's \"Vertigo\". Marker has said that \"Vertigo\" is the only film \"capable of portraying impossible memory, insane memory.\" The film's commentary are credited to the fictitious cameraman Sandor Krasna, and read in the form of letters by an unnamed woman. Though centered around Japan, the film was also shot in such other countries as Guinea Bissau, Ireland and Iceland. \"Sans Soleil\" was shown at the 1983 Berlin Film Festival where it won the OCIC Award. It was also awarded the Sutherland Trophy at the 1983 British Film Institute Awards.\n\nIn 1984, Marker was invited by producer Serge Silberman to document the making of Akira Kurosawa's film \"Ran\". From this Marker made \"A.K.\", released in 1985. The film focuses more on Kurosawa's remote but polite personality than on the making of the film. The film was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1985 Cannes Film Festival, before \"Ran\" itself had been released.\n\nIn 1985, Marker's long-time friend and neighbor Simone Signoret died of cancer. Marker then made the one-hour TV documentary \"Mémoires pour Simone\" as a tribute to her in 1986.\n\nBeginning with \"Sans Soleil\", he developed a deep interest in digital technology. From 1985 to 1988, he worked on a conversational program (a prototypical chatbot) called \"Dialector,\" which he wrote in Applesoft BASIC on an Apple II. He incorporated audiovisual elements in addition to the snippets of dialogue and poetry that \"Computer\" exchanged with the user. Version 6 of this program was revived from a floppy disk (with Marker's help and permission) and emulated online in 2015.\n\nHis interests in digital technology also led to his film \"Level Five\" (1996) and \"Immemory\" (1998, 2008), an interactive multimedia CD-ROM, produced for the Centre Pompidou (French language version) and from Exact Change (English version). Marker created a 19-minute multimedia piece in 2005 for the Museum of Modern Art in New York City titled \"Owls at Noon Prelude: The Hollow Men\" which was influenced by T. S. Eliot's poem.\n\nMarker lived in Paris, and very rarely granted interviews. One exception was a lengthy interview with \"Libération\" in 2003 in which he explained his approach to filmmaking. When asked for a picture of himself, he usually offered a photograph of a cat instead. (Marker was represented in Agnes Varda's 2008 documentary \"The Beaches of Agnes\" by a cartoon drawing of a cat, speaking in a technologically altered voice.) Marker's own cat was named \"Guillaume-en-égypte\". In 2009, Marker commissioned an to represent him in machinima works. The avatar was created by Exosius Woolley and first appeared in the short film / machinima, \"Ouvroir the Movie by Chris Marker\".\n\nIn the 2007 Criterion Collection release of \"La Jetée\" and \"Sans Soleil\", Marker included a short essay, \"Working on a Shoestring Budget\". He confessed to shooting all of \"Sans Soleil\" with a silent film camera, and recording all the audio on a primitive audio cassette recorder. Marker also reminds the reader that only one short scene in \"La Jetée\" is of a moving image, as Marker could only borrow a movie camera for one afternoon while working on the film.\n\nFrom 2007 through 2011 Chris Marker collaborated with the art dealer and publisher Peter Blum on a variety of projects which were exhibited at the Peter Blum galleries in the SoHo and Chelsea neighborhoods. Marker's works have also been exhibited at the current Peter Blum Gallery location in the Midtown neighborhood on 57th Street in 2014. These projects include several series of printed photographs titled \"PASSENGERS\", \"Koreans\", \"Crush Art\", \"Quelle heure est-elle?\", and \"Staring Back\"; a set of photogravures titled \"After Dürer\"; a book titled \"PASSENGERS\"; and digital prints of movie posters, whose titles were often appropriated, titled \"Breathless\", \"Hiroshima Mon Amour\", \"Owl People\", and \"Rin Tin Tin\". The video installations titled \"Silent Movie\" and \"Owls at Noon Prelude: The Hollow Men\" were exhibited through Peter Blum in 2009. These mentioned works have also been exhibited at the 2014 & 2015 Venice Biennale, Whitechapel Gallery in London, the MIT List Visual Arts Center in Cambridge, Massachusetts, the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, the Moscow Photobiennale, Les Recontres d'Arles de la Photographie in Arles, France, the Centre de la Photographie in Geneva, Switzerland, the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, Ohio, The Museum of Modern Art in New York, and the Pacific Film Archive in Berkeley, California. Since 2014 the artworks of the Estate of Chris Marker are represented by Peter Blum Gallery, New York.\n\nMarker died on 29 July 2012, 91 years to the day after his birth.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Olympia 52\" (1952)\nBULLET::::- \"Statues Also Die\" (1953 with Alain Resnais)\nBULLET::::- \"Sundays in Peking\" (1956)\nBULLET::::- \"Letter from Siberia\" (1957)\nBULLET::::- \"Les Astronautes\" (1959 with Walerian Borowczyk)\nBULLET::::- \"Description d'un combat\" (1960)\nBULLET::::- \"¡Cuba Sí!\" (1961)\nBULLET::::- \"La jetée\" (1962)\nBULLET::::- \"Le joli mai\" (1963, 2006 re-cut)\nBULLET::::- \"Le Mystère Koumiko\" (1965)\nBULLET::::- \"Si j'avais quatre dromadaires\" (1966)\nBULLET::::- \"Loin du Vietnam\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"Rhodiacéta\" (1967)\nBULLET::::- \"La Sixième face du pentagone\" (1968 with Reichenbach)\nBULLET::::- \"Cinétracts\" (1968)\nBULLET::::- \"À bientôt, j'espère\" (1968 with Marret)\nBULLET::::- \"On vous parle du Brésil: Tortures\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Jour de tournage\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"Classe de lutte\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- \"On vous parle de Paris: Maspero, les mots ont un sens\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"On vous parle du Brésil: Carlos Marighela\" (1970)\nBULLET::::- \"La Bataille des dix millions\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"Le Train en marche\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"On vous parle de Prague: le deuxième procès d'Artur London\" (1971)\nBULLET::::- \"Vive la baleine\" (1972)\nBULLET::::- \"L'Ambassade\" (1973)\nBULLET::::- \"On vous parle du Chili: ce que disait Allende\" (1973 with Miguel Littín)\nBULLET::::- \"Puisqu'on vous dit que c'est possible\" (1974)\nBULLET::::- \"La Solitude du chanteur de fond\" (1974)\nBULLET::::- \"La Spirale\" (1975)\nBULLET::::- \"A Grin Without a Cat\" (1977)\nBULLET::::- \"Quand le siècle a pris formes\" (1978)\nBULLET::::- \"Junkopia\" (1981)\nBULLET::::- \"Sans Soleil\" (1983)\nBULLET::::- \"2084\" (1984)\nBULLET::::- \"From Chris to Christo\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Matta\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"A.K.\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Eclats\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Mémoires pour Simone\" (1986)\nBULLET::::- \"Tokyo Days\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Spectre\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"L'héritage de la chouette\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Bestiaire\" (three short video haiku) (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Bestiaire 1. Chat écoutant la musique\"\nBULLET::::- \"Bestiaire 2. An owl is An owl is an owl\"\nBULLET::::- \"Bestiaire 3. Zoo Piece\"\nBULLET::::- \"Getting away with it\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Berlin 1990\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Détour Ceausescu\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Théorie des ensembles\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Coin fenêtre\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Azulmoon\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Le Tombeau d'Alexandre\" a.k.a. \"The Last Bolshevik\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Le 20 heurs dans les camps\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Prime Time in the Camps\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"SLON Tango\" (1993)\nBULLET::::- \"Bullfight in Okinawa\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Eclipse\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Haiku\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Haiku 1. Petite Ceinture\"\nBULLET::::- \"Haiku 2. Chaika\"\nBULLET::::- \"Haiku 3. Owl Gets in Your Eyes\"\nBULLET::::- \"Casque bleu\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Silent Movie\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Level Five\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"One Day in the Life of Andrei Arsenevich\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Un maire au Kosovo\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"Le facteur sonne toujours cheval\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Avril inquiet\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Le souvenir d'un avenir\" (with Bellon 2003)\nBULLET::::- \"Un maire au Kosovo\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"Chats Perchés\" (2004) a documentary about M. Chat street art\nBULLET::::- \"Leila Attacks\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Stopover In Dubai\" (2011)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Nuit et Brouillard\" (Resnais 1955)\nBULLET::::- Note: In a 1995 interview Resnais states that the final version of the commentary was a collaboration between Marker and Jean Cayrol (source: \"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Les hommes de la baleine\" (Ruspoli 1956)\nBULLET::::- Note: under the pseudonym \"Jacopo Berenizi\" Marker wrote the commentary for this short about whale hunters in the Azores. The two would return to this topic in 1972's Vive la Baleine (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Le mystere de l'atelier quinze\" (Resnais et Heinrich 1957)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker wrote the commentary for this fictional short (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Le Siècle a soif\" (Vogel 1958)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker wrote and spoke all the commentary for this short film about fruit juice in Alexandrine verse (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"La Mer et les jours\" (Vogel et Kaminker 1958)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker present commentary for this \"somber work about the daily lives of fishermen on Brittany's Île de Sein\" (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"L'Amérique insolite\" (Reichenbach 1958)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker was eventually credited as a writer for this one, apparently, he wrote the dialogue (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Django Reinhardt\" (Paviot 1959)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker narrated this one (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Jouer à Paris\" (Varlin 1962)\nBULLET::::- Note: This was edited by Marker essentially, this film is a 27-minute postscript to \"Le Joli Mai\" assembled from leftover footage and organized around a new commentary (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"A Valparaiso\" (Ivens 1963)\nBULLET::::- Note: This gem was written by Marker. It feels like a Marker film.\nBULLET::::- \"Les Chemins de la fortune\" (Kassovitz 1964)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker apparently helped edit and organise this Venezuela travelogue (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"La Douceur du village\" (Reichenbach 1964)\nBULLET::::- Note: Edited by Marker.\nBULLET::::- \"La Brûlure de mille soleils\" (Kast 1964)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker edited this (mostly) animated science-fiction existentialist short and (possibly) collaborated on the script (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Le volcan interdit\" (Tazieff 1966)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker narrates this volcano documentary.\nBULLET::::- \"Europort-Rotterdam\" (Ivens 1966)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker did the textual adaptation (Film Comment.\nBULLET::::- \"On vous parle de Flins\" (Devart 1970)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker helped film and edit this short (Film Comment).\nBULLET::::- \"L'Afrique express\" (Tessier et Lang 1970)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker wrote the introductory text for this film under the name \"Boris Villeneuve\" (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"Kashima Paradise\" (Le Masson et Deswarte 1974)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker collaborated on the commentary on this documentary about the destruction of Kashima and Narita (Film Comment).\nBULLET::::- \"La Batalla de Chile\" (Guzman, 1975–1976)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker helped produce and contributed to the screenplay for this, perhaps the greatest of all documentary films (\"Film Comment\").\nBULLET::::- \"One Sister and Many Brothers\" (Makavejev 1994)\nBULLET::::- Note: Marker tapes Makavejev circulating among the guests of a party in his honor as much jovial backslapping abounds (\"Film comment\").\n\nBULLET::::- \"Koreans\" (1957, printed in 2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Crush Art\" (2003–08)\nBULLET::::- \"\"Quelle heure est-elle?\"\" (2004–08)\nBULLET::::- \"PASSENGERS\" (2008–10)\nBULLET::::- \"Staring Back\" (varying years)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Breathless\" (1995, printed 2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Hiroshima Mon Amour\" (1995, printed 2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Owl People\" (1995, printed 2009)\nBULLET::::- \"Rin Tin Tin\" (1995, printed 2009)\n\nBULLET::::- \"After Dürer\" (2005–07, printed in 2009)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Silent Movie\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Owls at Noon Prelude: The Hollow Men\" (2005)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Le Cœur Net\" (1949, Editions du Seuil, Paris)\nBULLET::::- \"Giraudoux Par Lui-Même\" (1952, Editions du Seuil, Paris)\nBULLET::::- \"Commentaires I\" (1961, Editions du Seuil, Paris)\nBULLET::::- \"Coréennes\" (1962, Editions du Seuil, Paris)\nBULLET::::- \"Commentaires II\" (1967, Editions du Seuil, Paris)\nBULLET::::- \"Le Dépays\" (1982, Editions Herscher, Paris)\nBULLET::::- \"Silent Movie\" (1995, Ohio State University Press)\nBULLET::::- \"La Jetée ciné-roman\" (1996 / 2nd printing 2008, MIT Press, Cambridge; designed by Bruce Mau)\nBULLET::::- \"Staring Back\" (2007, MIT Press, Cambridge)\nBULLET::::- \"Immemory\" (CDROM) (1997 / 2nd printing 2008, Exact Change, Cambridge)\nBULLET::::- \"Inner Time of Television\" (2010, The Otolith Group, London)\n\nBULLET::::- Chris Marker: Notes from the Era of Imperfect Memory A site, blog and search engine exploring all aspects of the work of Chris Marker\nBULLET::::- Chris Marker: Plongée en imméroire (French) The most up-to-date site on Chris Marker's work\nBULLET::::- Icarus Films biography of Marker and list of his titles that they distribute\nBULLET::::- EAI: Chris Marker Biography and list of video works by the artist.\nBULLET::::- Texts from Chris Marker films\nBULLET::::- Bibliography of books and articles about Marker via UC Berkeley Media Resources Center\nBULLET::::- Marker's book of photographs and essays: Staring Back\nBULLET::::- The Wexner Center's \"Chris Marker Store\"\nBULLET::::- Filmmaker As Socialist Anthologist by Williams Cole, \"The Brooklyn Rail\", May 2009 Issue\nBULLET::::- Literature on Chris Marker\nBULLET::::- Chris Marker and the Audiovisual Archive, Oliver Mayer, \"Scope\" 20\nBULLET::::- Chris Marker Fundació Antoni Tàpies\n"}
{"id": "6716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6716", "title": "Cardinal vowels", "text": "Cardinal vowels\n\nCardinal vowels are a set of reference vowels used by phoneticians in describing the sounds of languages. For instance, the vowel of the English word \"feet\" can be described with reference to cardinal vowel 1, , which is the cardinal vowel closest to it. It is often stated that to be able to use the cardinal vowel system effectively one must undergo training with an expert phonetician, working both on the recognition and the production of the vowels. Daniel Jones wrote \"The values of cardinal vowels cannot be learnt from written descriptions; they should be learnt by oral instruction from a teacher who knows them\".\n\nA cardinal vowel is a vowel sound produced when the tongue is in an extreme position, either front or back, high or low. The current system was systematised by Daniel Jones in the early 20th century, though the idea goes back to earlier phoneticians, notably Ellis and Bell.\n\nCardinal vowels are not vowels of any particular language, but a measuring system. However, some languages contain vowel or vowels that are close to the cardinal vowel(s). An example of such language is Ngwe, which is spoken in Cameroon. It has been cited as a language with a vowel system that has 8 vowels which are rather similar to the 8 primary cardinal vowels (Ladefoged 1971:67).\n\nThree of the cardinal vowels—, and —have articulatory definitions. The vowel is produced with the tongue as far forward and as high in the mouth as is possible (without producing friction), with spread lips. The vowel is produced with the tongue as far back and as high in the mouth as is possible, with protruded lips. This sound can be approximated by adopting the posture to whistle a very low note, or to blow out a candle. And is produced with the tongue as low and as far back in the mouth as possible.\n\nThe other vowels are 'auditorily equidistant' between these three 'corner vowels', at four degrees of aperture or 'height': close (high tongue position), close-mid, open-mid, and open (low tongue position).\n\nThese degrees of aperture plus the front-back distinction define 8 reference points on a mixture of articulatory and auditory criteria. These eight vowels are known as the eight 'primary cardinal vowels', and vowels like these are common in the world's languages.\n\nThe lip positions can be reversed with the lip position for the corresponding vowel on the opposite side of the front-back dimension, so that e.g. Cardinal 1 can be produced with rounding somewhat similar to that of Cardinal 8 (though normally compressed rather than protruded); these are known as 'secondary cardinal vowels'. Sounds such as these are claimed to be less common in the world's languages. Other vowel sounds are also recognised on the vowel chart of the International Phonetic Alphabet.\n\n! cardinal !! !! description\nIn the , the cardinal vowels have the same numbers used above, but added to 300.\n\nThe usual explanation of the cardinal vowel system implies that the competent user can reliably distinguish between sixteen Primary and Secondary vowels plus a small number of central vowels. The provision of diacritics by the International Phonetic Association further implies that intermediate values may also be reliably recognized, so that a phonetician might be able to produce and recognize not only a close-mid front unrounded vowel and an open-mid front unrounded vowel but also a mid front unrounded vowel , a centralized mid front unrounded vowel , and so on. This suggests a range of vowels nearer to forty or fifty than to twenty in number. Empirical evidence for this ability in trained phoneticians is hard to come by.\n\nLadefoged, in a series of pioneering experiments published in the 1950s and 60s, studied how trained phoneticians coped with the vowels of a dialect of Scottish Gaelic. He asked eighteen phoneticians to listen to a recording of ten words spoken by a native speaker of Gaelic and to place the vowels on a cardinal vowel quadrilateral. He then studied the degree of agreement or disagreement among the phoneticians. Ladefoged himself drew attention to the fact that the phoneticians who were trained in the British tradition established by Daniel Jones were closer to each other in their judgments than those who had not had this training. However, the most striking result is the great divergence of judgments among \"all\" the listeners regarding vowels that were distant from Cardinal values.\n\nBULLET::::- List of phonetics topics\n\nBULLET::::- Ladefoged, Peter. (1971). \"Preliminaries to linguistic phonetics\". Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Audio demonstrations of cardinal vowels by Daniel Jones at age 75\n"}
{"id": "6719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6719", "title": "Columbia, Missouri", "text": "Columbia, Missouri\n\nColumbia is a city in the U.S. state of Missouri. It is the county seat of Boone County and home to the University of Missouri. Founded in 1821, it is the principal city of the five-county Columbia metropolitan area. It is Missouri's fourth most-populous and fastest growing city, with an estimated 123,180 residents in 2018.\n\nAs a Midwestern college town, Columbia has a reputation for progressive politics, persuasive journalism, and public art. The tripartite establishment of Stephens College (1833), the University of Missouri (1839), and Columbia College (1851), which surround the city's Downtown to the east, south, and north, has made the city a center of learning. At its center is 8th Street, also known as the Avenue of the Columns, which connects Francis Quadrangle and Jesse Hall to the Boone County Courthouse and the City Hall. Originally an agricultural town, the cultivation of the mind is Columbia's chief economic concern today. Never a major center of manufacturing, the city also depends on healthcare, insurance, and technology businesses. Companies such as Shelter Insurance, Carfax, and Slackers CDs and Games, were founded in the city. Cultural institutions include the State Historical Society of Missouri, the Museum of Art and Archaeology, and the annual True/False Film Festival. The Missouri Tigers, the state's only major college athletic program, play football at Faurot Field and basketball at Mizzou Arena as members of the rigorous Southeastern Conference.\n\nThe city rests upon the forested hills and rolling prairies of Mid-Missouri, near the Missouri River valley, where the Ozark Mountains begin to transform into plains and savanna. Limestone forms bluffs and glades while rain dissolves the bedrock, creating caves and springs which water the Hinkson, Roche Perche, and Bonne Femme creeks. Surrounding the city, Rock Bridge Memorial State Park, Mark Twain National Forest, and Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge form a greenbelt preserving sensitive and rare environments. The Columbia Agriculture Park is home to the Columbia Farmers Market.\n\nThe first humans who entered the area at least twelve thousand years ago were nomadic hunters. Later, woodland tribes lived in villages along waterways and built mounds in high places. The Osage and Missouria nations were expelled by the exploration of French traders and the rapid settlement of American pioneers. The latter arrived by the Boone's Lick Road and hailed from the culture of the Upland South, especially Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee. From 1812 on the Boonslick area would play a pivotal role in Missouri's early history and the nation's westward expansion. German, Irish, and other European immigrants soon joined. The modern populace is unusually diverse, over eight percent foreign-born. While White and Black remain the largest ethnicities, people of Asian descent are now the third-largest group. The city has been called the \"Athens of Missouri\" for its classic beauty and educational emphasis, but is more commonly called \"CoMo\".\n\nColumbia's origins begin with the settlement of American pioneers from Kentucky and Virginia in an early 1800s region known as the Boonslick. Before 1815 settlement in the region was confined to small log forts because of the threat of Native American attack during the War of 1812. When the war ended settlers came on foot, horseback, and wagon, often moving entire households along the Boone's Lick Road and sometimes bringing enslaved African Americans. By 1818 it was clear that the increased population would necessitate a new county be created from territorial Howard County. The Moniteau Creek on the west and Cedar Creek on the east were obvious natural boundaries.\n\nBelieving it was only a matter of time before a county seat was chosen, the Smithton Land Company was formed to purchase over to established the village of Smithton near the present-day intersection of Walnut and Garth. In 1819 Smithton was a small cluster of log cabins in an ancient forest of oak and hickory; chief among them was the cabin of Richard Gentry, a trustee of the Smithton Company who would become first mayor of Columbia. In 1820 Boone County was formed and named after the recently deceased explorer Daniel Boone. The Missouri Legislature appointed John Gray, Jefferson Fulcher, Absalom Hicks, Lawrence Bass, and David Jackson as commissioners to select and establish a permanent county seat. Smithton never had more than twenty people, and it was quickly realized that well digging was difficult because of the bedrock.\n\nSprings were discovered across the Flat Branch Creek, so in the spring of 1821 Columbia was laid out and the inhabitants of Smithton moved their cabins to the new town. The first house in Columbia was built by Thomas Duly in 1820 at what would become Fifth and Broadway. Columbia's permanence was ensured when it was chosen as county seat in 1821 and the Boone's Lick Road was rerouted down Broadway.\n\nThe roots of Columbia's three economic foundations—education, medicine, and insurance— can be traced to the city's incorporation in 1821. Original plans for the town set aside land for a state university. In 1833, Columbia Baptist Female College opened, which later became Stephens College. Columbia College, distinct from today's and later to become the University of Missouri, was founded in 1839. When the state legislature decided to establish a state university, Columbia raised three times as much money as any competing city, and James S. Rollins donated the land that is today the Francis Quadrangle. Soon other educational institutions were founded in Columbia, such as Christian Female College, the first college for women west of the Mississippi, which later became Columbia College.\n\nThe city benefited from being a stagecoach stop of the Santa Fe and Oregon trails, and later from the Missouri–Kansas–Texas Railroad. In 1822, William Jewell set up the first hospital. In 1830, the first newspaper began; in 1832, the first theater in the state was opened; and in 1835, the state's first agricultural fair was held. By 1839, the population of 13,000 and wealth of Boone County was exceeded in Missouri only by that of St. Louis County, which, at that time, included the City of St. Louis.\n\nColumbia's infrastructure was relatively untouched by the Civil War. As a slave state, Missouri had many residents with Southern sympathies, but it stayed in the Union. The majority of the city was pro-Union; however, the surrounding agricultural areas of Boone County and the rest of central Missouri were decidedly pro-Confederate. Because of this, the University of Missouri became a base from which Union troops operated. No battles were fought within the city because the presence of Union troops dissuaded Confederate guerrillas from attacking, though several major battles occurred at nearby Boonville and Centralia.\n\nAfter Reconstruction, race relations in Columbia followed the Southern pattern of increasing violence of whites against blacks in efforts to suppress voting and free movement: George Burke, a black man who worked at the university, was lynched in 1889. In the spring of 1923, James T. Scott, an African-American janitor at the University of Missouri, was arrested on allegations of raping a university professor's daughter. He was taken from the county jail and lynched on April 29 before a white mob of several hundred, hanged from the Old Stewart Road Bridge.\nIn the 21st century, a number of efforts have been undertaken to recognize Scott's death. In 2010 his death certificate was changed to reflect that he was never tried or convicted of charges, and that he had been lynched. In 2011 a headstone was put at his grave at Columbia Cemetery; it includes his wife's and parents' names and dates, to provide a fuller account of his life. In 2016, a marker was erected at the lynching site to memorialize Scott.\n\nIn 1963, University of Missouri System and the Columbia College system established their headquarters in Columbia. The insurance industry also became important to the local economy as several companies established headquarters in Columbia, including Shelter Insurance, Missouri Employers Mutual, and Columbia Insurance Group. State Farm Insurance has a regional office in Columbia. In addition, the now-defunct Silvey Insurance was a large local employer.\n\nColumbia became a transportation crossroads when U.S. Route 63 and U.S. Route 40 (which was improved as present-day Interstate 70) were routed through the city. Soon after, the city opened the Columbia Regional Airport. By 2000, the city's population was nearly 85,000.\nIn 2017, Columbia was in the path of totality for the Solar eclipse of August 21, 2017. The city was expecting upwards of 400,000 tourists coming to view the eclipse.\n\nColumbia, in northern mid-Missouri, is away from both St. Louis and Kansas City, and north of the state capital of Jefferson City. The city is near the Missouri River, between the Ozark Plateau and the Northern Plains.\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of of which is land and is water.\n\nThe city generally slopes from the highest point in the Northeast to the lowest point in the Southwest towards the Missouri River. Prominent tributaries of the river are Perche Creek, Hinkson Creek, and Flat Branch Creek. Along these and other creeks in the area can be found large valleys, cliffs, and cave systems such as that in Rock Bridge State Park just south of the city. These creeks are largely responsible for numerous stream valleys giving Columbia hilly terrain similar to the Ozarks while also having prairie flatland typical of northern Missouri. Columbia also operates several greenbelts with trails and parks throughout town.\n\nLarge mammals found in the city include urbanized coyotes, red foxes, and numerous whitetail deer. Eastern gray squirrel, and other rodents are abundant, as well as cottontail rabbits and the nocturnal opossum and raccoon. Large bird species are abundant in parks and include the Canada goose, mallard duck, as well as shorebirds, including the great egret and great blue heron. Turkeys are also common in wooded areas and can occasionally be seen on the MKT recreation trail. Populations of bald eagles are found by the Missouri River. The city is on the Mississippi Flyway, used by migrating birds, and has a large variety of small bird species, common to the eastern U.S. The Eurasian tree sparrow, an introduced species, is limited in North America to the counties surrounding St. Louis. Columbia has large areas of forested and open land and many of these areas are home to wildlife.\n\nColumbia has a humid continental climate (Köppen \"Dfa)\" marked by sharp seasonal contrasts in temperature, and is in USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 6a. The monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in July, while the high reaches or exceeds on an average of 32 days per year, on two days, while four nights of sub- lows can be expected. Precipitation tends to be greatest and most frequent in the latter half of spring, when severe weather is also most common. Snow averages per season, mostly from December to March, with occasional November accumulation and falls in April being rarer; historically seasonal snow accumulation has ranged from in 2005–06 to in 1977–78. Extreme temperatures have ranged from on February 12, 1899 to on July 12 and 14, 1954. Readings of or are uncommon, the last occurrences being January 7, 2014 and July 31, 2012.\n\nColumbia's most significant and well-known architecture is found in buildings located in its downtown area and on the university campuses. The University of Missouri's Jesse Hall and the neo-gothic Memorial Union have become icons of the city. The David R. Francis Quadrangle is an example of Thomas Jefferson's academic village concept.\n\nFour historic districts located within the city are listed on the National Register of Historic Places: Downtown Columbia, the East Campus Neighborhood, Francis Quadrangle, and the North Ninth Street Historic District. The downtown skyline is relatively low and is dominated by the 10-story Tiger Hotel and the 15-story Paquin Tower.\n\nDowntown Columbia is an area of approximately one square mile surrounded by the University of Missouri on the south, Stephens College to the east, and Columbia College on the north. The area serves as Columbia's financial and business district.\nSince the early-21st century, a large number of high-rise apartment complexes have been built in downtown Columbia. Many of these buildings also offer mixed-use business and retail space on the lower levels. These developments have not been without criticism, with some expressing concern the buildings hurt the historic feel of the area, or that the city does not yet have the infrastructure to support them.\n\nThe city's historic residential core lies in a ring around downtown, extending especially to the west along Broadway, and south into the East Campus Neighborhood. The city government recognizes 63 neighborhood associations. The city's most dense commercial areas are primarily along Interstate 70, U.S. Route 63, Stadium Boulevard, Grindstone Parkway, and Downtown.\n\nAs of the census of 2010, 108,500 people, 43,065 households, and 21,418 families resided in the city. The population density was . There were 46,758 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 79.0% White, 11.3% African American, 0.3% Native American, 5.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.1% from other races, and 3.1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.4% of the population.\n\nThere were 43,065 households of which 26.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.6% were married couples living together, 10.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.5% had a male householder with no wife present, and 50.3% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.94.\n\nIn the city the population was spread out with 18.8% of residents under the age of 18; 27.3% between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.7% from 25 to 44; 18.6% from 45 to 64; and 8.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age in the city was 26.8 years. The gender makeup of the city was 48.3% male and 51.7% female.\n\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 84,531 people, 33,689 households, and 17,282 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,592.8 people per square mile (615.0/km²). There were 35,916 housing units at an average density of 676.8 per square mile (261.3/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 81.54% White, 10.85% Black or African American, 0.39% Native American, 4.30% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.81% from other races, and 2.07% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.05% of the population.\n\nThere were 33,689 households out of which 26.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.2% were married couples living together, 10.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.7% were non-families. 33.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.92.\n\nIn the city, the population was spread out with 19.7% under the age of 18, 26.7% from 18 to 24, 28.7% from 25 to 44, 16.2% from 45 to 64, and 8.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.1 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $33,729, and the median income for a family was $52,288. Males had a median income of $34,710 versus $26,694 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,507. About 9.4% of families and 19.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.8% of those under age 18 and 5.2% of those age 65 or over. However, traditional statistics of income and poverty can be misleading when applied to cities with high student populations, such as Columbia.\n\nColumbia's economy is historically dominated by education, healthcare, and insurance. Jobs in government are also common, either in Columbia or a half-hour south in Jefferson City. Commutes into the city are also common and, in 2000, the city had a day time population of 106,487—a 26% increase over the census population of the same year. The Columbia Regional Airport and the Missouri River Port of Rocheport connect the region with trade and transportation.\n\nThe economy of Columbia's metro area is slightly larger than the Bahamas. With a Gross Metropolitan Product of $5.84 billion in 2004, Columbia's economy makes up 2.9% of the Gross State Product of Missouri. Insurance corporations headquartered in Columbia include Shelter Insurance and the Columbia Insurance Group. Other organizations include Veterans United Home Loans, MFA Incorporated, the Missouri State High School Activities Association, and MFA Oil. Companies such as Socket, Datastorm Technologies, Inc. (no longer existent), Slackers CDs and Games, Carfax, and MBS Textbook Exchange were all founded in Columbia.\n\nAccording to Columbia's 2017 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\n\n! #\n! Employer\n! # of Employees\n1\n8,706\n2\n4,600\n3\n2,517\n4\n1,742\n5\n1,487\n6\n1,341\n7\n1,220\n8\n1,139\n9\n882\n10\n827\n\nThe Missouri Theatre Center for the Arts and Jesse Auditorium are Columbia's largest fine arts venues. Ragtag Cinema annually hosts the True/False Film Festival, which brings in over 30,000 each year for a weekend of art, film, and music.\n\nIn 2008, filmmaker Todd Sklar completed \"Box Elder\", which was filmed entirely in and around Columbia and the University of Missouri. The city was also the set for a well-received horror film which was released in 2011.\n\nThe North Village Arts District, located on the North side of Downtown is home to galleries, restaurants, theaters, bars, music venues, and the Missouri Contemporary Ballet.\n\nThe University of Missouri's Museum of Art and Archaeology displays 14,000 works of art and archaeological objects in five galleries for no charge to the public. Libraries include the Columbia Public Library, the University of Missouri Libraries, with over three million volumes in Ellis Library, and the State Historical Society of Missouri.\n\nThe \"We Always Swing\" Jazz Series and the Roots N Blues N BBQ Festival is held in Columbia. \"9th Street Summerfest\" (Now hosted in Rose Park at Rose Music Hall) closes part of that street several nights each summer to hold outdoor performances and has featured Willie Nelson (2009), Snoop Dogg (2010), The Flaming Lips (2010), Weird Al Yankovic (2013), and others. The \"University Concert Series\" regularly includes musicians and dancers from various genres, typically in Jesse Hall. Other musical venues in town include the Missouri Theatre, the University's multipurpose Hearnes Center, The Blue Note, and Rose Music Hall. Shelter Gardens, a park on the campus of Shelter Insurance headquarters, also hosts outdoor performances during the summer.\n\nThe University of Missouri School of Music attracts hundreds of musicians to Columbia, student performances are held in Whitmore Recital Hall. Among many non-profit organizations for classical music are included the \"Odyssey Chamber Music Series\", \"Missouri Symphony Society\" and \"Columbia Civic Orchestra\". Founded in 2006, the \"Plowman Chamber Music Competition\" is a biennial competition held in March/April of odd-numbered years, considered to be one of the finest, top five chamber music competitions in the nation.\n\nColumbia has multiple opportunities to watch and perform in theatrical productions. The city is home to Stephens College, a private institution known for performing arts. Their season includes multiple plays and musicals. The University of Missouri and Columbia College also present multiple productions a year.\n\nThe cities three public high schools are also known for their productions. Rock Bridge high school performs a musical in November and 2 plays in the spring. Hickman High School also performs a similar season with 2 musical performances (one in the fall, and one in the spring) and 2 plays (one in the winter, and one at the end of their school year). They are a Columbia staple when it comes to High School Theatre with a wide variety of performances such as Hairspray, Guys and Dolls, The Miracle Worker, and Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Nights Dream. The newest high school, Battle High, opened six years ago and also is known for their outstanding productions such as Annie, Beauty and the Beast, 9 to 5, and Tarzan. Battle presents a musical in the fall and a play in the spring, along with improv nights and more productions throughout the year. Ticket's to the High school shows are typically eight dollars for students and ten for adults.\n\nThe city is also home to the indoor/outdoor theatre Maplewood Barn Theatre in Nifong Park and other community theatre programs such as Columbia Entertainment Company, Talking Horse Productions, Pace Youth Theatre and TRYPS.\n\nThe University of Missouri's sports teams, the Missouri Tigers, play a significant role in the city's sports culture. Faurot Field at Memorial Stadium, which has a capacity of 71,168, hosts home football games. The Hearnes Center and Mizzou Arena are two other large sport and event venues, the latter being the home arena for Mizzou's basketball team. Taylor Stadium is host to their baseball team and was the regional host for the 2007 NCAA Baseball Championship. Columbia College has several men and women collegiate sports teams as well. In 2007, Columbia hosted the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics Volleyball National Championship, which the Lady Cougars participated in.\n\nColumbia also hosts the Show-Me State Games, a non-profit program of the Missouri Governor's Council on Physical Fitness and Health. They are the largest state games in the United States.\n\nSituated midway between St. Louis and Kansas City, Columbians will often have allegiances to the professional sports teams housed there, such as the St. Louis Cardinals, the Kansas City Royals, the Kansas City Chiefs, the St. Louis Blues, Sporting Kansas City, and St. Louis FC.\n\nThe city has two daily newspapers: the \"Columbia Missourian\" and the \"Columbia Daily Tribune\", both morning deliveries. The \"Missourian\" is directed by professional editors and staffed by Missouri School of Journalism students who do reporting, design, copy editing, information graphics, photography and multimedia. The \"Missourian\" publishes the weekly city magazine, \"Vox\". With a daily circulation of nearly 20,000, the \"Daily Tribune\" is the most widely read newspaper in central Missouri. The University of Missouri has the independent but official student newspaper called \"The Maneater\", which is printed bi-weekly. The now-defunct \"Prysms Weekly\" was also published in Columbia. In Fall 2009, KCOU News launched full operations out of KCOU 88.1 FM on the MU Campus. The entirely student-run news organization airs a daily newscast, \"The Pulse\", weekdays from 4:30 to 5:30 p.m.\n\nThe city has 14 radio stations and 4 television channels. Columbia's Public Access channel, Columbia Access Television, is commonly referred to by its acronym, CAT, or CAT-TV. The Education Access channel in Columbia, CPSTV, is managed by Columbia Public Schools as a function of the Columbia Public Schools Community Relations Department. The city's Government Access channel broadcast City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment meetings\n\nColumbia has many bars and restaurants that provide diverse styles of cuisine, which is in part due to it being a college town with three colleges. One such establishment is the historic Booches bar, restaurant and pool hall, which was established in 1884 and is frequented by college students, as well as others from all walks of life. Shakespeare's Pizza is known across the nation for its college town pizza.\n\nThe City of Columbia's current government was established by a home rule charter adopted by voters on November 11, 1974, which established a Council-manager government that invested power in the City Council. The City Council is made up of seven members – six elected by each of Columbia's six single-member districts or wards, plus an at-large council member, the Mayor, who is elected by all city voters. The Mayor receives a $9,000 annual stipend and the six remaining council members receive a $6,000 annual stipend. They are elected to staggered three-year terms. As well as serving as a voting member of the City Council, the mayor is also recognized as the head of city government for ceremonial purposes. Chief executive authority is invested in a hired city manager, who oversees the day-to-day operations of government.\n\nColumbia is the county seat of Boone County, and houses the county court and government center. The city lies within Missouri's 4th congressional district. The 19th Missouri State Senate district covers all of Boone County. There are five Missouri House of Representatives districts (9, 21, 23, 24, and 25) in the city. The principal law enforcement agency is the Columbia Police Department, while the Columbia Fire Department provides fire protection. The University of Missouri Police Department patrols areas on and around the MU campus and has jurisdiction throughout the city and Boone County. The Public Service Joint Communications Center coordinates efforts between the two organizations as well as the Boone County Fire Protection District, which operates Urban Search and Rescue Missouri Task Force 1.\nThe population generally supports progressive causes such as the extensive city recycling programs and the decriminalization of cannabis both for medical and recreational use at the municipal level (though the scope of the latter of the two cannabis ordinances has since been restricted). The city is one of only four in the state to offer medical benefits to same-sex partners of city employees. The new health plan extends health benefits to unmarried heterosexual domestic partners of city employees.\n\nOn October 10, 2006, the City Council approved an ordinance to prohibit smoking in public places, including restaurants and bars. The ordinance was passed over protest, and several amendments to the ordinance reflect this. Over half of residents possess at least a bachelor's degree, while over a quarter hold a graduate degree. Columbia is the thirteenth most-highly educated municipality in the United States.\n\nColumbia and much of the surrounding area lies within the Columbia Public School District. The district enrolls over 17,000 students and had a revenue of nearly $200 million for the 2007–08 school year. It is above the state average in both attendance percentage and graduation rate. The city operates four public high schools which cover grades 9–12: David H. Hickman High School, Rock Bridge High School, Muriel Battle High School, and Frederick Douglass High School. Rock Bridge is one of two Missouri high schools to receive a silver medal by U.S. News & World Report, putting it in the Top 3% of all high schools in the nation. Hickman has been on Newsweek magazine's list of Top 1,300 schools in the country for the past three years and has more named presidential scholars than any other public high school in the US. There are also several private high schools located in the city, including Christian Fellowship School, Columbia Independent School, Heritage Academy, Christian Chapel Academy, and Tolton High School.\n\nCPS also manages six middle schools: West, Jefferson, Lange, Oakland, Smithton, and Gentry. There is also a seventh school that will open in the 2019-20 school year.\n\nThe city has three institutions of higher education: the University of Missouri, Stephens College, and Columbia College, all of which surround Downtown Columbia. The city is the headquarters of the University of Missouri System, which also operates campuses in St. Louis, Kansas City, and Rolla. Moberly Area Community College, Central Methodist University, and William Woods University also operate satellite campuses in Columbia.\n\nThe Columbia Transit provides public bus and para-transit service, and is owned and operated by the city. In 2008, 1,414,400 passengers boarded along the system's six fixed routes and nine University of Missouri shuttle routes, and 27,000 boarded the Para-transit service. The system is constantly experiencing growth in service and technology. A $3.5 million project to renovate and expand the Wabash Station, a rail depot built in 1910 and converted into the city's transit center in the mid-1980s, was completed in summer of 2007. In 2007, a Transit Master Plan was created to address the future transit needs of the city and county with a comprehensive plan to add infrastructure in three key phases. The five to 15-year plan intends to add service along the southwest, southeast and northeast sections of Columbia and develop alternative transportation models for Boone County.\n\nColumbia is also known for its MKT Trail, a spur of the Katy Trail State Park, which allows foot and bike traffic across the city, and, conceivably, the state. It consists of a soft gravel surface for running and biking. Columbia also is preparing to embark on construction of several new bike paths and street bike lanes thanks to a $25 million grant from the federal government. The city is also served by American Airlines and United Airlines at the Columbia Regional Airport, the only commercial airport in mid-Missouri.\n\nI-70 (concurrent with US 40) and US 63 are the two main freeways used for travel to and from Columbia. Within the city, there are also three state highways: Routes 763 (Rangeline Street & College Avenue), 163 (Providence Road), and 740 (Stadium Boulevard).\n\nRail service is provided by the city-owned Columbia Terminal Railroad (COLT), which runs from the north side of Columbia to Centralia and a connection to the Norfolk Southern Railway. Columbia would be at the center of the proposed Missouri Hyperloop, reducing travel times to Kansas City and St. Louis to around 15 minutes.\n\nHealth care is a big part of Columbia's economy, with nearly one in six people working in a health-care related profession and a physician density that is about three times the United States average. Columbia's hospitals and supporting facilities are a large referral center for the state, and medical related trips to the city are common. There are three hospital systems within the city and five hospitals with a total of 1,105 beds.\n\nThe University of Missouri Health Care operates three hospitals in Columbia: the University of Missouri Hospital, the University of Missouri Women's and Children's Hospital (formerly Columbia Regional Hospital), and the Ellis Fischel Cancer Center. Boone Hospital Center is administered by BJC Healthcare and operates several clinics as well as outpatient locations. The Harry S. Truman Memorial Veterans' Hospital, next to University Hospital, is administered by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.\n\nThere are also a large number of medical-related industries in Columbia. The University of Missouri School of Medicine uses university-owned facilities as teaching hospitals. The University of Missouri Research Reactor Center is the largest research reactor in the United States and produces radioisotopes used in nuclear medicine. The center serves as the sole supplier of the active ingredients in two U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved radiopharmaceuticals and produces Fluorine-18 used in PET imaging with its cyclotron.\n\nIn accordance with the Columbia Sister Cities Program, which operates in conjunction with Sister Cities International, Columbia has been paired with five international sister cities in an attempt to foster cross-cultural understanding:\n\nBULLET::::- Kutaisi, Georgia\nBULLET::::- Matto, Ishikawa, Japan\n\nBULLET::::- Sibiu, Romania\nBULLET::::- Suncheon, South Jeolla, South Korea\n\nBULLET::::- Laoshan, Shandong, China\n\nBULLET::::- List of people from Columbia, Missouri\nBULLET::::- History of the University of Missouri\nBULLET::::- National Register of Historic Places listings in Boone County, Missouri\nBULLET::::- List of tallest buildings in Columbia, Missouri\n\nBULLET::::- Doug Hunt, \"Summary Justice: The Lynching of James Scott and the Trial of George Barkwell in Columbia, Missouri, 1923\", Amazon Digital Services LLC, Kindle Edition: 2010\n\nBULLET::::- Official city government website\nBULLET::::- Columbia Convention & Visitors Bureau\nBULLET::::- Columbia Chamber of Commerce\nBULLET::::- Historic maps of Columbia in the Sanborn Maps of Missouri Collection at the University of Missouri\n"}
{"id": "6720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6720", "title": "Charlton Athletic F.C.", "text": "Charlton Athletic F.C.\n\nCharlton Athletic Football Club is an English professional association football club based in Charlton, south-east London. They currently compete in the EFL Championship, the second tier of English football. The club was founded on 9 June 1905 when a number of youth clubs in south-east London, including East Street Mission and Blundell Mission, combined to form Charlton Athletic. Their home ground is the Valley, where the club have played since 1919, apart from one year in Catford, during 1923–24, and seven years at Crystal Palace and West Ham United between 1985 and 1992, due to financial issues, and then safety concerns raised by the local council. The club's fans formed the Valley Party, nominating candidates to stand in local elections, in a bid to return the club to The Valley.\n\nCharlton turned professional in 1920 and first entered the Football League in 1921. Since then the club has had four separate periods in the top flight of English football: 1936–1957, 1986–1990, 1998–1999, and 2000–2007. Historically, Charlton's most successful period was the 1930s, when the club's highest league finishes were recorded, including runners-up of the First Division in 1937. After World War II, Charlton reached two consecutive FA Cup finals, losing in 1946, and winning in 1947.\n\nThe club's traditional kit consists of red shirts, white shorts and red socks, and their most commonly used nickname is \"The Addicks\". Charlton share local rivalries with fellow South East London clubs Crystal Palace and Millwall.\n\nCharlton Athletic F.C. were formed on 9 June 1905 by a group of 15- to 17-year-olds in East Street, Charlton, which is now known as Eastmoor Street and no longer residential. Charlton spent most of the years before the First World War playing in youth leagues. They became a senior side in 1913 the same year that nearby Woolwich Arsenal relocated to North London. After the war, they joined the Kent League for one season (1919–20) before becoming professional, appointing Walter Rayner as the first full-time manager. They were accepted by the Southern League and played just a single season (1920–21) before being voted into the Football League. Charlton's first Football League match was against Exeter City in August 1921, which they won 1–0. In 1923, Charlton became \"giant killers\" in the FA Cup beating top flight sides Manchester City, West Bromwich Albion, and Preston North End before losing to eventual winners Bolton Wanderers in the Quarter-Finals. Later that year, it was proposed that Charlton merge with Catford Southend to create a larger team with bigger support. In the 1923–24 season Charlton played in Catford at The Mount stadium and wore the colours of \"The Enders\", light and dark blue vertical stripes. However, the move fell through and the Addicks returned to the Charlton area in 1924, returning to the traditional red and white colours in the process.\n\nCharlton finished second bottom in the Football League in 1926 and were forced to apply for re-election which was successful. Three years later the Addicks won the Division Three championship in 1929<ref name=\"England 1928/29\"></ref> and they remained at the Division Two level for four years. After relegation into the Third Division south at the end of the 1932–33 season the club appointed Jimmy Seed as manager and he oversaw the most successful period in Charlton's history either side of the Second World War. Seed, an ex-miner who had made a career as a footballer despite suffering the effects of poison gas in the First World War, remains the most successful manager in Charlton's history. He is commemorated in the name of a stand at the Valley. Seed was an innovative thinker about the game at a time when tactical formations were still relatively unsophisticated. He later recalled \"a simple scheme that enabled us to pull several matches out of the fire\" during the 1934–35 season: when the team was in trouble \"the centre-half was to forsake his defensive role and go up into the attack to add weight to the five forwards.\" The organisation Seed brought to the team proved effective and the Addicks gained successive promotions from the Third Division to the First Division between 1934 and 1936, becoming the first club to ever do so. Charlton finally secured promotion to the First Division by beating local rivals West Ham United at the Boleyn Ground, with their centre-half John Oakes playing on despite concussion and a broken nose.\n\nIn 1937, Charlton finished runners up in the First Division,<ref name=\"1936/1937 English Division 1 (old) Table\"></ref> in 1938 finished fourth<ref name=\"1937/1938 English Division 1 (old) Table\"></ref> and 1939 finished third.<ref name=\"1938/1939 English Division 1 (old) Table\"></ref> They were the most consistent team in the top flight of English football over the three seasons immediately before the Second World War. This continued during the war years and they won the Football League War Cup and appeared in finals.\n\nCharlton reached the 1946 FA Cup Final, but lost 4–1 to Derby County at Wembley. Charlton's Bert Turner scored an own goal in the eightieth minute before equalising for the Addicks a minute later to take them into extra time, but they conceded three further goals in the extra period. When the full league programme resumed in 1946–47 Charlton could finish only 19th in the First Division, just above the relegation spots, but they made amends with their performance in the FA Cup, reaching the 1947 FA Cup Final. This time they were successful, beating Burnley 1–0, with Chris Duffy scoring the only goal of the day. In this period of renewed football attendances, Charlton became one of only thirteen English football teams to average over 40,000 as their attendance during a full season. The Valley was the largest football ground in the League, drawing crowds in excess of 70,000. However, in the 1950s little investment was made either for players or to The Valley, hampering the club's growth. In 1956, the then board undermined Jimmy Seed and asked for his resignation; Charlton were relegated the following year.\n\nFrom the late 1950s until the early 1970s, Charlton remained a mainstay of the Second Division before relegation to the Third Division in 1972<ref name=\"England 1971/72\"></ref> caused the team's support to drop, and even a promotion in 1975 back to the second division<ref name=\"England 1974/75\"></ref> did little to re-invigorate the team's support and finances. In 1979–80 Charlton were relegated again to the Third Division,<ref name=\"England 1979/80\"></ref> but won immediate promotion back to the Second Division in 1980–81.<ref name=\"England 1980/81\"></ref> Even though it did not feel like it, this was a turning point in the club's history leading to a period of turbulence and change including further promotion and exile. A change in management and shortly after a change in club ownership led to severe problems, such as the reckless signing of former European Footballer of the Year Allan Simonsen, and the club looked like it would go out of business.\n\nIn 1984 financial matters came to a head and the club went into administration, to be reformed as Charlton Athletic. (1984) Ltd. although the club's finances were still far from secure. They were forced to leave the Valley just after the start of the 1985–86 season, after its safety was criticised by Football League officials in the wake of the Bradford City stadium fire.\nThe club began to groundshare with Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park and this arrangement looked to be for the long-term, as Charlton did not have enough funds to revamp the Valley to meet safety requirements.\nDespite the move away from the Valley, Charlton were promoted to the First Division as Second Division runners-up at the end of 1985–86,<ref name=\"England 1985/86\"></ref> and remained at this level for four years (achieving a highest league finish of 14th) often with late escapes, most notably against Leeds in 1987, where the Addicks triumphed in extra-time of the play-off final replay to secure their top flight place. In 1987 Charlton also returned to Wembley for the first time since the 1947 FA Cup final for the Full Members Cup final against Blackburn.\nEventually, Charlton were relegated in 1990 along with Sheffield Wednesday and bottom club Millwall. Manager Lennie Lawrence remained in charge for one more season before he accepted an offer to take charge of Middlesbrough. He was replaced by joint player-managers Alan Curbishley and Steve Gritt. The pair had unexpected success in their first season finishing just outside the play-offs, and 1992–93 began promisingly and Charlton looked good bets for promotion in the new Division One (the new name of the old Second Division following the formation of the Premier League). However, the club was forced to sell players such as Rob Lee to help pay for a return to the Valley, while club fans formed the Valley Party, nominating candidates to stand in local elections in 1990, pressing the local council to enable the club's return to the Valley - finally achieved in December 1992.\n\nIn March 1993, defender Tommy Caton, who had been out of action due to injury since January 1991, announced his retirement from playing on medical advice. He died suddenly at the end of the following month at the age of 30.\n\nIn 1995, new chairman Richard Murray appointed Alan Curbishley as sole manager of Charlton. Under his sole leadership Charlton made an appearance in the play-off in 1996 but were eliminated by Crystal Palace in the semi-finals and the following season brought a disappointing 15th-place finish. 1997–98 was Charlton's best season for years. They reached the Division One play-off final and battled against Sunderland in a thrilling game which ended with a 4–4 draw after extra time. Charlton won 7–6 on penalties, with the match described as \"arguably the most dramatic game of football in Wembley's history\", and were promoted to the Premier League.\n\nCharlton's first Premier League campaign began promisingly (they went top after two games) but they were unable to keep up their good form and were soon battling relegation. The battle was lost on the final day of the season but the club's board kept faith in Curbishley, confident that they could bounce back. Curbishley rewarded the chairman's loyalty with the Division One title in 2000 which signalled a return to the Premier League.\n\nAfter the club's return, Curbishley proved an astute spender and by 2003 he had succeeded in establishing Charlton in the top flight. Charlton spent much of the 2003–04 Premier League season challenging for a Champions League place, but a late-season slump in form and the sale of star player Scott Parker to Chelsea, left Charlton in seventh place, which was still the club's highest finish since the 1950s. Charlton were unable to build on this level of achievement and Curbishley departed in 2006, with the club still established as a solid mid-table side.\n\nIn May 2006, Iain Dowie was named as Curbishley's successor, but was sacked after 12 league matches in November 2006, with only two wins. Les Reed replaced Dowie as manager, however he too failed to improve Charlton's position in the league table and on Christmas Eve 2006, Reed was replaced by former player Alan Pardew. Although results did improve, Pardew was unable to keep Charlton up and relegation was confirmed in the penultimate match of the season.\n\nCharlton's return to the second tier of English football was a disappointment, with their promotion campaign tailing off to an 11th-place finish. Early in the following season the Addicks were linked with a foreign takeover, but this was swiftly denied by the club. On 10 October 2008, Charlton received an indicative offer for the club from a Dubai-based diversified investment company. However, the deal later fell through. The full significance of this soon became apparent as the club recorded net losses of over £13 million for that financial year. Pardew left on 22 November after a 2–5 home loss to Sheffield United that saw the team fall into the relegation places. Matters did not improve under caretaker manager Phil Parkinson, and the team went a club record 18 games without a win, a new club record, before finally achieving a 1–0 away victory over Norwich City in an FA Cup Third Round replay; Parkinson was hired on a permanent basis. The team were relegated to League One after a 2–2 draw against Blackpool on 18 April 2009.\n\nAfter spending almost the entire 2009–10 season in the top six of League One, Charlton were defeated in the Football League One play-offs semi-final second leg on penalties against Swindon Town.\nAfter a change in ownership, Parkinson and Charlton legend Mark Kinsella left after a poor run of results. Another Charlton legend, Chris Powell, was appointed manager of the club in January 2011, winning his first game in charge 2–0 over Plymouth at the Valley. This was Charlton's first league win since November. Powell's bright start continued with a further three victories, before running into a downturn which saw the club go 11 games in succession without a win. Yet the fans' respect for Powell saw him come under remarkably little criticism. The club's fortunes picked up towards the end of the season, but leaving them far short of the play-offs. In a busy summer, Powell brought in 19 new players and after a successful season, on 14 April 2012, Charlton Athletic won promotion back to the Championship with a 1–0 away win at Carlisle United. A week later, on 21 April 2012, they were confirmed as champions after a 2–1 home win over Wycombe Wanderers. Charlton then lifted the League One trophy on 5 May 2012, having been in the top position since 15 September 2011, and after recording a 3–2 victory over Hartlepool United, recorded their highest ever league points score of 101, the highest in any professional European league that year.\n\nIn the first season back in the Championship, the 2012–13 season saw Charlton finish ninth place with 65 points, just three points short of the play-off places to the Premier League.\n\nIn early January 2014 during the 2013–14 season, Belgian businessman Roland Duchâtelet took over Charlton as owner in a deal worth £14million. This made Charlton a part of a network of football clubs owned by Duchâtelet. On 11 March 2014, two days after an FA Cup quarter-final loss to Sheffield United, and with Charlton sitting bottom of the table, Powell was sacked and leaked private emails suggested that this was due to a rift with the owner.\n\nNew manager Jose Riga, despite having to join Charlton long after the transfer window had closed, was able to improve Charlton's form and eventually guide them to 18th place, successfully avoiding relegation. After Riga's departure to manage Blackpool, former Millwall player Bob Peeters was appointed as manager in May 2014 on a 12-month contract. Charlton started strong, but a long run of draws meant that after only 25 games in charge Peeters was dismissed with the team in 14th place. His replacement, Guy Luzon, ensured there was no relegation battle by winning most of the remaining matches, resulting in a 12th-place finish.\n\nThe 2015–16 season began promisingly but results under Luzon deteriorated and on 24 October 2015 after a 3–0 defeat at home to Brentford he was sacked. Luzon said in a \"News Shopper\" interview that he \"was not the one who chose how to do the recruitment\" as the reason why he failed as manager. Karel Fraeye was appointed \"interim head coach\", but was sacked after 14 games and just two wins, with the club then second from bottom in the Championship. On 14 January 2016, Jose Riga was appointed head coach for a second spell, but could not prevent Charlton from being relegated to League One for the 2016–17 season. Riga resigned at the end of the season. To many fans, the managerial changes and subsequent relegation to League One were symptomatic of the mismanagement of the club under Duchâtelet's ownership and several protests began.\n\nAfter a slow start to the new season, with the club in 15th place of League One, the club announced that it had \"parted company\" with Russell Slade in November 2016. Karl Robinson was appointed on a permanent basis soon after. He led the Addicks to an uneventful 13th-place finish. The following season Robinson had the team challenging for the play-offs, but a drop in form in March led him to resign by mutual consent. He was replaced by former player Lee Bowyer as caretaker manager who guided them to a 6th-place finish, but lost in the play-off semi-final.\n\nBowyer was appointed permanently in September on a one-year contract and after finishing third in the regular 2018-19 EFL League One season, Charlton beat Sunderland 2–1 in the League One play-off final to earn promotion back to the EFL Championship after a three-season absence.\n\nOn 29 November 2019, Charlton Athletic were acquired by East Street Investments from Abu Dhabi, subject to approval from the English Football League (EFL).\n\nThe club's first ground was Siemens Meadow (1905–1907), a patch of rough ground by the River Thames. This was over-shadowed by the Siemens Brothers Telegraph Works. Then followed Woolwich Common (1907–1908), Pound Park (1908–1913), and Angerstein Lane (1913–1915). After the end of the First World War, a chalk quarry known as the Swamps was identified as Charlton's new ground, and in the summer of 1919 work began to create the level playing area and remove debris from the site. The first match at this site, now known as the club's current ground The Valley, was in September 1919. Charlton stayed at The Valley until 1923, when the club moved to The Mount stadium in Catford as part of a proposed merger with Catford Southend Football Club. However, after this move collapsed in 1924 Charlton returned to The Valley.\n\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, significant improvements were made to the ground, making it one of the largest in the country at that time. In 1938 the highest attendance to date at the ground was recorded at over 75,000 for a FA Cup match against Aston Villa. During the 1940s and 1950s the attendance was often above 40,000, and Charlton had one of the largest support bases in the country. However, after the club's relegation little investment was made in The Valley as it fell into decline.\n\nIn the 1980s matters came to a head as the ownership of the club and The Valley was divided. The large East Terrace had been closed down by the authorities after the Bradford City stadium fire and the ground's owner wanted to use part of the site for housing. In September 1985, Charlton made the controversial move to ground-share with South London neighbours Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park. This move was unpopular with supporters and in the late 1980s significant steps were taken to bring about the club's return to The Valley.\n\nA single issue political party, the Valley Party, contested the 1990 local Greenwich Borough Council elections on a ticket of reopening the stadium, capturing 11% of the vote, aiding the club's return. The Valley Gold investment scheme was created to help supporters fund the return to The Valley, and several players were also sold to raise funds. For the 1991–92 season and part of the 1992–93 season, the Addicks played at West Ham's Upton Park as Wimbledon had moved into Selhurst Park alongside Crystal Palace. Charlton finally returned to The Valley in December 1992, celebrating with a 1–0 victory against Portsmouth.\n\nSince the return to The Valley, three sides of the ground have been completely redeveloped turning The Valley into a modern, all-seater stadium with a 27,111 capacity. There are plans in place to increase the ground's capacity to approximately 31,000 and even around 40,000 in the future.\n\nThe bulk of the club's support base comes from South East London and Kent, particularly the London boroughs of Greenwich, Bexley and Bromley. Supporters played a key role in the return of the club to The Valley in 1992 and were rewarded by being granted a voice on the board in the form of an elected supporter director. Any season ticket holder could put themselves forward for election, with a certain number of nominations, and votes were cast by all season ticket holders over the age of 18. The last such director, Ben Hayes, was elected in 2006 to serve until 2008, when the role was discontinued as a result of legal issues. Its functions were replaced by a fans forum which met for the first time in December 2008 and is still active to this day.\n\nCharlton's most common nickname is The Addicks. The most likely origin of this name is from a local fishmonger, Arthur \"Ikey\" Bryan, who rewarded the team with meals of haddock and chips.\n\nThe progression of the nickname can be seen in the book \"The Addicks Cartoons: An Affectionate Look into the Early History of Charlton Athletic\", which covers the pre-First World War history of Charlton through a narrative based on 56 cartoons which appeared in the now defunct Kentish Independent. The very first cartoon, from 31 October 1908, calls the team the Haddocks. By 1910, the name had changed to Addicks although it also appeared as Haddick. The club also have two other nicknames, The Red Robins, adopted in 1931, and The Valiants, chosen in a fan competition in the 1960s which also led to the adoption of the sword badge which is still in use. The Addicks nickname never went away and was revived by fans after the club lost its Valley home in 1985 and went into exile at Crystal Palace. It is now once again the official nickname of the club.\n\nCharlton fans' chants have included \"Valley, Floyd Road\", a song noting the stadium's address to the tune of \"Mull of Kintyre\", and \"The Red, Red Robin\".\n\nCharlton Athletic featured in the ITV one-off drama \"Albert's Memorial\", shown on 12 September 2010 and starring David Jason and David Warner.\n\nIn the long-running BBC sitcom \"Only Fools and Horses\", Rodney Charlton Trotter is named after the club.\n\nCharlton's ground and the then manager, Alan Curbishley, made appearances in the Sky One TV series, \"Dream Team\".\n\nCharlton Athletic has also featured in a number of book publications, in both the realm of fiction and factual/sports writing. These include works by Charlie Connelly and Paul Breen's work of popular fiction which is entitled \"The Charlton Men\". The book is set against Charlton's successful 2011–12 season when they won the League One title and promotion back to the Championship in concurrence with the 2011 London riots.\n\nTimothy Young, the protagonist in Out of the Shelter, a novel by David Lodge, supports Charlton Athletic. The book describes Timothy listening to Charlton's victory in the 1947 FA Cup Final on the radio.\n\nCharlton have used a number of crests and badges during their history, although the current design has not been changed since 1968. The first known badge, from the 1930s, consisted of the letters CAF in the shape of a club from a pack of cards. In the 1940s, Charlton used a design featuring a robin sitting in a football within a shield, sometimes with the letters CAFC in the four-quarters of the shield, which was worn for the 1946 FA Cup Final. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, the crest of the former metropolitan borough of Greenwich was used as a symbol for the club but this was not used on the team's shirts.\n\nIn 1963, a competition was held to find a new badge for the club, and the winning entry was a hand holding a sword, which complied with Charlton's nickname of the time, the Valiants. Over the next five years modifications were made to this design, such as the addition of a circle surrounding the hand and sword and including the club's name in the badge. By 1968, the design had reached the one known today, and has been used continuously from this year, apart from a period in the 1970s when just the letters CAFC appeared on the team's shirts.\n\nWith the exception of one season, Charlton have always played in red and white. The colours had been chosen by the group of boys who had founded Charlton Athletic in 1905 after having to play their first matches in the borrowed kits of their local rivals Woolwich Arsenal, who also played in red and white. The exception came during the 1923–24 season when Charlton wore the colours of Catford Southend as part of the proposed move to Catford, which were light and dark blue stripes. However, after the move fell through, Charlton returned to wearing red and white as their home colours.\n\n! Year !!Kit Manufacturer!!Main Shirt Sponsor!!Back of Shirt Sponsor!!Shorts Sponsor\n\nCharlton's main rivals are Millwall and Crystal Palace.\n\nThe rivalry with Crystal Palace grew substantially in the mid-1980s, when the Addicks left their traditional home at The Valley because of safety concerns and played their home fixtures at The Eagles' Selhurst Park stadium. The ground-sharing arrangement – although seen by Crystal Palace chairman Ron Noades as essential for the future of football – was unpopular with both sets of fans. Indeed, the Charlton fans campaigned for a return to The Valley throughout the club's time at Selhurst Park.\n\nCharlton left Selhurst Park in 1991, and the rivalry between the teams once again returned to a nominal level until two incidents 14 years later:\n\nIn 2005, having already lost 1–0 to Charlton at Selhurst Park earlier in the season, Palace were relegated at The Valley after a 2–2 draw. After the match there was a well publicised altercation between the two chairmen Richard Murray and Simon Jordan, which only served to renew old hostilities between the fans.\n\nThe rivalry began when Millwall moved south of the river in 1910 to The Den in New Cross, South East London situated fewer than four miles from The Valley. Matches between the two sides are always fiercely contested.\n\n<ref name=\"2019/20 squad numbers revealed\"></ref>\n\nvalign=\"top\"\n!Year\n!Winner\n1971Paul Went\n1972Keith Peacock\n1973Arthur Horsfield\n1974John Dunn\n1975Richie Bowman\n1976Derek Hales\n1977Mike Flanagan\n1978Keith Peacock\n1979Keith Peacock\n1980Les Berry\nwidth=\"50\" \nvalign=\"top\"\n!Year\n!Winner\n1981Nicky Johns\n1982Terry Naylor\n1983Nicky Johns\n1984Nicky Johns\n1985Mark Aizlewood\n1986Mark Aizlewood\n1987Bob Bolder\n1988John Humphrey\n1989John Humphrey\n1990John Humphrey\nwidth=\"50\" \nvalign=\"top\"\n!Year\n!Winner\n1991Robert Lee\n1992Simon Webster\n1993Stuart Balmer\n1994Carl Leaburn\n1995Richard Rufus\n1996John Robinson\n1997Andy Petterson\n1998Mark Kinsella\n1999Mark Kinsella\n2000Richard Rufus\nwidth=\"50\" \nvalign=\"top\"\n!Year\n!Winner\n2001Richard Rufus\n2002Dean Kiely\n2003Scott Parker\n2004Dean Kiely\n2005Luke Young\n2006Darren Bent\n2007Scott Carson\n2008Matt Holland\n2009Nicky Bailey\n2010Christian Dailly\nwidth=\"50\" \nvalign=\"top\"\n!Year\n!Winner\n2011José Semedo\n2012Chris Solly\n2013Chris Solly\n2014Diego Poyet\n2015Jordan Cousins\n2016Jordan Cousins\n2017Ricky Holmes\n2018Jay DaSilva\n2019Lyle Taylor\n\nClub officials as of 13 January 2011\n\n! style=\"background:silver;\"Year !! style=\"background:silver;\"Name\n1921–1924 Douglas Oliver\n1924–1932 Edwin Radford\n1932–1951 Albert Gliksten\n1951–1962 Stanley Gliksten\n1962–1982 Edward Gliksten\n1982–1983 Mark Hulyer\n1983 Richard Collins\n1983–1984 Mark Hulyer\n1984 John Fryer\n1984–1985 Jimmy Hill\n1985–1987 John Fryer\n1987–1989 Richard Collins\n1989–1995 Roger Alwen\n1995–2008  Richard Murray (PLC)\n1995–2008  Martin Simons\n2008–2010  Derek Chappell\n2008–2010  Richard Murray\n2010– 2014  Michael Slater \n\n! Role\n! Name\n\n! style=\"background:#eee;\"Role\n!! style=\"background:#eee;\"Name\nManager Lee Bowyer\nAssistant Manager Johnnie Jackson\nGoalkeeper Coach Andy Marshall\nHead of Recruitment Steve Gallen\nFirst-Team Lead Sports Scientist/ Fitness Coach  Josh Hornby\nFirst-Team Strength & Conditioning Coach  Ian Jones\nFirst-Team Development Coach Grant Basey\nClub Doctor Chris Jones\nHead of Medical Services Alastair Thrush\nHead Physiotherapist Adam Coe\nAssistant Physiotherapist Steve Jackson\nHead of Performance Analysis Brett Shaw\nKit Manager Wayne Baldacchino\nAcademy Manager Steve Avory\nSenior Professional Development Lead Coach (U18-U21) Jason Euell\nProfessional Development Phase Coach (U17-U18) Sergei Baltacha\nProfessional Development Phase Coach (U16-U18) Anthony Hayes\nYouth Development Lead Phase Coach (U12-U16) Adam Lawrence\nFoundation Phase Lead Coach (U5-U11) Rhys Williams\nAcademy Physiotherapist Joe Ranson\nPerformance Analyst (U21) James Parker\nPerformance Analyst (U18) Jonny Dixon\n\n! style=\"background:silver;\"Name\n! style=\"background:silver;\"Dates\n! style=\"background:silver;\"Achievements\nSeptember 2018 – Present  League One Play-off Winners (2019)\n\nBULLET::::- Football League First Division (1st Tier)\nBULLET::::- Runners-up – 1937\nBULLET::::- Football League Second Division / Football League First Division (2nd Tier)\nBULLET::::- Champions – 2000\nBULLET::::- Runners-up – 1936, 1986\nBULLET::::- Play-off winners – 1987, 1998\nBULLET::::- Football League Third Division / Football League One (3rd Tier)\nBULLET::::- Champions – 2012\nBULLET::::- Promoted (old Division 3) – 1975, 1981\nBULLET::::- Play-off winners – 2019\nBULLET::::- Football League Third Division South\nBULLET::::- Champions – 1929, 1935\nBULLET::::- FA Cup\nBULLET::::- Winners – 1947\nBULLET::::- Runners-up – 1946\nBULLET::::- Full Members Cup\nBULLET::::- Runners-up – 1987\nBULLET::::- Football League War Cup\nBULLET::::- Joint Winners – 1944\nBULLET::::- Kent Senior Cup\nBULLET::::- Winners – 1995, 2013, 2015\nBULLET::::- Runners-up – 2016\n\nBULLET::::- Goalkeeper Sam Bartram is Charlton's record appearance maker, having played a total of 623 times between 1934 and 1956. But for six years lost to the Second World War, when no league football was played, this tally would be far higher\nBULLET::::- Keith Peacock is the club's second highest appearance maker with 591 games between 1961 and 1979 He was also the first-ever substitute in a Football League game, replacing injured goalkeeper Mike Rose after 11 minutes of a match against Bolton Wanderers on 21 August 1965.\nBULLET::::- Defender and midfielder, Radostin Kishishev is Charlton's record international appearance maker, having received 42 caps for Bulgaria while a Charlton player.\nBULLET::::- In total, 12 Charlton players have received full England caps. The first was Seth Plum, in 1923 and the most recent was Darren Bent, in 2006. Luke Young, with 7 caps, is Charlton's most capped England international.\nBULLET::::- Charlton's record goalscorer is Derek Hales, who scored 168 times in all competitions in 368 matches, during two spells, for the club\nBULLET::::- Counting only league goals, Stuart Leary is the club's record scorer with 153 goals between 1951 and 1962\nBULLET::::- The record number of goals scored in one season is 33, scored by Ralph Allen in the 1934–35 season\nBULLET::::- Charlton's record home attendance is 75,031 which was set on 12 February 1938 for an FA Cup match against Aston Villa\n\nBULLET::::- The record all-seated attendance is 27,111, The Valley's current capacity. This record was first set in September 2005 in a Premier League match against Chelsea and has since been equalled several times\n{ class=\"toccolours\"\n! style=\"background:gold;\"Achievement!! style=\"background:silver;\"Record (Year Division)\nHighest League Finish  Runners-up in 1936/37 (First Division)\nMost League Points in a Season  101 in 2011/2012 (League One)\nMost League Goals in a Season  107 in 1957/58 (Second Division)\nRecord Victory  8–0 vs Stevenage, 9 October 2018\nRecord Away Victory  8–0 vs Stevenage, 9 October 2018\nRecord Defeat  1–11 vs Aston Villa, 14 November 1959\nRecord FA Cup Victory  7–0 vs Burton Albion, 7 January 1956\nRecord League Cup Victory  5–0 vs Brentford, 12 August 1980\nMost Successive Victories  12 matches (from 26 December 1999 to 7 March 2000)\nMost Games Without A Win  18 matches (from 18 October 2008 to 13 January 2009)\nMost Successive Defeats  10 matches (from 11 April 1990 to 15 September 1990)\nMost Successive Draws  6 matches (from 13 December 1992 to 16 January 1993)\nLongest Unbeaten  15 matches (from 4 October 1980 to 20 December 1980)\nRecord Attendance  75,031 vs Aston Villa, 17 October 1938\nRecord League Attendance  68,160 vs Arsenal, 17 October 1936\nRecord Gate Receipts  £400,920 vs Leicester City, 19 February 2005\n\n! style=\"background:gold;\"Achievement!! style=\"background:silver;\"Player (Record)\nMost appearances  Sam Bartram (623)\nMost appearances (outfield)  Keith Peacock (591)\nMost goals  Derek Hales (168)\nMost hat-tricks  Johnny Summers and Eddie Firmani (8)\nMost capped player  Dennis Rommedahl (126)\nMost capped player while at the club Radostin Kishishev (42)\nOldest player  Sam Bartram (42 years and 47 days)\nYoungest player  Jonjo Shelvey (16 years and 59 days)\nOldest scorer  Chris Powell (38 years and 239 days)\nYoungest scorer  Jonjo Shelvey (16 years and 310 days)\nQuickest scorer  Jim Melrose (9 seconds)\nQuickest sending off  Naby Sarr (1 minute)\n\nBULLET::::- General\nBULLET::::- Specific\nBULLET::::- Charlton Athletic UEFA.com\nBULLET::::- Charlton Athletic information and statistics Soccerbase\n"}
{"id": "6721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6721", "title": "Cross-country skiing", "text": "Cross-country skiing\n\nCross-country skiing is a form of skiing where skiers rely on their own locomotion to move across snow-covered terrain, rather than using ski lifts or other forms of assistance. Cross-country skiing is widely practiced as a sport and recreational activity; however, some still use it as a means of transportation. Variants of cross-country skiing are adapted to a range of terrain which spans unimproved, sometimes mountainous terrain to groomed courses that are specifically designed for the sport.\n\nModern cross-country skiing is similar to the original form of skiing, from which all skiing disciplines evolved, including alpine skiing, ski jumping and Telemark skiing. Skiers propel themselves either by striding forward (classic style) or side-to-side in a skating motion (skate skiing), aided by arms pushing on ski poles against the snow. It is practised in regions with snow-covered landscapes, including Northern Europe, Canada, Russia, the United States, Australia and New Zealand.\nCompetitive cross-country skiing is one of the Nordic skiing sports. Cross-country skiing and rifle marksmanship are the two components of biathlon, ski-orienteering is a form of cross-country skiing, which includes map navigation along snow trails and tracks.\n\nThe word ski comes from the Old Norse word which means stick of wood. Skiing started as a technique for traveling cross-country over snow on skis, starting almost five millennia ago with beginnings in Scandinavia. It may have been practised as early as 600 BCE in Daxing'anling, in what is now China. Early historical evidence includes Procopius's (around CE 550) description of Sami people as \"skrithiphinoi\" translated as \"ski running samis\". Birkely argues that the Sami people have practiced skiing for more than 6000 years, evidenced by the very old Sami word \"čuoigat\" for skiing. Egil Skallagrimsson's 950 CE saga describes King Haakon the Good's practice of sending his tax collectors out on skis. The Gulating law (1274) stated that \"No moose shall be disturbed by skiers on private land.\" Cross-country skiing evolved from a utilitarian means of transportation to being a worldwide recreational activity and sport, which branched out into other forms of skiing starting in the mid-1800s.\n\nEarly skiers used one long pole or spear in addition to the skis. The first depiction of a skier with two ski poles dates to 1741. Traditional skis, used for snow travel in Norway and elsewhere into the 1800s, often comprised one short ski with a natural fur traction surface, the \"andor\", and one long for gliding, the \"langski\"—one being up to longer than the other—allowing skiers to propel themselves with a scooter motion. This combination has a long history among the Sami people. Skis up to 280 cm have been produced in Finland, and the longest recorded ski in Norway is 373 cm.\n\nSki warfare, the use of ski-equipped troops in war, is first recorded by the Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus in the 13th century. These troops were reportedly able to cover distances comparable to that of light cavalry. The garrison in Trondheim used skis at least from 1675, and the Danish-Norwegian army included specialized skiing battalions from 1747—details of military ski exercises from 1767 are on record. Skis were used in military exercises in 1747. In 1799 French traveller Jacques de la Tocnaye recorded his visit to Norway in his travel diary: Norwegian immigrants used skis (\"Norwegian snowshoes\") in the US midwest from around 1836. Norwegian immigrant \"Snowshoe Thompson\" transported mail by skiing across the Sierra Nevada between California and Nevada from 1856. In 1888 Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen and his team crossed the Greenland icecap on skis. Norwegian workers on the Buenos Aires - Valparaiso railway line introduced skiing in South America around 1890. In 1910 Roald Amundsen used skis on his South Pole Expedition. In 1902 the Norwegian consul in Kobe imported ski equipment and introduced skiing to the Japanese, motivated by the death of Japanese soldiers during a snow storm.\n\nNorwegian skiing regiments organized military skiing contests in the 18th century, divided in four classes: shooting at a target while skiing at \"top speed\", downhill racing among trees, downhill racing on large slopes without falling, and \"long racing\" on \"flat ground\". An early record of a public ski competition occurred in Tromsø, 1843. In Norwegian, refers to \"competitive skiing where the goal is to complete a specific distance in groomed tracks in the shortest possible time\". In Norway, \"ski touring competitions\" () are long-distance cross-country competitions open to the public, competition is usually within age intervals.\n\nA new technique, skate skiing, was experimented with early in the 20th Century, but was not widely adopted until the 1980s. Johan Grøttumsbråten used the skating technique at the 1931 World Championship in Oberhof, one of the earliest recorded use of skating in competitive cross-country skiing. This technique was later used in ski orienteering in the 1960s on roads and other firm surfaces. It became widespread during the 1980s after the success of Bill Koch (United States) in 1982 Cross-country Skiing Championships drew more attention to the skating style. Norwegian skier Ove Aunli started using the technique in 1984, when he found it to be much faster than classic style. Finnish skier, Pauli Siitonen, developed a one-sided variant of the style in the 1970s, leaving one ski in the track while skating to the side with the other one during endurance events; this became known as the \"marathon skate\".\n\nWhile the noun \"ski\" originates from the Norwegian language, unlike the English \"skiing\" there is no corresponding verb in Norwegian. Fridtjov Nansen, for instance, describes the crossing of Greenland as , literally \"On skis across Greenland\", while the English edition of the report was titled, \"The first crossing of Greenland\". Nansen referred to the activity of traversing snow on skis as (he used the term also in the English translation), which may be translated as \"ski running\". Nansen used , regarding all forms of skiing, but noted that ski jumping is purely a competitive sport and not for amateurs. He further noted that in some competitions the skier \"is also required to show his skill in turning his ski to one side or the other within given marks\" at full speed on a steep hill. Nansen regarded these forms (i.e., jumping and slalom) as \"special arts\", and believed that the most important branch of skiing was travel \"in an ordinary way across the country\". In Germany, Nansen's Greenland report was published as (literally \"On snowshoes through Greenland\"). The German term, , was supplanted by the borrowed Norwegian word, , in the late 19th century. The Norwegian encyclopedia of sports also uses the term, , (literally \"ski running\") for all forms of skiing. Around 1900 the word was used in German in the same sense as . In modern Norwegian, a variety of terms refer to cross-country skiing, including:\n\nBULLET::::- (literally \"walk on skis\")—a general term for self-propelled skiing\nBULLET::::- (literally \"hiking on skis\")—refers to ski touring as recreation\nBULLET::::- (literally \"long competition\")—refers to cross-country ski racing\n\nIn contrast, alpine skiing is referred to as (literally \"stand on skis\").\n\nRecreational cross-country skiing includes ski touring and groomed-trail skiing, typically at resorts or in parklands. It is an accessible form of recreation for persons with vision and mobility impairments. A related form of recreation is dog skijoring—a winter sport where a cross-country skier is assisted by one or more dogs.\n\nSki touring takes place off-piste and outside of ski resorts. Tours may extend over multiple days. Typically, skis, bindings, and boots allow for free movement of the heel to enable a walking pace, as with Nordic disciplines and unlike Alpine skiing. Ski touring's subgenre ski mountaineering involves independently navigating and route finding through potential avalanche terrain and often requires familiarity with meteorology along with skiing skills. Ski touring can be faster and easier than summer hiking in some terrain, allowing for traverses and ascents that would be harder in the summer. Skis can also be used to access backcountry alpine climbing routes when snow is off the technical route, but still covers the hiking trail. In some countries, organizations maintain a network of huts for use by cross-country skiers in wintertime. For example, the Norwegian Trekking Association maintains over 400 huts stretching across thousands of kilometres of trails which hikers can use in the summer and skiers in the winter.\n\nGroomed trail skiing occurs at facilities such as Nordmarka (Oslo), Royal Gorge Cross Country Ski Resort and Gatineau Park in Quebec, where trails are laid out and groomed for both classic and skate-skiing. Such grooming and track setting (for classic technique) requires specialized equipment and techniques that adapt to the condition of the snow. Trail preparation employs snow machines which tow snow-compaction, texturing and track-setting devices. Groomers must adapt such equipment to the condition of the snow—crystal structure, temperature, degree of compaction, moisture content, etc. Depending on the initial condition of the snow, grooming may achieve an increase in density for new-fallen snow or a decrease in density for icy or compacted snow. Cross-country ski facilities may incorporate a course design that meets homologation standards for such organizations as the International Olympic Committee, the International Ski Federation, or national standards. Standards address course distances, degree of difficulty with maximums in elevation difference and steepness—both up and downhill, plus other factors.\nSome facilities have night-time lighting on select trails—called \"lysløype\" (light trails) in Norwegian and \"elljusspår\" (electric-light trails) in Swedish. The first \"lysløype\" opened in 1946 in Nordmarka and at Byåsen (Trondheim).\n\nCross-country ski competition encompasses a variety of formats for races over courses of varying lengths according to rules sanctioned by the International Ski Federation (FIS) and by national organizations, such as the U.S. Ski and Snowboard Association and Cross Country Ski Canada. It also encompasses cross-country ski marathon events, sanctioned by the Worldloppet Ski Federation, cross-country ski orienteering events, sanctioned by the International Orienteering Federation, and Paralympic cross-country skiing, sanctioned by the International Paralympic Committee.\n\nThe FIS Nordic World Ski Championships have been held in various numbers and types of events since 1925 for men and since 1954 for women. From 1924 to 1939, the World Championships were held every year, including the Winter Olympic Games. After World War II, the World Championships were held every four years from 1950 to 1982. Since 1985, the World Championships have been held in odd-numbered years. Notable cross-country ski competitions include the Winter Olympics, the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships, and the FIS World Cup events (including the Holmenkollen).\n\nCross-country ski marathons—races with distances greater than 40 kilometers—have two cup series, the Ski Classics, which started in 2011, and the Worldloppet. Skiers race in classic or free-style (skating) events, depending on the rules of the race. Notable ski marathons, include the \"Vasaloppet\" in Sweden, \"Birkebeineren\" in Norway, the Engadin Skimarathon in Switzerland, the American Birkebeiner, the Tour of Anchorage in Anchorage, Alaska, and the Boreal Loppet, held in Forestville, Quebec, Canada.\n\nBiathlon combines cross-country skiing and rifle shooting. Depending on the shooting performance, extra distance or time is added to the contestant's total running distance/time. For each shooting round, the biathlete must hit five targets; the skier receives a penalty for each missed target, which varies according to the competition rules.\n\nSki orienteering is a form of cross-country skiing competition that requires navigation in a landscape, making optimal route choices at racing speeds. Standard orienteering maps are used, but with special green overprinting of trails and tracks to indicate their navigability in snow; other symbols indicate whether any roads are snow-covered or clear. Standard skate-skiing equipment is used, along with a map holder attached to the chest. It is one of the four orienteering disciplines recognized by the International Orienteering Federation. Upper body strength is especially important because of frequent double poling along narrow snow trails.\n\nParalympic cross-country ski competition is an adaptation of cross-country skiing for athletes with disabilities. Paralympic cross-country skiing includes standing events, sitting events (for wheelchair users), and events for visually impaired athletes under the rules of the International Paralympic Committee. These are divided into several categories for people who are missing limbs, have amputations, are blind, or have any other physical disability, to continue their sport.\n\nCross-country skiing has two basic propulsion techniques, which apply to different surfaces: classic (undisturbed snow and tracked snow) and skate skiing (firm, smooth snow surfaces). The classic technique relies on a wax or texture on the ski bottom under the foot for traction on the snow to allow the skier to slide the other ski forward in virgin or tracked snow. With the skate skiing technique a skier slides on alternating skis on a firm snow surface at an angle from each other in a manner similar to ice skating. Both techniques employ poles with baskets that allow the arms to participate in the propulsion. Specialized equipment is adapted to each technique and each type of terrain. A variety of turns are used, when descending.\n\nBoth poles can be used simultaneously (\"double-poling\"), or alternating, in classic the alternating technique is most common (the \"diagonal stride\") while in the skating technique double poles are more common.\n\nThe classic style is often used on prepared trails (pistes) that have pairs of parallel grooves (tracks) cut into the snow. It is also the most usual technique where no tracks have been prepared. With this technique, each ski is pushed forward from the other stationary ski in a striding and gliding motion, alternating foot to foot. With the \"diagonal stride\" variant the poles are planted alternately on the opposite side of the forward-striding foot; with the \"kick-double-pole\" variant the poles are planted simultaneously with every other stride. At times, especially with gentle descents, double poling is the sole means of propulsion. On uphill terrain, techniques include the \"side step\" for steep slopes, moving the skis perpendicular to the fall line, the \"herringbone\" for moderate slopes, where the skier takes alternating steps with the skis splayed outwards, and, for gentle slopes, the skier uses the diagonal technique with shorter strides and greater arm force on the poles.\n\nWith skate skiing, the skier provides propulsion on a smooth, firm snow surface by pushing alternating skis away from one another at an angle, in a manner similar to ice skating. Skate-skiing usually involves a coordinated use of poles and the upper body to add impetus, sometimes with a double pole plant each time the ski is extended on a temporarily \"dominant\" side (\"V1\") or with a double pole plant each time the ski is extended on either side (\"V2\"). Skiers climb hills with these techniques by widening the angle of the \"V\" and by making more frequent, shorter strides and more forceful use of poles. A variant of the technique is the \"marathon skate\" or \"Siitoten step\", where the skier leaves one ski in the track while skating outwards to the side with the other ski.\n\nTurns, used while descending or for braking, include the snowplough (or \"wedge turn\"), the stem christie (or \"wedge christie\"), parallel turn, and the Telemark turn. The step turn is used for maintaining speed during descents or out of track on flats.\n\nEquipment comprises skis, poles, boots and bindings; these vary according to:\nBULLET::::- Technique, classic vs skate\nBULLET::::- Terrain, which may vary from groomed trails to wilderness\nBULLET::::- Performance level, from recreational use to competition at the elite level\n\nSkis used in cross-country are lighter and narrower than those used in alpine skiing. Ski bottoms are designed to provide a gliding surface and, for classic skis, a traction zone under foot. The base of the gliding surface is a plastic material that is designed both to minimize friction and, in many cases, to accept waxes. Glide wax may be used on the tails and tips of classic skis and across the length of skate skis.\n\nEach type of ski is sized and designed differently. Length affects maneuverability; camber affects pressure on the snow beneath the feet of the skier; side-cut affects the ease of turning; width affects forward friction; overall area on the snow affects bearing capacity; and tip geometry affects the ability to penetrate new snow or to stay in a track. Each of the following ski types has a different combination of these attributes:\nBULLET::::- Classic skis: Designed for skiing in tracks. For adult skiers (between 155 cm/50 kg and 185 cm/75 kg), recommended lengths are between 180 and 210 centimetres (approximately 115% of the skier's height). Traction comes from a \"grip zone\" underfoot that when bearing the skier's weight engages either a textured gripping surface or a grip wax. Accordingly, these skis are classified as \"waxable\" or \"waxless\". Recreational waxless skis generally require little attention and are adapted for casual use. Waxable skis, if prepared correctly, provide better grip and glide.\n\nBULLET::::- Skate skis: Designed for skiing on groomed surfaces. Recommended lengths are between 170 and 200 centimetres (up to 110% of the skier's height) for adult skiers. The entire bottom of each skate ski is a glide zone—prepared for maximum glide. Traction comes from the skier pushing away from the edge of the previous ski onto the next ski.\nBULLET::::- Back country skis: Designed for ski touring on natural snow conditions. Recommended lengths are between 150 and 195 centimeters for adult skiers, depending on height and weight of the user. Back country skis are typically heavier and wider than classic and skate skis; they often have metal edges for better grip on hard snow; and their greater sidecut helps to carve turns.\n\nGlide waxes enhance the speed of the gliding surface, and are applied by ironing them onto the ski and then polishing the ski bottom. Three classes of glide wax are available, depending on the level of desired performance with higher performance coming at higher cost. Hydrocarbon glide waxes, based on paraffin are common for recreational use. Race waxes comprise a combination of fluorinated hydrocarbon waxes and fluorocarbon overlays. Fluorocarbons decrease surface tension and surface area of the water between the ski and the snow, increasing speed and glide of the ski under specific conditions. Either combined with the wax or applied after in a spray, powder, or block form, fluorocarbons significantly improve the glide of the ski and are widely used in cross-country ski races.\n\nSkis designed for classic technique, both in track and in virgin snow, rely on a traction zone, called the \"grip zone\" or \"kick zone\", underfoot. This comes either from a) \"texture\", designed to slide forward but not backwards, that is built into the grip zone of waxless skis, or from applied devices, e.g. climbing skins, or b) from \"grip waxes\". Grip waxes are classified according to their hardness: harder waxes are for colder and newer snow. An incorrect choice of grip wax for the snow conditions encountered may cause ski slippage (wax too hard for the conditions) or snow sticking to the grip zone (wax too soft for the conditions). Grip waxes generate grip by interacting with snow crystals, which vary with temperature, age and compaction. Hard grip waxes don't work well for snow which has metamorphosed to having coarse grains, whether icy or wet. In these conditions, skiers opt for a stickier substance, called \"klister\".\n\nSki boots are attached to the ski only at the toe, leaving the heel free. Depending on application, boots may be lightweight (performance skiing) or heavier and more supportive (back-country skiing).\n\nBindings connect the boot to the ski. There are three primary groups of binding systems used in cross-country skiing (in descending order of importance):\nBULLET::::- Standardized system: Boots and bindings have an integrated connection, typically a bar across the front end of the sole of the boot, and platform on which the boot rests. Two families of standards prevail: NNN (New Nordic Norm) and SNS (Salomon Nordic System) Profil. Both systems have variants for skiing on groomed surfaces and in back country. These systems are the most common type of binding.\nBULLET::::- Three-pin: The boot-gripping system comprises three pins that correspond to three holes in the sole of the boot's toe, used primarily for back-country skiing.\nBULLET::::- Cable: A cable secures the free-moving heel and keeps the toe of the boot pushed into a boot-gripping section, used primarily for back-country and telemark skiing.\n\nSki poles are used for balance and propulsion. Modern cross-country ski poles are made from aluminium, fibreglass-reinforced plastic, or carbon fibre, depending on weight, cost and performance parameters. Formerly they were made of wood or bamboo. They feature a foot (called a basket) near the end of the shaft that provides a pushing platform, as it makes contact with the snow. Baskets vary in size, according to the expected softness/firmness of the snow. Racing poles feature smaller, lighter baskets than recreational poles. Poles designed for skating are longer than those designed for classic skiing. Traditional skiing in the 1800s used a single pole for both cross-country and downhill. The single pole was longer and stronger than the poles that are used in pairs. In competitive cross-country poles in pairs were introduced around 1900.\n\nBULLET::::- Tutorial on classic style.\nBULLET::::- Tutorial on skate skiing.\nBULLET::::- Tutorial on the snowplough or wedge turn.\nBULLET::::- Tutorial on the stem or wedge christie turn.\nBULLET::::- Tutorial on the Telemark turn.\nBULLET::::- Tutorial on the step turn.\n"}
{"id": "6724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6724", "title": "Copacabana, Rio de Janeiro", "text": "Copacabana, Rio de Janeiro\n\nCopacabana () is a \"bairro\" (neighbourhood) located in the South Zone of the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It is known for its 4 km (2.5 miles) balneario beach, which is one of the most famous in the world.\n\nThe district was originally called \"Sacopenapã\" (translated from the Tupi language, it means \"the way of the socós\", the socós being a kind of bird) until the mid-18th century. It was renamed after the construction of a chapel holding a replica of the Virgen de Copacabana, the patron saint of Bolivia. The name may be derived from the Aymara \"kota kahuana\", meaning \"view of the lake.\" The social scientist Mario Montaño Aragón found in the \"archives of Indias\" in Sevilla, Spain, a different history: \"Kotakawana\" is the god of fertility in ancient Andean mythology, the equivalent to the classical Greek goddess Aphrodite or the Roman Venus. This god is androgynous and lives in the Titicaca, and his court consists of creatures (male and female) that are represented in colonial sculptures and in Catholic churches. They were called \"Umantuus\", known as mermaids in Western culture.\n\nCopacabana begins at Princesa Isabel Avenue and ends at Posto Seis (lifeguard watchtower Six). Beyond Copacabana, there are two small beaches: one, inside Fort Copacabana and the other, right after it: Diabo (\"Devil\") Beach. Arpoador beach, where surfers go after its perfect waves, comes next, followed by the famous borough of Ipanema. The area was one of the four \"Olympic Zones\" during the 2016 Summer Olympics. According to Riotur, the Tourism Secretariat of Rio de Janeiro, there are 63 hotels and 10 hostels in Copacabana.\n\nCopacabana beach, located at the Atlantic shore, stretches from Posto Dois (lifeguard watchtower Two) to Posto Seis (lifeguard watchtower Six). Leme is at Posto Um (lifeguard watchtower One). There are historic forts at both ends of Copacabana beach; Fort Copacabana, built in 1914, is at the south end by Posto Seis and Fort Duque de Caxias, built in 1779, at the north end. One curiosity is that the lifeguard watchtower of Posto Seis never existed. Hotels, restaurants, bars, nightclubs and residential buildings dot the promenade facing Avenida Atlântica. On Sundays and holidays, one side of Avenida Atlântica is closed to cars, giving residents and tourists more space for activities along the beach. \n\nCopacabana Beach plays host to millions of revellers during the annual New Year's Eve celebrations, and in most years, has been the official venue of the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup. \nThe Copacabana promenade is a pavement landscape in large scale (4 kilometres long). It was rebuilt in 1970 and has used a black and white Portuguese pavement design since its origin in the 1930s: a geometric wave. The Copacabana promenade was designed by Roberto Burle Marx.\n\nCopacabana has the 11th highest Human Development Index in Rio; the 2000 census put the HDI of Copacabana at 0.902.\n\nAccording to the IBGE, 160,000 people live in Copacabana and 44,000 or 27.5% of them are 60 years old or older. Copacabana covers an area of 7.84 km² which gives the borough a population density of 20,400 people per km². Residential buildings eleven to thirteen stories high built next to each other dominate the borough. Houses and two-story buildings are rare.\n\nWhen Rio was the capital of Brazil, Copacabana was considered one of the best neighborhoods in the country.\n\nMore than 40 different bus routes serve Copacabana, as do three subway Metro stations: Cantagalo, Siqueira Campos and Cardeal Arcoverde.\n\nThree major arteries parallel to each other cut across the entire borough: Avenida Atlântica (Atlantic Avenue), which is a 6-lane, 4 km avenue by the beachside, Nossa Senhora de Copacabana Avenue and Barata Ribeiro/Raul Pompéia Street both of which are 4 lanes and 3.5 km in length. Barata Ribeiro Street changes its name to Raul Pompéia Street after the Sá Freire Alvim Tunnel. Twenty-four streets intersect all three major arteries, and seven other streets intersect some of the three.\n\nBULLET::::- On 26 April 1949, broke in two as she was being towed into Rio de Janeiro harbour. Much of her cargo of oranges was washed up upon the beach.\nBULLET::::- On December 31, 1994, the New Year's Eve celebrations featured a Rod Stewart concert with an attendance of 3.5 million, making it the largest concert crowd ever. More recently, the beach has been a site for huge free concerts unrelated to the year-end festivities. On March 21, 2005, Lenny Kravitz performed there in front of 300,000 people, on a Monday night. On February 18, 2006, a Saturday, The Rolling Stones surpassed that mark by far, attracting over 1.5 million people to the beach.\nBULLET::::- On July 7, 2007, the beach hosted the Brazilian leg of the Live Earth concerts, which attracted 400,000 people. As the headliner, Lenny Kravitz got to play the venue a second time, with Jorge Benjor, Macy Gray, O Rappa and Pharrell as the main opening acts.\nBULLET::::- On October 2, 2009, 100,000 people filled the beach for a huge beach party as the IOC announced Rio would be hosting the 2016 Olympics. 11 of the 15 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cups have taken place here.\nBULLET::::- On July 28, 2013, the beach hosted the final event of the World Youth Day 2013. About 3 million people including 3 presidents joined Pope Francis when he celebrated the holy mass.\nBULLET::::- From May till July, 2014 the United Buddy Bears exhibit was held on the Copacabana promenade and attracted more than 1,000,000 people. The presentation consisted of more than 140 bear sculptures, each two metres high and designed by a different artist.\nBULLET::::- In August 2016, Copacabana Beach was the site of beach volleyball in the Olympic Games.\n\nThe fireworks display in Rio de Janeiro to celebrate New Year's Eve is one of the largest in the world, lasting 15 to 20 minutes. It is estimated that 2 million people go to Copacabana Beach to see the spectacle. The festival also includes a concert that extends throughout the night. The celebration has become one of the biggest tourist attractions of Rio de Janeiro, attracting visitors from all over Brazil as well as from different parts of the world, and the city hotels generally stay fully booked.\n\nNew Year's Eve has been celebrated on Copacabana beach since the 1950s when cults of African origin such as Candomblé and Umbanda gathered in small groups dressed in white for ritual celebrations. The first fireworks display occurred in 1976, sponsored by a hotel on the waterfront and this has been repeated ever since. In the 1990s the city saw it as a great opportunity to promote the city and organized and expanded the event.\n\nAn assessment made during the New Year's Eve 1992 highlighted the risks associated with increasing crowd numbers on Copacabana beach after the fireworks display. Since the 1993-94 event concerts have been held on the beach to retain the public. The result was a success with egress spaced out over a period of 2 hours without the previous turmoil, although critics claimed that it denied the spirit of the New Year's tradition of a religious festival with fireworks by the sea. The following year Rod Stewart beat attendance records. Finally, the Tribute to Tom Jobim - with Gal Costa, Gilberto Gil, Caetano Veloso, Chico Buarque, and Paulinho da Viola - consolidated the shows at the Copacabana Réveillon.\n\nThere was a need to transform the fireworks display in a show of the same quality. The fireworks display was created by entrepreneurs Ricardo Amaral and Marius. From the previous 8–10 minutes the time was extended to 20 minutes and the quality and diversity of the fireworks was improved. A technical problem in fireworks 2000 required the use of ferries from New Year's Eve 2001-02. New Year's Eve has begun to compete with the Carnival, and since 1992 it has been a tourist attraction in its own right.\n\nBULLET::::- History of Copacabana (in English)\nBULLET::::- Copacabana - Tropical Crime Noir\n"}
{"id": "6725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6725", "title": "Cy Young Award", "text": "Cy Young Award\n\nThe Cy Young Award is given annually to the best pitchers in Major League Baseball (MLB), one each for the American League (AL) and National League (NL). The award was first introduced in 1956 by Baseball Commissioner Ford Frick in honor of Hall of Fame pitcher Cy Young, who died in 1955. The award was originally given to the single best pitcher in the major leagues, but in 1967, after the retirement of Frick, the award was given to one pitcher in each league.\n\nEach league's award is voted on by members of the Baseball Writers' Association of America, with one representative from each team. As of the 2010 season, each voter places a vote for first, second, third, fourth and fifth place among the pitchers of each league. The formula used to calculate the final scores is a weighted sum of the votes. The pitcher with the highest score in each league wins the award. If two pitchers receive the same number of votes, the award is shared. The current formula started in the 2010 season. Before that, dating back to 1970, writers voted for three pitchers, with the formula of 5 points for a first place vote, 3 for a second place vote and 1 for a third place vote. Prior to 1970, writers only voted for the best pitcher and used a formula of one point per vote.\n\nThe Cy Young Award was first introduced in 1956 by Commissioner of Baseball Ford C. Frick in honor of Hall of Fame pitcher Cy Young, who died in 1955. The award would be given to pitchers only. Originally given to the single best pitcher in the major leagues, the award changed its format over time. From 1956 to 1966, the award was given to one pitcher in Major League Baseball. After Frick retired in 1967, William Eckert became the new Commissioner of Baseball. Due to fan requests, Eckert announced that the Cy Young Award would be given out both in the American League and the National League. From 1956 to 1958, a pitcher was not allowed to win the award on more than one occasion; this rule was eliminated in 1959. After a tie in the 1969 voting for the Cy Young Award, the process was changed, in which each writer was to vote for three different pitchers: the first-place vote received five points, the second-place vote received three points, and the third-place vote received one point.\n\nThe first recipient of the Cy Young Award was Don Newcombe of the Dodgers. In 1957, Warren Spahn became the first left-handed pitcher to win the award. In 1963, Sandy Koufax became the first pitcher to win the award in a unanimous vote; two years later he became the first multiple winner. In 1978, Gaylord Perry (age 40) became the oldest pitcher to receive the award, a record that stood until broken in 2004 by Roger Clemens (age 42). The youngest recipient was Dwight Gooden (age 20 in 1985). In 2012, R.A. Dickey became the first knuckleball pitcher to win the award.\n\nIn 1974, Mike Marshall won the award, becoming the first relief pitcher to win the award. In 1992, Dennis Eckersley was the first modern closer (first player to be used almost exclusively in ninth-inning situations) to win the award, and since then only one other relief pitcher has won the award, Éric Gagné in 2003 (also a closer). A total of nine relief pitchers have won the Cy Young Award across both leagues.\n\nSteve Carlton in 1982 became the first pitcher to win more than three Cy Young Awards, while Greg Maddux in 1994 became the first to win at least three in a row (and received a fourth straight the following year), a feat later repeated by Randy Johnson.\n\n+Key\nYear\nEach year is linked to an article about that Major League Baseball season.\nERA\nEarned run average\nAlso named Most Valuable Player (11 occurrences as of 2018)\nAlso named Rookie of the Year (1 occurrence as of 2018, by Fernando Valenzuela)\n! scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nMember of the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum (21 individuals as of 2019)\n\n!scope=\"col\" Year\n!scope=\"col\" Pitcher\n!scope=\"col\" Team\n!RecordSavesERAK's\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nBrooklyn Dodgers (NL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nMilwaukee Braves (NL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Yankees (AL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nChicago White Sox (AL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nPittsburgh Pirates (NL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nNew York Yankees (AL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers (NL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"*\nLos Angeles Dodgers (NL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nLos Angeles Angels (AL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers (NL)\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers (NL)\n\n!scope=\"col\" Year\n!scope=\"col\" Pitcher\n!scope=\"col\" Team\n!data-sort-type=\"number\"RecordSavesERAK's\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSan Francisco Giants\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"*\nSt. Louis Cardinals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nSt. Louis Cardinals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nChicago Cubs\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSan Diego Padres\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nSan Diego Padres\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nChicago Cubs\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"**\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nChicago Cubs\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nHouston Astros\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSan Diego Padres\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nPittsburgh Pirates\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nAtlanta Braves\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nChicago Cubs\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nAtlanta Braves\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nAtlanta Braves\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nAtlanta Braves\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nAtlanta Braves\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nMontreal Expos\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nAtlanta Braves\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nArizona Diamondbacks\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nArizona Diamondbacks\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nArizona Diamondbacks\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nArizona Diamondbacks\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nHouston Astros\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSt. Louis Cardinals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nArizona Diamondbacks\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSan Diego Padres\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSan Francisco Giants\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSan Francisco Giants\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nPhiladelphia Phillies\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nLos Angeles Dodgers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nChicago Cubs\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nWashington Nationals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nWashington Nationals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Mets\n\n!scope=\"col\" Year\n!scope=\"col\" Pitcher\n!scope=\"col\" Team\n!data-sort-type=\"number\"RecordSavesERAK's\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nDetroit Tigers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBaltimore Orioles\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nDetroit Tigers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nMinnesota Twins\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nOakland Athletics\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nCleveland Indians\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nBaltimore Orioles\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nOakland Athletics\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nBaltimore Orioles\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nBaltimore Orioles\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Yankees\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Yankees\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBaltimore Orioles\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBaltimore Orioles\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"*\nMilwaukee Brewers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nMilwaukee Brewers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nChicago White Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nDetroit Tigers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nKansas City Royals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nMinnesota Twins\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nKansas City Royals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nOakland Athletics\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"*\nOakland Athletics\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nChicago White Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nKansas City Royals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nSeattle Mariners\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nToronto Blue Jays\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nToronto Blue Jays\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nToronto Blue Jays\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nNew York Yankees\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nOakland Athletics\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\"\nToronto Blue Jays\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nMinnesota Twins\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nLos Angeles Angels of Anaheim\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nMinnesota Twins\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nCleveland Indians\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nCleveland Indians\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nKansas City Royals\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nSeattle Mariners\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"*\nDetroit Tigers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nTampa Bay Rays\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nDetroit Tigers\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nCleveland Indians\nRick Porcello\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nHouston Astros\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nBoston Red Sox\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \nCleveland Indians\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nTampa Bay Rays\n\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"\nHouston Astros\n\nTwenty one (21) pitchers have won the award multiple times. Roger Clemens currently holds the record for the most awards won, with seven - his first and last wins separated by eighteen years. Greg Maddux (1992–1995) and Randy Johnson (1999–2002) share the record for the most consecutive awards won. Clemens, Johnson, Pedro Martínez, Gaylord Perry, Roy Halladay and Max Scherzer are the only pitchers to have won the award in both the American League and National League; Sandy Koufax is the only pitcher who won multiple awards during the period when only one award was presented for all of Major League Baseball. Roger Clemens was the youngest pitcher to win a second Cy Young Award, while Tim Lincecum is the youngest pitcher to do so in the National League and Clayton Kershaw is the youngest left-hander to do so. Clayton Kershaw is the youngest pitcher to win a third Cy Young Award.\n\n! Pitcher\n! # of Awards\n! Years\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n7\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n5\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \nrowspan=24\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \nrowspan=63\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n! scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\"  \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \nrowspan=112\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center; background:#ffb;\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n2018, 2019\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" \n2011, 2019\n\nOnly four teams have never had a pitcher win the Cy Young Award. The Brooklyn/Los Angeles Dodgers have won more than any other team with 12.\n!scope=\"col Team\n!scope=\"col # of Awards\n!scope=\"col Years\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Brooklyn/Los Angeles Dodgers\n12\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Milwaukee/Atlanta Braves\nrowspan=47\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Philadelphia Phillies\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Boston Red Sox\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" New York Mets\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Baltimore Orioles\n6\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Arizona Diamondbacks\nrowspan=65\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Detroit Tigers\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" New York Yankees\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Oakland Athletics\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Chicago Cubs\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Cleveland Indians\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Kansas City Royals\nrowspan=54\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Minnesota Twins\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" San Diego Padres\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Toronto Blue Jays\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Houston Astros\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Chicago White Sox\nrowspan=43\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" San Francisco Giants\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" St. Louis Cardinals\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Montreal Expos/Washington Nationals\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Los Angeles Angels\nrowspan=52\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Milwaukee Brewers\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Pittsburgh Pirates\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Seattle Mariners\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Tampa Bay Rays\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Cincinnati Reds\nrowspan=40\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Colorado Rockies\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Miami Marlins\n!scope=\"row\" style=\"text-align:center\" Texas Rangers\n\nThere have been 17 players who unanimously won the Cy Young Award, for a total of 23 wins.\n\nFive of these unanimous wins were accompanied with a win of the Most Valuable Player award (marked with * below; ** denotes that the player's unanimous win was accompanied with a unanimous win of the MVP).\n\nIn the National League, 11 players have unanimously won the Cy Young Award, for a total of 14 wins.\nBULLET::::- Sandy Koufax (1963*, 1965, 1966)\nBULLET::::- Greg Maddux (1994, 1995)\nBULLET::::- Bob Gibson (1968*)\nBULLET::::- Steve Carlton (1972)\nBULLET::::- Rick Sutcliffe (1984)\nBULLET::::- Dwight Gooden (1985)\nBULLET::::- Orel Hershiser (1988)\nBULLET::::- Randy Johnson (2002)\nBULLET::::- Jake Peavy (2007)\nBULLET::::- Roy Halladay (2010)\nBULLET::::- Clayton Kershaw (2014*)\n\nIn the American League, 6 players have unanimously won the Cy Young Award, for a total of 9 wins.\nBULLET::::- Denny McLain (1968**)\nBULLET::::- Ron Guidry (1978)\nBULLET::::- Roger Clemens (1986*, 1998)\nBULLET::::- Pedro Martínez (1999, 2000)\nBULLET::::- Johan Santana (2004, 2006)\nBULLET::::- Justin Verlander (2011*)\n\nBULLET::::- Triple Crown (pitching)\nBULLET::::- Pitcher of the Month\nBULLET::::- Mariano Rivera AL Reliever and Trevor Hoffman NL Reliever of the Year awards\nBULLET::::- \"Esurance MLB Awards\" Best Pitcher (in MLB)\nBULLET::::- \"Baseball Digest\" Pitcher of the Year (in MLB)\nBULLET::::- \"Players Choice Awards\" Outstanding Pitcher (in each league)\nBULLET::::- \"Sporting News\" Starting Pitcher (in each league)\nBULLET::::- \"Greg Spira Memorial Internet Baseball Awards\" Pitcher of the Year (in each league)\nBULLET::::- NLBM Wilbur \"Bullet\" Rogan Legacy Award (\"Pitchers of the Year\") (in each league)\nBULLET::::- \"Sporting News\" Relief Pitcher of the Year (in each league)\nBULLET::::- NLBM Hilton Smith Legacy Award (\"Relievers of the Year\") (in each league)\nBULLET::::- \"TSN\" Reliever of the Year (in each league) (\"discontinued\")\nBULLET::::- \"Rolaids\" Relief Man Award (in each league) (\"discontinued\")\nBULLET::::- Warren Spahn Award (best left-handed pitcher)\nBULLET::::- Major League Baseball All-Century Team\nBULLET::::- Major League Baseball All-Time Team\nBULLET::::- \"Pitching Wall of Great Achievement\" (in the Ted Williams Museum and Hitters Hall of Fame)\nBULLET::::- Eiji Sawamura Award (top starting pitcher in Nippon Professional Baseball)\nBULLET::::- Baseball awards\nBULLET::::- The formula is: Score = 7F + 4S + 3T + 2FO + 1 FI, where \"F\" is the number of first place votes, \"S\" is second place votes, \"T\" is third place votes, \"FO\" is fourth place votes and \"FI\" is fifth place votes.\nBULLET::::- See: Decision (baseball)\nBULLET::::- In baseball, a save is credited to a pitcher who finishes a game for the winning team under certain prescribed circumstances. It became an official statistic in Major League Baseball in 1969.\n\nBULLET::::- General\n\nBULLET::::- Specific\n"}
{"id": "6728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6728", "title": "Antisemitism in Christianity", "text": "Antisemitism in Christianity\n\nAntisemitism in Christianity is the hostility of Christian Churches, Christian groups, and by Christians in general to Judaism and the Jewish people.\n\nChristian rhetoric and antipathy towards Jews developed in the early years of Christianity and was reinforced by the belief that Jews had killed Christ and ever increasing anti-Jewish measures over the ensuing centuries. The action taken by Christians against Jews included acts of ostracism, humiliation, violence, and murder, culminating in the Holocaust.\n\nChristian antisemitism has been attributed to numerous factors including theological differences, competition between Church and Synagogue, the Christian drive for converts, misunderstanding of Jewish beliefs and practices, and a perceived Jewish hostility toward Christians. These attitudes were reinforced in Christian preaching, art and popular teaching for two millennia, containing contempt for Jews, as well as statutes which were designed to humiliate and stigmatise Jews.\n\nModern antisemitism has been described as primarily hatred against Jews as a race with its modern expression rooted in 18th-century racial theories, while anti-Judaism is described as hostility to Jewish religion, but in Western Christianity it effectively merged into antisemitism during the 12th century. Scholars have debated how Christian antisemitism played a role in the Nazi Third Reich, World War II and the Holocaust. The Holocaust has driven many within Christianity to reflect on the relationship between Christian theology, practices, and that genocide.\n\nChristianity and Judaism differed in their legal status in the Roman Empire: Judaism, restricted to the Jewish people and Jewish proselytes, was generally exempt from obligation to the Roman imperial cult and since the reign of Julius Caesar enjoyed the status of a \"licit religion\", though there were also occasional persecutions, for example in 19 Tiberius expelled the Jews from Rome, as Claudius did again in 49. Christianity however was not restricted to one people, and as Jewish Christians were excluded from the synagogue (see Council of Jamnia), they also lost the protection of the status of Judaism, though said \"protection\" did have its limits (see for example Titus Flavius Clemens (consul), Rabbi Akiva, and Ten Martyrs).\n\nFrom the reign of Nero onwards, who is said by Tacitus to have blamed the Great Fire of Rome on Christians, Christianity was considered to be illegal and Christians were frequently subjected to persecution, differing regionally. Comparably, Judaism suffered the setbacks of the Jewish-Roman wars, remembered in the legacy of the Ten Martyrs. Robin Lane Fox traces the origin of much later hostility to the period of persecution, where the commonest test by the authorities of a suspected Christian was to require homage to be paid to the deified emperor. Jews were exempt from this requirement as long as they paid the Fiscus Judaicus, and Christians (many or mostly of Jewish origins) would say they were Jewish but refused to pay the tax. This had to be confirmed by the local Jewish authorities, who were likely to refuse to accept the Christians as Jewish, often leading to their execution. The Birkat haMinim was often brought forward as support for this charge that the Jews were responsible for the Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire. In the 3rd century systematic persecution of Christians began and lasted until Constantine's conversion to Christianity. In 390 Theodosius I made Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire. While pagan cults and Manichaeism were suppressed, Judaism retained its legal status as a licit religion, though anti-Jewish violence still occurred. In the 5th century, some legal measures worsened the status of the Jews in the Roman Empire (now more properly called the Byzantine Empire since relocating to Constantinople).\n\nAnother point of contention for Christians concerning Judaism, which according to the modern KJV of the Protestant Bible, is attributed more to a religious bias, rather than an issue of race or being a \"Semite\". Paul (a Benjamite Hebrew) clarifies this point in the letter to the Galatians where he makes plain his declaration ″28There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. 29And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.″ Further Paul states: ″15Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto. 16Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.″ Many misled Christians read Matthew 23, John 8:44, Revelations 2:9, 3:9, and wrongly believe the term \"Jew\" is meaning a Hebrew or Semite...it does not, but rather to the religious belief of Judaism. A perfect real life example of this clarification is \"Brother Nathanael\" a Christian Hebrew. \n\nJesus is rejected in Judaism as a failed Jewish Messiah claimant and a false prophet. Belief in the divinity of any human being is incompatible with Judaism: However, since the traditional Jewish belief is that the messiah has not yet come and the Messianic Age is not yet present, the total rejection of Jesus as either messiah or deity has never been a central issue for Judaism.\n\nIf Christianity had come from Judaism and Jesus was a Jew, how and why did the Jews reject such core elements of Christianity? The most widely held explanation, believed by most Christians for early history, was that Jews had been the chosen people but broke the covenant with God, and were condemned to spend the rest of eternity suffering on earth, a symbol of degradation and sub-humanity. According to Jews, however, it is because Jesus failed to meet various messianic prophesies. It was because of this belief that many Medieval European rulers protected the Jews, but considered them property of the king.\n\nMany New Testament passages criticise the Pharisees and it has been argued that these passages have shaped the way that Christians viewed Jews. Like most Bible passages, however, they can be and have been interpreted in a variety of ways.\n\nMainstream Talmudic Rabbinical Judaism today directly descends from the Pharisees whom Jesus often criticized. During Jesus' life and at the time of his execution, the Pharisees were only one of several Jewish groups such as the Sadducees, Zealots, and Essenes who mostly died out not long after the period; indeed, Jewish scholars such as Harvey Falk and Hyam Maccoby have suggested that Jesus was himself a Pharisee. Arguments by Jesus and his disciples against the Pharisees and what he saw as their hypocrisy were most likely examples of disputes among Jews and internal to Judaism that were common at the time, see for example Hillel and Shammai.\n\nProfessor Lillian C. Freudmann, author of \"Antisemitism in the New Testament\" (University Press of America, 1994) has published a detailed study of the description of Jews in the New Testament, and the historical effects that such passages have had in the Christian community throughout history. Similar studies of such verses have been made by both Christian and Jewish scholars, including, Professors Clark Williamsom (Christian Theological Seminary), Hyam Maccoby (The Leo Baeck Institute), Norman A. Beck (Texas Lutheran College), and Michael Berenbaum (Georgetown University). Most rabbis feel that these verses are antisemitic, and many Christian scholars, in America and Europe, have reached the same conclusion. Another example is John Dominic Crossan's 1995 \"book titled Who Killed Jesus? Exposing the Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Gospel Story of the Death of Jesus\".\n\nSome biblical scholars have also been accused of holding antisemitic beliefs. Bruce J. Malina, a founding member of The Context Group, has come under criticism for going as far as to deny the Semitic ancestry of modern Israelis. He then ties this back to his work on first century cultural anthropology.\n\nAfter Paul's death, Christianity emerged as a separate religion, and Pauline Christianity emerged as the dominant form of Christianity, especially after Paul, James and the other apostles agreed on a compromise set of requirements. Some Christians continued to adhere to aspects of Jewish law, but they were few in number and often considered heretics by the Church. One example is the Ebionites, who seem to have denied the virgin birth of Jesus, the physical Resurrection of Jesus, and most of the books that were later canonized as the New Testament. For example, the Ethiopian Orthodox still continue Old Testament practices such as the Sabbath. As late as the 4th century Church Father John Chrysostom complained that some Christians were still attending Jewish synagogues.\n\nThe Church Fathers identified Jews and Judaism with heresy and declared the people of Israel to be \"extra Deum\" (lat. \"outside of God\"). Saint Peter of Antioch referred to Christians that refused to worship religious images as having \"Jewish minds\". In the early second century AD, the heretic Marcion of Sinope ( 85 – 160 AD) declared that the Jewish God was a different God, inferior to the Christian one, and rejected the Jewish scriptures as the product of a lesser deity. Marcion's teachings, which were extremely popular, rejected Judaism not only as an incomplete revelation, but as a false one as well, but, at the same time, allowed less blame to be placed on the Jews personally for having not recognized Jesus, since, in Marcion's worldview, Jesus was not sent by the lesser Jewish God, but by the supreme Christian God, whom the Jews had no reason to recognize.\n\nIn combating Marcion, orthodox apologists conceded that Judaism was an incomplete and inferior religion to Christianity, while also defending the Jewish scriptures as canonical. The Church Father Tertullian ( 155 – 240 AD) had a particularly intense personal dislike towards the Jews and argued that the Gentiles had been chosen by God to replace the Jews, because they were worthier and more honorable. Origen of Alexandria ( 184 – 253) was more knowledgeable about Judaism than any of the other Church Fathers, having studied Hebrew, met Rabbi Hillel the Younger, consulted and debated with Jewish scholars, and been influenced by the allegorical interpretations of Philo of Alexandria. Origen defended the canonicity of the Old Testament and defended Jews of the past as having been chosen by God for their merits. Nonetheless, he condemned contemporary Jews for not understanding their own Law, insisted that Christians were the \"true Israel\", and blamed the Jews for the death of Christ. He did, however, maintain that Jews would eventually attain salvation in the final \"apocatastasis\".\n\nPatristic bishops of the patristic era such as Augustine argued that the Jews should be left alive and suffering as a perpetual reminder of their murder of Christ. Like his anti-Jewish teacher, Ambrose of Milan, he defined Jews as a special subset of those damned to hell. As \"Witness People\", he sanctified collective punishment for the Jewish deicide and enslavement of Jews to Catholics: \"Not by bodily death, shall the ungodly race of carnal Jews perish ... 'Scatter them abroad, take away their strength. And bring them down O Lord. Augustine claimed to \"love\" the Jews but as a means to convert them to Christianity. Sometimes he identified all Jews with the evil Judas and developed the doctrine (together with St. Cyprian) that there was \"no salvation outside the Church\".\n\nOther Church Fathers, such as John Chrysostom, went further in their condemnation. The Catholic editor Paul Harkins wrote that St. John Chrysostom's anti-Jewish theology \"is no longer tenable (..) For these objectively unchristian acts he cannot be excused, even if he is the product of his times.\" John Chrysostom held, as most Church Fathers did, that the sins of all Jews were communal and endless, to him his Jewish neighbours were the collective representation of all alleged crimes of all preexisting Jews. All Church Fathers applied the passages of the New Testament concerning the alleged advocation of the crucifixion of Christ to all Jews of his day, the Jews were the ultimate evil. However, John Chrysostom went so far to say that because Jews rejected the Christian God in human flesh, Christ, they therefore deserved to be killed: \"grew fit for slaughter.\" In citing the New Testament, he claimed that Jesus was speaking about Jews when he said, \"as for these enemies of mine who did not want me to reign over them, bring them here and \"slay them\" before me.\"\n\nSt. Jerome identified Jews with Judas Iscariot and the immoral use of money (\"Judas is cursed, that in Judas the Jews may be accursed... their prayers turn into sins\"). Jerome's homiletical assaults, that may have served as the basis for the anti-Jewish Good Friday liturgy, contrasts Jews with the evil, and that \"the ceremonies of the Jews are harmful and deadly to Christians\", whoever keeps them was doomed to the devil: \"My enemies are the Jews; they have conspired in hatred against Me, crucified Me, heaped evils of all kinds upon Me, blasphemed Me.\"\n\nEphraim the Syrian wrote polemics against Jews in the 4th century, including the repeated accusation that Satan dwells among them as a partner. The writings were directed at Christians who were being proselytized by Jews. Ephraim feared that they were slipping back into Judaism; thus, he portrayed the Jews as enemies of Christianity, like Satan, to emphasize the contrast between the two religions, namely, that Christianity was Godly and true and Judaism was Satanic and false. Like John Chrysostom, his objective was to dissuade Christians from reverting to Judaism by emphasizing what he saw as the wickedness of the Jews and their religion.\n\nHowever, there are also positive remarks from the Church Fathers on the issue, such as Eusebius of Caesarea (circa. 263-340 A.D) in his Ecclesiastical History, who said, \"The race of the Hebrews is not new, but is honoured among all men for its antiquity and is itself well known to all.\"\n\nBernard of Clairvaux (1090-1153), a Doctor of the Catholic Church, said \"For us the Jews are Scripture's living words, because they remind us of what Our Lord suffered. They are not to be persecuted, killed, or even put to flight.\"\n\nJews were subject to a wide range of legal disabilities and restrictions in Medieval Europe. Jews were excluded from many trades, the occupations varying with place and time, and determined by the influence of various non-Jewish competing interests. Often Jews were barred from all occupations but money-lending and peddling, with even these at times forbidden. Jews' association to money lending would carry on throughout history in the stereotype of Jews being greedy and perpetuating capitalism.\n\nIn the later medieval period, the number of Jews permitted to reside in certain places was limited; they were concentrated in ghettos, and were not allowed to own land; they were subject to discriminatory taxes on entering cities or districts other than their own,\nThe Oath More Judaico, the form of oath required from Jewish witnesses, in some places developed bizarre or humiliating forms, e.g. in Swabian law of the 13th century, the Jew would be required to stand on the hide of a sow or a bloody lamb.\n\nThe Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 was the first to proclaim the requirement for Jews to wear something that distinguished them as Jews (and Muslims the same).\nOn many occasions, Jews were accused of a blood libel, the supposed drinking of blood of Christian children in mockery of the Christian Eucharist.\n\n\"Sicut Judaeis\" (the \"Constitution for the Jews\") was the official position of the papacy regarding Jews throughout the Middle Ages and later. The first bull was issued in about 1120 by Calixtus II, intended to protect Jews who suffered during the First Crusade, and was reaffirmed by many popes, even until the 15th century although they were not always strictly upheld.\n\nThe bull forbade, besides other things, Christians from coercing Jews to convert, or to harm them, or to take their property, or to disturb the celebration of their festivals, or to interfere with their cemeteries, on pain of excommunication.\n\nAntisemitism in popular European Christian culture escalated beginning in the 13th century. Blood libels and host desecration drew popular attention and led to many cases of persecution against Jews. Many believed Jews poisoned wells to cause plagues. In the case of blood libel it was widely believed that the Jews would kill a child before Easter and needed Christian blood to bake matzo. Throughout history if a Christian child was murdered accusations of blood libel would arise no matter how small the Jewish population. The Church often added to the fire by portraying the dead child as a martyr who had been tortured and child had powers like Jesus was believed to. Sometimes the children were even made into Saints. Antisemitic imagery such as Judensau and Ecclesia et Synagoga recurred in Christian art and architecture.\n\nIn Iceland, one of the hymns repeated in the days leading up to Easter includes the lines,\n\nDuring the Middle Ages in Europe persecutions and formal expulsions of Jews were liable to occur at intervals, although it should be said that this was also the case for other minority communities, regardless of whether they were religious or ethnic. There were particular outbursts of riotous persecution during the Rhineland massacres of 1096 in Germany accompanying the lead-up to the First Crusade, many involving the crusaders as they travelled to the East. There were many local expulsions from cities by local rulers and city councils. In Germany the Holy Roman Emperor generally tried to restrain persecution, if only for economic reasons, but he was often unable to exert much influence. In the Edict of Expulsion, King Edward I expelled all the Jews from England in 1290 (only after ransoming some 3,000 among the most wealthy of them), on the accusation of usury and undermining loyalty to the dynasty. In 1306 there was a wave of persecution in France, and there were widespread Black Death Jewish persecutions as the Jews were blamed by many Christians for the plague, or spreading it. As late as 1519, the Imperial city of Regensburg took advantage of the recent death of Emperor Maximilian I to expel its 500 Jews.\n\nThe largest expulsion of Jews followed the Reconquista or the reunification of Spain, and it preceded the expulsion of the Muslims who would not convert, in spite of the protection of their religious rights promised by the Treaty of Granada (1491). On 31 March 1492 Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile, the rulers of Spain who financed Christopher Columbus' voyage to the New World just a few months later in 1492, declared that all Jews in their territories should either convert to Christianity or leave the country. While some converted, many others left for Portugal, France, Italy (including the Papal States), Netherlands, Poland, the Ottoman Empire, and North Africa. Many of those who had fled to Portugal were later expelled by King Manuel in 1497 or left to avoid forced conversion and persecution.\n\nOn 14 July 1555, Pope Paul IV issued papal bull Cum nimis absurdum which revoked all the rights of the Jewish community and placed religious and economic restrictions on Jews in the Papal States, renewed anti-Jewish legislation and subjected Jews to various degradations and restrictions on their personal freedom.\n\nThe bull established the Roman Ghetto and required Jews of Rome, which had existed as a community since before Christian times and which numbered about 2,000 at the time, to live in it. The Ghetto was a walled quarter with three gates that were locked at night. Jews were also restricted to one synagogue per city.\n\nPaul IV's successor, Pope Pius IV, enforced the creation of other ghettos in most Italian towns, and his successor, Pope Pius V, recommended them to other bordering states.\n\nMartin Luther at first made overtures towards the Jews, believing that the \"evils\" of Catholicism had prevented their conversion to Christianity. When his call to convert to his version of Christianity was unsuccessful, he became hostile to them.\n\nIn his book \"On the Jews and Their Lies\", Luther excoriates them as \"venomous beasts, vipers, disgusting scum, canders, devils incarnate.\" He provided detailed recommendations for a pogrom against them, calling for their permanent oppression and expulsion, writing \"Their private houses must be destroyed and devastated, they could be lodged in stables. Let the magistrates burn their synagogues and let whatever escapes be covered with sand and mud. Let them be forced to work, and if this avails nothing, we will be compelled to expel them like dogs in order not to expose ourselves to incurring divine wrath and eternal damnation from the Jews and their lies.\" At one point he wrote: \"...we are at fault in not slaying them...\" a passage that \"may be termed the first work of modern antisemitism, and a giant step forward on the road to the Holocaust.\"\n\nLuther's harsh comments about the Jews are seen by many as a continuation of medieval Christian antisemitism. In his final sermon shortly before his death, however, Luther preached: \"We want to treat them with Christian love and to pray for them, so that they might become converted and would receive the Lord.\"\n\nIn accordance with the anti-Jewish precepts of the Russian Orthodox Church, Russia's discriminatory policies towards Jews intensified when the partition of Poland in the 18th century resulted, for the first time in Russian history, in the possession of land with a large Jewish population. This land was designated as the Pale of Settlement from which Jews were forbidden to migrate into the interior of Russia. In 1772 Catherine II, the empress of Russia, forced the Jews living in the Pale of Settlement to stay in their \"shtetls\" and forbade them from returning to the towns that they occupied before the partition of Poland.\n\nThroughout the 19th century and into the 20th, the Roman Catholic Church still incorporated strong antisemitic elements, despite increasing attempts to separate anti-Judaism (opposition to the Jewish religion on religious grounds) and racial antisemitism. Brown University historian David Kertzer, working from the Vatican archive, has argued in his book \"The Popes Against the Jews\" that in the 19th and early 20th centuries the Roman Catholic Church adhered to a distinction between \"good antisemitism\" and \"bad antisemitism\". The \"bad\" kind promoted hatred of Jews because of their descent. This was considered un-Christian because the Christian message was intended for all of humanity regardless of ethnicity; anyone could become a Christian. The \"good\" kind criticized alleged Jewish conspiracies to control newspapers, banks, and other institutions, to care only about accumulation of wealth, etc. Many Catholic bishops wrote articles criticizing Jews on such grounds, and, when they were accused of promoting hatred of Jews, they would remind people that they condemned the \"bad\" kind of antisemitism. Kertzer's work is not without critics. Scholar of Jewish-Christian relations Rabbi David G. Dalin, for example, criticized Kertzer in the \"Weekly Standard\" for using evidence selectively.\n\nThe counter-revolutionary Catholic royalist Louis de Bonald stands out among the earliest figures to explicitly call for the reversal of Jewish emancipation in the wake of the French Revolution. Bonald's attacks on the Jews are likely to have influenced Napoleon's decision to limit the civil rights of Alsatian Jews. Bonald's article \"Sur les juifs\" (1806) was one of the most venomous screeds of its era and furnished a paradigm which combined anti-liberalism, a defense of a rural society, traditional Christian antisemitism, and the identification of Jews with bankers and finance capital, which would in turn influence many subsequent right-wing reactionaries such as Roger Gougenot des Mousseaux, Charles Maurras, and Édouard Drumont, nationalists such as Maurice Barrès and Paolo Orano, and antisemitic socialists such as Alphonse Toussenel. Bonald furthermore declared that the Jews were an \"alien\" people, a \"state within a state\", and should be forced to wear a distinctive mark to more easily identify and discriminate against them.\n\nIn the 1840s, the popular counter-revolutionary Catholic journalist Louis Veuillot propagated Bonald's arguments against the Jewish \"financial aristocracy\" along with vicious attacks against the Talmud and the Jews as a \"deicidal people\" driven by hatred to \"enslave\" Christians. Gougenot des Mousseaux's \"Le Juif, le judaïsme et la judaïsation des peuples chrétiens\" (1869) has been called a \"Bible of modern antisemitism\" and was translated into German by Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg. Between 1882 and 1886 alone, French priests published twenty antisemitic books blaming France's ills on the Jews and urging the government to consign them back to the ghettos, expel them, or hang them from the gallows. \n\nIn Italy the Jesuit priest Antonio Bresciani's highly popular novel 1850 novel \"L'Ebreo di Verona\" (\"The Jew of Verona\") shaped religious anti-Semitism for decades, as did his work for \"La Civiltà Cattolica\", which he helped launch.\n\nPope Pius VII (1800–1823) had the walls of the Jewish ghetto in Rome rebuilt after the Jews were emancipated by Napoleon, and Jews were restricted to the ghetto through the end of the Papal States in 1870. Official Catholic organizations, such as the Jesuits, banned candidates \"who are descended from the Jewish race unless it is clear that their father, grandfather, and great-grandfather have belonged to the Catholic Church\" until 1946.\n\nIn Russia, under the Tsarist regime, antisemitism intensified in the early years of the 20th century and was given official favour when the secret police forged the notorious \"Protocols of the Elders of Zion\", a document purported to be a transcription of a plan by Jewish elders to achieve global domination. Violence against the Jews in the Kishinev pogrom in 1903 was continued after the 1905 revolution by the activities of the Black Hundreds. The Beilis Trial of 1913 showed that it was possible to revive the blood libel accusation in Russia.\n\nCatholic writers such as Ernest Jouin, who published the \"Protocols\" in French, seamlessly blended racial and religious anti-Semitism, as in his statement that \"from the triple viewpoint of race, of nationality, and of religion, the Jew has become the enemy of humanity.\" Pope Pius XI praised Jouin for \"combating our mortal [Jewish] enemy\" and appointed him to high papal office as a protonotary apostolic.\n\nIn 1916, in the midst of the First World War, American Jews petitioned Pope Benedict XV on behalf of the Polish Jews.\n\nOn April 26, 1933 Hitler declared during a meeting with Roman Catholic Bishop of Osnabrück:\n\n“I have been attacked because of my handling of the Jewish question. The Catholic Church considered the Jews pestilent for fifteen hundred years, put them in ghettos, etc., because it recognized the Jews for what they were. In the epoch of liberalism the danger was no longer recognized. I am moving back toward the time in which a fifteen-hundred-year-long tradition was implemented. I do not set race over religion, but I recognize the representatives of this race as pestilent for the state and for the Church, and perhaps I am thereby doing Christianity a great service by pushing them out of schools and public functions.”\nThe transcript of the discussion contains no response by Bishop Berning. Martin Rhonheimer does not consider that unusual since in his opinion, for a Catholic Bishop in 1933 there was nothing particularly objectionable \"in this historically correct reminder\".\n\nThe Nazis used Martin Luther's book, \"On the Jews and Their Lies\" (1543), to claim a moral righteousness for their ideology. Luther even went so far as to advocate the murder of Jews who refused to convert to Christianity by writing that \"we are at fault in not slaying them\".\n\nArchbishop Robert Runcie has asserted that: \"Without centuries of Christian antisemitism, Hitler's passionate hatred would never have been so fervently echoed... because for centuries Christians have held Jews collectively responsible for the death of Jesus. On Good Friday Jews, have in times past, cowered behind locked doors with fear of a Christian mob seeking 'revenge' for deicide. Without the poisoning of Christian minds through the centuries, the Holocaust is unthinkable.\" The dissident Catholic priest Hans Küng has written that \"Nazi anti-Judaism was the work of godless, anti-Christian criminals. But it would not have been possible without the almost two thousand years' pre-history of 'Christian' anti-Judaism...\"\n\nThe document Dabru Emet was issued by over 220 rabbis and intellectuals from all branches of Judaism in 2000 as a statement about Jewish-Christian relations. This document states,\n\"Nazism was not a Christian phenomenon. Without the long history of Christian anti-Judaism and Christian violence against Jews, Nazi ideology could not have taken hold nor could it have been carried out. Too many Christians participated in, or were sympathetic to, Nazi atrocities against Jews. Other Christians did not protest sufficiently against these atrocities. But Nazism itself was not an inevitable outcome of Christianity.\"\nAccording to American historian Lucy Dawidowicz, antisemitism has a long history within Christianity. The line of \"antisemitic descent\" from Luther, the author of \"On the Jews and Their Lies\", to Hitler is \"easy to draw.\" In her \"The War Against the Jews, 1933-1945\", she contends that Luther and Hitler were obsessed by the \"demonologized universe\" inhabited by Jews. Dawidowicz writes that the similarities between Luther's anti-Jewish writings and modern antisemitism are no coincidence, because they derived from a common history of \"Judenhass\", which can be traced to Haman's advice to Ahasuerus. Although modern German antisemitism also has its roots in German nationalism and the liberal revolution of 1848, Christian antisemitism she writes is a foundation that was laid by the Roman Catholic Church and \"upon which Luther built.\"\n\nBULLET::::- German Christians\nBULLET::::- \"Gleichschaltung\"\nBULLET::::- Hanns Kerrl, Minister for Ecclesiastical Affairs\nBULLET::::- Positive Christianity (the approved Nazi version of Christianity)\nBULLET::::- Protestant Reich Church\n\nThe Confessing Church was, in 1934, the first Christian opposition group. The Catholic Church officially condemned the Nazi theory of racism in Germany in 1937 with the encyclical \"\"Mit brennender Sorge\"\", signed by Pope Pius XI, and Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber led the Catholic opposition, preaching against racism.\n\nMany individual Christian clergy and laypeople of all denominations had to pay for their opposition with their life, including:\nBULLET::::- Catholic priest, Maximilian Kolbe.\nBULLET::::- Lutheran pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer\nBULLET::::- the Catholic parson of Berlin Cathedral, Bernhard Lichtenberg.\nBULLET::::- the mostly Catholic members of the Munich resistance group White Rose around Hans and Sophie Scholl.\n\nBy the 1940s fewer Christians were willing to oppose Nazi policy publicly, but many secretly helped save the lives of Jews. There are many sections of Israel's Holocaust Remembrance Museum, Yad Vashem, dedicated to honoring these \"Righteous Among the Nations\".\n\nBefore becoming Pope, Cardinal Pacelli addressed the International Eucharistic Congress in Budapest on 25–30 May 1938 during which he made reference to the Jews \"whose lips curse [Christ] and whose hearts reject him even today\"; at this time antisemitic laws were in the process of being formulated in Hungary.\n\nThe 1937 encyclical \"Mit brennender Sorge\" was issued by Pope Pius XI, but drafted by the future Pope Pius XII and read from the pulpits of all German Catholic churches, it condemned Nazi ideology and has been characterized by scholars as the \"first great official public document to dare to confront and criticize Nazism\" and \"one of the greatest such condemnations ever issued by the Vatican.\"\n\nIn the summer of 1942, Pius explained to his college of Cardinals the reasons for the great gulf that existed between Jews and Christians at the theological level: \"\"Jerusalem has responded to His call and to His grace with the same rigid blindness and stubborn ingratitude that has led it along the path of guilt to the murder of God.\"\" Historian Guido Knopp describes these comments of Pius as being \"\"incomprehensible\"\" at a time when \"\"Jerusalem was being murdered by the million\"\". This traditional adversarial relationship with Judaism would be reversed in \"Nostra aetate\" issued during the Second Vatican Council.\n\nProminent members of the Jewish community have contradicted the criticisms of Pius and spoke highly of his efforts to protect Jews. The Israeli historian Pinchas Lapide interviewed war survivors and concluded that Pius XII \"was instrumental in saving at least 700,000, but probably as many as 860,000 Jews from certain death at Nazi hands\". Some historians dispute this estimate.\n\nThe Christian Identity movement, the Ku Klux Klan and other White supremacist groups have expressed antisemitic views. They claim that their antisemitism is based on purported Jewish control of the media, international banks, radical left-wing politics, and the Jews' promotion of multiculturalism, anti-Christian groups, liberalism and perverse organizations. They rebuke charges of racism by claiming that Jews who share their ideology maintain membership in their organizations. A racial belief which is common among these groups, but not universal among them, is an alternative history doctrine, which is sometimes called British Israelism. In some of its forms, this doctrine absolutely denies the view that modern Jews have any racial connection to the Israel of the Bible. Instead, according to extreme forms of this doctrine, the true racial Israelites and the true humans are the members of the Adamic (white) race. These groups are often rejected and not even considered Christian groups by mainstream Christian denominations and the vast majority of Christians around the world.\n\nAntisemitism in Europe remains a substantial problem. Antisemitism exists to a lesser or greater degree in many other nations as well, including Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union, and the increasingly frequent tensions between some Muslim immigrants and Jews across Europe. The US State Department reports that antisemitism has increased dramatically in Europe and Eurasia since 2000.\n\nWhile in a decline since the 1940s, there is still a measurable amount of antisemitism in the United States of America as well, although acts of violence are rare. For example, the influential evangelical preacher Billy Graham and then-president Richard Nixon were captured on tape in the early 1970s discussing matters like how to address the Jews' control of the American media. This belief in Jewish conspiracies and domination of the media was similar to those of Graham's former mentors: William Bell Riley chose Graham to succeed him as the second president of Northwestern Bible and Missionary Training School and evangelist Mordecai Ham led the meetings where Graham first believed in Christ. Both held strongly antisemitic views. The 2001 survey by the Anti-Defamation League reported 1432 acts of antisemitism in the United States that year. The figure included 877 acts of harassment, including verbal intimidation, threats and physical assaults. A minority of American churches engage in anti-Israel activism, including support for the controversial BDS (Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions) movement. While not directly indicative of anti-semitism, this activism often conflates the Israeli government's treatment of Palestinians with that of Jesus, thereby promoting the anti-semitic doctrine of Jewish guilt. Many Christian Zionists are also accused of anti-semitism, such as John Hagee, who argued that the Jews brought the Holocaust upon themselves by angering God.\n\nRelations between Jews and Christians have improved dramatically since the 20th century. According to a global 2014 poll collecting data on 102 countries on their attitudes toward Jews by the Anti-Defamation League, a Jewish group devoted to fighting antisemitism and other forms of racism, only 24% of Christians worldwide held views considered to be antisemitic in their index, compared to nearly half of Muslims at 49%.\n\nMany Christians do not consider anti-Judaism to be antisemitism. They regard anti-Judaism as a disagreement of religiously sincere people with the tenets of Judaism, while regarding antisemitism as an emotional bias or hatred not specifically targeting the religion of Judaism. Under this approach, anti-Judaism is not regarded as antisemitism as it only rejects the religious ideas of Judaism and does not involve actual hostility to the Jewish people.\n\nOthers see anti-Judaism as the rejection of or opposition to beliefs and practices \"essentially because\" of their source in Judaism or because a belief or practice is associated with the Jewish people. (But see supersessionism)\n\nThe position that \"Christian theological anti-Judaism is a phenomenon distinct from modern antisemitism, which is rooted in economic and racial thought, so that Christian teachings should not be held responsible for antisemitism\" has been articulated, among other places, by Pope John Paul II in 'We Remember: A Reflection on the Shoah,' and the Jewish declaration on Christianity, Dabru Emet. Several scholars, including Susannah Heschel, Gavin I Langmuir and Uriel Tal have challenged this position, arguing that anti-Judaism led directly to modern antisemitism.\n\nAlthough some Christians in the past did consider anti-Judaism to be contrary to Christian teaching, this view was not widely expressed by leaders and lay people. In many cases, the practical tolerance towards the Jewish religion and Jews prevailed. Some Christian groups, particularly in early years, condemned verbal anti-Judaism.\n\nThe Southern Baptist Convention (SBC), the largest Protestant Christian denomination in the U.S., has explicitly rejected suggestions that it should back away from seeking to convert Jews, a position which critics have called antisemitic, but a position which Baptists believe is consistent with their view that salvation is found solely through faith in Christ. In 1996 the SBC approved a resolution calling for efforts to seek the conversion of Jews \"as well as for the salvation of 'every kindred and tongue and people and nation.'\"\n\nMost Evangelicals agree with the SBC's position, and some support efforts which specifically seek the Jews' conversion. At the same time these Evangelical groups are among the most pro-Israel groups. (\"For more information, see Christian Zionism\".) Among the controversial groups that have found support from some Evangelical churches is Jews for Jesus, which claims that Jews can \"complete\" their Jewish faith by accepting Jesus as the Messiah.\n\nThe Presbyterian Church (USA), the United Methodist Church, and the United Church of Canada have ended their efforts to convert Jews. While Anglicans do not, as a rule, seek converts from other Christian denominations, the General Synod has affirmed that \"the good news of salvation in Jesus Christ is for all and must be shared with all including people from other faiths or of no faith and that to do anything else would be to institutionalize discrimination\".\n\nThe Roman Catholic Church formerly had religious congregations specifically aimed at the conversion of Jews. Some of these were founded by Jewish converts themselves, like the Congregation of Our Lady of Sion, which was composed of nuns and ordained priests. Many Catholic saints were noted specifically because of their missionary zeal in converting Jews, such as Vincent Ferrer. After the Second Vatican Council many missionary orders aimed at converting Jews to Christianity no longer actively sought to missionize (or proselytize) among Jews. Traditionalist Roman Catholic groups, congregations and clergymen, however, continue to support missionizing Jews according to traditional patterns, sometimes with success (\"e.g.\", the Society of St. Pius X which has notable Jewish converts among its faithful, many of whom have become traditionalist priests).\n\nSome Jewish organizations have described evangelism and missionary activity directed specifically at Jews as antisemitic.\n\nIn recent years there has been much to note in the way of reconciliation between some Christian groups and the Jews.\n\nBULLET::::- Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire\nBULLET::::- Anti-Jewish violence in Poland, 1944–1946\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism and the New Testament\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism in Europe\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism in Islam\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism in the Soviet Union\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism in the United States\nBULLET::::- Antisemitism in Ukraine\nBULLET::::- Christianity and Judaism\nBULLET::::- Criticisms of Christianity\nBULLET::::- Ecclesia et Synagoga\nBULLET::::- Good Friday Prayer for the Jews\nBULLET::::- History of antisemitism in the United States\nBULLET::::- History of antisemitism\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Poland\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Ukraine\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews and the Crusades\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Germany\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Hungary\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Romania\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews in Russia\nBULLET::::- Jewish deicide\nBULLET::::- Kishinev pogrom\nBULLET::::- New antisemitism\nBULLET::::- History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance\nBULLET::::- Persecution of Jews\nBULLET::::- Pope John Paul II and Judaism\nBULLET::::- Racial antisemitism\nBULLET::::- Religious antisemitism\nBULLET::::- Timeline of antisemitism\nBULLET::::- Beck, Norman A. \"Mature Christianity: The Recognition and Repudiation of the Anti-Jewish Polemic in the New Testament\" (Expanded Edition). Crossroad Pub Co 1994.\nBULLET::::- Boyarin, Daniel. \"The Subversion of the Jews: Moses's Veil and the Hermeneutics of Supersession\" diacritics 23.2: 16–35 Summer 1993.\nBULLET::::- Boys, Mary (Ed.). \"Seeing Judaism Anew: Christianity's Sacred Obligation\". Sheed & Ward March 31, 2005\nBULLET::::- Carmichael, Joel. \"The Satanizing of the Jews: Origin and development of mystical anti-Semitism\". Fromm, 1993\nBULLET::::- Eckhardt, A. Roy. \"Elder and Younger Brothers: The Encounter of Jews and Christians\", Schocken Books (1973)\nBULLET::::- Eckhardt, A. Roy. \"Your People, My People: The Meeting of Christians & Jews\", Crown Publishing Group (1974);\nBULLET::::- Gager, John C. \"The Origins of Anti-Semitism: Attitudes Toward Judaism in Pagan and Christian Antiquity\". Oxford Univ. Press, 1983\nBULLET::::- Gould, Allan, (Ed.). \"What Did They Think of the Jews?\", Jason Aronson Inc., 1991\nBULLET::::- Hall III, Sidney G. \"Christian Anti-Semitism and Paul's Theology\". Fortress Press, 1993.\nBULLET::::- Johnson, Luke. \"The New Testament's Anti-Jewish Slander and Conventions of Ancient Polemic\" Journal of Biblical Literature, Vol. 108, No. 3, Autumn, 1989\nBULLET::::- Lapide, Pinchas E, \"Three Popes and the Jews\". Hawthorne Books, 1967\nBULLET::::- Micklem, Nathaniel. \"National Socialism and the Roman Catholic Church: Being an Account of the Conflict between the National Socialist Government of Germany and the Roman Catholic Church, 1933-1938\". London: Oxford University Press, 1939.\nBULLET::::- Nicholls, William, \"Christian Antisemitism: A History of Hate\". Jason Aronson Inc., 1993.\nBULLET::::- Ruether, Rosemary Radford \"Faith and fratricide: the theological roots of anti-Semitism\". New York 1974, Seabury Press, .\nBULLET::::- Synan, Edward A. \"The Popes and the Jews in the Middle Ages\". Macmillan, New York, 1965\nBULLET::::- Tausch, Arno, \"The Effects of 'Nostra Aetate:' Comparative Analyses of Catholic Antisemitism More Than Five Decades after the Second Vatican Council\", 2018. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3098079\nBULLET::::- Utz, Richard. \"Remembering Ritual Murder: The Anti-Semitic Blood Accusation Narrative in Medieval and Contemporary Cultural Memory\". Pp. 145–62 in \"Genre and Ritual: The Cultural Heritage of Medieval Rituals\". Ed. Eyolf Østrem. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press/University of Copenhagen, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Wilken, Robert L. \"John Chrysostom and the Jews : Rhetoric and Reality in the Late 4th Century\", University of California Press, Berkeley, 1983\nBULLET::::- United States Holocaust Memorial Museum\nBULLET::::- Yad Vashem\n"}
{"id": "6731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6731", "title": "Boeing C-17 Globemaster III", "text": "Boeing C-17 Globemaster III\n\nThe McDonnell Douglas/Boeing C-17 Globemaster III is a large military transport aircraft. It was developed for the United States Air Force (USAF) from the 1980s to the early 1990s by McDonnell Douglas. The C-17 carries forward the name of two previous piston-engined military cargo aircraft, the Douglas C-74 Globemaster and the Douglas C-124 Globemaster II. The C-17 commonly performs tactical and strategic airlift missions, transporting troops and cargo throughout the world; additional roles include medical evacuation and airdrop duties. It was designed to replace the Lockheed C-141 Starlifter, and also fulfill some of the duties of the Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, freeing the C-5 fleet for outsize cargo.\n\nBoeing, which merged with McDonnell Douglas in 1997, continued to manufacture C-17s for export customers following the end of deliveries to the U.S. Air Force. Aside from the United States, the C-17 is in service with the air forces of India, United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, NATO Heavy Airlift Wing and Kuwait. The final C-17 was completed at the Long Beach, California plant and flown on 29 November 2015.\n\nIn the 1970s, the U.S. Air Force began looking for a replacement for its Lockheed C-130 Hercules tactical cargo aircraft. The Advanced Medium STOL Transport (AMST) competition was held, with Boeing proposing the YC-14, and McDonnell Douglas proposing the YC-15. Though both entrants exceeded specified requirements, the AMST competition was canceled before a winner was selected. The Air Force started the C-X program in November 1979 to develop a larger AMST with longer range to augment its strategic airlift.\nBy 1980, the USAF found itself with a large fleet of aging C-141 Starlifter cargo aircraft. Compounding matters, USAF needed increased strategic airlift capabilities to fulfill its rapid-deployment airlift requirements. The USAF set mission requirements and released a request for proposals (RFP) for C-X in October 1980. McDonnell Douglas elected to develop a new aircraft based on the YC-15. Boeing bid an enlarged three-engine version of its AMST YC-14. Lockheed submitted two designs, a C-5-based design and an enlarged C-141 design. On 28 August 1981, McDonnell Douglas was chosen to build its proposed aircraft, then designated \"C-17\". Compared to the YC-15, the new aircraft differed in having swept wings, increased size, and more powerful engines. This would allow it to perform the work done by the C-141, and to fulfill some of the duties of the Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, freeing the C-5 fleet for outsize cargo.\n\nAlternative proposals were pursued to fill airlift needs after the C-X contest. These were lengthening of C-141As into C-141Bs, ordering more C-5s, continued purchases of KC-10s, and expansion of the Civil Reserve Air Fleet. Limited budgets reduced program funding, requiring a delay of four years. During this time contracts were awarded for preliminary design work and for the completion of engine certification. In December 1985, a full-scale development contract was awarded, under Program Manager Bob Clepper. At this time, first flight was planned for 1990. The Air Force had formed a requirement for 210 aircraft.\n\nDevelopment problems and limited funding caused delays in the late 1980s. Criticisms were made of the developing aircraft and questions were raised about more cost-effective alternatives during this time. In April 1990, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney reduced the order from 210 to 120 aircraft. The maiden flight of the C-17 took place on 15 September 1991 from the McDonnell Douglas's plant in Long Beach, California, about a year behind schedule. The first aircraft (T-1) and five more production models (P1-P5) participated in extensive flight testing and evaluation at Edwards Air Force Base. Two complete airframes were built for static and repeated load testing.\n\nA static test of the C-17 wing in October 1992 resulted in the wing failing at 128% of design limit load, which was below the 150% requirement. Both wings buckled rear to the front and failures occurred in stringers, spars and ribs. Some $100 million were spent to redesign the wing structure; the wing failed at 145% during a second test in September 1993. A careful review of the test data, however, showed that the wing was not loaded correctly and did indeed meet the requirement. The C-17 received the \"Globemaster III\" name in early 1993. In late 1993, the Department of Defense gave the contractor two years to solve production and cost overrun problems or face termination of the contract after the delivery of the 40th aircraft. By accepting the 1993 terms, McDonnell Douglas incurred a loss of nearly US$1.5 billion on the development phase of the program.\n\nIn April 1994, the C-17 program remained over budget, and did not meet weight, fuel burn, payload and range specifications. It failed several key criteria during airworthiness evaluation tests. Technical problems were found with the mission software, landing gear, and other areas. In May 1994, it was proposed to cut production to as few as 32 aircraft; these cuts were later rescinded. A July 1994 GAO report revealed that Air Force and DoD studies from 1986 and 1991 stated the C-17 could use 6,400 more runways outside the U.S. than the C-5; it was discovered that these studies only considered runway dimensions, but not runway strength or Load Classification Numbers (LCN). The C-5 has a lower LCN, but the USAF classifies both in the same broad Load Classification Group. When considering runway dimensions and load ratings, the C-17's worldwide runway advantage over the C-5 shrank from 6,400 to 911 airfields. The report also stated that \"current military doctrine that does not reflect the use of small, austere airfields\". So the C-17's short field capability was not yet considered.\n\nA January 1995 GAO report stated that the USAF originally planned to order 210 C-17s at a cost of $41.8 billion, and that the 120 aircraft on order were to cost $39.5 billion based on a 1992 estimate. In March 1994, the U.S. Army decided it did not need the low-altitude parachute-extraction system (LAPES) delivery with the C-17 and that the C-130's capability was sufficient. C-17 testing was limited to this lower weight. Airflow issues prevented the C-17 from meeting airdrop requirements. A February 1997 GAO report revealed that a C-17 with a full payload could not land on wet runways; simulations suggested a distance of was required. The YC-15 was transferred to AMARC to be made flightworthy again for further flight tests for the C-17 program in March 1997.\n\nBy September 1995, most of the C-17's previous problems were reportedly resolved and the aircraft was meeting all of its performance and reliability targets. The first C-17 squadron was declared operational by the USAF in January 1995.\n\nIn 1996, DoD ordered another 80 aircraft for a total of 120. In 1997 McDonnell Douglas merged with its former competitor, Boeing. In April 1999, Boeing proposed cutting the price of the C-17 if the Air Force bought 60 more, and in August 2002, the order was increased to 180 aircraft. In 2007, 190 C-17s were on order for the USAF. On 6 February 2009, Boeing was awarded a $2.95 billion contract for 15 additional aircraft, increasing the total USAF C-17 fleet to 205 and extending production from August 2009 to August 2010. On 6 April 2009, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates stated that there would be no more C-17s ordered beyond the 205 planned. However, on 12 June 2009, the House Armed Services Air and Land Forces Subcommittee added a further 17 C-17s.\n\nIn 2010, Boeing reduced the C-17 production rate to 10 aircraft per year from a high of 16 per year. This was due to dwindling orders and to extend the life of the production line while additional international orders were sought. The workforce was reduced by approximately 1,100 through 2012, and a second shift at the Long Beach assembly plant was also eliminated. By April 2011, 230 production C-17s had been delivered, including 210 to the USAF. The C-17 prototype \"T-1\" was retired in 2012 after being used by the USAF for testing and development. In January 2010, the USAF announced the end of Boeing's performance-based logistics contracts to maintain the aircraft. On 19 June 2012, the USAF ordered its 224th and final C-17, as a replacement for an aircraft that crashed in Alaska in July 2010.\n\nIn September 2013, Boeing announced that C-17 production was starting to close down. In October 2014, the main wing spar of the 279th and last aircraft was completed; this C-17 was delivered in 2015, after which Boeing will close the Long Beach plant. Production of spare components will continue until at least 2017. The C-17 is projected to be in service for several decades. In February 2014, Boeing was engaged in sales talks with \"five or six\" countries for the remaining 15 C-17s, \"two to four\" of which are not current operators, and Boeing decided to build 10 aircraft without confirmed buyers in anticipation of future purchases. , five aircraft found buyers, including two for the Middle East, two for Australia and one for Canada.\n\nIn May 2015, the \"Wall Street Journal\" reported that Boeing expected to book a charge of under $100 million and cut 3,000 positions associated with the C-17 program, and it also suggested that Airbus' lower cost A400M Atlas has taken international sales away from the C-17.\n\n! 1991!! 1992!! 1993!! 1994!! 1995!! 1996!! 1997!! 1998!! 1999!! 2000!! 2001!! 2002!! 2003!! 2004!! 2005!! 2006!! 2007!! 2008!! 2009!! 2010!! 2011!! 2012!! 2013!! 2014\nSources: C-17 Globemaster III Pocket Guide, Boeing IDS Major Deliveries\n\nThe C-17 is long and has a wingspan of . It can airlift cargo close to a battle area. The size and weight of U.S. mechanized firepower and equipment have grown in recent decades from increased air mobility requirements, particularly for large or heavy non-palletized outsize cargo.\n\nThe C-17 is powered by four Pratt & Whitney F117-PW-100 turbofan engines, which are based on the commercial Pratt and Whitney PW2040 used on the Boeing 757. Each engine is rated at of thrust. The engine's thrust reversers direct engine exhaust air upwards and forward, reducing the chances of foreign object damage by ingestion of runway debris, and providing enough reverse thrust to back the aircraft up on the ground while taxiing. The thrust reversers can also be used in flight at idle-reverse for added drag in maximum-rate descents. In vortex surfing tests performed by two C-17s, up to 10% fuel savings were reported.\nFor cargo operations the C-17 requires a crew of three: pilot, copilot, and loadmaster. The cargo compartment is long by wide by high. The cargo floor has rollers for palletized cargo but it can be flipped to provide a flat floor suitable for vehicles and other rolling stock. Cargo is loaded through a large aft ramp that accommodates rolling stock, such as a 69-ton (63-metric ton) M1 Abrams main battle tank, other armored vehicles, trucks, and trailers, along with palletized cargo.\nMaximum payload of the C-17 is , and its maximum takeoff weight is . With a payload of and an initial cruise altitude of , the C-17 has an unrefueled range of about on the first 71 aircraft, and on all subsequent extended-range models that include a sealed center wing bay as a fuel tank. Boeing informally calls these aircraft the \"C-17 ER\". The C-17's cruise speed is about (Mach 0.74). It is designed to airdrop 102 paratroopers and their equipment. The U.S. Army's canceled Ground Combat Vehicle was to be transported by the C-17.\n\nThe C-17 is designed to operate from runways as short as and as narrow as . In addition, the C-17 can operate from unpaved, unimproved runways (although with greater chance of damage to the aircraft). The thrust reversers can be used to move the aircraft backwards and reverse direction on narrow taxiways using a three- (or more) point turn. The plane is designed for 20 man-hours of maintenance per flight hour, and a 74% mission availability rate.\n\nThe first production C-17 was delivered to Charleston Air Force Base, South Carolina, on 14 July 1993. The first C-17 squadron, the 17th Airlift Squadron, became operationally ready on 17 January 1995. The C-17 has broken 22 records for oversized payloads. The C-17 was awarded U.S. aviation's most prestigious award, the Collier Trophy, in 1994. A Congressional report on operations in Kosovo and Operation Allied Force noted \"One of the great success stories...was the performance of the Air Force's C-17A\" The C-17 flew half of the strategic airlift missions in the operation, the type could use small airfields, easing operations; rapid turnaround times also led to efficient utilization.\n\nOn 26 March 2003, nearly 1,000 U.S. service members were parachuted into the Kurdish-controlled area of northern Iraq during Operation Northern Delay in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. This was the first combat insertion of paratroopers using the C-17.\n\nIn 2006, eight C-17s were delivered to March Joint Air Reserve Base, California; controlled by the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC), assigned to the 452d Air Mobility Wing; and subsequently assigned to AMC's 436th Airlift Wing and its AFRC \"associate\" unit, the 512th Airlift Wing, at Dover Air Force Base, Delaware, supplementing the Lockheed C-5 Galaxy. The Mississippi Air National Guard, 172 Airlift Group received their first C-17 in 2006. The only Guard Unit to receive sequential serial number aircraft. The Mississippi Air Guard currently operates 8 C-17 aircraft. In 2011, the New York Air National Guard's 105th Airlift Wing at Stewart Air National Guard Base, New York, transitioned from the C-5 to the C-17.\nC-17s delivered military goods during Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq as well as humanitarian aid missions in the immediate aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the 2011 Sindh floods delivering thousands of food rations, tons of medical and emergency supplies. On 26 March 2003, 15 USAF C-17s participated in the biggest combat airdrop since the United States invasion of Panama in December 1989: the night-time airdrop of 1,000 paratroopers from the 173rd Airborne Brigade occurred over Bashur, Iraq. The airdrop of paratroopers were followed by C-17s ferrying M1 Abrams, M2 Bradleys, M113s and artillery. USAF C-17s have also been used to assist allies in their airlift requirements, including Canadian vehicles to Afghanistan in 2003 and Australian forces during the Australian-led military deployment to East Timor in 2006. In 2006, USAF C-17s flew 15 Canadian Leopard C2 tanks from Kyrgyzstan into Kandahar in support of NATO's Afghanistan mission. In 2013, five USAF C-17s supported French operations in Mali, operating with other nations' C-17s (RAF, NATO and RCAF deployed a single C-17 each).\n\nA C-17 accompanies the President of the United States on his visits to both domestic and foreign arrangements, consultations, and meetings. The C-17 is used to transport the Presidential Limousine, Marine One, and security detachments. There have been several occasions when a C-17 has been used to transport the President himself, temporarily gaining the Air Force One call sign while doing so.\n\nThere was debate over follow-on C-17 orders, Air Force having requested line shutdown while Congress attempted to reinstate production. In FY2007, the Air Force requested $1.6 billion in response to \"excessive combat use\" on the C-17 fleet. In 2008, USAF General Arthur Lichte, Commander of Air Mobility Command, indicated before a House of Representatives subcommittee on air and land forces a need to extend production to another 15 aircraft to increase the total to 205. Pending the delivery of the results of two studies in 2009, Lichte observed that the production line may remain open for further C-17s to satisfy airlift requirements. The USAF eventually decided to cap its C-17 fleet at 223 aircraft; its final delivery was on 12 September 2013.\n\nBoeing has marketed the C-17 to many European nations including Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom. The Royal Air Force (RAF) has established an aim of having interoperability and some weapons and capabilities commonality with the USAF. The 1998 Strategic Defence Review identified a requirement for a strategic airlifter. The Short-Term Strategic Airlift (STSA) competition commenced in September of that year, however tendering was canceled in August 1999 with some bids identified by ministers as too expensive, including the Boeing/BAe C-17 bid, and others unsuitable. The project continued, with the C-17 seen as the favorite. In the light of Airbus A400M delays, the UK Secretary of State for Defence, Geoff Hoon, announced in May 2000 that the RAF would lease four C-17s at an annual cost of £100 million from Boeing for an initial seven years with an optional two-year extension. The RAF had the option to buy or return the aircraft to Boeing. The UK committed to upgrading its C-17s in line with the USAF so that if they were returned, the USAF could adopt them. The lease agreement restricted the operational use of the C-17s, meaning that the RAF could not use them for para-drop, airdrop, rough field, low-level operations and air to air refuelling.\nThe first C-17 was delivered to the RAF at Boeing's Long Beach facility on 17 May 2001 and flown to RAF Brize Norton by a crew from No. 99 Squadron. The RAF's fourth C-17 was delivered on 24 August 2001. The RAF aircraft were some of the first to take advantage of the new center wing fuel tank found in Block 13 aircraft. In RAF service, the C-17 has not been given an official service name and designation (for example, C-130J referred to as Hercules C4 or C5), but is referred to simply as the C-17 or \"C-17A Globemaster\".\n\nThe RAF declared itself delighted with the C-17. Although the Globemaster fleet was to be a fallback for the A400M, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) announced on 21 July 2004 that they had elected to buy their four C-17s at the end of the lease, even though the A400M appeared to be closer to production. The C-17 gives the RAF strategic capabilities that it would not wish to lose, for example a maximum payload of compared to the A400M's . The C-17's capabilities allow the RAF to use it as an airborne hospital for medical evacuation missions.\n\nAnother C-17 was ordered in August 2006, and delivered on 22 February 2008. The four leased C-17s were to be purchased later in 2008. Because of fears that the A400M may suffer further delays, the MoD announced in 2006 that it planned to acquire three more C-17s, for a total of eight, with delivery in 2009–2010. On 26 July 2007, Defence Secretary Des Browne announced that the MoD intended to order a sixth C-17 to boost operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. On 3 December 2007, the MoD announced a contract for a sixth C-17, which was received on 11 June 2008.\n\nOn 18 December 2009, Boeing confirmed that the RAF had ordered a seventh C-17, which was delivered on 16 November 2010. The UK announced the purchase of its eighth C-17 in February 2012. The RAF showed interest in buying a ninth C-17 in November 2013.\n\nOn 13 January 2013, the RAF deployed two C-17s of No. 99 Squadron from RAF Brize Norton to the French Évreux Air Base. The aircraft transported French armored vehicles to the Malian capital of Bamako during the French Intervention in Mali. In June 2015, an RAF C-17 was used to medically evacuate four victims of the 2015 Sousse attacks from Tunisia.\n\nThe Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) began investigating an acquisition of heavy lift aircraft for strategic transport in 2005. In late 2005 the then Minister for Defence Robert Hill stated that such aircraft were being considered due to the limited availability of strategic airlift aircraft from partner nations and air freight companies. The C-17 was considered to be favored over the A400M as it was a \"proven aircraft\" and in production. One major RAAF requirement was the ability to airlift the Army's M1 Abrams tanks; another requirement was immediate delivery. Though unstated, commonality with the USAF and the United Kingdom's RAF was also considered advantageous. RAAF aircraft were ordered directly from the USAF production run and are identical to American C-17 even in paint scheme, the only difference being the national markings. This allowed delivery to commence within nine months of commitment to the program.\n\nOn 2 March 2006, the Australian government announced the purchase of three aircraft and one option with an entry into service date of 2006. In July 2006 a fixed price contract was awarded to Boeing to deliver four C-17s for (). Australia also signed a US$80.7M contract to join the global 'virtual fleet' C-17 sustainment program and the RAAF's C-17s will receive the same upgrades as the USAF's fleet.\n\nThe Royal Australian Air Force took delivery of its first C-17 in a ceremony at Boeing's plant at Long Beach, California on 28 November 2006. Several days later the aircraft flew from Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii to Defence Establishment Fairbairn, Canberra, arriving on 4 December 2006. The aircraft was formally accepted in a ceremony at Fairbairn shortly after arrival. The second aircraft was delivered to the RAAF on 11 May 2007 and the third was delivered on 18 December 2007. The fourth Australian C-17 was delivered on 19 January 2008. All the Australian C-17s are operated by No. 36 Squadron and are based at RAAF Base Amberley in Queensland.\nOn 18 April 2011, Boeing announced that Australia had signed an agreement with the U.S. government to acquire a fifth C-17 due to an increased demand for humanitarian and disaster relief missions. The aircraft was delivered to the RAAF on 14 September 2011. On 23 September 2011, Australian Minister for Defence Materiel Jason Clare announced that the government was seeking information from the U.S. about the price and delivery schedule for a sixth Globemaster. In November 2011, Australia requested a sixth C-17 through the U.S. Foreign Military Sales program; it was ordered in June 2012, and was delivered on 1 November 2012.\n\nAustralia's C-17s have supported ADF operations around the world, including supporting Air Combat Group training deployments to the U.S., transporting Royal Australian Navy Sea Hawk helicopters and making fortnightly supply missions to Australian forces in Iraq and Afghanistan. The C-17s have also carried humanitarian supplies to Papua New Guinea during Operation Papua New Guinea Assist in 2007, supplies and South African Puma helicopters to Burma in 2008 following Cyclone Nargis, relief supplies to Samoa following the 2009 earthquake, aid packages around Queensland following the 2010–2011 floods and Cyclone Yasi, and rescue teams and equipment to New Zealand following the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake, and equipment after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami from Western Australia to Japan. In July 2014, an Australian C-17 transported several bodies of victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 from Ukraine to the Netherlands.\n\nIn August 2014, Defence Minister David Johnston announced the intention to purchase one or two additional C-17s. On 3 October 2014, Johnston announced the government's approval to buy two C-17s at a total cost of (). The United States Congress approved the sale under the Foreign Military Sales program. Prime Minister Tony Abbott confirmed in April 2015 that two additional aircraft are to be ordered, with both delivered by 4 November 2015; these are to add to the six C-17s it has .\n\nThe Canadian Forces has had a long-standing need for strategic airlift for military and humanitarian operations around the world. It had followed a pattern similar to the German Air Force in leasing Antonovs and Ilyushins for many of its needs, including deploying the Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) to tsunami-stricken Sri Lanka in 2005. The Canadian Forces was forced to rely entirely on leased An-124 \"Ruslan\" for a Canadian Army deployment to Haiti in 2003. A combination of leased \"Ruslans\", Ilyushins and USAF C-17s was also used to move heavy equipment into Afghanistan. In 2002, the Canadian Forces Future Strategic Airlifter Project began to study alternatives, including long-term leasing arrangements.\nOn 5 July 2006, the Canadian government issued a notice that it intended to negotiate directly with Boeing to procure four airlifters for the Canadian Forces Air Command (Royal Canadian Air Force after August 2011). On 1 February 2007, Canada awarded a contract for four C-17s with delivery beginning in August 2007. Like Australia, Canada was granted airframes originally slated for the U.S. Air Force, to accelerate delivery.\n\nOn 23 July 2007, the first Canadian C-17 made its initial flight. It was turned over to Canada on 8 August, and participated at the Abbotsford International Airshow on 11 August prior to arriving at its new home base at 8 Wing, CFB Trenton, Ontario on 12 August. Its first operational mission was delivery of disaster relief to Jamaica following Hurricane Dean. The second C-17 arrived at 8 Wing, CFB Trenton on 18 October 2007. The last of the initial four aircraft was delivered in April 2008. The official Canadian designation is \"CC-177 Globemaster III\". The aircraft are assigned to 429 Transport Squadron based at CFB Trenton.\n\nOn 14 April 2010, a Canadian C-17 landed for the first time at CFS Alert, the world's most northerly airport. Canadian Globemasters have been deployed in support of numerous missions worldwide, including Operation Hestia after the earthquake in Haiti, providing airlift as part of Operation Mobile and support to the Canadian mission in Afghanistan. After Typhoon Haiyan hit the Philippines in 2013, Canadian C-17s established an air bridge between the two nations, deploying Canada's DART Team and delivering humanitarian supplies and equipment. In 2014, they supported Operation Reassurance and Operation Impact.\n\nOn 19 December 2014, it was reported that Canada's Defence Department intended to purchase one more C-17. On 30 March 2015, Canada's fifth C-17 arrived at CFB Trenton.\n\nAt the 2006 Farnborough Airshow, a number of NATO member nations signed a letter of intent to jointly purchase and operate several C-17s within the Strategic Airlift Capability (SAC). SAC members are Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, the U.S., along with two Partnership for Peace countries Finland and Sweden as of 2010. The purchase was for two C-17s, and a third was contributed by the U.S. On 14 July 2009, Boeing delivered the first C-17 under the SAC program. The second and third C-17s were delivered in September and October 2009.\n\nThe SAC C-17s are based at Pápa Air Base, Hungary. The Heavy Airlift Wing is hosted by Hungary, which acts as the flag nation. The aircraft are manned in similar fashion as the NATO E-3 AWACS aircraft. The C-17 flight crew are multi-national, but each mission is assigned to an individual member nation based on the SAC's annual flight hour share agreement. The NATO Airlift Management Programme Office (NAMPO) provides management and support for the Heavy Airlift Wing. NAMPO is a part of the NATO Support Agency (NSPA). In September 2014, Boeing stated that the three C-17s supporting SAC missions had achieved a readiness rate of nearly 94 percent over the last five years and supported over 1,000 missions.\n\nIn June 2009, the Indian Air Force (IAF) selected the C-17 for its \"Very Heavy Lift Transport Aircraft\" requirement to replace several types of transport aircraft. In January 2010, India requested 10 C-17s through the U.S.'s Foreign Military Sales program, the sale was approved by Congress in June 2010. On 23 June 2010, the Indian Air Force successfully test-landed a USAF C-17 at the Gaggal Airport, India to complete the IAF's C-17 trials. In February 2011, the IAF and Boeing agreed terms for the order of 10 C-17s with an option for six more; the US$4.1 billion order was approved by the Indian Cabinet Committee on Security on 6 June 2011. Deliveries began in June 2013 and were to continue to 2014. In 2012, the IAF reportedly finalized plans to buy six more C-17s in its five-year plan for 2017–2022. However, this option is no longer available since C-17 production ended in 2015.\nThe aircraft provides strategic airlift and the ability to deploy special forces, such as during national emergencies. They are operated in diverse terrain – from Himalayan air bases in North India at to Indian Ocean bases in South India. The C-17s are based at Hindon Air Force Station and are operated by No. 81 Squadron IAF \"Skylords\". The first C-17 was delivered in January 2013 for testing and training; it was officially accepted on 11 June 2013. The second C-17 was delivered on 23 July 2013 and put into service immediately. IAF Chief of Air Staff Norman AK Browne called the Globemaster III \"a major component in the IAF's modernization drive\" while taking delivery of the aircraft at Boeing's Long Beach factory. On 2 September 2013, the \"Skylords\" squadron with three C-17s officially entered IAF service.\n\nThe \"Skylords\" regularly fly missions within India, such as to high-altitude bases at Leh and Thoise. The IAF first used the C-17 to transport an infantry battalion's equipment to Port Blair on Andaman Islands on 1 July 2013. Foreign deployments to date include Tajikistan in August 2013, and Rwanda to support Indian peacekeepers. One C-17 was used for transporting relief materials during Cyclone Phailin. The fifth aircraft was received in November 2013. The sixth aircraft was received in July 2014.\n\nIn June 2017, the U.S. Department of State approved the potential sale of one C-17 to India under a proposed $366 million U.S. Foreign Military Sale that includes spare parts and support. This aircraft was the last C-17 produced. The sale, if finalized, would increase the Indian Air Force's fleet to 11 C-17s. The contract was awarded in March 2018 for completion by 22 August 2019.\n\nBoeing delivered Qatar's first C-17 on 11 August 2009 and the second on 10 September 2009 for the Qatar Emiri Air Force. Qatar received its third C-17 in 2012, and fourth C-17 was received on 10 December 2012. In June 2013, the \"New York Times\" reported that Qatar was allegedly using its C-17s to ship weapons from Libya to the Syrian opposition during the civil war via Turkey. On 15 June 2015, it was announced at the Paris Airshow that Qatar agreed to order four additional C-17s from the five remaining \"white tail\" C-17s to double Qatar's C-17 fleet.\n\nIn February 2009, the United Arab Emirates Air Force agreed to purchase four C-17s. In January 2010, a contract was signed for six C-17s. In May 2011, the first C-17 was handed over and the last of the six was received in June 2012.\n\nKuwait requested the purchase of one C-17 in September 2010 and a second in April 2013 through the U.S.'s Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program. The nation ordered two C-17s; the first was delivered on 13 February 2014.\n\nIn 2015 New Zealand Defence Force was considering the purchase of two C-17s for the Royal New Zealand Air Force at an estimated cost of $600 million to replace its aging C-130s. However, the New Zealand Government eventually decided not to acquire any Globemasters.\n\nBULLET::::- C-17A: Initial military airlifter version.\nBULLET::::- C-17A \"ER\": Unofficial name for C-17As with extended range due to the addition of the center wing tank. This upgrade was incorporated in production beginning in 2001 with Block 13 aircraft.\nBULLET::::- C-17B: A proposed tactical airlifter version with double-slotted flaps, an additional main landing gear on the center fuselage, more powerful engines, and other systems for shorter landing and take-off distances. Boeing offered the C-17B to the U.S. military in 2007 for carrying the Army's Future Combat Systems (FCS) vehicles and other equipment.\nBULLET::::- MD-17: Proposed variant for civilian operators, later redesignated as BC-17 after 1997 merger.\n\nBULLET::::- Royal Australian Air Force – 8 C-17A ERs in service as of Jan. 2018.\nBULLET::::- No. 36 Squadron\nBULLET::::- Royal Canadian Air Force – 5 CC-177 (C-17A ER) aircraft in use as of Jan. 2018.\nBULLET::::- 429 Transport Squadron, CFB Trenton\nBULLET::::- Indian Air Force – 11 C-17s as of Aug. 2019.\nBULLET::::- No. 81 Squadron (\"Skylords\"), Hindon AFS\nBULLET::::- Kuwait Air Force – 2 C-17s as of Jan. 2018\nBULLET::::- NATO\nBULLET::::- NATO Strategic Airlift Capability Heavy Airlift Wing – 3 C-17s in service as of Jan. 2018, including 1 C-17 contributed by the USAF; based at Pápa Air Base, Hungary.\nBULLET::::- Qatari Emiri Air Force – 8 C-17As in use as of Jan. 2018\nBULLET::::- United Arab Emirates Air Force – 8 C-17As in operation as of Jan. 2018\nBULLET::::- Royal Air Force – 8 C-17A ERs in use as of Jan. 2018\nBULLET::::- No. 99 Squadron, RAF Brize Norton\nBULLET::::- United States Air Force – 222 C-17s in service as of Jan. 2018 (157 Active, 47 Air National Guard, 18 Air Force Reserve)\nBULLET::::- 60th Air Mobility Wing – Travis Air Force Base, California\nBULLET::::- 21st Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 62d Airlift Wing – McChord AFB, Washington\nBULLET::::- 4th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 7th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 8th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 305th Air Mobility Wing – Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- 6th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 385th Air Expeditionary Group – Al Udeid Air Base, Qatar\nBULLET::::- 816th Expeditionary Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 436th Airlift Wing – Dover Air Force Base, Delaware\nBULLET::::- 3d Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 437th Airlift Wing – Charleston Air Force Base, South Carolina\nBULLET::::- 14th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 15th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 16th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 3d Wing – Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska\nBULLET::::- 517th Airlift Squadron (Associate)\nBULLET::::- 15th Wing – Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii\nBULLET::::- 535th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 97th Air Mobility Wing – Altus AFB, Oklahoma\nBULLET::::- 58th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 412th Test Wing – Edwards AFB, California\nBULLET::::- 418th Flight Test Squadron\nBULLET::::- Air Force Reserve\nBULLET::::- 315th Airlift Wing (Associate) – Charleston AFB, South Carolina\nBULLET::::- 300th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 317th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 701st Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 349th Air Mobility Wing (Associate) – Travis AFB, California\nBULLET::::- 301st Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 445th Airlift Wing – Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio\nBULLET::::- 89th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 446th Airlift Wing (Associate) – McChord AFB, Washington\nBULLET::::- 97th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 313th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 728th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 452d Air Mobility Wing – March ARB, California\nBULLET::::- 729th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 507th Air Refueling Wing – Tinker AFB, Oklahoma\nBULLET::::- 730th Air Mobility Training Squadron (Altus AFB)\nBULLET::::- 512th Airlift Wing (Associate) – Dover AFB, Delaware\nBULLET::::- 326th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 514th Air Mobility Wing (Associate) – Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- 732d Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 911th Airlift Wing – Pittsburgh Air Reserve Station, Pennsylvania\nBULLET::::- 758th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- Air National Guard\nBULLET::::- 105th Airlift Wing – Stewart ANGB, New York\nBULLET::::- 137th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 145th Airlift Wing – Charlotte Air National Guard Base, North Carolina\nBULLET::::- 156th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 154th Wing – Hickam AFB, Hawaii\nBULLET::::- 204th Airlift Squadron (Associate)\nBULLET::::- 164th Airlift Wing – Memphis, Tennessee\nBULLET::::- 155th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 167th Airlift Wing – Martinsburg, West Virginia\nBULLET::::- 167th Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 172d Airlift Wing – Jackson, Mississippi\nBULLET::::- 183d Airlift Squadron\nBULLET::::- 176th Wing – Elmendorf AFB, Alaska\nBULLET::::- 144th Airlift Squadron\n\nBULLET::::- On 10 September 1998, a U.S. Air Force C-17 (AF Serial No.\"96-0006\") delivered Keiko the whale to Vestmannaeyjar, Iceland, a runway, and suffered a landing gear failure during landing. There were no injuries, but the aircraft received major damage to the landing gear. After receiving temporary repairs, the C-17 was flown to a city in Iceland for further repairs.\nBULLET::::- On 10 December 2003, a U.S. Air Force C-17 (AF Serial No. \"98-0057\") was hit by a surface-to-air missile after take-off from Baghdad, Iraq. One engine was disabled and the aircraft returned for a safe landing. The aircraft was repaired and returned to service.\nBULLET::::- On 6 August 2005, a U.S. Air Force C-17 (AF Serial No. \"01-0196\") ran off the runway at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan while attempting to land, destroying the aircraft's nose and main landing gear. It took two months to make the aircraft flightworthy. The aircraft was flown to Boeing's Long Beach facility by a test pilot, as the temporary repairs imposed performance limitations. In October 2006, the aircraft returned to service after receiving repairs.\nBULLET::::- On 30 January 2009, a U.S. Air Force C-17 (AF Serial No. \"96-0002\" – \"Spirit of the Air Force\") made a gear-up landing at Bagram Air Base. The C-17 was ferried from Bagram AB, making several stops along the way, to Boeing's Long Beach plant for extensive repairs. The USAF Aircraft Accident Investigation Board concluded the cause was the crew's failure to lower the landing gear, having not followed the pre-landing checklist.\nBULLET::::- On 28 July 2010, a U.S. Air Force C-17 (AF Serial No. \"00-0173\" – \"Spirit of the Aleutians\") crashed at Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska, while practicing for the 2010 Arctic Thunder Air Show, killing all four aboard. The C-17 crashed near a railroad, disrupting rail operations. A military investigative report determined that a stall caused by pilot error led to the crash. This is the only fatal C-17 crash and its only hull-loss incident.\nBULLET::::- On 23 January 2012, a U.S. Air Force C-17 (AF Serial No. \"07-7189\"), assigned to the 437th Airlift Wing, Joint Base Charleston, South Carolina, landed on runway 34R at Forward Operating Base Shank, Afghanistan; however, the pilot and copilot did not realize their required stopping distance was longer than the runway and were unable to stop before departing the prepared surface. The C-17 struck an embankment, and came to rest approximately 700 feet from the end of runway. The aircraft sustained major structural damage but no injuries were reported. After 9 months of repairs to make the C-17 airworthy, it departed FOB Shank for Boeing's factory in Long Beach, California. The aircraft returned to service after another 22 months of overhauls with an estimated cost of $69.4 million.\nBULLET::::- On 20 July 2012, a C-17 of the US Air Force's 305th Air Mobility Wing, flying from McGuire AFB, New Jersey to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida mistakenly landed at nearby Peter O. Knight Airport. The landing followed an extended duration flight from Europe to Southwest Asia to embark military passengers, and then return to the U.S. There were no injuries and no damage to the aircraft or the airfield's runway. The aircraft took off a short time later with ease from Knight's 3,580-foot runway and made the short flight to MacDill AFB. With both airfields only a few miles apart and both of the main runways having the same magnetic heading, the Air Force blamed the mistaken landing on a combination of pilot error and fatigue.\n\nBULLET::::- Bonny, Danny, Barry Fryer and Martyn Swann. \"AMARC MASDC III, The Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Center, Davis-Monthan AFB, AZ, 1997–2005.\" Surrey, UK: British Aviation Research Group, 2006. .\nBULLET::::- Department of Defense. \"Kosovo/Operation Allied Force After-Action Report\", DIANE Publishing; 31 January 2000..\nBULLET::::- Gertler, Jeremiah. \"Air Force C-17 Aircraft Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress.\" \"Congressional Research Service,\". DIANE Publishing; 22 December 2009. .\nBULLET::::- Kennedy, Betty R. \"Globemaster III: Acquiring the C-17\". McConnell AFB, Kansas: Air Mobility Command Office of History, 2004.\nBULLET::::- McLaughlin, Andrew. \"Big Mover.\" Canberra: \"Australian Aviation (Phantom Media),\" September 2008.\nBULLET::::- Norton, Bill. \"Boeing C-17 Globemaster III\" (Warbird Tech, Vol. 30). North Branch, Minnesota: Specialty Press, 2001. .\n\nBULLET::::- C-17 overview page and C-17 History page on Boeing.com\nBULLET::::- USAF C-17 fact sheet\nBULLET::::- RCAF CC-177 Globemaster III page\nBULLET::::- Full C-17 production list, including manufacturer serial numbers (c/n)\n"}
