{"id": "8419", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8419", "title": "Dartmouth, Devon", "text": "Dartmouth, Devon\n\nDartmouth is a town and civil parish in the English county of Devon. It is a tourist destination set on the western bank of the estuary of the River Dart, which is a long narrow tidal ria that runs inland as far as Totnes. It lies within the South Devon Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and South Hams district, and had a population of 5,512 in 2001, reducing to 5,064 at the 2011 census There are two electoral wards in the \"Dartmouth\" area (Townstal & Kingswear). Their combined population at the above census was 6,822.\n\nIn 1086, the Domesday Book lists \"Dunestal\" as the only settlement in the area which now makes up the parish of Dartmouth. It was held by Walter of Douai. It paid tax on half a hide, and had two plough teams, two slaves, five villagers and four smallholders. There were six cattle, 40 sheep and 15 goats. At this time Townstal (as the name became) was apparently a purely agricultural settlement, centred around the church. Walter of Douai rebelled against William II, and his lands were confiscated and added to the honour of Marshwood (Dorset), which sublet Townstal and Dartmouth to the FitzStephens. It was probably during the early part of their proprietorship that Dartmouth began to grow as a port, as it was of strategic importance as a deep-water port for sailing vessels. The port was used as the sailing point for the Crusades of 1147 and 1190, and Warfleet Creek, close to Dartmouth Castle is supposed by some to be named for the vast fleets which assembled there. Dartmouth was a home of the Royal Navy from the reign of Edward III and was twice surprised and sacked during the Hundred Years' War, after which the mouth of the estuary was closed every night with a great chain. The narrow mouth of the Dart is protected by two fortified castles, Dartmouth Castle and Kingswear Castle. Originally Dartmouth's only wharf was Bayard's Cove, a relatively small area protected by a fort at the southern end of the town.\n\nIn 1373 Geoffrey Chaucer visited and among the pilgrims in his Canterbury Tales\n\nNotwithstanding Dartmouth's connections with the crown and respectable society, it was a major base for privateering in medieval times. John Hawley or Hauley, a licensed privateer and sometime mayor of Dartmouth is reputed to be a model for Chaucer's \"schipman\".\n\nThe earliest street in Dartmouth to be recorded by name (in the 13th century) is Smith Street. Several of the houses on the street are originally late 16th century or early 17th century and probably rebuilt on the site of earlier medieval dwellings. The street name undoubtedly derives from the smiths and shipwrights who built and repaired ships here when the tidal waters reached as far as this point. Smith Street was also the site of the town pillory in medieval times.\n\nThe first church in the parish was St Clement's, Townstal, which may have existed in some form before the 1190s. It was granted by the FitzStephens to Torre Abbey in about 1198, the Abbey having been founded in 1196, and the present stone-built church was probably started shortly after this.\n\nManorial transactions are first recorded in 1220, when the manor house was at Norton, about half a mile west of Townstal. Names of occupations also started to appear, including taverner, tailor, coggar, korker, goldsmith, glover, skinner and baker. The \"Fosse\", now Foss Street, a dam across the creek known later as The Mill Pool, was first mentioned in 1243. The flow of water out of the pool through the Mill Gullet powered a tidal mill. The dam was used as an unofficial footpath linking Clifton, to the south, with Hardness, to the north. Before this it was necessary to go westwards to the head of the creek at Ford to travel between the two settlements. The lord of the manor was given the rights to hold a weekly market and an annual fair in 1231. In 1281, a legal case proved that the Lord of Totnes had the right to charge tolls on ships using the river, and this right was bought by Nicholas of Tewkesbury in 1306, who conveyed the town, river and port to the king in 1327, so making Dartmouth a Royal Borough. The king gave the river to the Duchy of Cornwall in 1333, who still own the \"fundus\" or bed of the river. In 1335 Edward III granted Dartmouth to Joan of Carew, whose husband was Lord of Stoke Fleming, and almost immediately she obediently passed the lordship to Guy de Bryan, one of the king's leading ministers. In 1341, the town was granted a Royal Charter, which allowed for the election of a mayor. The borough was required to provide two ships for forty days per year. After 1390, no more is heard of lordship rights, and the borough became effectively independent of any lord.\n\nSt Saviour's Church was constructed in 1335 and consecrated in 1372. It contains a pre-Reformation oak rood screen built in 1480 and several monuments including the tomb of John Hawley (d. 1408) and his two wives, covered with a large brass plate effigy of all three. A large medieval ironwork door is decorated with two leopards of the Plantagenets and is possibly the original portal. Although it is dated \"1631\", this is thought to be the date of a subsequent refurbishment coincidental with major renovations of the church in the 17th century. The gallery of the church is decorated with the heraldic crests of prominent local families and is reputed to be constructed of timbers from ships captured during the defeat of the Spanish Armada, although this has not been categorically substantiated. An engraving of the interior of the church and showing the screen provided the inspiration for Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poetical illustration \"Dartmouth Church\" in Fisher's Drawing Room scrap Book, 1833.\nIn mediaeval times, land access from the Totnes direction passed the manor at Norton and the parish church at Townstal before falling steeply along what are now Church Road, Mount Boone and Ridge Hill to the river at Hardness. There were steeper routes via Townstal Hill and Clarence Street and also via Brown's Hill. These were all too steep for vehicles, so the only land access was by packhorse. In 1671 there is the first mention of the building of the \"New Ground\". A previously existing sandbank was built up using ships' ballast, and a quay wall was built around it to provide more mooring space. The area proved too unstable to be built on, and is now the Royal Avenue Gardens. It was originally linked to the corner of the Quay by a bridge, opposite Duke Street. At the other end of The Quay, Spithead extended into the river for a few yards. \nIn 1592 the \"Madre de Deus\", a Portuguese treasure ship captured by the English in the Azores, docked at Dartmouth Harbour. It attracted all manner of traders, dealers, cutpurses and thieves and by the time Sir Walter Raleigh arrived to reclaim the Crown's share of the loot, a cargo estimated at half a million pounds had been reduced to £140,000. Still, ten freighters were needed to carry the treasure to London.\n\nHenry Hudson put into Dartmouth on his return from North America, and was arrested for sailing under a foreign flag. The Pilgrim Fathers put into Dartmouth's Bayard's Cove, en route from Southampton to America. They rested a while before setting off on their journey in the \"Mayflower\" and the \"Speedwell\" on 20 August 1620. About 300 miles west of Land's End, upon realising that the \"Speedwell\" was unseaworthy, it returned to Plymouth. The \"Mayflower\" departed alone to complete the crossing to Cape Cod. Dartmouth's sister city is Dartmouth, Massachusetts.\n\nThe town contains many medieval and Elizabethan streetscapes and is a patchwork of narrow lanes and stone stairways. A significant number of the historic buildings are listed. One of the most obvious is the Butterwalk, built 1635 to 1640. Its intricately carved wooden fascia is supported on granite columns. Charles II held court in the Butterwalk whilst sheltering from storms in 1671 in a room which now forms part of Dartmouth Museum. Much of the interior survives from that time.\n\nThe Royal Castle Hotel was built in 1639 on the then new quay. The building was re-fronted in the 19th century, and as the new frontage is itself listed, it is not possible to see the original which lies beneath. A claimant for the oldest building is a former merchant's house in Higher Street, now a Good Beer Guide listed public house called \"the Cherub\", built circa 1380. Agincourt House (next to the Lower Ferry) is also 14th century.\n\nDartmouth sent numerous ships to join the English fleet that attacked the Spanish Armada, including the Roebuck, Crescent and Hart. The \"Nuestra Señora del Rosario\", the Spanish Armada's \"payship\" commanded by Admiral Pedro de Valdés, was captured along with all its crew by Sir Francis Drake. It was reportedly anchored in the River Dart for more than a year and the crew were used as labourers on the nearby Greenway Estate which was the home of Sir Humphrey Gilbert and his half-brother Sir Walter Raleigh. Greenway was later the home of Dame Agatha Christie.\n\nThe remains of a fort at Gallants Bower just outside the town are some of the best preserved remains of a Civil War defensive structure. The fort was built by Royalist occupation forces in c. 1643 to the south east of the town, with a similar fort at Mount Ridley on the opposite slopes of what is now Kingswear. The Parliamentarian General Fairfax attacked from the north in 1646, taking the town and forcing the Royalists to surrender, after which Gallants Bower was demolished.\n\nBefore 1671, what is now the town centre was almost entirely tidal mud flats. The New Road (now Victoria Road) was constructed across the bed of the (silted up) Mill Pool and up the Ford valley after 1823. Spithead was extended in 1864 when the Dartmouth and Torbay Railway arrived in Kingswear and a pontoon was constructed, linked to Spithead by a bridge. The railway directors and others formed the Dartmouth Harbour Commissioners. \nAt this time, all the roads in those parts of Dartmouth which were not land reclamations were very narrow. In 1864-7 Higher Street was widened into Southtown and linked to Lower Street, which was also widened, with the northern part renamed Fairfax Place. Some of the buildings were rebuilt further back with decorative frontages.\nIn 1881 the Harbour Commissioners produced a scheme for an embankment or esplanade from near the Lower Ferry to Hardness, across the remains of The Pool, to provide an attraction for tourists and further mooring space. It was completed in 1885 after much disagreement between the Borough, the Commissioners and the Railway (now the Great Western Railway). A new station was also built at this time. The building of the Embankment left a section of river isolated between Spithead and the New Ground, which is known as The Boatfloat, and is linked to the river by a bridge for small vessels under the road.\n\nThe coming of steam ships led to Dartmouth being used as a bunkering port, with coal being brought in by ship or train. Coal lumpers were members of gangs, who competed to bunker the ships by racing to be first to a ship. This led to the men living as close as possible to the river, and their tenements became grossly overcrowded, with the families living in slum conditions, with up to 15 families in one house, one family to a room.\n\nThe Royal National Lifeboat Institution opened the Dart Lifeboat Station at the Sand Quay in 1878, but it was closed in 1896. In all this time only one effective rescue was made by the lifeboat.\n\nThe area to the north of Ridge Hill was a shallow and muddy bay (\"Coombe Mud\") with a narrow road running along the shore linking with the Higher Ferry. The mud was a dumping ground for vessels, including a submarine. The reclamation was completed in 1937 by the extension of the Embankment and the reclamation of the mud behind it, which became Coronation Park. \n\nIn the 1920s, aided by government grants, the council made a start on clearing the slums. This was aided by the decline in the use of coal as a fuel for ships. The slums were demolished, and the inhabitants were rehoused in new houses in the Britannia Avenue area, to the west of the old village or hamlet of Townstal. The process was interrupted by the second world war, but was resumed with the construction of many prefabs, and later more houses. Community facilities were minimal at first, but a central area was reserved for a church, which was used by the Baptists and opened in 1954, together with a speedway track. The latter was later used for housing, but a new community centre was opened nearby, together with a leisure centre, an outdoor swimming pool, and later an indoor pool, and supermarkets. There are also light industrial units.\n\nIn the latter part of the Second World War the town was a base for American forces and one of the departure points for Utah Beach in the D Day landings. Slipways and harbour improvements were also constructed. Much of the surrounding countryside and notably Slapton Sands was closed to the public while it was used by US troops for practise landings and manoeuvres. \nBetween 1985 and 1990 the Embankment was widened by 6 metres and raised to prevent flooding at spring tides. A tidal lock gate was provided at the Boatfloat bridge, which could be closed at such times.\n\nDart Lifeboat Station was reopened in 2007, the first time that a lifeboat had been stationed in the town since 1896. It has initially been kept in a temporary building in Coronation Park.\n\nIn 2010, a fire seriously damaged numerous historical properties in Fairfax Place and Higher Street. Several were Tudor and Grade I or Grade II listed buildings.\n\nThe town was an ancient borough, incorporated by Edward III, known formally as Clifton-Dartmouth-Hardness, and consisting of the three parishes of \"St Petrox\", \"St Saviour\" and \"Townstal\", and incorporating the hamlets of Ford, Old Mill and Norton. It was reformed under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. The town returned two members of parliament from the 13th century until 1835, after which one MP was elected until the town was disenfranchised in 1868. It remained a municipal borough until 1974, when it was merged into the South Hams district, and became a successor parish of Dartmouth with a town council.\n\nDartmouth Town Council is the lowest of three tiers of local government. It consists of 16 councillors representing the two wards of Clifton and Townstal. At the second tier, Dartmouth forms part of the Dartmouth and Kingswear ward of South Hams District Council, which returns three councillors. At the upper tier of local government Dartmouth and Kingswear Electoral Division elects one member to Devon County Council.\n\nThe Port of Dartmouth Royal Regatta takes place annually over three days at the end of August. The event sees the traditional regatta boat races along with markets, fun fairs, community games, musical performances, air displays including the Red Arrows and fireworks. A Royal Navy guard ship is often present at the event.\nOther cultural events include beer festivals in February and July (the latter in Kingswear), a music festival and an art and craft weekend in June, a food festival in October and a Christmas candlelit event.\n\nThe Flavel Centre incorporates the public library and performance spaces, featuring films, live music and comedy and exhibitions.\n\nBayard's Cove has been used in several television productions, including \"The Onedin Line\" a popular BBC television drama series that ran from 1971 to 1980. Many of the scenes from the BBC's popular series 'Down to Earth', starring Ricky Tomlinson, were filmed at various locations around the town.\n\nNotable tourist attractions include the Dartmouth Royal Naval College, Dartmouth Castle and the Dartmouth Steam Railway which terminates at Kingswear on the opposite bank of the river.\n\nBoat cruises to nearby places along the coast (such as Torbay and Start Bay) and up the river (to Totnes, Dittisham and the Greenway Estate) are provided by several companies. The paddlesteamer PS Kingswear Castle returned to the town in 2013. The South West Coast Path National Trail passes through the town, and also through extensive National Trust coastal properties at Little Dartmouth and Brownstone (Kingswear). The Dart Valley Trail starts in Dartmouth, with routes either side of the River Dart as far as Dittisham, and continuing to Totnes via Cornworthy, Tuckenhay and Ashprington. The area has long been well regarded for yachting, and there are extensive marinas at Sandquay, Kingswear and Noss (approximately one mile north of Kingswear).\n\nThe nearest Met Office weather station is Slapton, about 5 miles south-south west of Dartmouth and a similar distance from the coast. As with the rest of the British Isles and South West England, the area experiences a maritime climate with warm summers and mild winters - this is particularly pronounced due to its position near the coast - extremes range from a record low of just in January 1987 up to a record high of during June 1976.\n\nDartmouth is linked to Kingswear, on the other side of the River Dart, by three ferries. The Higher Ferry and the Lower Ferry are both vehicular ferries. The Passenger Ferry, as its name suggests, carries only passengers, principally to connect with the Dartmouth Steam Railway at Kingswear railway station. The nearest bridge across the Dart is in Totnes, some away by road.\n\nThe A379 road runs through Dartmouth, linking the town to Slapton and Kingsbridge to the southwest and to Torbay to the east across the Higher Ferry. The A3122 connects Dartmouth to a junction with the A381, and hence to both Totnes and a more direct route to Kingsbridge.\nStagecoach Devon provides local town bus services and links to Plymouth, Totnes and Exeter, and Kingsbridge. In addition Stagecoach Devon provides links to the Torbay resorts of Brixham, Paignton and Torquay from Kingswear via the ferry.\n\nNo railway has ever run to Dartmouth, but the town does have a railway station, opened on 31 March 1890 to replace the original facility on the pontoon, although it is now a restaurant. The railway line to Kingswear was opened in 1864. As a result of shortage of capital, a deviation from the original scheme to run the line from Churston to Greenway with a steamer service to Dartmouth was proposed, but defeated in Parliament. It had been suggested that this could, at a later date, be used as a jumping off point for a bridge to the west bank of the Dart and a line direct to Dartmouth. In 1900, a Light Railway scheme was proposed for a crossing of the Dart near Maypool to join another line from Totnes and then proceed to Kingsbridge and Yealmpton, with a branch to Salcombe. This was also defeated by lack of funds. The railway terminated at a station called \"Kingswear for Dartmouth\" (now on the Dartmouth Steam Railway) and a ferry took passengers across the river to the station at Dartmouth railway station, which had a dedicated pontoon. British Railways formally closed the line to mainline passenger trains in 1973, but it immediately re-opened as a heritage line and has run as one ever since.\n\nThe town is home to the Royal Navy's officer training college (Britannia Royal Naval College), where all officers of the Royal Navy and many foreign naval officers are trained.\n\nDartmouth has one secondary school — formerly (Dartmouth Community College) now Dartmouth Academy — an all-through school for those aged 3–16, and two primary schools: (Dartmouth Primary school (now part of Dartmouth Academy) and St John the Baptist R.C. Primary School). Dartmouth Community College and Dartmouth Primary School are part of the Dartmouth Learning Campus; as from September 2007, Dartmouth Community College is part of a federation with Dartmouth Primary School and Nursery, meaning that the two schools share one governing body for pupils aged 1 to 16. Dartmouth also has a pre-school in the centre of town, established for over 40 years and based in the old Victorian school rooms at South Ford Road. It provides care for 2- to 5-year-olds and is run as a charitable organisation.\n\nDartmouth has a Non-League football club Dartmouth A.F.C. who play at Long Cross.\n\nDartmouth also hosts the annual \"World Indoor Rally Championship\", based on slot car racing in the late summer.\n\nAt the end of August and early September there is the annual Port of Dartmouth Royal Regatta.\n\nSince 1905 Dartmouth has had a greenhouse as part of the Royal Avenue Gardens. In May 2013 this building, used for the previous 10 years by Dartmouth in Bloom, a not-for-profit organisation affiliated with Britain in Bloom, was closed as structurally unsound. There are proposals to restore the greenhouse to its prior Edwardian style.\n\nBULLET::::- George Parker Bidder The town was home to the civil engineer and calculating prodigy George Parker Bidder (1806–1878), who is notable for his work on railways over much of the world, as well as the docks of the East End in the Port of London. Bidder served on the town council, and his expertise was instrumental in draining the area which is now the centre of the town. He also undertook pioneering work with Samuel Lake on steam trawling whilst living in the town. Bidder died at his home at Paradise Point near Warfleet Creek and is buried at nearby Stoke Fleming.\n\nBULLET::::- Gordon Onslow Ford (1912–2003), a leading British surrealist painter, attended the Royal Naval College.\n\nBULLET::::- Sir John Harvey Jones (1924-2008), Businessman and television presenter, attended the Royal Naval College.\n\nBULLET::::- Rachel Kempson The stage and film actress Rachel Kempson (1910–2003) was born in Dartmouth. She was the wife of Sir Michael Redgrave and mother of Vanessa, Lynn and Corin, and published her autobiography, \"Life Among the Redgraves\", in 1988.\n\nBULLET::::- Christopher Robin Milne, son of A. A. Milne, after whom the character Christopher Robin in the Winnie-the-Pooh books was named, used to own the Harbour Bookshop. The bookshop was reported as facing closure in September 2011 and the report was fulfilled.\n\nBULLET::::- Thomas Newcomen, the inventor of the atmospheric engine – the first successful steam-powered pumping engine – was born in Dartmouth in 1663. The location of his house in Lower Street is marked with a plaque, although the building itself was demolished (and elements incorporated into local architect Thomas Lidstone's house on Ridge Hill) in the 19th century to make way for a new road which was named after Newcomen. An 18th-century working Newcomen steam engine is on display in the town.\n\nBULLET::::- Mary Nightingale, ITV newscaster lived in Dartmouth for much of her childhood.\n\nBULLET::::- Flora Thompson lived in Above Town between 1928 and 1940, writing \"Lark Rise\" and \"Over to Candleford\" during this time. The books were later combined into a single volume with \"Candleford Green\" and published as \"Lark Rise to Candleford\". She is buried at Longcross Cemetery.\n\nBULLET::::- Theodore Veale, recipient of the Victoria Cross during the First World War.\n\nBULLET::::- John L. Wimbush, landscape and portrait painter.\n\nBULLET::::- Charles Oman, \"Dartmouth and Kingswear Castles: Twin Dart estuary defenders\"\nBULLET::::- Dartmouth WebCam\n"}
{"id": "8420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8420", "title": "Dodo", "text": "Dodo\n\nThe dodo (\"Raphus cucullatus\") is an extinct flightless bird that was endemic to the island of Mauritius, east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean. The dodo's closest genetic relative was the also-extinct Rodrigues solitaire, the two forming the subfamily Raphinae of the family of pigeons and doves. The closest living relative of the dodo is the Nicobar pigeon. A white dodo was once thought to have existed on the nearby island of Réunion, but this is now thought to have been confusion based on the Réunion ibis and paintings of white dodos.\n\nSubfossil remains show the dodo was about tall and may have weighed in the wild. The dodo's appearance in life is evidenced only by drawings, paintings, and written accounts from the 17th century. As these vary considerably, and only some of the illustrations are known to have been drawn from live specimens, its exact appearance in life remains unresolved, and little is known about its behaviour. Though the dodo has historically been considered fat and clumsy, it is now thought to have been well-adapted for its ecosystem. It has been depicted with brownish-grey plumage, yellow feet, a tuft of tail feathers, a grey, naked head, and a black, yellow, and green beak. It used gizzard stones to help digest its food, which is thought to have included fruits, and its main habitat is believed to have been the woods in the drier coastal areas of Mauritius. One account states its clutch consisted of a single egg. It is presumed that the dodo became flightless because of the ready availability of abundant food sources and a relative absence of predators on Mauritius.\n\nThe first recorded mention of the dodo was by Dutch sailors in 1598. In the following years, the bird was hunted by sailors and invasive species, while its habitat was being destroyed. The last widely accepted sighting of a dodo was in 1662. Its extinction was not immediately noticed, and some considered it to be a mythical creature. In the 19th century, research was conducted on a small quantity of remains of four specimens that had been brought to Europe in the early 17th century. Among these is a dried head, the only soft tissue of the dodo that remains today. Since then, a large amount of subfossil material has been collected on Mauritius, mostly from the Mare aux Songes swamp. The extinction of the dodo within less than a century of its discovery called attention to the previously unrecognised problem of human involvement in the disappearance of entire species. The dodo achieved widespread recognition from its role in the story of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", and it has since become a fixture in popular culture, often as a symbol of extinction and obsolescence.\n\nThe dodo was variously declared a small ostrich, a rail, an albatross, or a vulture, by early scientists. In 1842, Danish zoologist Johannes Theodor Reinhardt proposed that dodos were ground pigeons, based on studies of a dodo skull he had discovered in the collection of the Natural History Museum of Denmark. This view was met with ridicule, but was later supported by English naturalists Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alexander Gordon Melville in their 1848 monograph \"The Dodo and Its Kindred\", which attempted to separate myth from reality. After dissecting the preserved head and foot of the specimen at the Oxford University Museum and comparing it with the few remains then available of the extinct Rodrigues solitaire (\"Pezophaps solitaria\") they concluded that the two were closely related. Strickland stated that although not identical, these birds shared many distinguishing features of the leg bones, otherwise known only in pigeons.\n\nStrickland and Melville established that the dodo was anatomically similar to pigeons in many features. They pointed to the very short keratinous portion of the beak, with its long, slender, naked basal part. Other pigeons also have bare skin around their eyes, almost reaching their beak, as in dodos. The forehead was high in relation to the beak, and the nostril was located low on the middle of the beak and surrounded by skin, a combination of features shared only with pigeons. The legs of the dodo were generally more similar to those of terrestrial pigeons than of other birds, both in their scales and in their skeletal features. Depictions of the large crop hinted at a relationship with pigeons, in which this feature is more developed than in other birds. Pigeons generally have very small clutches, and the dodo is said to have laid a single egg. Like pigeons, the dodo lacked the vomer and septum of the nostrils, and it shared details in the mandible, the zygomatic bone, the palate, and the hallux. The dodo differed from other pigeons mainly in the small size of the wings and the large size of the beak in proportion to the rest of the cranium.\n\nThroughout the 19th century, several species were classified as congeneric with the dodo, including the Rodrigues solitaire and the Réunion solitaire, as \"Didus solitarius\" and \"Raphus solitarius\", respectively (\"Didus\" and \"Raphus\" being names for the dodo genus used by different authors of the time). An atypical 17th-century description of a dodo and bones found on Rodrigues, now known to have belonged to the Rodrigues solitaire, led Abraham Dee Bartlett to name a new species, \"Didus nazarenus\", in 1852. Based on solitaire remains, it is now a synonym of that species. Crude drawings of the red rail of Mauritius were also misinterpreted as dodo species; \"Didus broeckii\" and \"Didus herberti\".\n\nFor many years the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire were placed in a family of their own, the Raphidae (formerly Dididae), because their exact relationships with other pigeons were unresolved. Each was also placed in its own monotypic family (Raphidae and Pezophapidae, respectively), as it was thought that they had evolved their similarities independently. Osteological and DNA analysis has since led to the dissolution of the family Raphidae, and the dodo and solitaire are now placed in their own subfamily, Raphinae, within the family Columbidae.\n\nIn 2002, American geneticist Beth Shapiro and colleagues analysed the DNA of the dodo for the first time. Comparison of mitochondrial cytochrome \"b\" and 12S rRNA sequences isolated from a tarsal of the Oxford specimen and a femur of a Rodrigues solitaire confirmed their close relationship and their placement within the Columbidae. The genetic evidence was interpreted as showing the Southeast Asian Nicobar pigeon (\"Caloenas nicobarica\") to be their closest living relative, followed by the crowned pigeons (\"Goura\") of New Guinea, and the superficially dodo-like tooth-billed pigeon (\"Didunculus strigirostris\") from Samoa (its scientific name refers to its dodo-like beak). This clade consists of generally ground-dwelling island endemic pigeons. The following cladogram shows the dodo's closest relationships within the Columbidae, based on Shapiro et al., 2002:\n\nA similar cladogram was published in 2007, inverting the placement of \"Goura\" and \"Didunculus\" and including the pheasant pigeon (\"Otidiphaps nobilis\") and the thick-billed ground pigeon (\"Trugon terrestris\") at the base of the clade. The DNA used in these studies was obtained from the Oxford specimen, and since this material is degraded, and no usable DNA has been extracted from subfossil remains, these findings still need to be independently verified. Based on behavioural and morphological evidence, Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire should be placed in the subfamily Gourinae along with the \"Goura\" pigeons and others, in agreement with the genetic evidence. In 2014, DNA of the only known specimen of the recently extinct spotted green pigeon (\"Caloenas maculata\") was analysed, and it was found to be a close relative of the Nicobar pigeon, and thus also the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire.\n\nThe 2002 study indicated that the ancestors of the dodo and the solitaire diverged around the Paleogene-Neogene boundary. The Mascarene Islands (Mauritius, Réunion, and Rodrigues), are of volcanic origin and are less than 10 million years old. Therefore, the ancestors of both birds probably remained capable of flight for a considerable time after the separation of their lineage. The Nicobar and spotted green pigeon were placed at the base of a lineage leading to the Raphinae, which indicates the flightless raphines had ancestors that were able to fly, were semi-terrestrial, and inhabited islands. This in turn supports the hypothesis that the ancestors of those birds reached the Mascarene islands by island hopping from South Asia. The lack of mammalian herbivores competing for resources on these islands allowed the solitaire and the dodo to attain very large sizes and flightlessness. Despite its divergent skull morphology and adaptations for larger size, many features of its skeleton remained similar to those of smaller, flying pigeons. Another large, flightless pigeon, the Viti Levu giant pigeon (\"Natunaornis gigoura\"), was described in 2001 from subfossil material from Fiji. It was only slightly smaller than the dodo and the solitaire, and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons.\n\nOne of the original names for the dodo was the Dutch \"\"Walghvoghel\"\", first used in the journal of Dutch Vice Admiral Wybrand van Warwijck, who visited Mauritius during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia in 1598. \"Walghe\" means \"tasteless\", \"insipid\", or \"sickly\", and \"voghel\" means \"bird\". The name was translated by Jakob Friedlib into German as \"Walchstök\" or \"Walchvögel\". The original Dutch report titled \"Waarachtige Beschryving\" was lost, but the English translation survived:\nAnother account from that voyage, perhaps the first to mention the dodo, states that the Portuguese referred to them as penguins. The meaning may not have been derived from \"penguin\" (the Portuguese referred to them as \"\"fotilicaios\"\" at the time), but from \"pinion\", a reference to the small wings. The crew of the Dutch ship \"Gelderland\" referred to the bird as \"Dronte\" (meaning \"swollen\") in 1602, a name that is still used in some languages. This crew also called them \"griff-eendt\" and \"kermisgans\", in reference to fowl fattened for the Kermesse festival in Amsterdam, which was held the day after they anchored on Mauritius.\n\nThe etymology of the word \"dodo\" is unclear. Some ascribe it to the Dutch word \"dodoor\" for \"sluggard\", but it is more probably related to \"Dodaars\", which means either \"fat-arse\" or \"knot-arse\", referring to the knot of feathers on the hind end. The first record of the word \"Dodaars\" is in Captain Willem Van West-Zanen's journal in 1602. The English writer Sir Thomas Herbert was the first to use the word \"dodo\" in print in his 1634 travelogue claiming it was referred to as such by the Portuguese, who had visited Mauritius in 1507. Another Englishman, Emmanuel Altham, had used the word in a 1628 letter in which he also claimed its origin was Portuguese. The name \"dodar\" was introduced into English at the same time as dodo, but was only used until the 18th century. As far as is known, the Portuguese never mentioned the bird. Nevertheless, some sources still state that the word \"dodo\" derives from the Portuguese word \"doudo\" (currently \"doido\"), meaning \"fool\" or \"crazy\". It has also been suggested that \"dodo\" was an onomatopoeic approximation of the bird's call, a two-note pigeon-like sound resembling \"doo-doo\".\n\nThe Latin name \"cucullatus\" (\"hooded\") was first used by Juan Eusebio Nieremberg in 1635 as \"Cygnus cucullatus\", in reference to Carolus Clusius's 1605 depiction of a dodo. In his 18th-century classic work \"Systema Naturae\", Carl Linnaeus used \"cucullatus\" as the specific name, but combined it with the genus name \"Struthio\" (ostrich). Mathurin Jacques Brisson coined the genus name \"Raphus\" (referring to the bustards) in 1760, resulting in the current name \"Raphus cucullatus\". In 1766, Linnaeus coined the new binomial \"Didus ineptus\" (meaning \"inept dodo\"). This has become a synonym of the earlier name because of nomenclatural priority.\n\nAs no complete dodo specimens exist, its external appearance, such as plumage and colouration, is hard to determine. Illustrations and written accounts of encounters with the dodo between its discovery and its extinction (1598–1662) are the primary evidence for its external appearance. According to most representations, the dodo had greyish or brownish plumage, with lighter primary feathers and a tuft of curly light feathers high on its rear end. The head was grey and naked, the beak green, black and yellow, and the legs were stout and yellowish, with black claws. A study of the few remaining feathers on the Oxford specimen head showed that they were pennaceous rather than plumaceous (downy) and most similar to those of other pigeons.\n\nSubfossil remains and remnants of the birds that were brought to Europe in the 17th century show that dodos were very large birds, up to tall. \nThe bird was sexually dimorphic; males were larger and had proportionally longer beaks. Weight estimates have varied from study to study. In 1993, Bradley C. Livezey proposed that males would have weighed and females . Also in 1993, Andrew C. Kitchener attributed a high contemporary weight estimate and the roundness of dodos depicted in Europe to these birds having been overfed in captivity; weights in the wild were estimated to have been in the range of , and fattened birds could have weighed . A 2011 estimate by Angst and colleagues gave an average weight as low as . This has also been questioned, and there is still controversy over weight estimates. A 2016 study estimated the weight at , based on CT scans of composite skeletons. It has also been suggested that the weight depended on the season, and that individuals were fat during cool seasons, but less so during hot.\n\nThe skull of the dodo differed much from those of other pigeons, especially in being more robust, the bill having a hooked tip, and in having a short cranium compared to the jaws. The upper bill was nearly twice as long as the cranium, which was short compared to those of its closest pigeon relatives. The openings of the bony nostrils were elongated along the length of the beak, and they contained no bony septum. The cranium (excluding the beak) was wider than it was long, and the frontal bone formed a dome-shape, with the highest point above the hind part of the eye sockets. The skull sloped downwards at the back. The eye sockets occupied much of the hind part of the skull. The sclerotic rings inside the eye were formed by eleven ossicles (small bones), similar to the amount in other pigeons. The mandible was slightly curved, and each half had a single fenestra (opening), as in other pigeons.\n\nThe dodo had about nineteen presynsacral vertebrae (those of the neck and thorax, including three fused into a notarium), sixteen synsacral vertebrae (those of the lumbar region and sacrum), six free tail (caudal) vertebrae, and a pygostyle. The neck had well-developed areas for muscle and ligament attachment, probably to support the heavy skull and beak. On each side, it had six ribs, four of which articulated with the sternum through sternal ribs. The sternum was large, but small in relation to the body compared to those of much smaller pigeons that are able to fly. The sternum was highly pneumatic, broad, and relatively thick in cross-section. The bones of the pectoral girdle, shoulder blades, and wing bones were reduced in size compared to those of flighted pigeon, and were more gracile compared to those of the Rodrigues solitaire, but none of the individual skeletal components had disappeared. The carpometacarpus of the dodo was more robust than that of the solitaire, however. The pelvis was wider than that of the solitaire and other relatives, yet was comparable to the proportions in some smaller, flighted pigeons. Most of the leg bones were more robust than those of extant pigeons and the solitaire, but the length proportions were little different.\n\nMany of the skeletal features that distinguish the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire, its closest relative, from pigeons have been attributed to their flightlessness. The pelvic elements were thicker than those of flighted pigeons to support the higher weight, and the pectoral region and the small wings were paedomorphic, meaning that they were underdeveloped and retained juvenile features. The skull, trunk and pelvic limbs were peramorphic, meaning that they changed considerably with age. The dodo shared several other traits with the Rodrigues solitaire, such as features of the skull, pelvis, and sternum, as well as their large size. It differed in other aspects, such as being more robust and shorter than the solitaire, having a larger skull and beak, a rounded skull roof, and smaller orbits. The dodo's neck and legs were proportionally shorter, and it did not possess an equivalent to the knob present on the solitaire's wrists.\n\nMost contemporary descriptions of the dodo are found in ship's logs and journals of the Dutch East India Company vessels that docked in Mauritius when the Dutch Empire ruled the island. These records were used as guides for future voyages. Few contemporary accounts are reliable, as many seem to be based on earlier accounts, and none were written by scientists. One of the earliest accounts, from van Warwijck's 1598 journal, describes the bird as follows:\n\nOne of the most detailed descriptions is by Herbert in \"A Relation of Some Yeares Travaille into Afrique and the Greater Asia\" from 1634:\n\nThe travel journal of the Dutch ship \"Gelderland\" (1601–1603), rediscovered in the 1860s, contains the only known sketches of living or recently killed specimens drawn on Mauritius. They have been attributed to the professional artist Joris Joostensz Laerle, who also drew other now-extinct Mauritian birds, and to a second, less refined artist. Apart from these sketches, it is unknown how many of the twenty or so 17th-century illustrations of the dodos were drawn from life or from stuffed specimens, which affects their reliability.\n\nThe traditional image of the dodo is of a very fat and clumsy bird, but this view may be exaggerated. The general opinion of scientists today is that many old European depictions were based on overfed captive birds or crudely stuffed specimens. It has also been suggested that the images might show dodos with puffed feathers, as part of display behaviour. The Dutch painter Roelant Savery was the most prolific and influential illustrator of the dodo, having made at least twelve depictions, often showing it in the lower corners. A famous painting of his from 1626, now called \"Edwards's Dodo\" as it was once owned by the ornithologist George Edwards, has since become the standard image of a dodo. It is housed in the Natural History Museum, London. The image shows a particularly fat bird and is the source for many other dodo illustrations.\n\nAn Indian Mughal painting rediscovered in St. Petersburg in the 1950s shows a dodo along with native Indian birds. It depicts a slimmer, brownish bird, and its discoverer A. Iwanow and British palaeontologist Julian Hume regarded it as one of the most accurate depictions of the living dodo; the surrounding birds are clearly identifiable and depicted with appropriate colouring. It is believed to be from the 17th century and has been attributed to the Mughal painter Ustad Mansur. The bird depicted probably lived in the menagerie of the Mughal Emperor Jahangir, located in Surat, where the English traveller Peter Mundy also claimed to have seen two dodos sometime between 1628 and 1633. In 2014, another Indian illustration of a dodo was reported, but it was found to be derivative of an 1836 German illustration.\n\nAll post-1638 depictions appear to be based on earlier images, around the time reports mentioning dodos became rarer. Differences in the depictions led ornithologists such as Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans and Masauji Hachisuka to speculate about sexual dimorphism, ontogenic traits, seasonal variation, and even the existence of different species, but these theories are not accepted today. Because details such as markings of the beak, the form of the tail feathers, and colouration vary from account to account, it is impossible to determine the exact morphology of these features, whether they signal age or sex, or if they even reflect reality. Hume argued that the nostrils of the living dodo would have been slits, as seen in the \"Gelderland\", Cornelis Saftleven, Savery's Crocker Art Gallery, and Ustad Mansur images. According to this claim, the gaping nostrils often seen in paintings indicate that taxidermy specimens were used as models. Most depictions show that the wings were held in an extended position, unlike flighted pigeons, but similar to ratites such as the ostrich and kiwi.\n\nLittle is known of the behaviour of the dodo, as most contemporary descriptions are very brief. Based on weight estimates, it has been suggested the male could reach the age of 21, and the female 17. Studies of the cantilever strength of its leg bones indicate that it could run quite fast. The legs were robust and strong to support the bulk of the bird, and also made it agile and manoeuvrable in the dense, pre-human landscape. Though the wings were small, well-developed muscle scars on the bones show that they were not completely vestigial, and may have been used for display behaviour and balance; extant pigeons also use their wings for such purposes. Unlike the Rodrigues solitaire, there is no evidence that the dodo used its wings in intraspecific combat. Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures, it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison. The dodo may instead have used its large, hooked beak in territorial disputes. Since Mauritius receives more rainfall and has less seasonal variation than Rodrigues, which would have affected the availability of resources on the island, the dodo would have less reason to evolve aggressive territorial behaviour. The Rodrigues solitaire was therefore probably the more aggressive of the two.\n\nThe preferred habitat of the dodo is unknown, but old descriptions suggest that it inhabited the woods on the drier coastal areas of south and west Mauritius. This view is supported by the fact that the Mare aux Songes swamp, where most dodo remains have been excavated, is close to the sea in south-eastern Mauritius. Such a limited distribution across the island could well have contributed to its extinction. A 1601 map from the \"Gelderland\" journal shows a small island off the coast of Mauritius where dodos were caught. Julian Hume has suggested this island was l'île aux Benitiers in Tamarin Bay, on the west coast of Mauritius. Subfossil bones have also been found inside caves in highland areas, indicating that it once occurred on mountains. Work at the Mare aux Songes swamp has shown that its habitat was dominated by tambalacoque and \"Pandanus\" trees and endemic palms. The near-coastal placement and wetness of the Mare aux Songes led to a high diversity of plant species, whereas the surrounding areas were drier.\n\nMany endemic species of Mauritius became extinct after the arrival of humans, so the ecosystem of the island is badly damaged and hard to reconstruct. Before humans arrived, Mauritius was entirely covered in forests, but very little remains of them today, because of deforestation. The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened. The dodo lived alongside other recently extinct Mauritian birds such as the flightless red rail, the broad-billed parrot, the Mascarene grey parakeet, the Mauritius blue pigeon, the Mauritius owl, the Mascarene coot, the Mauritian shelduck, the Mauritian duck, and the Mauritius night heron. Extinct Mauritian reptiles include the saddle-backed Mauritius giant tortoise, the domed Mauritius giant tortoise, the Mauritian giant skink, and the Round Island burrowing boa. The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail \"Tropidophora carinata\" lived on Mauritius and Réunion, but vanished from both islands. Some plants, such as \"Casearia tinifolia\" and the palm orchid, have also become extinct.\n\nA 1631 Dutch letter (long thought lost, but rediscovered in 2017) is the only account of the dodo's diet, and also mentions that it used its beak for defence. The document uses word-play to refer to the animals described, with dodos presumably being an allegory for wealthy mayors:\nIn addition to fallen fruits, the dodo probably subsisted on nuts, seeds, bulbs, and roots. It has also been suggested that the dodo might have eaten crabs and shellfish, like their relatives the crowned pigeons. Its feeding habits must have been versatile, since captive specimens were probably given a wide range of food on the long sea journeys. Oudemans suggested that as Mauritius has marked dry and wet seasons, the dodo probably fattened itself on ripe fruits at the end of the wet season to survive the dry season, when food was scarce; contemporary reports describe the bird's \"greedy\" appetite. France Staub suggested that they mainly fed on palm fruits, and he attempted to correlate the fat-cycle of the dodo with the fruiting regime of the palms.\n\nSkeletal elements of the upper jaw appear to have been rhynchokinetic (movable in relation to each other), which must have affected its feeding behaviour. In extant birds, such as frugivorous (fruit-eating) pigeons, kinetic premaxillae help with consuming large food items. The beak also appears to have been able to withstand high force loads, which indicates a diet of hard food. In 2016, the first 3D endocast was made from the brain of the dodo; examination found that though the brain was similar to that of other pigeons in most respects, the dodo had a comparatively large olfactory bulb. This gave the dodo a good sense of smell, which may have aided in locating fruit and small prey.\n\nSeveral contemporary sources state that the dodo used Gastroliths (gizzard stones) to aid digestion. The English writer Sir Hamon L'Estrange witnessed a live bird in London and described it as follows:\n\nIt is not known how the young were fed, but related pigeons provide crop milk. Contemporary depictions show a large crop, which was probably used to add space for food storage and to produce crop milk. It has been suggested that the maximum size attained by the dodo and the solitaire was limited by the amount of crop milk they could produce for their young during early growth.\n\nIn 1973, the tambalacoque, also known as the dodo tree, was thought to be dying out on Mauritius, to which it is endemic. There were supposedly only 13 specimens left, all estimated to be about 300 years old. Stanley Temple hypothesised that it depended on the dodo for its propagation, and that its seeds would germinate only after passing through the bird's digestive tract. He claimed that the tambalacoque was now nearly coextinct because of the disappearance of the dodo. Temple overlooked reports from the 1940s that found that tambalacoque seeds germinated, albeit very rarely, without being abraded during digestion. Others have contested his hypothesis and suggested that the decline of the tree was exaggerated, or seeds were also distributed by other extinct animals such as \"Cylindraspis\" tortoises, fruit bats or the broad-billed parrot. According to Wendy Strahm and Anthony Cheke, two experts in the ecology of the Mascarene Islands, the tree, while rare, has germinated since the demise of the dodo and numbers several hundred, not 13 as claimed by Temple, hence discrediting Temple's view as to the dodo and the tree's sole survival relationship.\n\nThe Brazilian ornithologist Carlos Yamashita suggested in 1997 that the broad-billed parrot may have depended on dodos and \"Cylindraspis\" tortoises to eat palm fruits and excrete their seeds, which became food for the parrots. \"Anodorhynchus\" macaws depended on now-extinct South American megafauna in the same way, but now rely on domesticated cattle for this service.\n\nAs it was flightless and terrestrial and there were no mammalian predators or other kinds of natural enemy on Mauritius, the dodo probably nested on the ground. The account by François Cauche from 1651 is the only description of the egg and the call:\nCauche's account is problematic, since it also mentions that the bird he was describing had three toes and no tongue, unlike dodos. This led some to believe that Cauche was describing a new species of dodo (\"\"Didus nazarenus\"\"). The description was most probably mingled with that of a cassowary, and Cauche's writings have other inconsistencies. A mention of a \"young ostrich\" taken on board a ship in 1617 is the only other reference to a possible juvenile dodo. An egg claimed to be that of a dodo is stored in the museum of East London, South Africa. It was donated by Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer, whose great aunt had received it from a captain who claimed to have found it in a swamp on Mauritius. In 2010, the curator of the museum proposed using genetic studies to determine its authenticity. It may instead be an aberrant ostrich egg.\n\nBecause of the possible single-egg clutch and the bird's large size, it has been proposed that the dodo was K-selected, meaning that it produced a low number of altricial offspring, which required parental care until they matured. Some evidence, including the large size and the fact that tropical and frugivorous birds have slower growth rates, indicates that the bird may have had a protracted development period. The fact that no juvenile dodos have been found in the Mare aux Songes swamp may indicate that they produced little offspring, that they matured rapidly, that the breeding grounds were far away from the swamp, or that the risk of miring was seasonal.\n\nA 2017 study examined the histology of thin-sectioned dodo bones, modern Mauritian birds, local ecology, and contemporary accounts, to recover information about the life history of the dodo. The study suggested that dodos bred around August, after having potentially fattened themselves, corresponding with the fat and thin cycles of many vertebrates of Mauritius. The chicks grew rapidly, reaching robust, almost adult, sizes, and sexual maturity before Austral summer or the cyclone season. Adult dodos which had just bred moulted after Austral summer, around March. The feathers of the wings and tail were replaced first, and the moulting would have completed at the end of July, in time for the next breeding season. Different stages of moulting may also account for inconsistencies in contemporary descriptions of dodo plumage.\n\nMauritius had previously been visited by Arab vessels in the Middle Ages and Portuguese ships between 1507 and 1513, but was settled by neither. No records of dodos by these are known, although the Portuguese name for Mauritius, \"Cerne (swan) Island\", may have been a reference to dodos. The Dutch Empire acquired Mauritius in 1598, renaming it after Maurice of Nassau, and it was used for the provisioning of trade vessels of the Dutch East India Company henceforward. The earliest known accounts of the dodo were provided by Dutch travelers during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia, led by admiral Jacob van Neck in 1598. They appear in reports published in 1601, which also contain the first published illustration of the bird. Since the first sailors to visit Mauritius had been at sea for a long time, their interest in these large birds was mainly culinary. The 1602 journal by Willem Van West-Zanen of the ship \"Bruin-Vis\" mentions that 24–25 dodos were hunted for food, which were so large that two could scarcely be consumed at mealtime, their remains being preserved by salting. An illustration made for the 1648 published version of this journal, showing the killing of dodos, a dugong, and possibly Mascarene grey parakeets, was captioned with a Dutch poem, here in Hugh Strickland's 1848 translation:\nSome early travellers found dodo meat unsavoury, and preferred to eat parrots and pigeons; others described it as tough but good. Some hunted dodos only for their gizzards, as this was considered the most delicious part of the bird. Dodos were easy to catch, but hunters had to be careful not to be bitten by their powerful beaks.\n\nThe appearance of the dodo and the red rail led Peter Mundy to speculate, 230 years before Charles Darwin's theory of evolution:\n\nThe dodo was found interesting enough that living specimens were sent to Europe and the East. The number of transported dodos that reached their destinations alive is uncertain, and it is unknown how they relate to contemporary depictions and the few non-fossil remains in European museums. Based on a combination of contemporary accounts, paintings, and specimens, Julian Hume has inferred that at least eleven transported dodos reached their destinations alive.\n\nHamon L'Estrange's description of a dodo that he saw in London in 1638 is the only account that specifically mentions a live specimen in Europe. In 1626 Adriaen van de Venne drew a dodo that he claimed to have seen in Amsterdam, but he did not mention if it were alive, and his depiction is reminiscent of Savery's \"Edwards's Dodo\". Two live specimens were seen by Peter Mundy in Surat, India, between 1628 and 1634, one of which may have been the individual painted by Ustad Mansur around 1625. In 1628, Emmanuel Altham visited Mauritius and sent a letter to his brother in England:\n\nWhether the dodo survived the journey is unknown, and the letter was destroyed by fire in the 19th century.\nThe earliest known picture of a dodo specimen in Europe is from a collection of paintings depicting animals in the royal menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II in Prague. This collection includes paintings of other Mauritian animals as well, including a red rail. The dodo, which may be a juvenile, seems to have been dried or embalmed, and had probably lived in the emperor's zoo for a while together with the other animals. That whole stuffed dodos were present in Europe indicates they had been brought alive and died there; it is unlikely that taxidermists were on board the visiting ships, and spirits were not yet used to preserve biological specimens. Most tropical specimens were preserved as dried heads and feet.\n\nOne dodo was reportedly sent as far as Nagasaki, Japan in 1647, but it was long unknown whether it arrived. Contemporary documents first published in 2014 proved the story, and showed that it had arrived alive. It was meant as a gift, and, despite its rarity, was considered of equal value to a white deer and a bezoar stone. It is the last recorded live dodo in captivity.\n\nLike many animals that evolved in isolation from significant predators, the dodo was entirely fearless of humans. This fearlessness and its inability to fly made the dodo easy prey for sailors. Although some scattered reports describe mass killings of dodos for ships' provisions, archaeological investigations have found scant evidence of human predation. Bones of at least two dodos were found in caves at Baie du Cap that sheltered fugitive slaves and convicts in the 17th century, which would not have been easily accessible to dodos because of the high, broken terrain. The human population on Mauritius (an area of ) never exceeded 50 people in the 17th century, but they introduced other animals, including dogs, pigs, cats, rats, and crab-eating macaques, which plundered dodo nests and competed for the limited food resources. At the same time, humans destroyed the forest habitat of the dodos. The impact of the introduced animals on the dodo population, especially the pigs and macaques, is today considered more severe than that of hunting. Rats were perhaps not much of a threat to the nests, since dodos would have been used to dealing with local land crabs.\n\nIt has been suggested that the dodo may already have been rare or localised before the arrival of humans on Mauritius, since it would have been unlikely to become extinct so rapidly if it had occupied all the remote areas of the island. A 2005 expedition found subfossil remains of dodos and other animals killed by a flash flood. Such mass mortalities would have further jeopardised a species already in danger of becoming extinct. Yet the fact that the dodo survived hundreds of years of volcanic activity and climactic changes shows the bird was resilient within its ecosystem.\n\nSome controversy surrounds the date of their extinction. The last widely accepted record of a dodo sighting is the 1662 report by shipwrecked mariner Volkert Evertsz of the Dutch ship \"Arnhem\", who described birds caught on a small islet off Mauritius, now suggested to be Amber Island:\nThe dodos on this islet may not necessarily have been the last members of the species. The last claimed sighting of a dodo was reported in the hunting records of Isaac Johannes Lamotius in 1688. Statistical analysis of these records by Roberts and Solow gives a new estimated extinction date of 1693, with a 95% confidence interval of 1688–1715. The authors also pointed out that because the last sighting before 1662 was in 1638, the dodo was probably already quite rare by the 1660s, and thus a disputed report from 1674 by an escaped slave cannot be dismissed out of hand.\n\nCheke pointed out that some descriptions after 1662 use the names \"Dodo\" and \"Dodaers\" when referring to the red rail, indicating that they had been transferred to it after the disappearance of the dodo itself. Cheke therefore points to the 1662 description as the last credible observation. A 1668 account by English traveller John Marshall, who used the names \"Dodo\" and \"Red Hen\" interchangeably for the red rail, mentioned that the meat was \"hard\", which echoes the description of the meat in the 1681 account. Even the 1662 account has been questioned by the writer Errol Fuller, as the reaction to distress cries matches what was described for the red rail. Until this explanation was proposed, a description of \"dodos\" from 1681 was thought to be the last account, and that date still has proponents. Recently accessible Dutch manuscripts indicate that no dodos were seen by settlers in 1664–1674. It is unlikely the issue will ever be resolved, unless late reports mentioning the name alongside a physical description are rediscovered. The IUCN Red List accepts Cheke's rationale for choosing the 1662 date, taking all subsequent reports to refer to red rails. In any case, the dodo was probably extinct by 1700, about a century after its discovery in 1598. The Dutch left Mauritius in 1710, but by then the dodo and most of the large terrestrial vertebrates there had become extinct.\n\nEven though the rareness of the dodo was reported already in the 17th century, its extinction was not recognised until the 19th century. This was partly because, for religious reasons, extinction was not believed possible until later proved so by Georges Cuvier, and partly because many scientists doubted that the dodo had ever existed. It seemed altogether too strange a creature, and many believed it a myth. The bird was first used as an example of human-induced extinction in \"Penny Magazine\" in 1833, and has since been referred to as an \"icon\" of extinction.\n\nThe only extant remains of dodos taken to Europe in the 17th century are a dried head and foot in the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, a foot once housed in the British Museum but now lost, a skull in the University of Copenhagen Zoological Museum, and an upper jaw in the National Museum, Prague. The last two were rediscovered and identified as dodo remains in the mid-19th century. Several stuffed dodos were also mentioned in old museum inventories, but none are known to have survived. Apart from these remains, a dried foot, which belonged to the Dutch professor Pieter Pauw, was mentioned by Carolus Clusius in 1605. Its provenance is unknown, and it is now lost, but it may have been collected during the Van Neck voyage.\n\nThe only known soft tissue remains, the Oxford head (specimen OUM 11605) and foot, belonged to the last known stuffed dodo, which was first mentioned as part of the Tradescant collection in 1656 and was moved to the Ashmolean Museum in 1659. It has been suggested that this might be the remains of the bird that Hamon L'Estrange saw in London, the bird sent by Emanuel Altham, or a donation by Thomas Herbert. Since the remains do not show signs of having been mounted, the specimen might instead have been preserved as a study skin. In 2018, it was reported that scans of the Oxford dodo's head showed that its skin and bone contained lead shot, pellets which were used to hunt birds in the 17th century. This indicates that the Oxford dodo was shot either before being transported to Britain, or some time after arriving. The circumstances of its killing are unknown, and the pellets are to be examined to identify where the lead was mined from.\n\nMany sources state that the Ashmolean Museum burned the stuffed dodo around 1755 because of severe decay, saving only the head and leg. Statute 8 of the museum states \"That as any particular grows old and perishing the keeper may remove it into one of the closets or other repository; and some other to be substituted.\" The deliberate destruction of the specimen is now believed to be a myth; it was removed from exhibition to preserve what remained of it. This remaining soft tissue has since degraded further; the head was dissected by Strickland and Melville, separating the skin from the skull in two halves. The foot is in a skeletal state, with only scraps of skin and tendons. Very few feathers remain on the head. It is probably a female, as the foot is 11% smaller and more gracile than the London foot, yet appears to be fully grown. The specimen was exhibited at the Oxford museum from at least the 1860s and until 1998, where-after it was mainly kept in storage to prevent damage. Casts of the head can today be found in many museums worldwide.\n\nThe dried London foot, first mentioned in 1665, and transferred to the British Museum in the 18th century, was displayed next to Savery's \"Edwards's Dodo\" painting until the 1840s, and it too was dissected by Strickland and Melville. It was not posed in a standing posture, which suggests that it was severed from a fresh specimen, not a mounted one. By 1896 it was mentioned as being without its integuments, and only the bones are believed to remain today, though its present whereabouts are unknown.\n\nThe Copenhagen skull (specimen ZMUC 90-806) is known to have been part of the collection of Bernardus Paludanus in Enkhuizen until 1651, when it was moved to the museum in Gottorf Castle, Schleswig. After the castle was occupied by Danish forces in 1702, the museum collection was assimilated into the Royal Danish collection. The skull was rediscovered by J. T. Reinhardt in 1840. Based on its history, it may be the oldest known surviving remains of a dodo brought to Europe in the 17th century. It is shorter than the Oxford skull, and may have belonged to a female. It was mummified, but the skin has perished.\n\nThe front part of a skull (specimen NMP P6V-004389) in the National Museum of Prague was found in 1850 among the remains of the Böhmisches Museum. Other elements supposedly belonging to this specimen have been listed in the literature, but it appears only the partial skull was ever present (a partial right limb in the museum appears to be from a Rodrigues solitaire). It may be what remains of one of the stuffed dodos known to have been at the menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II, possibly the specimen painted by Hoefnagel or Savery there.\n\nUntil 1860, the only known dodo remains were the four incomplete 17th-century specimens. Philip Burnard Ayres found the first subfossil bones in 1860, which were sent to Richard Owen at the British Museum, who did not publish the findings. In 1863, Owen requested the Mauritian Bishop Vincent Ryan to spread word that he should be informed if any dodo bones were found. In 1865, George Clark, the government schoolmaster at Mahébourg, finally found an abundance of subfossil dodo bones in the swamp of Mare aux Songes in Southern Mauritius, after a 30-year search inspired by Strickland and Melville's monograph. In 1866, Clark explained his procedure to \"The Ibis\", an ornithology journal: he had sent his coolies to wade through the centre of the swamp, feeling for bones with their feet. At first they found few bones, until they cut away herbage that covered the deepest part of the swamp, where they found many fossils. The swamp yielded the remains of over 300 dodos, but very few skull and wing bones, possibly because the upper bodies were washed away or scavenged while the lower body was trapped. The situation is similar to many finds of moa remains in New Zealand marshes. Most dodo remains from the Mare aux Songes have a medium to dark brown colouration.\n\nClark's reports about the finds rekindled interest in the bird. Sir Richard Owen and Alfred Newton both wanted to be first to describe the post-cranial anatomy of the dodo, and Owen bought a shipment of dodo bones originally meant for Newton, which led to rivalry between the two. Owen described the bones in \"Memoir on the Dodo\" in October 1866, but erroneously based his reconstruction on the \"Edwards's Dodo\" painting by Savery, making it too squat and obese. In 1869 he received more bones and corrected its stance, making it more upright. Newton moved his focus to the Réunion solitaire instead. The remaining bones not sold to Owen or Newton were auctioned off or donated to museums. In 1889, Théodor Sauzier was commissioned to explore the \"historical souvenirs\" of Mauritius and find more dodo remains in the Mare aux Songes. He was successful, and also found remains of other extinct species.\n\nIn 2005, after a hundred years of neglect, a part of the Mare aux Songes swamp was excavated by an international team of researchers (International Dodo Research Project). To prevent malaria, the British had covered the swamp with hard core during their rule over Mauritius, which had to be removed. Many remains were found, including bones of at least 17 dodos in various stages of maturity (though no juveniles), and several bones obviously from the skeleton of one individual bird, which have been preserved in their natural position. These findings were made public in December 2005 in the Naturalis museum in Leiden. 63% of the fossils found in the swamp belonged to turtles of the extinct genus \"Cylindraspis\", and 7.1% belonged to dodos, which had been deposited within several centuries, 4,000 years ago. Subsequent excavations suggested that dodos and other animals became mired in the Mare aux Songes while trying to reach water during a long period of severe drought about 4,200 years ago. Furthermore, cyanobacteria thrived in the conditions created by the excrements of animals gathered around the swamp, which died of intoxication, dehydration, trampling, and miring. Though many small skeletal elements were found during the recent excavations of the swamp, few were found during the 19th century, probably owing to the employment of less refined methods when collecting.\n\nLouis Etienne Thirioux, an amateur naturalist at Port Louis, also found many dodo remains around 1900 from several locations. They included the first articulated specimen, which is the first subfossil dodo skeleton found outside the Mare aux Songes, and the only remains of a juvenile specimen, a now lost tarsometatarsus. The former specimen was found in 1904 in a cave near Le Pouce mountain, and is the only known complete skeleton of an individual dodo. Thirioux donated the specimen to the Museum Desjardins (now Natural History Museum at Mauritius Institute). Thrioux's heirs sold a second mounted composite skeleton (composed of at least two skeletons, with a mainly reconstructed skull) to the Durban Museum of Natural Science in South Africa in 1918. Together, these two skeletons represent the most completely known dodo remains, including bone elements previously unrecorded (such as knee-caps and various wing bones). Though some contemporary writers noted the importance of Thrioux's specimens, they were not scientifically studied, and were largely forgotten until 2011, when sought out by a group of researchers. The mounted skeletons were laser scanned, from which 3-D models were reconstructed, which became the basis of a 2016 monograph about the osteology of the dodo. In 2006, explorers discovered a complete skeleton of a dodo in a lava cave in Mauritius. This was only the second associated skeleton of an individual specimen ever found, and the only one in recent times.\n\nWorldwide, 26 museums have significant holdings of dodo material, almost all found in the Mare aux Songes. The Natural History Museum, American Museum of Natural History, Cambridge University Museum of Zoology, the Senckenberg Museum, and others have almost complete skeletons, assembled from the dissociated subfossil remains of several individuals. In 2011, a wooden box containing dodo bones from the Edwardian era was rediscovered at the Grant Museum at University College London during preparations for a move. They had been stored with crocodile bones until then.\n\nThe supposed \"white dodo\" (or \"solitaire\") of Réunion is now considered an erroneous conjecture based on contemporary reports of the Réunion ibis and 17th-century paintings of white, dodo-like birds by Pieter Withoos and Pieter Holsteyn that surfaced in the 19th century. The confusion began when Willem Ysbrandtszoon Bontekoe, who visited Réunion around 1619, mentioned fat, flightless birds that he referred to as \"Dod-eersen\" in his journal, though without mentioning their colouration. When the journal was published in 1646, it was accompanied by an engraving of a dodo from Savery's \"Crocker Art Gallery sketch\". A white, stocky, and flightless bird was first mentioned as part of the Réunion fauna by Chief Officer J. Tatton in 1625. Sporadic mentions were subsequently made by Sieur Dubois and other contemporary writers.\n\nBaron Edmond de Sélys Longchamps coined the name \"Raphus solitarius\" for these birds in 1848, as he believed the accounts referred to a species of dodo. When 17th-century paintings of white dodos were discovered by 19th-century naturalists, it was assumed they depicted these birds. Oudemans suggested that the discrepancy between the paintings and the old descriptions was that the paintings showed females, and that the species was therefore sexually dimorphic. Some authors also believed the birds described were of a species similar to the Rodrigues solitaire, as it was referred to by the same name, or even that there were white species of both dodo and solitaire on the island.\n\nThe Pieter Withoos painting, which was discovered first, appears to be based on an earlier painting by Pieter Holsteyn, three versions of which are known to have existed. According to Hume, Cheke, and Valledor de Lozoya, it appears that all depictions of white dodos were based on Roelant Savery's painting \"Landscape with Orpheus and the animals\", or on copies of it. The painting has generally been dated to 1611, though a post-1614, or even post-1626, date has also been proposed. The painting shows a whitish specimen and was apparently based on a stuffed specimen then in Prague; a \"walghvogel\" described as having a \"dirty off-white colouring\" was mentioned in an inventory of specimens in the Prague collection of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II, to whom Savery was contracted at the time (1607–1611). Savery's several later images all show greyish birds, possibly because he had by then seen another specimen. Cheke and Hume believe the painted specimen was white, owing to albinism. Valledor de Lozoya has instead suggested that the light plumage was a juvenile trait, a result of bleaching of old taxidermy specimens, or simply artistic license.\n\nIn 1987, scientists described fossils of a recently extinct species of ibis from Réunion with a relatively short beak, \"Borbonibis latipes\", before a connection to the solitaire reports had been made. Cheke suggested to one of the authors, Francois Moutou, that the fossils may have been of the Réunion solitaire, and this suggestion was published in 1995. The ibis was reassigned to the genus \"Threskiornis\", now combined with the specific epithet \"\" from the binomial \"R. solitarius\". Birds of this genus are also white and black with slender beaks, fitting the old descriptions of the Réunion solitaire. No fossil remains of dodo-like birds have ever been found on the island.\n\nThe dodo's significance as one of the best-known extinct animals and its singular appearance led to its use in literature and popular culture as a symbol of an outdated concept or object, as in the expression \"dead as a dodo,\" which has come to mean unquestionably dead or obsolete. Similarly, the phrase \"to go the way of the dodo\" means to become extinct or obsolete, to fall out of common usage or practice, or to become a thing of the past. \"Dodo\" is also a slang term for a stupid, dull-witted person, as it was supposedly stupid and easily caught.\n\nThe dodo appears frequently in works of popular fiction, and even before its extinction, it was featured in European literature, as symbol for exotic lands, and of gluttony, due to its apparent fatness. In 1865, the same year that George Clark started to publish reports about excavated dodo fossils, the newly vindicated bird was featured as a character in Lewis Carroll's \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\". It is thought that he included the dodo because he identified with it and had adopted the name as a nickname for himself because of his stammer, which made him accidentally introduce himself as \"Do-do-dodgson\", his legal surname. Carroll and the girl who served as inspiration for Alice, Alice Liddell, had enjoyed visiting the Oxford museum to see the dodo remains there. The book's popularity made the dodo a well-known icon of extinction.\nThe dodo is used as a mascot for many kinds of products, especially in Mauritius. It appears as a supporter on the coat of arms of Mauritius, on Mauritius coins, is used as a watermark on all Mauritian rupee banknotes, and features as the background of the Mauritian immigration form. A smiling dodo is the symbol of the Brasseries de Bourbon, a popular brewer on Réunion, whose emblem displays the white species once thought to have lived there.\n\nThe dodo is used to promote the protection of endangered species by environmental organisations, such as the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and the Durrell Wildlife Park. The Center for Biological Diversity gives an annual 'Rubber Dodo Award', to \"those who have done the most to destroy wild places, species and biological diversity\". In 2011, the nephiline spider \"Nephilengys dodo\", which inhabits the same woods as the dodo once did, was named after the bird to raise awareness of the urgent need for protection of the Mauritius biota. Two species of ant from Mauritius have been named after the dodo: \"Pseudolasius dodo\" in 1946 and \"Pheidole dodo\" in 2013. A species of isopod from a coral reef off Réunion was named \"Hansenium dodo\" in 1991. The name dodo has been used by scientists naming genetic elements, honoring the dodo's flightless nature. A fruitfly gene within a region of a chromosome required for flying ability was named \"dodo\". In addition, a defective transposable element family from \"Phytophthora infestans\" was named \"DodoPi\" as it contained mutations that eliminated the element's ability to jump to new locations in a chromosome. \n\nIn 2009, a previously unpublished 17th-century Dutch illustration of a dodo went for sale at Christie's and was expected to sell for £6,000. It is unknown whether the illustration was based on a specimen or on a previous image. It sold for £44,450.\n\nThe poet Hilaire Belloc included the following poem about the dodo in his \"Bad Child's Book of Beasts\" from 1896:\n\nBULLET::::- List of recently extinct birds\nBULLET::::- List of African animals extinct in the Holocene\nBULLET::::- Holocene extinction\n\nBULLET::::- Supplementary information\nBULLET::::- Painting the Dodo: Two-minute video about Julian Hume's modern interpretation of Roelant Savery's Dodo\nBULLET::::- Dodo Bird Unboxing: Seven-minute video showing the Oxford specimen being taken out of storage and discussed\nBULLET::::- Aves3D – \"Raphus cucullatus\": Interactive 3D scans of various dodo elements\n"}
{"id": "8421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8421", "title": "Sideroxylon grandiflorum", "text": "Sideroxylon grandiflorum\n\nSideroxylon grandiflorum, known as tambalacoque or dodo tree, is a long-lived tree in the family Sapotaceae, endemic to Mauritius. It is valued for its timber. The \"Sideroxylon grandiflorum\" fruit is analogous to the peach. They are both termed drupes because both have a hard endocarp, or pit, surrounding the seed, with the endocarp naturally splitting along a fracture line during germination.\n\nIn 1973, it was thought that this species was dying out. There were supposedly only 13 specimens left, all estimated to be about 300 years old. The true age could not be determined because tambalacoque has no growth rings. Stanley Temple hypothesized that the dodo, which became extinct in the 17th century, ate tambalacoque fruits, and only by passing through the digestive tract of the dodo could the seeds germinate. Temple (1977) force-fed seventeen tambalacoque fruits to wild turkeys. Seven of the fruits were crushed by the bird's gizzard. The remaining ten were either regurgitated or passed with the bird's feces. Temple planted the remaining ten fruits and three germinated. Temple did not try to germinate any seeds from control fruits not fed to turkeys so the effect of feeding fruits to turkeys was unclear. Reports made on tambalacoque seed germination by Hill (1941) and King (1946) found the seeds germinated without abrading.\n\nTemple's hypothesis that the tree required the dodo has been contested. Others have suggested the decline of the tree was exaggerated, or that other extinct animals may also have been distributing the seeds, such as tortoises, fruit bats or the broad-billed parrot. Wendy Strahm and Anthony Cheke, two experts in Mascarene ecology, claim that while a rare tree, it has germinated since the demise of the dodo and numbers a few hundred, not 13. The difference in numbers is because young trees are not distinct in appearance and may easily be confused with similar species. The decline of the tree may possibly be due to introduction of domestic pigs and crab-eating macaques and competition with introduced plants. Catling (2001) in a summary cites Owadally and Temple (1979), and Witmer (1991). Hershey (2004) reviewed the flaws in Temple's dodo-tambalacoque hypothesis.\n\nIn 2004, Botanical Society of America's Plant Science Bulletin disputed Dr. Temple's research as flawed which published evidence as to why the dodo's extinction did not directly cause the increasing disappearance of young trees including suggestion that tortoises would have been more likely to disperse the seeds than dodo hence discrediting Temple's view as to the dodo and the tree's sole survival relationship.\n\nThis dodo tree is highly valued for its wood in Mauritius, which has led some foresters to scrape the pits by hand to make them sprout and grow.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Sideroxylon majus\", a species native to Réunion, that has been confounded with \"Sideroxylon grandiflorum\" (particularly under its synonym \"Calvaria major\")\n\nBULLET::::- Catling, P. M. (2001): Extinction and the importance of history and dependence in conservation. \"Biodiversity\" 2(3): 2-13 pdf\nBULLET::::- Helfferich, C. (1990): The Turkey and the Tambalacoque Tree\nBULLET::::- Hershey, D. R. (2004): The widespread misconception that the tambalacoque absolutely required the dodo for its seeds to germinate. \"Plant Science Bulletin\" 50: 105-108.\nBULLET::::- Hill, A. W. (1941): The genus \"Calvaria\", with an account of the stony endocarp and germination of the seed, and description of the new species. \"Annals of Botany\" 5(4): 587-606. PDF fulltext (requires user account)\nBULLET::::- King, H. C. (1946): \"Interim Report on Indigenous Species in Mauritius\". Port Louis, Mauritius: Government Printer.\nBULLET::::- Owadally, A. W. & Temple, Stanley A. (1979): The dodo and the tambalacoque tree. \"Science\" 203(4387): 1363-1364.\nBULLET::::- Quammen, David (1996): \"The Song of the Dodo: Island Biogeography in an Age of Extinction\". Touchstone, New York.\nBULLET::::- Temple, Stanley A. (1977): Plant-animal mutualism: coevolution with Dodo leads to near extinction of plant. \"Science\" 197(4306): 885-886. HTML abstract\nBULLET::::- Witmer, M. C. & Cheke, A. S. (1991): The dodo and the tambalacoque tree: an obligate mutualism reconsidered. \"Oikos\" 61(1): 133-137. HTML abstract\n"}
{"id": "8425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8425", "title": "Dwight Schultz", "text": "Dwight Schultz\n\nWilliam Dwight Schultz (born November 24, 1947) is an American actor and voice artist. He is known for his roles as Captain \"Howling Mad\" Murdock on the 1980s action series \"The A-Team\" and as Reginald Barclay in \"\", \"\", and the film \"\". He is also known in animation as the mad scientist Dr. Animo in the \"Ben 10\" series, Chef Mung Daal in the children's animated series \"Chowder\", and Eddie the Squirrel in \"CatDog\".\n\nSchultz was born in Baltimore, Maryland of German descent and is a Roman Catholic. He attended Calvert Hall College High School and Towson University.\n\nSchultz's breakthrough role was the character of Captain \"Howling Mad\" Murdock on \"The A-Team\". He subsequently appeared in several films, including \"The Fan\" (1981), and he starred in \"Fat Man and Little Boy\" (1989) as J. Robert Oppenheimer. In the early 1990s, he had a recurring role as Lieutenant Reginald Barclay in \"\", and he reprised the role in \"\" and the film \"\". He played in the 1992 television film \"Child of Rage\", starring opposite Mel Harris as a compassionate couple who adopt a troubled girl who has been sexually abused. In November 2009, Schultz confirmed that he and former \"A-Team\" co-star Dirk Benedict would make cameo appearances in the feature film \"The A-Team\".\n\nSchultz hosted a conservative talk radio podcast called \"Howling Mad Radio\" which ended in March 2009. He has also guest-hosted on numerous occasions for Michael Savage on \"The Savage Nation\", Jerry Doyle on \"The Jerry Doyle Show\", and Rusty Humphries on \"The Rusty Humphries Show\".\n\nSchultz married actress Wendy Fulton in 1983. Their daughter Ava (born 1987) serves in the Marines.\n\nSchultz is a conservative, and he began regular appearances on \"The Glazov Gang\" in 2012, an Internet political talk show hosted by Jamie Glazov, managing editor of FrontPage Magazine. He also posts political commentaries and podcasts on his official fansite.\n\nIn 2011, while guest hosting Savage Nation, Schultz stated that he would not get a sex change no matter how much he was pressured by the Obama administration. \n\n+ List of live-action performances in film\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Year\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Series\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Role \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Source\n\n+ List of voice performances in film\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Year\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Series\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Role \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Source\n\nDirect-to-video\n\nDirect-to-video\n\nEnglish dub\n\nDirect-to-video\n\nEnglish dub\n\nDirect-to-video\n\n2016\n\n2018\nEobard Thawne / Professor Zoom / Reverse-Flash\nDirect-to-video\n\n+ List of live-action performances in television\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Year\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Series\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Role \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Source\n\n+ List of voice performances in television\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Year\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Series\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Role \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Source\n\n2018\n\"The Powerpuff Girls\"\nLester van Luster\nEpisode: \"Small World\"\n\nEpisode: \"Triptych\" \n\n+ List of voice performances in video games\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Year\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Series\n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" Role \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Notes \n! style=\"background:#b0c4de;\" class=\"unsortable\" Source\n\n\"Call to Power II\"\n\n\"The Bard's Tale\"\n\n\"Gothic 3\"\n\n2018\n\nBULLET::::- \"Night and Day\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Crucifer of Blood\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Water Engine\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dark Matters Radio with Don Ecker and Special Co-Host Dwight Schultz\"\nBULLET::::- \"Howling Mad Radio\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Jerry Doyle Show\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Laura Ingraham Show\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Rusty Humphries Show\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Savage Nation\"\n\n"}
{"id": "8429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8429", "title": "Density", "text": "Density\n\nThe density (more precisely, the volumetric mass density; also known as specific mass), of a substance is its mass per unit volume. The symbol most often used for density is \"ρ\" (the lower case Greek letter rho), although the Latin letter \"D\" can also be used. Mathematically, density is defined as mass divided by volume: \n\nwhere \"ρ\" is the density, \"m\" is the mass, and \"V\" is the volume. In some cases (for instance, in the United States oil and gas industry), density is loosely defined as its weight per unit volume, although this is scientifically inaccurate – this quantity is more specifically called specific weight.\n\nFor a pure substance the density has the same numerical value as its mass concentration.\nDifferent materials usually have different densities, and density may be relevant to buoyancy, purity and packaging. Osmium and iridium are the densest known elements at standard conditions for temperature and pressure but certain chemical compounds may be denser.\n\nTo simplify comparisons of density across different systems of units, it is sometimes replaced by the dimensionless quantity \"relative density\" or \"specific gravity\", i.e. the ratio of the density of the material to that of a standard material, usually water. Thus a relative density less than one means that the substance floats in water.\n\nThe density of a material varies with temperature and pressure. This variation is typically small for solids and liquids but much greater for gases. Increasing the pressure on an object decreases the volume of the object and thus increases its density. Increasing the temperature of a substance (with a few exceptions) decreases its density by increasing its volume. In most materials, heating the bottom of a fluid results in convection of the heat from the bottom to the top, due to the decrease in the density of the heated fluid. This causes it to rise relative to more dense unheated material.\n\nThe reciprocal of the density of a substance is occasionally called its specific volume, a term sometimes used in thermodynamics. Density is an intensive property in that increasing the amount of a substance does not increase its density; rather it increases its mass.\n\nIn a well-known but probably apocryphal tale, Archimedes was given the task of determining whether King Hiero's goldsmith was embezzling gold during the manufacture of a golden wreath dedicated to the gods and replacing it with another, cheaper alloy. Archimedes knew that the irregularly shaped wreath could be crushed into a cube whose volume could be calculated easily and compared with the mass; but the king did not approve of this. Baffled, Archimedes is said to have taken an immersion bath and observed from the rise of the water upon entering that he could calculate the volume of the gold wreath through the displacement of the water. Upon this discovery, he leapt from his bath and ran naked through the streets shouting, \"Eureka! Eureka!\" (Εύρηκα! Greek \"I have found it\"). As a result, the term \"eureka\" entered common parlance and is used today to indicate a moment of enlightenment.\n\nThe story first appeared in written form in Vitruvius' \"books of architecture\", two centuries after it supposedly took place. Some scholars have doubted the accuracy of this tale, saying among other things that the method would have required precise measurements that would have been difficult to make at the time.\n\nFrom the equation for density (\"ρ\" = \"m\"/\"V\"), mass density has units of mass divided by volume. As there are many units of mass and volume covering many different magnitudes there are a large number of units for mass density in use. The SI unit of kilogram per cubic metre (kg/m) and the cgs unit of gram per cubic centimetre (g/cm) are probably the most commonly used units for density. One g/cm is equal to one thousand kg/m. One cubic centimetre (abbreviation cc) is equal to one millilitre. In industry, other larger or smaller units of mass and or volume are often more practical and US customary units may be used. See below for a list of some of the most common units of density.\n\nA number of techniques as well as standards exist for the measurement of density of materials. Such techniques include the use of a hydrometer (a buoyancy method for liquids), Hydrostatic balance (a buoyancy method for liquids and solids), immersed body method (a buoyancy method for liquids), pycnometer (liquids and solids), air comparison pycnometer (solids), oscillating densitometer (liquids), as well as pour and tap (solids). However, each individual method or technique measures different types of density (e.g. bulk density, skeletal density, etc.), and therefore it is necessary to have an understanding of the type of density being measured as well as the type of material in question. \n\nThe density at all points of a homogeneous object equals its total mass divided by its total volume. The mass is normally measured with a scale or balance; the volume may be measured directly (from the geometry of the object) or by the displacement of a fluid. To determine the density of a liquid or a gas, a hydrometer, a dasymeter or a Coriolis flow meter may be used, respectively. Similarly, hydrostatic weighing uses the displacement of water due to a submerged object to determine the density of the object.\n\nIf the body is not homogeneous, then its density varies between different regions of the object. In that case the density around any given location is determined by calculating the density of a small volume around that location. In the limit of an infinitesimal volume the density of an inhomogeneous object at a point becomes: formula_2, where formula_3 is an elementary volume at position formula_4. The mass of the body then can be expressed as\n\nIn practice, bulk materials such as sugar, sand, or snow contain voids. Many materials exist in nature as flakes, pellets, or granules.\n\nVoids are regions which contain something other than the considered material. Commonly the void is air, but it could also be vacuum, liquid, solid, or a different gas or gaseous mixture.\n\nThe bulk volume of a material—inclusive of the void fraction—is often obtained by a simple measurement (e.g. with a calibrated measuring cup) or geometrically from known dimensions.\n\nMass divided by \"bulk\" volume determines bulk density. This is not the same thing as volumetric mass density.\n\nTo determine volumetric mass density, one must first discount the volume of the void fraction. Sometimes this can be determined by geometrical reasoning. For the close-packing of equal spheres the non-void fraction can be at most about 74%. It can also be determined empirically. Some bulk materials, however, such as sand, have a \"variable\" void fraction which depends on how the material is agitated or poured. It might be loose or compact, with more or less air space depending on handling.\n\nIn practice, the void fraction is not necessarily air, or even gaseous. In the case of sand, it could be water, which can be advantageous for measurement as the void fraction for sand saturated in water—once any air bubbles are thoroughly driven out—is potentially more consistent than dry sand measured with an air void.\n\nIn the case of non-compact materials, one must also take care in determining the mass of the material sample. If the material is under pressure (commonly ambient air pressure at the earth's surface) the determination of mass from a measured sample weight might need to account for buoyancy effects due to the density of the void constituent, depending on how the measurement was conducted. In the case of dry sand, sand is so much denser than air that the buoyancy effect is commonly neglected (less than one part in one thousand).\n\nMass change upon displacing one void material with another while maintaining constant volume can be used to estimate the void fraction, if the difference in density of the two voids materials is reliably known.\n\nIn general, density can be changed by changing either the pressure or the temperature. Increasing the pressure always increases the density of a material. Increasing the temperature generally decreases the density, but there are notable exceptions to this generalization. For example, the density of water increases between its melting point at 0 °C and 4 °C; similar behavior is observed in silicon at low temperatures.\n\nThe effect of pressure and temperature on the densities of liquids and solids is small. The compressibility for a typical liquid or solid is 10 bar (1 bar = 0.1 MPa) and a typical thermal expansivity is 10 K. This roughly translates into needing around ten thousand times atmospheric pressure to reduce the volume of a substance by one percent. (Although the pressures needed may be around a thousand times smaller for sandy soil and some clays.) A one percent expansion of volume typically requires a temperature increase on the order of thousands of degrees Celsius.\n\nIn contrast, the density of gases is strongly affected by pressure. The density of an ideal gas is\n\nwhere is the molar mass, is the pressure, is the universal gas constant, and is the absolute temperature. This means that the density of an ideal gas can be doubled by doubling the pressure, or by halving the absolute temperature.\n\nIn the case of volumic thermal expansion at constant pressure and small intervals of temperature the temperature dependence of density is :\n\nwhere formula_8 is the density at a reference temperature, formula_9 is the thermal expansion coefficient of the material at temperatures close to formula_10.\n\nThe density of a solution is the sum of mass (massic) concentrations of the components of that solution.\n\nMass (massic) concentration of each given component ρ in a solution sums to density of the solution.\n\nExpressed as a function of the densities of pure components of the mixture and their volume participation, it allows the determination of excess molar volumes:\nprovided that there is no interaction between the components.\n\nKnowing the relation between excess volumes and activity coefficients of the components, one can determine the activity coefficients.\n\n+Densities of various materials covering a range of values\n! Material\n! \"ρ\" (kg/m)\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n0.08988\n! colspan=3 style=\"background-color:#f9f9f9; text-align:left; font-weight:normal;\"  Notes:\n\n! Entity\n! \"ρ\" (kg/m)\n! class=\"unsortable\"  Notes\n\n+ Density of liquid water at 1 atm pressure\n! Temp. (°C)\n! Density (kg/m)\ncolspan=2 Notes:\n\n+Density of air at 1 atm pressure\n! \"T\" (°C)\n! \"ρ\" (kg/m)\n\nThe SI unit for density is:\nBULLET::::- kilogram per cubic metre (kg/m)\n\nThe litre and metric tons are not part of the SI, but are acceptable for use with it, leading to the following units:\nBULLET::::- kilogram per litre (kg/L)\nBULLET::::- gram per millilitre (g/mL)\nBULLET::::- metric ton per cubic metre (t/m)\n\nDensities using the following metric units all have exactly the same numerical value, one thousandth of the value in (kg/m). Liquid water has a density of about 1 kg/dm, making any of these SI units numerically convenient to use as most solids and liquids have densities between 0.1 and 20 kg/dm.\nBULLET::::- kilogram per cubic decimetre (kg/dm)\nBULLET::::- gram per cubic centimetre (g/cm)\nBULLET::::- 1 g/cm = 1000 kg/m\nBULLET::::- megagram (metric ton) per cubic metre (Mg/m)\n\nIn US customary units density can be stated in:\nBULLET::::- Avoirdupois ounce per cubic inch (1 g/cm ≈ 0.578036672 oz/cu in)\nBULLET::::- Avoirdupois ounce per fluid ounce (1 g/cm ≈ 1.04317556 oz/US fl oz = 1.04317556 lb/US fl pint)\nBULLET::::- Avoirdupois pound per cubic inch (1 g/cm ≈ 0.036127292 lb/cu in)\nBULLET::::- pound per cubic foot (1 g/cm ≈ 62.427961 lb/cu ft)\nBULLET::::- pound per cubic yard (1 g/cm ≈ 1685.5549 lb/cu yd)\nBULLET::::- pound per US liquid gallon (1 g/cm ≈ 8.34540445 lb/US gal)\nBULLET::::- pound per US bushel (1 g/cm ≈ 77.6888513 lb/bu)\nBULLET::::- slug per cubic foot\n\nImperial units differing from the above (as the Imperial gallon and bushel differ from the US units) in practice are rarely used, though found in older documents. The Imperial gallon was based on the concept that an Imperial fluid ounce of water would have a mass of one Avoirdupois ounce, and indeed 1 g/cm ≈ 1.00224129 ounces per Imperial fluid ounce = 10.0224129 pounds per Imperial gallon. The density of precious metals could conceivably be based on Troy ounces and pounds, a possible cause of confusion.\n\nBULLET::::- List of elements by density\nBULLET::::- Air density\nBULLET::::- Area density\nBULLET::::- Bulk density\nBULLET::::- Buoyancy\nBULLET::::- Charge density\nBULLET::::- Density prediction by the Girolami method\nBULLET::::- Dord\nBULLET::::- Energy density\nBULLET::::- Lighter than air\nBULLET::::- Linear density\nBULLET::::- Number density\nBULLET::::- Orthobaric density\nBULLET::::- Paper density\nBULLET::::- Specific weight\nBULLET::::- Spice (oceanography)\nBULLET::::- Standard temperature and pressure\nBULLET::::- Video: Density Experiment with Oil and Alcohol\nBULLET::::- Video: Density Experiment with Whiskey and Water\nBULLET::::- Glass Density Calculation – Calculation of the density of glass at room temperature and of glass melts at 1000 – 1400°C\nBULLET::::- List of Elements of the Periodic Table – Sorted by Density\nBULLET::::- Calculation of saturated liquid densities for some components\nBULLET::::- Field density test\nBULLET::::- On-line calculator for densities and partial molar volumes of aqueous solutions of some common electrolytes and their mixtures, at temperatures up to 323.15 K.\nBULLET::::- Water – Density and specific weight\nBULLET::::- Temperature dependence of the density of water – Conversions of density units\nBULLET::::- A delicious density experiment\nBULLET::::- Water density calculator Water density for a given salinity and temperature.\nBULLET::::- Liquid density calculator Select a liquid from the list and calculate density as a function of temperature.\nBULLET::::- Gas density calculator Calculate density of a gas for as a function of temperature and pressure.\nBULLET::::- Densities of various materials.\nBULLET::::- Determination of Density of Solid, instructions for performing classroom experiment.\nBULLET::::- density prediction\nBULLET::::- density prediction\n"}
{"id": "8432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8432", "title": "Dave Barry", "text": "Dave Barry\n\nDavid McAlister Barry (born July 3, 1947) is an American author and columnist who wrote a nationally syndicated humor column for the \"Miami Herald\" from 1983 to 2005. He has also written numerous books of humor and parody, as well as comic novels. Barry's honors include the Pulitzer Prize for Commentary (1988) and the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism (2005).\n\nBarry has defined a sense of humor as \"a measurement of the extent to which we realize that we are trapped in a world almost totally devoid of reason. Laughter is how we express the anxiety we feel at this knowledge.\"\n\nBarry was born in Armonk, New York, where his father, David, was a Presbyterian minister. He was educated at Wampus Elementary School, Harold C. Crittenden Junior High School (both in Armonk), and Pleasantville High School, where he was elected \"Class Clown\" in 1965. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English from Haverford College in 1969.\n\nAs an alumnus of a Quaker-affiliated college, he avoided military service during the Vietnam War by registering as a religious conscientious objector. Notwithstanding his father's vocation, Barry decided \"early on\" that he was an atheist. He said, \"The problem with writing about religion is that you run the risk of offending sincerely religious people, and then they come after you with machetes.\"\n\nBarry began his journalism career in 1971, working as a general-assignment reporter for the \"Daily Local News\" in West Chester, Pennsylvania, near his alma mater, Haverford College. He covered local government and civic events and was promoted to City Editor after about two years. He also started writing a weekly humor column for the paper and began to develop his unique style. He remained at the newspaper through 1974. He then worked briefly as a copy editor at the Associated Press's Philadelphia bureau before joining Burger Associates, a consulting firm.\n\nAt Burger, he taught effective writing to business people. In his own words, he \"spent nearly eight years trying to get various businesspersons to...stop writing things like 'Enclosed please find the enclosed enclosures,' but...eventually realized that it was hopeless.\"\n\nIn 1981 he wrote a humorous guest column in the \"Philadelphia Inquirer\" about watching the birth of his son, which attracted the attention of Gene Weingarten, then an editor of the \"Miami Herald\"s Sunday magazine \"Tropic\". Weingarten hired Barry as a humor columnist in 1983. Barry's column was syndicated nationally. Barry won a Pulitzer Prize for Commentary in 1988 for \"his consistently effective use of humor as a device for presenting fresh insights into serious concerns.\"\n\nBarry's first novel, \"Big Trouble\", was published in 1999. The book was adapted into a motion picture directed by Barry Sonnenfeld and starring Tim Allen, Rene Russo, and Patrick Warburton, with a cameo by Barry (deleted in post-production). The movie was originally due for release in September 2001 but was postponed following the September 11, 2001, attacks because the story involved smuggling a nuclear weapon onto an airplane. The film was released in April 2002.\n\nIn response to a column in which Barry mocked the cities of Grand Forks, North Dakota, and East Grand Forks, Minnesota, for calling themselves the \"Grand Cities\", Grand Forks named a sewage pumping station after Barry in January 2002. Barry traveled to Grand Forks for the dedication ceremony.\n\nArticles written by Barry have appeared in publications such as \"Boating\", \"Home Office Computing\", and \"Reader's Digest\", in addition to the \"Chicken Soup for the Soul\" inspirational book series. Two of his articles have been included in the \"Best American Sportswriting\" series. One of his columns was used as the introduction to the book \"Pirattitude!: So You Wanna Be a Pirate? Here's How!\" (), a follow-up to Barry's role in publicizing International Talk Like a Pirate Day. His books have frequently appeared on the New York Times Best Seller List.\n\nOn October 31, 2004, Barry announced that he would be taking an indefinite leave of absence of at least a year from his weekly column in order to spend more time with his family. In December 2005, Barry said in an interview with \"Editor and Publisher\" that he would not resume his weekly column, although he would continue such features as his yearly gift guide, his year-in-review feature, and his blog, as well as an occasional article or column.\n\nIn 2005, Barry won the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism.\n\nOn Sunday, September 22, 2013, the opening night of the 15th annual Fall for the Book festival in Fairfax, Virginia, Barry was awarded the event's highest honor, the Fairfax Prize, honoring outstanding literary achievement, presented by the Fairfax Library Foundation.\n\nFrom 1993 to 1997, CBS broadcast the sitcom \"Dave's World\" based on the books \"Dave Barry Turns 40\" and \"Dave Barry's Greatest Hits\". The show starred Harry Anderson as Barry and DeLane Matthews as his wife Beth. In an early episode, Barry appeared in a cameo role. After four seasons, the program was canceled shortly after being moved from Monday to the \"Friday night death slot\".\n\nDuring college, Barry was in a band called the Federal Duck. While at the \"Miami Herald\", he and several of his colleagues created a band called the Urban Professionals, with Barry on lead guitar and vocals. They performed an original song called \"The Tupperware Song\" at the Tupperware headquarters in Orlando, Florida.\n\nBeginning in 1992, Barry played lead guitar in the Rock Bottom Remainders, a rock band made up of published authors. \"(Remainder\" is a publishing term for a book that doesn't sell.) The band was founded by Barry's sister-in-law, Kathi Kamen Goldmark, for an American Booksellers Association convention, and has also included Stephen King, Amy Tan, Ridley Pearson, Scott Turow, Mitch Albom, Roy Blount Jr., Barbara Kingsolver, Matt Groening, and Barry's brother Sam, among others. The band's members \"are not musically skilled, but they are extremely loud,\" according to Barry. Several high-profile musicians, including Al Kooper, Warren Zevon, and Roger McGuinn, have performed with the band, and Bruce Springsteen sat in at least once. The band's road tour resulted in the book \"Mid-Life Confidential: The Rock Bottom Remainders Tour America with Three Chords and an Attitude\". The Rock Bottom Remainders disbanded in 2012 following Goldmark's death from breast cancer. They have reunited several times, performing at the Tucson Festival of books in 2016 and 2018.\n\nBeginning in 1984, Barry and \"Tropic\" editors Gene Weingarten and Tom Shroder have organized the Tropic Hunt (now the Herald Hunt), an annual puzzlehunt in Miami. A Washington, D.C., spinoff, the Post Hunt, began in 2008.\n\nBarry has run several mock campaigns for President of the United States, running on a libertarian platform. He has also written for the Libertarian Party's national newsletter.\n\nThe screen adaptation of Barry's book \"Dave Barry's Complete Guide to Guys\" was released in 2005; it is available on DVD.\n\nBarry married Lois Ann Shelnutt in 1969. He next married Beth Lenox, in 1976. Barry and Lenox worked together at the \"Daily Local News\", where they began their journalism careers on the same day in September 1971; they had one child, Robert, born October 8, 1980. Barry and Lenox divorced in 1993. \n\nBarry experienced tragedy in his family; his father David W and his youngest brother suffered alcoholism, and his father died in 1984, his sister Mary Katherine was institutionalized for schizophrenia, and his mother committed suicide in 1987. In 1996, Barry married \"Miami Herald\" sportswriter Michelle Kaufman; they had a daughter, Sophie, in 2000. Barry has had dogs named Earnest, Zippy, and now Lucy. All have been mentioned regularly in Barry's columns.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Taming of the Screw\" (1983, with illustrator Jerry O'Brien)\nBULLET::::- \"Babies and Other Hazards of Sex: How to Make a Tiny Person in Only 9 Months With Tools You Probably Have Around the Home\" (1984, with illustrator Jerry O'Brien)\nBULLET::::- \"Stay Fit and Healthy Until You're Dead\" (1985, with illustrator Jerry O'Brien)\nBULLET::::- \"Claw Your Way to the Top: How to Become the Head of a Major Corporation in Roughly a Week\" (1986, with illustrator Jerry O'Brien)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Guide to Marriage and/or Sex\" (1987 with illustrator Jerry O'Brien)\nBULLET::::- \"Homes and Other Black Holes\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Slept Here: A Sort of History of the United States\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Turns 40\" (1990)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Only Travel Guide You'll Ever Need\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Guide to Life\" (1991) (includes \"Dave Barry's Guide to Marriage and/or Sex\", \"Babies and Other Hazards of Sex\", \"Stay Fit and Healthy Until You're Dead\" and \"Claw Your Way to the Top\")\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Does Japan\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Gift Guide to End All Gift Guides\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Complete Guide to Guys\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry in Cyberspace\" (1996)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Book of Bad Songs\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Turns 50\" (1998)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Hits Below the Beltway: A Vicious and Unprovoked Attack on Our Most Cherished Political Institutions\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"\"My Teenage Son's Goal in Life is to Make Me Feel 3,500 Years Old\" and Other Thoughts On Parenting From Dave Barry\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"\"The Greatest Invention in the History Of Mankind Is Beer\" And Other Manly Insights From Dave Barry\" (2001)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Money Secrets\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry on Dads\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's History of the Millennium (So Far)\" (2007)\nBULLET::::- \"I'll Mature When I'm Dead: Dave Barry's Amazing Tales of Adulthood\" (2010)\nBULLET::::- \"You Can Date Boys When You're Forty: Dave Barry on Parenting and Other Topics He Knows Very Little About\" (2014)\nBULLET::::- \"Live Right and Find Happiness (Although Beer is Much Faster): Life Lessons and Other Ravings from Dave Barry\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"Best. State. Ever.: A Florida Man Defends His Homeland\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"For This We Left Egypt?: A Passover Haggadah for Jews and Those Who Love Them\" (2017, with Alan Zweibel and Adam Mansbach)\nBULLET::::- \"Lessons from Lucy\" (2019)\nBULLET::::- \"A Field Guide to the Jewish People\" (2019, with Adam Mansbach and Alan Zweibel)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Bad Habits: A 100% Fact-Free Book\" (1985)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Greatest Hits\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Talks Back\" (1991)\nBULLET::::- \"The World According to Dave Barry\" (1994) (includes \"Dave Barry Talks Back\", \"Dave Barry Turns 40\" and \"Dave Barry's Greatest Hits\")\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry is NOT Making This Up\" (1995)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Is from Mars and Venus\" (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry Is Not Taking This Sitting Down\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- \"Boogers Are My Beat\" (2003)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Big Trouble\" (1999)\nBULLET::::- \"Tricky Business\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Peter and the Starcatchers\" (2004, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Peter and the Shadow Thieves\" (2006, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Peter and the Secret of Rundoon\" (2007, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Escape From the Carnivale\" (2006, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"The Shepherd, the Angel, and Walter the Christmas Miracle Dog\" (2006)\nBULLET::::- \"Cave of the Dark Wind\" (2007, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Science Fair\" (2008, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Peter and the Sword of Mercy\" (2009, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Blood Tide\" (2008, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"The Bridge to Neverland\" (2011, with Ridley Pearson)\nBULLET::::- \"Lunatics\" (2012, with Alan Zweibel)\nBULLET::::- \"Insane City\" (2013)\nBULLET::::- \"The Worst Class Trip Ever\" (2015)\nBULLET::::- \"The Worst Night Ever\" (2016)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Big Trouble\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- \"Dave Barry's Complete Guide to Guys\" (2005)\nBULLET::::- \"Peter and the Starcatchers\" (Disney project, announced May 17, 2012. Release date TBA)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Mid-Life Confidential: The Rock Bottom Remainders Tour America With Three Chords and an Attitude\" (1994) with Stephen King, Kathi Kamen Goldmark, Al Kooper, Ridley Pearson, Roy Blount, Jr., Joel Selvin, Amy Tan, Dave Marsh, Tad Bartimus, Matt Groening, Greil Marcus, Tabitha King, Barbara Kingsolver, Michael Dorris\nBULLET::::- \"Naked Came the Manatee\" (1998) with Carl Hiaasen, Elmore Leonard, James W. Hall, Edna Buchanan, Les Standiford, Paul Levine, Brian Antoni, Tananarive Due, John Dufresne, Vicki Hendricks, Carolina Hospital, Evelyn Mayerson\nBULLET::::- Novels (as listed above) with Ridley Pearson and Alan Zweibel.\nBULLET::::- \"Hard Listening\", (July 2013) is an interactive ebook about his participation in a writer/musician band, the Rock Bottom Remainders. Published by digital publisher, Coliloquy, LLC\n\nBULLET::::- \"A Totally Random Evening With Dave Barry\" (1992)\nBULLET::::- \"A Prairie Home Companion: English Majors: A Comedy Collection for the Highly Literate\" (as guest) (1997)\nBULLET::::- \"Stranger than Fiction (compilation album)\" (1998)\n\nBULLET::::- Exploding whale\nBULLET::::- International Talk Like a Pirate Day\n\nBULLET::::- \"Write TV\" Public Television Interview with Dave Barry\nBULLET::::- Rock Bottom Remainders, \"Don't Quit Your Day Job\" Records\nBULLET::::- Dave Barry Interview Podcast – Horace J. Digby Report\n"}
{"id": "8436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8436", "title": "David Angell", "text": "David Angell\n\nDavid Lawrence Angell (April 10, 1946 – September 11, 2001) was an American television producer and screenwriter. Angell won multiple Emmy Awards as the creator and executive producer, along with Peter Casey and David Lee, of the sitcoms \"Wings\" and \"Frasier\". Angell and his wife Lynn both died heading home from their vacation on Cape Cod aboard American Airlines Flight 11, the first plane to hit the World Trade Center during the September 11 attacks.\n\nAngell was born in Providence, Rhode Island, to Henry and Mae (née Cooney) Angell. He received a bachelor's degree in English Literature from Providence College. He married Lynn Edwards on August 14, 1971. Soon after Angell entered the U.S. Army upon graduation and served at the Pentagon until 1972. He then moved to Boston and worked as a methods analyst at an engineering company and later at an insurance firm in Rhode Island. His brother, the Most Rev. Kenneth Angell, was a Roman Catholic prelate and Bishop of Burlington, Vermont.\n\nAngell moved to Los Angeles in 1977. His first script was sold to the producers of the \"Annie Flynn\" series. Five years later, he sold his second script to \"Archie Bunker's Place\". In 1983, he joined \"Cheers\" as a staff writer. In 1985, Angell joined forces with Peter Casey and David Lee as \"Cheers\" supervising producers/writers. The trio received 37 Emmy Award nominations and won 24 Emmy Awards, including the above-mentioned for \"Frasier\", as well as an Outstanding Comedy Series Emmy for \"Cheers\", in 1989, which Angell, Casey, Lee and the series' other producers shared, and Outstanding Writing/Comedy Emmy for \"Cheers\", which Angell received in 1984. After working together as producers on \"Cheers\", Angell, Casey and Lee formed Grub Street Productions. In 1990, they created and executive-produced the comedy series \"Wings\".\n\nAngell and his wife, Lynn, were among the passengers of American Airlines Flight 11 killed in the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City in 2001.\n\nThe American Screenwriters Association awards the annual David Angell Humanitarian Award to any individual in the entertainment industry who contributes to global well-being through donations of time, expertise or other support to improve the human condition.\n\nIn 2004, The Angell Foundation of Los Angeles, California, awarded Providence College a gift of $2 million for the Smith Center for the Arts.\n\nThe two-part episode of \"Frasier\" to air after the attacks, \"Don Juan in Hell\" airing on September 25, 2001, ended with the memorial tribute, \"In loving memory of our friends Lynn and David Angell\". \"Goodnight, Seattle\", series finale which aired May 13, 2004, featured the birth of Niles Crane and Daphne Moon’s son, who is named David in tribute.\n\nAt the National 9/11 Memorial, Angell and his wife are memorialized at the North Pool, on Panel N-1, along with other passengers from Flight 11.\n\n"}
{"id": "8437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8437", "title": "Diedrich Hermann Westermann", "text": "Diedrich Hermann Westermann\n\nDiedrich Hermann Westermann (June 24, 1875–May 31, 1956) was a German missionary, Africanist, and linguist. He substantially extended and revised the work of Carl Meinhof, his teacher, although he rejected some of Meinhof's theories only implicitly. Westermann is seen as one of the founders of modern African linguistics. \n\nHe carried out extensive linguistic and anthropological research in the area ranging from Senegal eastwards to the Upper Nile. His linguistic publications cover a wide range of African languages, including the Gbe languages, Nuer, Kpelle, Shilluk, Hausa, and Guang. \n\nWestermann's comparative work, begun in 1911, initially brought together much of today's Niger–Congo and Nilo-Saharan language phyla under the name Sudanic languages. His most important later publication \"Die westlichen Sudansprachen\" 1927a divided these into East and West Sudanic languages and laid the basis for what would become Niger–Congo. In this book and a series of associated articles between 1925 and 1928, Westermann both identified a large number of roots that form the basis of our understanding of Niger–Congo and set out the evidence for the coherence of many of the families that constitute it. Much of the classification of African languages associated with Joseph Greenberg actually derives from the work of Westermann.\nIn 1927 Westermann published a \"Practical Orthography of African Languages\", which became later known as the \"Westermann script\". Subsequently, he published the influential and oft-reprinted \"Practical Phonetics for Students of African Languages\" in collaboration with Ida C. Ward (1933).\n\nHe was born in Baden near Bremen and also died there.\n\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1911) \"Die Sudansprachen\" [The Sudanic languages].\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1912) \"The Shilluk People.\" Berlin.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1925) Das Tschi und Guang. Ihre Stellung innerhalb der Ewe-Tschi Gruppe. MSOS, 28:1-85.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1926a) Das Ibo in Nigerien. Seine Stellung innerhalb der Kwa-Sprachen. MSOS, 29:32-60.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1926b) Das Edo in Nigerien. Seine Stellung innerhalb der Kwa-Sprachen. MSOS, 29:1-31.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1927a) 'Die westlichen Sudansprachen und ihre Beziehungen zum Bantu' Berlin: de Gruyter.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1927b) Das Nupe in Nigerien. Seine Stellung innerhalb der Kwa-Sprachen. MSOS, 30:173-207.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1928) Die westatlantische Gruppe der Sudansprachen. MSOS, 31:63-86.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich Hermann & Ward, Ida C. (1933) \"Practical phonetics for students of African languages\". London: Oxford University Press for the International African Institute.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1940) Africans recount their lives. Eleven self-portraits (Afrikaner erzählen ihr Leben. Elf Selbstdarstellungen), Essener Verlagsanstalt\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1948). \"The missionary and anthropological research\". Oxford University Press for the International African Institute.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1949). \"Sprachbeziehungen und Sprachverwandtschaft in Afrika\". Sitzungsberichte der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Philosophisch-Historische Klasse, 1948 (Nr. 1). Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1952). \"The languages of West Africa\". Oxford: Oxford University Press.\nBULLET::::- Westermann, Diedrich H. (1964). \"Practical phonetics for students of African languages\" (4th improvement). Oxford: Oxford University Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Kallaway, Peter. Diedrich Westermann and the Ambiguities of Colonial Science in the Inter-War Era. The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History 2017 vol. 45 no. 6, p. 871–893 doi=10.1080/03086534.2017.1379672\n\n"}
{"id": "8439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8439", "title": "Diacritic", "text": "Diacritic\n\nA diacritic – also diacritical mark, diacritical point, diacritical sign, or accent – is a glyph added to a letter or basic glyph. The term derives from the Ancient Greek (, \"distinguishing\"), from (, \"to distinguish\"). \"Diacritic\" is primarily an adjective, though sometimes used as a noun, whereas \"diacritical\" is only ever an adjective. Some diacritical marks, such as the acute ( ´ ) and grave ( ` ), are often called \"accents\". Diacritical marks may appear above or below a letter, or in some other position such as within the letter or between two letters.\n\nThe main use of diacritical marks in the Latin script is to change the sound-values of the letters to which they are added. Examples are the diaereses in the borrowed French words and , which show that the vowel with the diaeresis mark is pronounced separately from the preceding vowel; the acute and grave accents, which can indicate that a final vowel is to be pronounced, as in \"saké\" and poetic \"breathèd\"; and the cedilla under the \"c\" in the borrowed French word , which shows it is pronounced rather than . In other Latin-script alphabets, they may distinguish between homonyms, such as the French (\"there\") versus (\"the\") that are both pronounced . In Gaelic type, a dot over a consonant indicates lenition of the consonant in question.\n\nIn other alphabetic systems, diacritical marks may perform other functions. Vowel pointing systems, namely the Arabic harakat (  etc.) and the Hebrew niqqud (  etc.) systems, indicate vowels that are not conveyed by the basic alphabet. The Indic virama ( ् etc.) and the Arabic sukūn (  ) mark the absence of vowels. Cantillation marks indicate prosody. Other uses include the Early Cyrillic titlo stroke ( ◌҃ ) and the Hebrew gershayim (  ), which, respectively, mark abbreviations or acronyms, and Greek diacritical marks, which showed that letters of the alphabet were being used as numerals. In the Hanyu Pinyin official romanization system for Chinese, diacritics are used to mark the tones of the syllables in which the marked vowels occur.\n\nIn orthography and collation, a letter modified by a diacritic may be treated either as a new, distinct letter or as a letter–diacritic combination. This varies from language to language, and may vary from case to case within a language. English is the only major modern European language requiring no diacritics for native words (although a diaeresis may be used in words such as \"coöperation\").\n\nIn some cases, letters are used as \"in-line diacritics\", with the same function as ancillary glyphs, in that they modify the sound of the letter preceding them, as in the case of the \"h\" in the English pronunciation of \"sh\" and \"th\".\n\nAmong the types of diacritic used in alphabets based on the Latin script are:\nBULLET::::- accents (so called because the acute, grave, and circumflex were originally used to indicate different types of pitch accents in the polytonic transcription of Greek)\nBULLET::::- ◌́ – acute ()\nBULLET::::- ◌̀ – grave\nBULLET::::- ◌̂ – circumflex\nBULLET::::- ◌̌ – caron, wedge (, )\nBULLET::::- ◌̋ – double acute\nBULLET::::- ◌̏ – double grave\nBULLET::::- ◌̃ – tilde\nBULLET::::- dots\nBULLET::::- ◌̇ – overdot (Indic )\nBULLET::::- ◌̣ – an underdot is used in and in Hebrew, Indic and Arabic transcription\nBULLET::::- ◌·◌ – interpunct\nBULLET::::- tittle, the superscript dot of the modern lowercase Latin \"i\" and \"j\"\nBULLET::::- ◌̈ – umlaut or diaeresis\nBULLET::::- ◌ː – triangular colon, used in the IPA to mark long vowels.\nBULLET::::- curves\nBULLET::::- ◌̆ – breve\nBULLET::::- ◌̑ – inverted breve\nBULLET::::- ◌͗ – sicilicus, a palaeographic diacritic similar to a caron or breve\nBULLET::::- ◌̃ – tilde\nBULLET::::- ◌҃ – titlo\nBULLET::::- vertical stroke\nBULLET::::- ◌̩ – syllabic a subscript vertical stroke is used in IPA to mark syllabicity and in to mark a schwa\nBULLET::::- macron or horizontal line\nBULLET::::- ◌̄ – macron\nBULLET::::- ◌̱ – underbar\nBULLET::::- overlays\nBULLET::::- ◌⃓ – vertical bar through the character\nBULLET::::- ◌̷ – slash through the character\nBULLET::::- ◌̵ – crossbar through the character\nBULLET::::- ring\nBULLET::::- ◌̊ – overring\nBULLET::::- superscript curls\nBULLET::::- ◌̓ – apostrophe\nBULLET::::- ◌̒ – inverted apostrophe\nBULLET::::- ◌̔ – reversed apostrophe\nBULLET::::- ◌̉ – hoi ()\nBULLET::::- ◌̛ – horn ()\nBULLET::::- subscript curls\nBULLET::::- ◌̦ – undercomma\nBULLET::::- ◌̧ – cedilla\nBULLET::::- ◌̡ ◌̢ – hook, left or right, sometimes superscript\nBULLET::::- ◌̨ – ogonek\nBULLET::::- double marks (over or under two base characters)\nBULLET::::- ◌͝◌ – double breve\nBULLET::::- ◌͡◌ – tie bar or top ligature\nBULLET::::- ◌᷍◌ – double circumflex\nBULLET::::- ◌͞◌ – longum\nBULLET::::- ◌͠◌ – double tilde\nBULLET::::- double sub/superscript diacritics\nBULLET::::- ◌̧ ̧ – double cedilla\nBULLET::::- ◌̨ ̨ – double ogonek\nBULLET::::- ◌̈ ̈ – double diaeresis\nBULLET::::- ◌ͅͺ – double ypogegrammeni\n\nThe tilde, dot, comma, titlo, apostrophe, bar, and colon are sometimes diacritical marks, but also have other uses.\n\nNot all diacritics occur adjacent to the letter they modify. In the Wali language of Ghana, for example, an apostrophe indicates a change of vowel quality, but occurs at the beginning of the word, as in the dialects \"’Bulengee\" and \"’Dolimi\". Because of vowel harmony, all vowels in a word are affected, so the scope of the diacritic is the entire word. In abugida scripts, like those used to write Hindi and Thai, diacritics indicate vowels, and may occur above, below, before, after, or around the consonant letter they modify.\n\nThe tittle (dot) on the letter \"i\" or the letter \"j\", of the Latin alphabet originated as a diacritic to clearly distinguish \"i\" from the minims (downstrokes) of adjacent letters. It first appeared in the 11th century in the sequence \"ii\" (as in ), then spread to \"i\" adjacent to \"m, n, u\", and finally to all lowercase \"i\"s. The \"j\", originally a variant of \"i\", inherited the tittle. The shape of the diacritic developed from initially resembling today's acute accent to a long flourish by the 15th century. With the advent of Roman type it was reduced to the round dot we have today.\n\nLanguages from Eastern Europe tend to use diacritics on both consonants and vowels, whereas in Western Europe digraphs are more typically used to change consonant sounds. Most languages in Western Europe use diacritics on vowels, aside from English where there are typically none (with some exceptions).\n\nBULLET::::- (ئ ؤ إ أ and stand alone ء) : indicates a glottal stop.\nBULLET::::- (ــًــٍــٌـ) () symbols: Serve a grammatical role in Arabic. The sign ـً is most commonly written in combination with alif, e.g. .\nBULLET::::- (ــّـ) : Gemination (doubling) of consonants.\nBULLET::::- (ٱ) : Comes most commonly at the beginning of a word. Indicates a type of that is pronounced only when the letter is read at the beginning of the talk.\nBULLET::::- (آ) : A written replacement for a that is followed by an alif, i.e. (). Read as a glottal stop followed by a long , e.g. are written out respectively as . This writing rule does not apply when the alif that follows a is not a part of the stem of the word, e.g. is not written out as as the stem does not have an alif that follows its .\nBULLET::::- (ــٰـ) \"superscript \" (also \"short\" or \"dagger alif\": A replacement for an original alif that is dropped in the writing out of some rare words, e.g. is not written out with the original alif found in the word pronunciation, instead it is written out as .\nBULLET::::- (In Arabic: also called ):\nBULLET::::- (ــَـ) (a)\nBULLET::::- (ــِـ) (i)\nBULLET::::- (ــُـ) (u)\nBULLET::::- (ــْـ) (no vowel)\nBULLET::::- The or vowel points serve two purposes:\nBULLET::::- They serve as a phonetic guide. They indicate the presence of short vowels (, , or ) or their absence ().\nBULLET::::- At the last letter of a word, the vowel point reflects the inflection case or conjugation mood.\nBULLET::::- For nouns, The is for the nominative, for the accusative, and for the genitive.\nBULLET::::- For verbs, the is for the imperfective, for the perfective, and the is for verbs in the imperative or jussive moods.\nBULLET::::- Vowel points or should not be confused with consonant points or () – one, two or three dots written above or below a consonant to distinguish between letters of the same or similar form.\n\nThese diacritics are used in addition to the acute, grave, and circumflex accents and the diaeresis:\nBULLET::::- () – iota subscript\nBULLET::::- – rough breathing (, ): aspiration\nBULLET::::- – smooth (or soft) breathing (, ): lack of aspiration\n\nBULLET::::- Niqqud\nBULLET::::- ּ – Dagesh\nBULLET::::- ּ – Mappiq\nBULLET::::- ֿ – Rafe\nBULLET::::- ׁ – Shin dot (at top right corner)\nBULLET::::- ׂ – Sin dot (at top left corner)\nBULLET::::- ְ – Shva\nBULLET::::- ֻ – Kubutz\nBULLET::::- ֹ◌ – Holam\nBULLET::::- ָ – Kamatz\nBULLET::::- ַ – Patakh\nBULLET::::- ֶ – Segol\nBULLET::::- ֵ – Tzeire\nBULLET::::- ִ – Hiriq\nBULLET::::- Cantillation marks do not generally render correctly; refer to Cantillation#Names and shapes of the ta'amim for a complete table together with instructions for how to maximize the possibility of viewing them in a web browser\nBULLET::::- Other\nBULLET::::- ׳ – Geresh\nBULLET::::- ״ – Gershayim\n\nThe diacritics >〮 and 〯 , known as Bangjeom (), were used to mark pitch accents in Hangul for Middle Korean. They were written to the left of a syllable in vertical writing and above a syllable in horizontal writing.\n\nThe South Korean government officially revised the romanization of the Korean language in July 2000 to eliminate diacritics.\n\nBULLET::::- A dot above and a dot below a letter represent , transliterated as \"a\" or \"ă\",\nBULLET::::- Two diagonally-placed dots above a letter represent , transliterated as \"ā\" or \"â\" or \"å\",\nBULLET::::- Two horizontally-placed dots below a letter represent , transliterated as \"e\" or \"ĕ\"; often pronounced and transliterated as \"i\" in the East Syriac dialect,\nBULLET::::- Two diagonally-placed dots below a letter represent , transliterated as \"ē\",\nBULLET::::- A dot underneath the \"Beth\" represent a soft sound, transliterated as \"v\"\nBULLET::::- A tilde (~) placed under \"Gamel\" represent a sound, transliterated as \"j\"\nBULLET::::- The letter \"Waw\" with a dot below it represents , transliterated as \"ū\" or \"u\",\nBULLET::::- The letter \"Waw\" with a dot above it represents , transliterated as \"ō\" or \"o\",\nBULLET::::- The letter \"Yōḏ\" with a dot beneath it represents , transliterated as \"ī\" or \"i\",\nBULLET::::- A tilde (~) under \"Kaph\" represent a sound, transliterated as \"ch\" or \"č\",\nBULLET::::- A semicircle under \"Peh\" represents an sound, transliterated as \"f\" or \"ph\".\n\nIn addition to the above vowel marks, transliteration of Syriac sometimes includes \"ə\", \"e̊\" or superscript \"\" (or often nothing at all) to represent an original Aramaic schwa that became lost later on at some point in the development of Syriac. Some transliteration schemes find its inclusion necessary for showing spirantization or for historical reasons.\n\nSome non-alphabetic scripts also employ symbols that function essentially as diacritics.\nBULLET::::- Non-pure abjads (such as Hebrew and Arabic script) and abugidas use diacritics for denoting vowels. Hebrew and Arabic also indicate consonant doubling and change with diacritics; Hebrew and Devanagari use them for foreign sounds. Devanagari and related abugidas also use a diacritical mark called a \"virama\" to mark the absence of a vowel. In addition, Devanagari uses the moon-dot \"chandrabindu\" ( ँ ).\nBULLET::::- Unified Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics use several types of diacritics, including the diacritics with alphabetic properties known as Medials and Finals. Although long vowels originally were indicated with a negative line through the Syllabic glyphs, making the glyph appear broken, in the modern forms, a dot above is used to indicate vowel length. In some of the styles, a ring above indicates a long vowel with a [j] off-glide. Another diacritic, the \"inner ring\" is placed at the glyph's head to modify [p] to [f] and [t] to [θ]. Medials such as the \"w-dot\" placed next to the Syllabics glyph indicates a [w] being placed between the syllable onset consonant and the nucleus vowel. Finals indicate the syllable coda consonant; some of the syllable coda consonants in word medial positions, such as with the \"h-tick\", indicate the fortification of the consonant in the syllable following it.\nBULLET::::- The Japanese \"hiragana\" and \"katakana\" syllabaries use the \"dakuten\" (◌゛) and \"handakuten\" (◌゜) (in Japanese: 濁点 and 半濁点) symbols, also known as \"nigori\" (濁 \"muddying\") or \"ten-ten\" (点々 \"dot dot\") and \"maru\" (丸 \"circle\"), to indicate voiced consonants or other phonetic changes.\nBULLET::::- Emoticons are commonly created with diacritic symbols, especially Japanese emoticons on popular imageboards.\n\nDifferent languages use different rules to put diacritic characters in alphabetical order. French treats letters with diacritical marks the same as the underlying letter for purposes of ordering and dictionaries.\n\nThe Scandinavian languages and the Finnish language, by contrast, treat the characters with diacritics \"å\", \"ä\", and \"ö\" as distinct letters of the alphabet, and sort them after \"z\". Usually \"ä\" (a-umlaut) and \"ö\" (o-umlaut) [used in Swedish and Finnish] are sorted as equivalent to \"æ\" (ash) and \"ø\" (o-slash) [used in Danish and Norwegian]. Also, \"aa\", when used as an alternative spelling to \"å\", is sorted as such. Other letters modified by diacritics are treated as variants of the underlying letter, with the exception that \"ü\" is frequently sorted as \"y\".\n\nLanguages that treat accented letters as variants of the underlying letter usually alphabetize words with such symbols immediately after similar unmarked words. For instance, in German where two words differ only by an umlaut, the word without it is sorted first in German dictionaries (e.g. \"schon\" and then \"schön\", or \"fallen\" and then \"fällen\"). However, when names are concerned (e.g. in phone books or in author catalogues in libraries), umlauts are often treated as combinations of the vowel with a suffixed \"e\"; Austrian phone books now treat characters with umlauts as separate letters (immediately following the underlying vowel).\n\nIn Spanish, the grapheme \"ñ\" is considered a new letter different from \"n\" and collated between \"n\" and \"o\", as it denotes a different sound from that of a plain \"n\". But the accented vowels \"á\", \"é\", \"í\", \"ó\", \"ú\" are not separated from the unaccented vowels \"a\", \"e\", \"i\", \"o\", \"u\", as the acute accent in Spanish only modifies stress within the word or denotes a distinction between homonyms, and does not modify the sound of a letter.\n\nFor a comprehensive list of the collating orders in various languages, see Collating sequence.\n\nModern computer technology was developed mostly in English-speaking countries, so data formats, keyboard layouts, etc. were developed with a bias favoring English, a language with an alphabet without diacritical marks. This has led some to theorize that the marks and accents may be made obsolete to facilitate the worldwide exchange of data. Efforts have been made to create internationalized domain names that further extend the English alphabet (e.g., \"pokémon.com\").\n\nDepending on the keyboard layout, which differs amongst countries, it is more or less easy to enter letters with diacritics on computers and typewriters. Some have their own keys; some are created by first pressing the key with the diacritic mark followed by the letter to place it on. Such a key is sometimes referred to as a dead key, as it produces no output of its own but modifies the output of the key pressed after it.\n\nIn modern Microsoft Windows and Linux operating systems, the keyboard layouts \"US International\" and \"UK International\" feature dead keys that allow one to type Latin letters with the acute, grave, circumflex, diaeresis, tilde, and cedilla found in Western European languages (specifically, those combinations found in the ISO Latin-1 character set) directly: + gives \"ë\", + gives \"õ\", etc. On Apple Macintosh computers, there are keyboard shortcuts for the most common diacritics; followed by a vowel places an acute accent, followed by a vowel gives an umlaut, gives a cedilla, etc. Diacritics can be composed in most X Window System keyboard layouts, as well as other operating systems, such as Microsoft Windows, using additional software.\n\nOn computers, the availability of code pages determines whether one can use certain diacritics. Unicode solves this problem by assigning every known character its own code; if this code is known, most modern computer systems provide a method to input it. With Unicode, it is also possible to combine diacritical marks with most characters. However, as of 2019, very few fonts include the necessary support to correctly render character-plus-diacritic(s) for the Latin, Cyrillic and some other alphabets (exceptions include Andika).\n\nThe following languages have letters that contain diacritics that are considered independent letters distinct from those without diacritics.\n\nBULLET::::- Baltic\nBULLET::::- Celtic\nBULLET::::- Cyrillic alphabets\nBULLET::::- In Bulgarian and Macedonian the possessive pronoun ѝ (\"ì\", \"her\") is spelled with a grave accent in order to distinguish it from the conjunction и (\"i\", \"and\").\nBULLET::::- Finno-Ugric\nBULLET::::- Germanic\nBULLET::::- Romance\nBULLET::::- Slavic\nBULLET::::- Turkic\n\nBULLET::::- Other\n\nEnglish is one of the few European languages that does not have many words that contain diacritical marks. Instead, digraphs are the main way the Modern English alphabet adapts the Latin to its phonemes. Exceptions are unassimilated foreign loanwords, including borrowings from French and, increasingly, Spanish; however, the diacritic is also sometimes omitted from such words. Loanwords that frequently appear with the diacritic in English include \"café\", \"résumé\" or \"resumé\" (a usage that helps distinguish it from the verb \"resume\"), \"soufflé\", and \"naïveté\" (see \"English terms with diacritical marks\"). In older practice (and even among some orthographically conservative modern writers) one may see examples such as \"élite\", \"mêlée\" and \"rôle.\"\n\nEnglish speakers and writers once used the diaeresis more often than now in words such as \"coöperation\" (from Fr. \"coopération\"), \"zoölogy\" (from Grk. \"zoologia\"), and \"seeër\" (now more commonly \"see-er \"or simply\" seer\") as a way of indicating that adjacent vowels belonged to separate syllables, but this practice has become far less common. \"The New Yorker\" magazine is a major publication that continues to use the diaresis in place of a dash for clarity and economy of space.\n\nA few English words, out of context, can only be distinguished from others by a diacritic or modified letter, including exposé, lamé, maté, öre, øre, pâté, and rosé'. The same is true of \"résumé,\" alternately \"\" but nevertheless it is regularly spelled \"resume\". In a few words, diacritics that did not exist in the original have been added for disambiguation, as in maté (from Sp. and Port. \"mate\"), saké (the standard Romanization of the Japanese has no accent mark), and Malé (from Dhivehi މާލެ), to clearly distinguish them from the English words \"mate\", \"sake\", and \"male\".\n\nThe acute and grave accents are occasionally used in poetry and lyrics: the acute to indicate stress overtly where it might be ambiguous (\"rébel\" vs. \"rebél\") or nonstandard for metrical reasons (\"caléndar\"), the grave to indicate that an ordinarily silent or elided syllable is pronounced (\"warnèd,\" \"parlìament\").\n\nIn certain personal names such as \"Renée\" and \"Zoë\", often two spellings exist, and the preference will be known only to those close to the person themselves. Even when the name of a person is spelled with a diacritic, like Charlotte Brontë, this may be dropped in English language articles and even official documents such as passports either due to carelessness, the typist not knowing how to enter letters with diacritical marks, or for technical reasons—California, for example, does not allow names with diacritics, as the computer system cannot process such characters. They also appear in some worldwide company names and/or trademarks such as Nestlé or Citroën.\n\nThe following languages have letter-diacritic combinations that are not considered independent letters.\nBULLET::::- Afrikaans uses a diaeresis to mark vowels that are pronounced separately and not as one would expect where they occur together, for example \"voel\" (to feel) as opposed to \"voël\" (bird). The circumflex is used in \"ê, î, ô\" and \"û\" generally to indicate long close-mid, as opposed to open-mid vowels, for example in the words \"wêreld\" (world) and \"môre\" (morning, tomorrow). The acute accent is used to add emphasis in the same way as underlining or writing in bold or italics in English, for example \"Dit is jóú boek\" (It is your book). The grave accent is used to distinguish between words that are different only in placement of the stress, for example \"appel\" (apple) and \"appèl\" (appeal) and in a few cases where it makes no difference to the pronunciation but distinguishes between homophones. The two most usual cases of the latter are the in the sayings \"òf... òf\" (either... or) and \"nòg... nòg\" (neither... nor) to distinguish them from \"of\" (or) and \"nog\" (again, still).\nBULLET::::- Aymara uses a diacritical horn over \"p, q, t, k, ch\".\nBULLET::::- Catalan has the following composite characters: \"à, ç, é, è, í, ï, ó, ò, ú, ü, l·l\". The acute and the grave indicate stress and vowel height, the cedilla marks the result of a historical palatalization, the diaeresis indicates either a hiatus, or that the letter \"u\" is pronounced when the graphemes \"gü, qü\" are followed by \"e\" or \"i\", the interpunct (·) distinguishes the different values of \"ll/l·l\".\nBULLET::::- Some orthographies of Cornish such as Kernowek Standard and Unified Cornish use diacritics, while others such as Kernewek Kemmyn and the Standard Written Form do not (or only use them optionally in teaching materials).\nBULLET::::- Dutch uses the diaeresis. For example, in \"ruïne\" it means that the \"u\" and the \"i\" are separately pronounced in their usual way, and not in the way that the combination \"ui\" is normally pronounced. Thus it works as a separation sign and not as an indication for an alternative version of the \"i\". Diacritics can be used for emphasis (\"érg koud\" for \"very\" cold) or for disambiguation between a number of words that are spelled the same when context doesn't indicate the correct meaning (\"één appel\" = one apple, \"een appel\" = an apple; \"vóórkomen\" = to occur, \"voorkómen\" = to prevent). Grave and acute accents are used on a very small number of words, mostly loanwords. The ç also appears in some loanwords.\nBULLET::::- Faroese. Non-Faroese accented letters are not added to the Faroese alphabet. These include \"é\", \"ö\", \"ü\", \"å\" and recently also letters like \"š\", \"ł\", and \"ć\".\nBULLET::::- Filipino has the following composite characters: \"á, à, â, é, è, ê, í, ì, î, ó, ò, ô, ú, ù, û\". The actual use of diacritics for Filipino is, however, uncommon, meant only to distinguish between homonyms with different stresses and meanings that either occur near each other in a text or to aid the reader in ascertaining its otherwise ambiguous meaning. The letter eñe is due to the Spanish alphabet and too, is considered a separate letter. The diacritics appears in Spanish loanwords and names if Spanish orthography is observed.\nBULLET::::- Finnish. Carons in \"š\" and \"ž\" appear only in foreign proper names and loanwords, but may be substituted with \"sh\" or \"zh\" if and only if it is technically impossible to produce accented letters in the medium. Contrary to Estonian, \"š\" and \"ž\" are not considered distinct letters in Finnish.\nBULLET::::- French uses five diacritics. The grave (\"accent grave\") marks the sound when over an e, as in \"père\" (\"father\") or is used to distinguish words that are otherwise homographs such as \"a\"/\"à\" (\"has\"/\"to\") or \"ou\"/\"où\" (\"or\"/\"where\"). The acute (\"accent aigu\") is only used in \"é\", modifying the \"e\" to make the sound , as in \"étoile\" (\"star\"). The circumflex (\"accent circonflexe\") generally denotes that an S once followed the vowel in Old French or Latin, as in \"fête\" (\"party\"), the Old French being \"feste\" and the Latin being \"festum\". Whether the circumflex modifies the vowel's pronunciation depends on the dialect and the vowel. The cedilla (\"cédille\") indicates that a normally hard \"c\" (before the vowels \"a\", \"o\", and \"u\") is to be pronounced , as in \"ça\" (\"that\"). The diaeresis (\"tréma\") indicates that two adjacent vowels that would normally be pronounced as one are to be pronounced separately, as in \"Noël\" (\"Christmas\").\nBULLET::::- Galician vowels can bear an acute (\"á, é, í, ó, ú\") to indicate stress or difference between two otherwise same written words (\"é\", 'is' vs. \"e\", 'and'), but the diaeresis (\"trema\") is only used with \"ï\" and \"ü\" to show two separate vowel sounds in pronunciation. Only in foreign words may Galician use other diacritics such as \"ç\" (common during the Middle Ages), \"ê\", or \"à\".\nBULLET::::- German uses the three umlauted characters \"ä\", \"ö\" and \"ü\". These diacritics indicate vowel changes. For instance, the word \"Ofen\" \"oven\" has the plural \"Öfen\" . The mark originated as a superscript \"e\"; a handwritten blackletter \"e\" resembles two parallel vertical lines, like a diaeresis. Due to this history, \"ä\", \"ö\" and \"ü\" can be written as \"ae\", \"oe\" and \"ue\" respectively, if the umlaut letters are not available.\nBULLET::::- Hebrew has many various diacritic marks known as \"niqqud\" that are used above and below script to represent vowels. These must be distinguished from cantillation, which are keys to pronunciation and syntax.\nBULLET::::- The International Phonetic Alphabet uses diacritic symbols and characters to indicate phonetic features or secondary articulations.\nBULLET::::- Irish uses the acute to indicate that a vowel is long: \"á\", \"é\", \"í\", \"ó\", \"ú\". It is known as \"síneadh fada\" \"long sign\" or simply \"fada\" \"long\" in Irish. In the older Gaelic type, overdots are used to indicate lenition of a consonant: \"ḃ\", \"ċ\", \"ḋ\", \"ḟ\", \"ġ\", \"ṁ\", \"ṗ\", \"ṡ\", \"ṫ\".\nBULLET::::- Italian mainly has the acute and the grave (\"à\", \"è\"/\"é\", \"ì\", \"ò\"/\"ó\", \"ù\"), typically to indicate a stressed syllable that would not be stressed under the normal rules of pronunciation but sometimes also to distinguish between words that are otherwise spelled the same way (e.g. \"e\", and; \"è\", is). Despite its rare use, Italian orthography allows the circumflex (î) too, in two cases: it can be found in old literary context (roughly up to 19th century) to signal a syncope (fêro→fecero, they did), or in modern Italian to signal the contraction of ″-ii″ due to the plural ending -i whereas the root ends with another -i; e.g., s. demonio, p. demonii→demonî; in this case the circumflex also signals that the word intended is not demoni, plural of \"demone\" by shifting the accent (demònî, \"devils\"; dèmoni, \"demons\").\nBULLET::::- Lithuanian uses the acute, grave and tilde in dictionaries to indicate stress types in the language's pitch accent system.\nBULLET::::- Maltese also uses the grave on its vowels to indicate stress at the end of a word with two syllables or more:– lowercase letters: à, è, ì, ò, ù ; capital letters: À, È, Ì, Ò, Ù\nBULLET::::- Maori makes use of macrons to mark long vowels.\nBULLET::::- Occitan has the following composite characters: \"á, à, ç, é, è, í, ï, ó, ò, ú, ü, n·h, s·h\". The acute and the grave indicate stress and vowel height, the cedilla marks the result of a historical palatalization, the diaeresis indicates either a hiatus, or that the letter \"u\" is pronounced when the graphemes \"gü, qü\" are followed by \"e\" or \"i\", and the interpunct (·) distinguishes the different values of \"nh/n·h\" and \"sh/s·h\" (i.e., that the letters are supposed to be pronounced separately, not combined into \"ny\" and \"sh\").\nBULLET::::- Portuguese has the following composite characters: \"à, á, â, ã, ç, é, ê, í, ó, ô, õ, ú\". The acute and the circumflex indicate stress and vowel height, the grave indicates crasis, the tilde represents nasalization, and the cedilla marks the result of a historical lenition.\nBULLET::::- Acutes are also used in Slavic language dictionaries and textbooks to indicate lexical stress, placed over the vowel of the stressed syllable. This can also serve to disambiguate meaning (e.g., in Russian писа́ть (\"pisáť\") means \"to write\", but пи́сать (\"písať\") means \"to piss\"), or \"бо́льшая часть\" (the biggest part) vs \"больша́я часть\" (the big part).\nBULLET::::- Spanish uses the acute and the diaeresis. The acute is used on a vowel in a stressed syllable in words with irregular stress patterns. It can also be used to \"break up\" a diphthong as in \"tío\" (pronounced , rather than as it would be without the accent). Moreover, the acute can be used to distinguish words that otherwise are spelled alike, such as \"si\" (\"if\") and \"sí\" (\"yes\"), and also to distinguish interrogative and exclamatory pronouns from homophones with a different grammatical function, such as \"donde/¿dónde?\" (\"where\"/\"where?\") or \"como/¿cómo?\" (\"as\"/\"how?\"). The acute may also used be used to avoid typographical ambiguity, as in \"1 ó 2\" (\"1 or 2\"; without the acute this might be interpreted as \"1 0 2\". The diaeresis is used only over \"u\" (\"ü\") for it to be pronounced in the combinations \"gue\" and \"gui,\" where \"u\" is normally silent, for example \"ambigüedad.\" In poetry, the diaeresis may be used on \"i\" and \"u\" as a way to force a hiatus. As foreshadowed above, in nasal \"ñ\" the tilde (squiggle) is not considered a diacritic sign at all, but a composite part of a distinct glyph, with its own chapter in the dictionary: a glyph that denotes the 15th letter of the Spanish alphabet.\nBULLET::::- Swedish uses the acute to show non-standard stress, for example in (café) and (résumé). This occasionally helps resolve ambiguities, such as \"ide\" (hibernation) versus \"idé\" (idea). In these words, the acute is not optional. Some proper names use non-standard diacritics, such as Carolina Klüft and Staël von Holstein. For foreign loanwords the original accents are strongly recommended, unless the word has been infused into the language, in which case they are optional. Hence \"crème fraîche\" but \"ampere\". Swedish also has the letters \"å\", \"ä\", and \"ö\", but these are considered distinct letters, not \"a\" and \"o\" with diacritics.\nBULLET::::- Tamil does not have any diacritics in itself, but uses the Arabic numerals 2, 3 and 4 as diacritics to represent aspirated, voiced, and voiced-aspirated consonants when Tamil script is used to write long passages in Sanskrit.\nBULLET::::- Thai has its own system of diacritics derived from Indian numerals, which denote different tones.\nBULLET::::- Vietnamese uses the acute (\"dấu sắc\"), the grave (\"dấu huyền\"), the tilde (\"dấu ngã\"), the underdot (\"dấu nặng\") and the hoi (\"dấu hỏi\") on vowels as tone indicators.\nBULLET::::- Welsh uses the circumflex, diaeresis, acute, and grave on its seven vowels \"a, e, i, o, u, w, y\". The most common is the circumflex (which it calls \"to bach\", meaning \"little roof\", or \"acen grom\" \"crooked accent\", or \"hirnod\" \"long sign\") to denote a long vowel, usually to disambiguate it from a similar word with a short vowel. The rarer grave accent has the opposite effect, shortening vowel sounds that would usually be pronounced long. The acute accent and diaeresis are also occasionally used, to denote stress and vowel separation respectively. The \"w\"-circumflex and the \"y\"-circumflex are among the most commonly accented characters in Welsh, but unusual in languages generally, and were until recently very hard to obtain in word-processed and HTML documents.\n\nSeveral languages that are not written with the Roman alphabet are transliterated, or romanized, using diacritics. Examples:\nBULLET::::- Arabic has several romanisations, depending on the type of the application, region, intended audience, country, etc. many of them extensively use diacritics, e.g., some methods use an underdot for rendering emphatic consonants (ṣ, ṭ, ḍ, ẓ, ḥ). The macron is often used to render long vowels. š is often used for , ġ for .\nBULLET::::- Chinese has several romanizations that use the umlaut, but only on \"u\" (\"ü\"). In Hanyu Pinyin, the four tones of Mandarin Chinese are denoted by the macron (first tone), acute (second tone), caron (third tone) and grave (fourth tone) diacritics. Example: \"ā, á, ǎ, à\".\nBULLET::::- Romanized Japanese (Rōmaji) occasionally uses macrons to mark long vowels. The Hepburn romanization system uses macrons to mark long vowels, and the Kunrei-shiki and Nihon-shiki systems use a circumflex.\nBULLET::::- Sanskrit, as well as many of its descendants, like Hindi and Bengali, uses a lossless romanization system. This includes several letters with diacritical markings, such as the macron (ā, ī, ū), over- and underdots (ṛ, ḥ, ṃ, ṇ, ṣ, ṭ, ḍ) as well as a few others (ś, ñ).\n\nPossibly the greatest number of combining diacritics \"required\" to compose a valid character in any Unicode language is 8, for the \"well-known grapheme cluster in Tibetan and Ranjana scripts\",ཧྐྵྨླྺྼྻྂ, or HAKṢHMALAWARAYAṀ.\n\nIt is U+0F67 U+0F90 U+0FB5 U+0FA8 U+0FB3 U+0FBA U+0FBC U+0FBB U+0F82, or:<br>\nTIBETAN LETTER HA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER KA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER SSA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER MA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER LA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER FIXED-FORM WA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER FIXED-FORM RA + TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER FIXED-FORM YA + TIBETAN SIGN NYI ZLA NAA DA.\n\nSome users have explored the limits of rendering in web browsers and other software by \"decorating\" words with multiple nonsensical diacritics per character. The result is called \"Zalgo text\". The composed bogus characters and words can be copied and pasted normally via the system clipboard.\n\n<br><br><br>Example: c̳̻͚̻̩̻͉̯̄̏͑̋͆̎͐ͬ͑͌́͢h̵͔͈͍͇̪̯͇̞͖͇̜͉̪̪̤̙ͧͣ̓̐̓ͤ͋͒ͥ͑̆͒̓͋̑́͞ǎ̡̮̤̤̬͚̝͙̞͎̇ͧ͆͊ͅo̴̲̺͓̖͖͉̜̟̗̮̳͉̻͉̫̯̫̍̋̿̒͌̃̂͊̏̈̏̿ͧ́ͬ̌ͥ̇̓̀͢͜s̵̵̘̹̜̝̘̺̙̻̠̱͚̤͓͚̠͙̝͕͆̿̽ͥ̃͠͡<br><br>\n\nBULLET::::- Latin-script alphabets\nBULLET::::- Alt code\nBULLET::::- Collating sequence\nBULLET::::- Combining character\nBULLET::::- Compose key\nBULLET::::- English terms with diacritical marks\nBULLET::::- Heavy metal umlaut\nBULLET::::- ISO/IEC 8859 8-bit extended-Latin-alphabet European character encodings\nBULLET::::- Latin alphabet\nBULLET::::- List of Latin letters\nBULLET::::- List of precomposed Latin characters in Unicode\nBULLET::::- List of U.S. cities with diacritics\nBULLET::::- Romanization\nBULLET::::- wikt:Appendix:English words with diacritics\n\nBULLET::::- Context of Diacritics  A research project\nBULLET::::- Diacritics Project\nBULLET::::- Unicode\nBULLET::::- Orthographic diacritics and multilingual computing, by J. C. Wells\nBULLET::::- Notes on the use of the diacritics, by Markus Lång\nBULLET::::- Entering International Characters (in Linux, KDE)\nBULLET::::- Standard Character Set for Macintosh PDF at Adobe.com\n"}
{"id": "8442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8442", "title": "Digraph", "text": "Digraph\n\nDigraph may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- Digraph (orthography), a pair of characters used together to represent a single sound, such as \"sh\" in English\nBULLET::::- Typographical ligature, the joining of two letters as a single glyph, such as \"æ\"\nBULLET::::- Digraph (programming), a group of characters used to symbolise one character\nBULLET::::- Digraph (mathematics), or directed graph, in graph theory\nBULLET::::- Digraph, component of a CIA cryptonym, a covert code name\nBULLET::::- As language codes in ISO 639-1\n\nBULLET::::- Digraphia, use of multiple complete writing systems for one language.\nBULLET::::- Digram (disambiguation) / Digramme\nBULLET::::- Bigram\nBULLET::::- Trigraph (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Multigraph (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Unigraph\n"}
{"id": "8443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8443", "title": "Didgeridoo", "text": "Didgeridoo\n\nThe didgeridoo (; also known as a didjeridu) is a wind instrument. The didgeridoo was developed by indigenous peoples of northern Australia, likely within the last 1,500 years and is now in use around the world. It is a wooden trumpet \"drone pipe\" classified by musicologists as a brass aerophone.\n\nA didgeridoo is usually cylindrical or conical, and can measure anywhere from long. Most are around long. Generally, the longer the instrument, the lower its pitch or key. However, flared instruments play a higher pitch than unflared instruments of the same length.\n\nThere are no reliable sources of the exact age of the didgeridoo. Archaeological studies suggest that people of the Kakadu region in Northern Australia have been using the didgeridoo for less than 1,000 years, based on the dating of rock art paintings. A clear rock painting in Ginga Wardelirrhmeng, on the northern edge of the Arnhem Land plateau, from the freshwater period (that had begun 1500 years ago) shows a didgeridoo player and two songmen participating in an Ubarr Ceremony.\n\nThe name \"Didgeridoo\" is not of aboriginal origin and is considered to be an onomatopoetic word. The earliest occurrences of the word in print include a 1908 edition of the \"Hamilton Spectator\", a 1914 edition of \"The Northern Territory Times and Gazette\", and a 1919 issue of \"Smith's Weekly\" where it was referred to as a \"didjerry\" which produced the sound – (phonic) \"didjerry, didjerry, didjerry and so on ad infinitum\".\n\nA rival explanation, that didgeridoo is a corruption of the Irish Gaelic language phrase \"dúdaire dubh\" or \"dúidire dúth\", is controversial. \"Dúdaire\"/\"dúidire\" is a noun that, depending on the context, may mean \"trumpeter\", \"hummer\", \"crooner\" or \"puffer\" while \"dubh\" means \"black\" and \"dúth\" means \"native\".\n\nThere are numerous names for the instrument among the Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia, none of which closely resemble the word \"didgeridoo\" (see below). Some didgeridoo enthusiasts, scholars and Aboriginal people advocate using local language names for the instrument. However, in everyday conversation, some Aboriginal people will often use the word \"didgeridoo\" interchangeably with the instrument's name in their local language.\n\n\"Yiḏaki\" (sometimes spelt \"yirdaki\") is one of the most commonly used names although, strictly speaking, it refers to a specific type of the instrument made and used by the Yolngu people of north-east Arnhem Land. Yolngu also use the synonym \"mandapul\" to refer to the instrument.\n\nThere are numerous other, regional names for the didgeridoo. The following are some of the more common of these.\n! width=\"33%\"  People\n! width=\"33%\"  Region\n! width=\"34%\"  Local name\n\nTraditional didgeridoos are usually made from hardwoods, especially the various eucalyptus species that are endemic to northern and central Australia. Generally the main trunk of the tree is harvested, though a substantial branch may be used instead. Traditional didgeridoo makers seek suitably hollow live trees in areas with obvious termite activity. Termites attack these living eucalyptus trees, removing only the dead heartwood of the tree, as the living sapwood contains a chemical that repels the insects. Various techniques are employed to find trees with a suitable hollow, including knowledge of landscape and termite activity patterns, and a kind of tap or knock test, in which the bark of the tree is peeled back, and a fingernail or the blunt end of a tool, such as an axe, is knocked against the wood to determine if the hollow produces the right resonance. Once a suitably hollow tree is found, it is cut down and cleaned out, the bark is taken off, the ends trimmed, and the exterior is shaped; this results in a finished instrument. A rim of beeswax may be applied to the mouthpiece end.\n\nNon-traditional didgeridoos can be made from native or non-native hard woods (typically split, hollowed and rejoined), glass, fiberglass, metal, agave, clay, hemp (in the form of a bioplastic named zelfo), PVC piping and carbon fibre. These typically have an upper inside diameter of around 1.25\" down to a bell end of anywhere between two and eight inches and have a length corresponding to the desired key. The end of the pipe can be shaped and smoothed to create a comfortable mouthpiece or an added mouthpiece can be made of any shaped and smoothed material such as rubber, rubber stopper with a hole or beeswax.\n\nModern didgeridoo designs are distinct from the traditional Australian Aboriginal didgeridoo, and are innovations recognized by musicologists. Didgeridoo design innovation started in the late 20th century using non-traditional materials and non-traditional shapes.\n\nDidgeridoos can be painted by their maker or a dedicated artist using traditional or modern paints while others retain the natural wood grain with minimal or no decoration.\n\nThe didgeridoo is played with continuously vibrating lips to produce the drone while using a special breathing technique called circular breathing. This requires breathing in through the nose whilst simultaneously expelling stored air out of the mouth using the tongue and cheeks. By use of this technique, a skilled player can replenish the air in their lungs, and with practice can sustain a note for as long as desired. Recordings exist of modern didgeridoo players playing continuously for more than 40 minutes; Mark Atkins on \"Didgeridoo Concerto\" (1994) plays for over 50 minutes continuously.\n\nThe didgeridoo functions \"...as an aural kaleidoscope of timbres\" and that \"the extremely difficult virtuoso techniques developed by expert performers find no parallel elsewhere.\"\n\nA termite-bored didgeridoo has an irregular shape that, overall, usually increases in diameter towards the lower end. This shape means that its resonances occur at frequencies that are not harmonically spaced in frequency. This contrasts with the harmonic spacing of the resonances in a cylindrical plastic pipe, whose resonant frequencies fall in the ratio 1:3:5 etc. The second resonance of a didgeridoo (the note sounded by overblowing) is usually around an 11th higher than the fundamental frequency (a frequency ratio somewhat less than 3:1).\n\nThe vibration produced by the player's lips has harmonics, i.e., it has frequency components falling exactly in the ratio 1:2:3 etc. However, the non-harmonic spacing of the instrument's resonances means that the harmonics of the fundamental note are not systematically assisted by instrument resonances, as is usually the case for Western wind instruments (e.g., in the low range of the clarinet, the 1st, 3rd, and 5th harmonics of the reed are assisted by resonances of the bore).\n\nSufficiently strong resonances of the vocal tract can strongly influence the timbre of the instrument.\nAt some frequencies, whose values depend on the position of the player's tongue, resonances of the vocal tract inhibit the oscillatory flow of air into the instrument.\nBands of frequencies that are not thus inhibited produce formants in the output sound.\nThese formants, and especially their variation during the inhalation and exhalation phases of circular breathing, give the instrument its readily recognizable sound.\n\nOther variations in the didgeridoo's sound can be made by adding vocalizations to the drone. Most of the vocalizations are related to sounds emitted by Australian animals, such as the dingo or the kookaburra. To produce these sounds, the players simply have to use their vocal folds to produce the sounds of the animals whilst continuing to blow air through the instrument. The results range from very high-pitched sounds to much lower sounds involving interference between the lip and vocal fold vibrations. Adding vocalizations increases the complexity of the playing.\n\nModern performances using the didgeridoo include combining it with beatboxing. It was featured on the British children's TV series \"Blue Peter\".\n\nThe didgeridoo also became a role playing instrument in the experimental and avant-garde music scene. Industrial music bands like Test Department generated sounds from this instrument and used them in their industrial performances.\n\nIt is very often used in the music project Naakhum which combines Extreme Metal and Ethnic music.\n\nEarly songs by the acid jazz band Jamiroquai featured didgeridoo player Wallis Buchanan (until he left the band in 1999). A notable song featuring a didgeridoo is the band's first single \"When You Gonna Learn\", which features prominent didgeridoo playing in both the introduction and solo sections.\n\nThe instrument is commonly used by ambient artist Steve Roach as a complement to his produced soundscapes, in both live and recorded formats. It features prominently in his collaborative work \"\" (with Australian Aboriginal artist David Hudson and cellist Sarah Hopkins) as well as \"Dreamtime Return\".\n\nIt is used in the Indian song \"Jaane Kyon\" from the film \"Dil Chahta Hai\".\n\nChris Brooks, lead singer of the New Zealand hard rock band Like a Storm uses the didgeridoo in some of the band's songs including \"Love the Way You Hate Me\" from their album \"\".\n\nKate Bush made extensive use of the didgeridoo (played by Australian musician Rolf Harris) on her album \"The Dreaming\", which was written and recorded after a holiday in Australia.\n\nCharlie McMahon, who formed the group Gondwanaland, was one of the first non-Aboriginal players to gain fame as a professional didgeridoo player. He has toured internationally with Midnight Oil. He invented the didjeribone, a sliding didgeridoo made from two lengths of plastic tubing; its playing style is somewhat in the manner of a trombone, hence the portmanteau name.\n\nTraditionally, the didgeridoo was played as an accompaniment to ceremonial dancing and singing and for solo or recreational purposes. For Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia, the didgeridoo is still used to accompany singers and dancers in cultural ceremonies. Today, most Didgeridoo playing is recreational but it has become an important commercial activity in tourism and a more limited professional activity in music performances and recordings.\n\nPair sticks, sometimes called \"clapsticks\" (\"bilma\" or \"bimla\" by some traditional groups), establish the beat for the songs during ceremonies. The rhythm of the didgeridoo and the beat of the clapsticks are precise, and these patterns have been handed down for many generations. In the Wangga genre, the song-man starts with vocals and then introduces \"bilma\" to the accompaniment of didgeridoo.\n\nTraditionally, only men play the didgeridoo and sing during ceremonial occasions and playing by females is sometimes discouraged by Aboriginal communities and elders. In 2008, publisher Harper Collins apologized for its book \"The Daring Book for Girls\", which openly encouraged girls to play the instrument after some Aboriginal academics described such encouragement as \"extreme cultural insensitivity\" and \"an extreme faux pas... part of a general ignorance that mainstream Australia has about Aboriginal culture.\" However, Linda Barwick, an ethnomusicologist, says that though traditionally women have not played the didgeridoo in ceremony, in informal situations there is no prohibition in the Dreaming Law. For example, Jemima Wimalu, a Mara woman from the Roper River is very proficient at playing the didgeridoo and is featured on the record \"Aboriginal Sound Instruments\" released in 1978. In 1995, musicologist Steve Knopoff observed Yirrkala women performing \"djatpangarri\" songs that are traditionally performed by men and in 1996, ethnomusicologist Elizabeth MacKinley reported women of the Yanyuwa group giving public performances. \n\nWhile there is no prohibition in the area of the didgeridoo's origin, such restrictions have been applied by other Indigenous communities. The didgeridoo was introduced to the Kimberleys almost a century ago but it is only in the last decade that Aboriginal men have shown adverse reactions to women playing the instrument and prohibitions are especially evident in the South East of Australia. The belief that women are prohibited from playing is widespread among non-Aboriginal people and is also common among Aboriginal communities in Southern Australia; some ethnomusicologists believe that the dissemination of the \"Taboo\" belief and other misconceptions is a result of commercial agendas and marketing. Tourists generally rely on shop employees for information when purchasing a didgeridoo. Additionally, the majority of commercial didgeridoo recordings available are distributed by multinational recording companies and feature non-Aboriginals playing a New Age style of music with liner notes promoting the instrument's spirituality which misleads consumers about the didgeridoo's secular role in traditional Aboriginal culture.\n\nThe Taboo belief is particularly strong among many Indigenous groups in the South East of Australia, where it is forbidden and considered \"cultural theft\" for non-Indigenous women, and especially performers of \"New Age\" music regardless of gender, to play or even touch a didgeridoo.\n\nA 2005 study reported in the \"British Medical Journal\" found that learning and practising the didgeridoo helped reduce snoring and obstructive sleep apnea by strengthening muscles in the upper airway, thus reducing their tendency to collapse during sleep. In the study, intervention subjects were trained in and practiced didgeridoo playing, including circular breathing and other techniques. Control subjects were asked not to play the instrument. Subjects were surveyed before and after the study period to assess the effects of intervention. A small 2010 study noted improvements in the asthma management of Aboriginal teens when incorporating didgeridoo playing.\n\nBULLET::::- Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts\nBULLET::::- Alphorn\nBULLET::::- Erke\nBULLET::::- Indigenous Australian music\nBULLET::::- List of didgeridoo players\nBULLET::::- Mayan trumpet\n\nBULLET::::- Ah Chee Ngala, P., Cowell C. (1996): \"How to Play the Didgeridoo – and history\".\nBULLET::::- Chaloupka, G. (1993): \"Journey in Time\". Reed, Sydney.\nBULLET::::- Cope, Jonathan (2000): \"How to Play the Didgeridoo: a practical guide for everyone\". .\nBULLET::::- Jones, T. A. (1967): \"The didjeridu. Some comparisons of its typology and musical functions with similar instruments throughout the world\". \"Studies in Music\" 1, pp. 23–55.\nBULLET::::- Kaye, Peter (1987): \"How to Play the Didjeridu of the Australian Aboriginal – A Newcomer's Guide\".\nBULLET::::- Kennedy, K. (1933): \"Instruments of music used by the Australian Aborigines\". \"Mankind\" (August edition), pp. 147–157.\nBULLET::::- Lindner, D. (ed) (2005): \"The Didgeridoo Phenomenon. From Ancient Times to the Modern Age\". Traumzeit-Verlag, Germany.\nBULLET::::- Moyle, A. M. (1981): \"The Australian didjeridu: A late musical intrusion\". in \"World Archaeology\", 12(3), 321–31.\nBULLET::::- Neuenfeldt, K. (ed) (1997): \"The didjeridu: From Arnhem Land to Internet\". Sydney: J. Libbey/Perfect Beat Publications.\n\nBULLET::::- iDIDJ Australian Didgeridoo Cultural Hub\nBULLET::::- The Didjeridu W3 Server\nBULLET::::- The physics of the didj\nBULLET::::- Didgeridoo acoustics from the University of New South Wales\nBULLET::::- Database of audio recordings of traditional Arnhem Land music, samples included, many with didgeridoo\nBULLET::::- \"The Didjeridu: A Guide\" By Joe Cheal – General info on the didgeridoo, with citations and references\nBULLET::::- BioloDidje (translations available)\nBULLET::::- Yidakiwuy Dhawu Miwatjngurunydja comprehensive site by traditional owners of the instrument\n"}
{"id": "8449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8449", "title": "Developmental biology", "text": "Developmental biology\n\nDevelopmental biology is the study of the process by which animals and plants grow and develop. Developmental biology also encompasses the biology of regeneration, asexual reproduction, metamorphosis, and the growth and differentiation of stem cells in the adult organism.\n\nIn the late 20th century, the discipline largely transformed into evolutionary developmental biology.\n\nThe main processes involved in the embryonic development of animals are: regional specification, morphogenesis, cell differentiation, growth, and the overall control of timing explored in evolutionary developmental biology:\n\nBULLET::::- Regional specification refers to the processes that create spatial pattern in a ball or sheet of initially similar cells. This generally involves the action of cytoplasmic determinants, located within parts of the fertilized egg, and of inductive signals emitted from signaling centers in the embryo. The early stages of regional specification do not generate functional differentiated cells, but cell populations committed to develop to a specific region or part of the organism. These are defined by the expression of specific combinations of transcription factors.\nBULLET::::- Morphogenesis relates to the formation of three-dimensional shape. It mainly involves the orchestrated movements of cell sheets and of individual cells. Morphogenesis is important for creating the three germ layers of the early embryo (ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm) and for building up complex structures during organ development.\nBULLET::::- Cell differentiation relates specifically to the formation of functional cell types such as nerve, muscle, secretory epithelia etc. Differentiated cells contain large amounts of specific proteins associated with the cell function.\nBULLET::::- Growth involves both an overall increase in size, and also the differential growth of parts (allometry) which contributes to morphogenesis. Growth mostly occurs through cell division but also through changes of cell size and the deposition of extracellular materials.\nBULLET::::- The control of timing of events and the integration of the various processes with one another is the least well understood area of the subject. It remains unclear whether animal embryos contain a master clock mechanism or not.\n\nThe development of plants involves similar processes to that of animals. However plant cells are mostly immotile so morphogenesis is achieved by differential growth, without cell movements. Also, the inductive signals and the genes involved are different from those that control animal development.\n\nCell differentiation is the process whereby different functional cell types arise in development. For example, neurons, muscle fibers and hepatocytes (liver cells) are well known types of differentiated cells. Differentiated cells usually produce large amounts of a few proteins that are required for their specific function and this gives them the characteristic appearance that enables them to be recognized under the light microscope. The genes encoding these proteins are highly active. Typically their chromatin structure is very open, allowing access for the transcription enzymes, and specific transcription factors bind to regulatory sequences in the DNA in order to activate gene expression. For example, NeuroD is a key transcription factor for neuronal differentiation, myogenin for muscle differentiation, and HNF4 for hepatocyte differentiation.\nCell differentiation is usually the final stage of development, preceded by several states of commitment which are not visibly differentiated. A single tissue, formed from a single type of progenitor cell or stem cell, often consists of several differentiated cell types. Control of their formation involves a process of lateral inhibition, based on the properties of the Notch signaling pathway. For example, in the neural plate of the embryo this system operates to generate a population of neuronal precursor cells in which NeuroD is highly expressed.\n\nRegeneration indicates the ability to regrow a missing part. This is very prevalent amongst plants, which show continuous growth, and also among colonial animals such as hydroids and ascidians. But most interest by developmental biologists has been shown in the regeneration of parts in free living animals. In particular four models have been the subject of much investigation. Two of these have the ability to regenerate whole bodies: \"Hydra\", which can regenerate any part of the polyp from a small fragment, and planarian worms, which can usually regenerate both heads and tails. Both of these examples have continuous cell turnover fed by stem cells and, at least in planaria, at least some of the stem cells have been shown to be pluripotent. The other two models show only distal regeneration of appendages. These are the insect appendages, usually the legs of hemimetabolous insects such as the cricket, and the limbs of urodele amphibians. Considerable information is now available about amphibian limb regeneration and it is known that each cell type regenerates itself, except for connective tissues where there is considerable interconversion between cartilage, dermis and tendons. In terms of the pattern of structures, this is controlled by a re-activation of signals active in the embryo.\nThere is still debate about the old question of whether regeneration is a \"pristine\" or an \"adaptive\" property. If the former is the case, with improved knowledge, we might expect to be able to improve regenerative ability in humans. If the latter, then each instance of regeneration is presumed to have arisen by natural selection in circumstances particular to the species, so no general rules would be expected.\n\nThe sperm and egg fuse in the process of fertilization to form a fertilized egg, or zygote. This undergoes a period of divisions to form a ball or sheet of similar cells called a blastula or blastoderm. These cell divisions are usually rapid with no growth so the daughter cells are half the size of the mother cell and the whole embryo stays about the same size. They are called cleavage divisions.\n\nMouse epiblast primordial germ cells (see Figure: “The initial stages of human embryogenesis”) undergo extensive epigenetic reprogramming. This process involves genome-wide DNA demethylation, chromatin reorganization and epigenetic imprint erasure leading to totipotency. DNA demethylation is carried out by a process that utilizes the DNA base excision repair pathway.\n\nMorphogenetic movements convert the cell mass into a three layered structure consisting of multicellular sheets called ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm, which are known as germ layers. This is the process of gastrulation. During cleavage and gastrulation the first regional specification events occur. In addition to the formation of the three germ layers themselves, these often generate extraembryonic structures, such as the mammalian placenta, needed for support and nutrition of the embryo, and also establish differences of commitment along the anteroposterior axis (head, trunk and tail).\n\nRegional specification is initiated by the presence of cytoplasmic determinants in one part of the zygote. The cells that contain the determinant become a signaling center and emit an inducing factor. Because the inducing factor is produced in one place, diffuses away, and decays, it forms a concentration gradient, high near the source cells and low further away. The remaining cells of the embryo, which do not contain the determinant, are competent to respond to different concentrations by upregulating specific developmental control genes. This results in a series of zones becoming set up, arranged at progressively greater distance from the signaling center. In each zone a different combination of developmental control genes is upregulated. These genes encode transcription factors which upregulate new combinations of gene activity in each region. Among other functions, these transcription factors control expression of genes conferring specific adhesive and motility properties on the cells in which they are active. Because of these different morphogenetic properties, the cells of each germ layer move to form sheets such that the ectoderm ends up on the outside, mesoderm in the middle, and endoderm on the inside. Morphogenetic movements not only change the shape and structure of the embryo, but by bringing cell sheets into new spatial relationships they also make possible new phases of signaling and response between them.\n\nGrowth in embryos is mostly autonomous. For each territory of cells the growth rate is controlled by the combination of genes that are active. Free-living embryos do not grow in mass as they have no external food supply. But embryos fed by a placenta or extraembryonic yolk supply can grow very fast, and changes to relative growth rate between parts in these organisms help to produce the final overall anatomy.\n\nThe whole process needs to be coordinated in time and how this is controlled is not understood. There may be a master clock able to communicate with all parts of the embryo that controls the course of events, or timing may depend simply on local causal sequences of events.\n\nDevelopmental processes are very evident during the process of metamorphosis. This occurs in various types of animal. Well-known are the examples of the frog, which usually hatches as a tadpole and metamorphoses to an adult frog, and certain insects which hatch as a larva and then become remodeled to the adult form during a pupal stage.\n\nAll the developmental processes listed above occur during metamorphosis. Examples that have been especially well studied include tail loss and other changes in the tadpole of the frog \"Xenopus\", and the biology of the imaginal discs, which generate the adult body parts of the fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\".\n\nPlant development is the process by which structures originate and mature as a plant grows. It is studied in plant anatomy and plant physiology as well as plant morphology.\n\nPlants constantly produce new tissues and structures throughout their life from meristems located at the tips of organs, or between mature tissues. Thus, a living plant always has embryonic tissues. By contrast, an animal embryo will very early produce all of the body parts that it will ever have in its life. When the animal is born (or hatches from its egg), it has all its body parts and from that point will only grow larger and more mature.\n\nThe properties of organization seen in a plant are emergent properties which are more than the sum of the individual parts. \"The assembly of these tissues and functions into an integrated multicellular organism yields not only the characteristics of the separate parts and processes but also quite a new set of characteristics which would not have been predictable on the basis of examination of the separate parts.\"\n\nA vascular plant begins from a single celled zygote, formed by fertilisation of an egg cell by a sperm cell. From that point, it begins to divide to form a plant embryo through the process of embryogenesis. As this happens, the resulting cells will organize so that one end becomes the first root, while the other end forms the tip of the shoot. In seed plants, the embryo will develop one or more \"seed leaves\" (cotyledons). By the end of embryogenesis, the young plant will have all the parts necessary to begin in its life.\n\nOnce the embryo germinates from its seed or parent plant, it begins to produce additional organs (leaves, stems, and roots) through the process of organogenesis. New roots grow from root meristems located at the tip of the root, and new stems and leaves grow from shoot meristems located at the tip of the shoot. Branching occurs when small clumps of cells left behind by the meristem, and which have not yet undergone cellular differentiation to form a specialized tissue, begin to grow as the tip of a new root or shoot. Growth from any such meristem at the tip of a root or shoot is termed primary growth and results in the lengthening of that root or shoot. Secondary growth results in widening of a root or shoot from divisions of cells in a cambium.\n\nIn addition to growth by cell division, a plant may grow through cell elongation. This occurs when individual cells or groups of cells grow longer. Not all plant cells will grow to the same length. When cells on one side of a stem grow longer and faster than cells on the other side, the stem will bend to the side of the slower growing cells as a result. This directional growth can occur via a plant's response to a particular stimulus, such as light (phototropism), gravity (gravitropism), water, (hydrotropism), and physical contact (thigmotropism).\n\nPlant growth and development are mediated by specific plant hormones and plant growth regulators (PGRs) (Ross et al. 1983). Endogenous hormone levels are influenced by plant age, cold hardiness, dormancy, and other metabolic conditions; photoperiod, drought, temperature, and other external environmental conditions; and exogenous sources of PGRs, e.g., externally applied and of rhizospheric origin.\n\nPlants exhibit natural variation in their form and structure. While all organisms vary from individual to individual, plants exhibit an additional type of variation. Within a single individual, parts are repeated which may differ in form and structure from other similar parts. This variation is most easily seen in the leaves of a plant, though other organs such as stems and flowers may show similar variation. There are three primary causes of this variation: positional effects, environmental effects, and juvenility.\n\nTranscription factors and transcriptional regulatory networks play key roles in plant morphogenesis and their evolution. During plant landing, many novel transcription factor families emerged and are preferentially wired into the networks of multicellular development, reproduction, and organ development, contributing to more complex morphogenesis of land plants.\n\nMuch of developmental biology research in recent decades has focused on the use of a small number of model organisms. It has turned out that there is much conservation of developmental mechanisms across the animal kingdom. In early development different vertebrate species all use essentially the same inductive signals and the same genes encoding regional identity. Even invertebrates use a similar repertoire of signals and genes although the body parts formed are significantly different. Model organisms each have some particular experimental advantages which have enabled them to become popular among researchers. In one sense they are \"models\" for the whole animal kingdom, and in another sense they are \"models\" for human development, which is difficult to study directly for both ethical and practical reasons. Model organisms have been most useful for elucidating the broad nature of developmental mechanisms. The more detail is sought, the more they differ from each other and from humans.\n\nPlants:\nBULLET::::- Thale cress (\"Arabidopsis thaliana\")\n\nVertebrates:\nBULLET::::- Frog: \"Xenopus\" (\"X.laevis and tropicalis\"). Good embryo supply. Especially suitable for microsurgery.\nBULLET::::- Zebrafish: \"Danio rerio\". Good embryo supply. Well developed genetics.\nBULLET::::- Chicken: \"Gallus gallus\". Early stages similar to mammal, but microsurgery easier. Low cost.\nBULLET::::- Mouse: \"Mus musculus\". A mammal with well developed genetics.\n\nInvertebrates:\n\nBULLET::::- Fruit fly: \"Drosophila melanogaster\". Good embryo supply. Well developed genetics.\nBULLET::::- Nematode: \"Caenorhabditis elegans\". Good embryo supply. Well developed genetics. Low cost.\n\nAlso popular for some purposes have been sea urchins and ascidians. For studies of regeneration urodele amphibians such as the axolotl \"Ambystoma mexicanum\" are used, and also planarian worms such as \"Schmidtea mediterranea\". Organoids have also been demonstrated as an efficient model for development. Plant development has focused on the thale cress \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" as a model organism.\n\nBULLET::::- Gilbert, S. F. (2013). \"Developmental Biology\". Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Associates Inc.\nBULLET::::- Slack, J. M. W. (2013). \"Essential Developmental Biology\". Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.\nBULLET::::- Wolpert, L. and Tickle, C. (2011). \"Principles of Development\". Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.\n\nBULLET::::- Society for Developmental Biology\nBULLET::::- Collaborative resources\nBULLET::::- Developmental Biology - 10th edition\nBULLET::::- Essential Developmental Biology 3rd edition\n"}
{"id": "8452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8452", "title": "December 27", "text": "December 27\n\nBULLET::::- 537 – The construction of the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople is completed.\nBULLET::::- 1512 – The Spanish Crown issues the Laws of Burgos, governing the conduct of settlers with regard to native Indians in the New World.\nBULLET::::- 1521 – The Zwickau prophets arrive in Wittenberg, disturbing the peace and preaching the Apocalypse.\nBULLET::::- 1655 – Second Northern War/the Deluge: Monks at the Jasna Góra Monastery in Częstochowa are successful in fending off a month-long siege.\nBULLET::::- 1657 – The Flushing Remonstrance articulates for the first time in North American history that freedom of religion is a fundamental right.\nBULLET::::- 1703 – Portugal and England sign the Methuen Treaty which gives preference to Portuguese imported wines into England.\nBULLET::::- 1814 – War of 1812: The American schooner is destroyed. It was the last of Commodore Daniel Patterson's makeshift fleet that fought a series of delaying actions that contributed to Andrew Jackson's victory at the Battle of New Orleans.\nBULLET::::- 1831 – Charles Darwin embarks on his journey aboard , during which he will begin to formulate his theory of evolution.\nBULLET::::- 1836 – The worst ever avalanche in England occurs at Lewes, Sussex, killing eight people.\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Ether anesthetic is used for childbirth for the first time by Dr. Crawford Long in Jefferson, Georgia.\nBULLET::::- 1845 – Journalist John L. O'Sullivan, writing in his newspaper the \"New York Morning News\", argues that the United States had the right to claim the entire Oregon Country \"by the right of our manifest destiny\".\nBULLET::::- 1911 – \"Jana Gana Mana\", the national anthem of India, is first sung in the Calcutta Session of the Indian National Congress.\nBULLET::::- 1918 – The Great Poland Uprising against the Germans begins.\nBULLET::::- 1922 – becomes the first purpose built aircraft carrier to be commissioned in the world.\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Kern and Hammerstein's musical play \"Show Boat\", considered to be the first true American musical play, opens at the Ziegfeld Theatre on Broadway.\nBULLET::::- 1929 – Soviet General Secretary Joseph Stalin orders the \"liquidation of the kulaks as a class\".\nBULLET::::- 1932 – Radio City Music Hall, \"Showplace of the Nation\", opens in New York City.\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Regina Jonas is ordained as the first female rabbi in the history of Judaism.\nBULLET::::- 1939 – The 7.8 Erzincan earthquake shakes eastern Turkey with a maximum Mercalli intensity of XI (\"Extreme\"). At least 32,700 people were killed.\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Winter War: Finland holds off a Soviet attack in the Battle of Kelja.\nBULLET::::- 1945 – The International Monetary Fund is created with the signing of an agreement by 29 nations.\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Indonesian National Revolution: The Netherlands officially recognizes Indonesian independence. End of the Dutch East Indies.\nBULLET::::- 1966 – The Cave of Swallows, the largest known cave shaft in the world, is discovered in Aquismón, San Luis Potosí, Mexico.\nBULLET::::- 1968 – Apollo program: \"Apollo 8\" splashes down in the Pacific Ocean, ending the first orbital manned mission to the Moon.\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Spain becomes a democracy after 40 years of fascist dictatorship.\nBULLET::::- 1979 – The Soviet Union invades the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Pope John Paul II visits Mehmet Ali Ağca in Rebibbia's prison and personally forgives him for the 1981 attack on him in St. Peter's Square.\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Palestinian guerrillas kill eighteen people inside the airports of Rome, Italy, and Vienna, Austria.\nBULLET::::- 1989 – The Romanian Revolution concludes, as the last minor street confrontations and stray shootings abruptly end in the country's capital, Bucharest.\nBULLET::::- 1996 – Taliban forces retake the strategic Bagram Airfield which solidifies their buffer zone around Kabul, Afghanistan.\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Protestant paramilitary leader Billy Wright is assassinated in Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.\nBULLET::::- 2002 – Two truck bombs kill 72 and wound 200 at the pro-Moscow headquarters of the Chechen government in Grozny, Chechnya, Russia.\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Radiation from an explosion on the magnetar SGR 1806-20 reaches Earth. It is the brightest extrasolar event known to have been witnessed on the planet.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Former Pakistani prime minister Benazir Bhutto is assassinated in a shooting incident.\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Riots erupt in Mombasa, Kenya, after Mwai Kibaki is declared the winner of the presidential election, triggering a political, economic, and humanitarian crisis.\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Operation Cast Lead: Israel launches 3-week operation on Gaza.\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Iranian election protests: On the Day of Ashura in Tehran, Iran, government security forces fire upon demonstrators.\n\nBULLET::::- 1350 – John I of Aragon (d. 1395)\nBULLET::::- 1390 – Anne de Mortimer, claimant to the English throne (d. 1411)\nBULLET::::- 1459 – John I Albert (d. 1501)\nBULLET::::- 1481 – Casimir, Margrave of Brandenburg-Bayreuth, Margrave of Bayreuth (d. 1527)\nBULLET::::- 1493 – Johann Pfeffinger, German theologian (d. 1573)\nBULLET::::- 1566 – Jan Jesenius, Bohemian physician, politician and philosopher (d. 1621)\nBULLET::::- 1571 – Johannes Kepler, German mathematician, astronomer, and astrologer (d. 1630)\nBULLET::::- 1572 – Johannes Vodnianus Campanus, Czech poet, playwright, and composer (d. 1622)\nBULLET::::- 1584 – Philipp Julius, Duke of Pomerania (d. 1625)\nBULLET::::- 1595 – Bohdan Khmelnytsky, hetman of Ukraine (d. 1657)\nBULLET::::- 1683 – Conyers Middleton, English priest and theologian (d. 1750)\nBULLET::::- 1714 – George Whitefield, English preacher and saint (d. 1770)\nBULLET::::- 1715 – Philippe de Noailles, French general (d. 1794)\nBULLET::::- 1721 – François Hemsterhuis, Dutch philosopher and author (d. 1790)\nBULLET::::- 1761 – Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly, Russian field marshal and politician, Governor-General of Finland (d. 1818)\nBULLET::::- 1773 – George Cayley, English engineer and politician (d. 1857)\nBULLET::::- 1776 – Nikolay Kamensky, Russian general (d. 1811)\nBULLET::::- 1797 – Ghalib, Indian poet (d. 1869)\nBULLET::::- 1797 – Charles Hodge, American theologian (d. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1803 – François-Marie-Thomas Chevalier de Lorimier, Canadian activist (d. 1839)\nBULLET::::- 1809 – Alexandros Rizos Rangavis, Greek poet and politician, Foreign Minister of Greece (d. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1822 – Louis Pasteur, French chemist and microbiologist (d. 1895)\nBULLET::::- 1823 – Mackenzie Bowell, English-Canadian journalist and politician, 5th Prime Minister of Canada (d. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1827 – Stanisław Mieroszewski, Polish-born politician, writer, historian and member of the Imperial Council of Austria (d. 1900)\nBULLET::::- 1832 – Pavel Tretyakov, Russian businessman and philanthropist, founded the Tretyakov Gallery (d. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Juan Luis Sanfuentes, Chilean lawyer and politician, 17th President of Chile (d. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 1863 – Louis Lincoln Emmerson, American lawyer and politician, 27th Governor of Illinois (d. 1941)\nBULLET::::- 1864 – Hermann-Paul, French painter and illustrator (d. 1940)\nBULLET::::- 1879 – Sydney Greenstreet, English-American actor (d. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 1883 – Cyrus S. Eaton, Canadian-American businessman and philanthropist (d. 1979)\nBULLET::::- 1888 – Thea von Harbou, German actress, director, and screenwriter (d. 1954)\nBULLET::::- 1892 – Alfred Edwin McKay, Canadian captain and pilot (d. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Louis Bromfield, American author and theorist (d. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Maurice De Waele, Belgian cyclist (d. 1952)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – Carl Zuckmayer, German author and playwright (d. 1977)\nBULLET::::- 1898 – Inejiro Asanuma, Japanese politician (d. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – Hans Stuck, German race car driver (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Marlene Dietrich, German-American actress and singer (d. 1992)\nBULLET::::- 1901 – Irene Handl, English actress (d. 1987)\nBULLET::::- 1904 – René Bonnet, French race car driver and engineer (d. 1983)\nBULLET::::- 1905 – Cliff Arquette, American actor and comedian (d. 1974)\nBULLET::::- 1906 – Oscar Levant, American pianist, composer, and actor (d. 1972)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Asaf Halet Çelebi, Turkish poet (d. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Sebastian Haffner, German journalist and author (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Mary Howard, English author (d. 1991)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Conrad L. Raiford, American baseball player and activist (d. 2002)\nBULLET::::- 1907 – Willem van Otterloo, Dutch conductor and composer (d. 1978)\nBULLET::::- 1909 – James Riddell, English skier and author (d. 2000)\nBULLET::::- 1910 – Charles Olson, American poet and educator (d. 1970)\nBULLET::::- 1911 – Anna Russell, English-Canadian singer and actress (d. 2006)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – William Masters, American gynecologist, author, and academic (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1915 – Gyula Zsengellér, Hungarian-Cypriot footballer and manager (d. 1999)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Werner Baumbach, German pilot (d. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 1916 – Cathy Lewis, American actress (d. 1968)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Buddy Boudreaux, American saxophonist and clarinet player (d. 2015)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – T. Nadaraja, Sri Lankan lawyer and academic (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1917 – Onni Palaste, Finnish soldier and author (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1918 – John Celardo, American captain and illustrator (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Charles Sweeney, American general and pilot (d. 2004)\nBULLET::::- 1920 – Bruce Hobbs, American jockey and trainer (d. 2005)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Bruno Bobak, Polish-Canadian painter and educator (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Lucas Mangope, South African politician (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Jean Bartik, American computer scientist and engineer (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – James A. McClure, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1925 – Michel Piccoli, French actor, singer, director, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1926 – Jerome Courtland, American actor, director, and producer (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Antony Gardner, English engineer and politician (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Nityanand Swami, Indian lawyer and politician, 1st Chief Minister of Uttarakhand (d. 2012)\nBULLET::::- 1927 – Audrey Wagner, American baseball player, obstetrician, and gynecologist (d. 1984)\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Marshall Sahlins, American anthropologist and academic\nBULLET::::- 1930 – Wilfrid Sheed, English-born American novelist and essayist (d. 2011)\nBULLET::::- 1931 – Scotty Moore, American guitarist and songwriter (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1933 – Dave Marr, American golfer (d. 1997)\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Larisa Latynina, Ukrainian gymnast and coach\nBULLET::::- 1934 – Jeffrey Sterling, Baron Sterling of Plaistow, English businessman\nBULLET::::- 1935 – Michael Turnbull, English bishop\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Phil Sharpe, English cricketer (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Eve Uusmees, Estonian swimmer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1939 – John Amos, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1940 – David Shepherd, English cricketer and umpire (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Miles Aiken, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Mike Pinder, English singer-songwriter and keyboard player\nBULLET::::- 1941 – Nolan Richardson, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Byron Browne, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Thomas Menino, American politician, 53rd Mayor of Boston (d. 2014)\nBULLET::::- 1942 – Ron Rothstein, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Cokie Roberts, American journalist and author (d. 2019)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Joan Manuel Serrat, Spanish singer-songwriter and guitarist\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Peter Sinfield, English songwriter and producer\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Roy White, American baseball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1944 – Mick Jones, English guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Lenny Kaye, American guitarist, songwriter, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Joe Kinnear, Irish footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Janet Street-Porter, English journalist and producer\nBULLET::::- 1946 – Polly Toynbee, English journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Bill Eadie, American wrestler and coach\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Doug Livermore, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Osman Pamukoğlu, Turkish general and politician\nBULLET::::- 1947 – Willy Polleunis, Belgian runner\nBULLET::::- 1948 – Gérard Depardieu, French-Russian actor\nBULLET::::- 1949 – Terry Ito, Japanese director, producer, and critic\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Haris Alexiou, Greek singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Roberto Bettega, Italian footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Terry Bozzio, American drummer and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1951 – Ernesto Zedillo, Mexican economist and politician, 54th President of Mexico\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Tovah Feldshuh, American actress, singer, and playwright\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Jay Hill, Canadian farmer and politician\nBULLET::::- 1952 – David Knopfler, Scottish singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Edmund Zagorski, American convicted murderer (d. 2018)\nBULLET::::- 1954 – Mandie Fletcher, English director, producer, and production manager\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Brad Murphey, American race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Barbara Olson, American journalist and author (d. 2001)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Doina Melinte, Romanian runner\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Steve Jones, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Gerina Dunwich, American astrologer, historian, and author\nBULLET::::- 1959 – Andre Tippett, American football player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Maryam d'Abo, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Donald Nally, American conductor and academic\nBULLET::::- 1960 – Terry Price, Australian golfer\nBULLET::::- 1961 – Guido Westerwelle, German lawyer and politician, 15th Vice-Chancellor of Germany (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Mark Few, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1962 – John Kampfner, Singaporean journalist and author\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Bill Self, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1962 – Sherri Steinhauer, American golfer\nBULLET::::- 1963 – Gaspar Noé, Argentinian-French director and screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Chris Mainwaring, Australian footballer and journalist (d. 2007)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Salman Khan, Indian film actor and producer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Marianne Elliott, English director and producer\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Bill Goldberg, American football player, wrestler and actor\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Eva LaRue, American model and actress\nBULLET::::- 1966 – Fabian Núñez, American politician\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Jean-Christophe Boullion, French race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Sarah Vowell, American author and journalist\nBULLET::::- 1969 – Chyna, American professional wrestler and actress (d. 2016)\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Brendon Cook, Australian race car driver and rugby player\nBULLET::::- 1970 – Lorenzo Neal, American football player and radio host\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Duncan Ferguson, Scottish footballer and coach\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Guthrie Govan, English guitarist and educator\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Savannah Guthrie, American television journalist\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Jason Hawes, American paranormal investigator and author, founded The Atlantic Paranormal Society\nBULLET::::- 1971 – Bryan Smolinski, American ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Colin Charvis, Welsh rugby union player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Kevin Ollie, American basketball player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Matt Slocum, American guitarist and songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1973 – Kristoffer Zegers, Dutch pianist and composer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Tomáš Janků, Czech high jumper\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Masi Oka, Japanese-American actor and visual effects designer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Fumiko Orikasa, Japanese voice actress and singer\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Jay Pandolfo, American ice hockey player and coach\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Aigars Fadejevs, Latvian race walker and therapist\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Kjell Eriksson, Swedish television personality\nBULLET::::- 1975 – Heather O'Rourke, American actress (d. 1988)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Nikolaos Georgeas, Greek footballer\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Piotr Morawski, Polish mountaineer (d. 2009)\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Daimí Pernía, Cuban basketball player and hurdler\nBULLET::::- 1976 – Fernando Pisani, Canadian-Italian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Jacqueline Pillon, Canadian actress\nBULLET::::- 1977 – Chris Tate, English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Deuce McAllister, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1979 – David Dunn, English footballer and manager\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Carson Palmer, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Bernard Berrian, American football player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Cesaro, Swiss professional wrestler\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Dahntay Jones, American basketball player\nBULLET::::- 1980 – Meelis Kompus, Estonian journalist\nBULLET::::- 1981 – David Aardsma, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Emilie de Ravin, Australian actress\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Moise Joseph, American-Haitian runner\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Patrick Sharp, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Erin E. Stead, American illustrator\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Anthony Boric, New Zealand rugby union player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Cole Hamels, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1983 – Jesse Williams, American high jumper\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Andrejs Perepļotkins, Ukrainian-Latvian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1984 – Gilles Simon, French tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Logan Bailly, Belgian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Jérôme d'Ambrosio, Belgian race car driver\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Paul Stastny, Canadian-American ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Halley Gross, American screenwriter\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Torah Bright, Australian snowboarder\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, Jamaican sprinter\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Tim Browne, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1987 – Lily Cole, English model\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Hera Hilmar, Icelandic actress\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Zavon Hines, Jamaican-English footballer\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Ok Taec-yeon, South Korean singer and actor\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Rick Porcello, American baseball player\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Hayley Williams, American singer-songwriter\nBULLET::::- 1989 – Ingrid Várgas Calvo, Peruvian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Max Lindholm, Finnish figure skater\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Milos Raonic, Canadian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 1990 – Jon Marchessault, Canadian ice hockey player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Michael Morgan, Australian rugby league player\nBULLET::::- 1991 – Danny Wilson, Scottish footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Joel Indermitte, Estonian footballer\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Maicel Uibo, Estonian decathlete\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Olivia Cooke, English actress\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Timothée Chalamet, American actor\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Mark Lapidus, Estonian chess player\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Ana Konjuh, Croatian tennis player\nBULLET::::- 2005 – Kristina Pimenova, Russian child model\nBULLET::::- 683 – Gaozong of Tang, founding emperor of the Chinese Tang dynasty (b. 628)\nBULLET::::- 870 – Aeneas of Paris, Frankish bishop\nBULLET::::- 975 – Balderic, bishop of Utrecht (b. 897)\nBULLET::::- 1003 – Emma of Blois, French duchess and regent\nBULLET::::- 1005 – Nilus the Younger, Byzantine abbot (b. 910)\nBULLET::::- 1076 – Sviatoslav II, Grand Prince of Kiev (b. 1027)\nBULLET::::- 1087 – Bertha of Savoy, Holy Roman Empress (b. 1051)\nBULLET::::- 1381 – Edmund Mortimer, 3rd Earl of March, English politician (b. 1352)\nBULLET::::- 1518 – Mahmood Shah Bahmani II, sultan of the Bahmani Sultanate (b. c. 1470)\nBULLET::::- 1543 – George, margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach (b. 1484)\nBULLET::::- 1548 – Francesco Spiera, Italian lawyer and jurist (b. 1502)\nBULLET::::- 1603 – Thomas Cartwright, English minister and theologian (b. 1535)\nBULLET::::- 1656 – Andrew White, English Jesuit missionary (b. 1579)\nBULLET::::- 1704 – Hans Albrecht von Barfus, Prussian field marshal and politician (b. 1635)\nBULLET::::- 1707 – Jean Mabillon, French monk and scholar (b. 1632)\nBULLET::::- 1737 – William Bowyer, English printer (b. 1663)\nBULLET::::- 1743 – Hyacinthe Rigaud, French painter (b. 1659)\nBULLET::::- 1771 – Henri Pitot, French engineer, invented the Pitot tube (b. 1695)\nBULLET::::- 1776 – Johann Rall, Hessian colonel (b. )\nBULLET::::- 1782 – Henry Home, Lord Kames, Scottish judge and philosopher (b. 1697)\nBULLET::::- 1800 – Hugh Blair, Scottish minister and author (b. 1718)\nBULLET::::- 1812 – Joanna Southcott, English religious leader (b. 1750)\nBULLET::::- 1834 – Charles Lamb, English essayist and poet (b. 1775)\nBULLET::::- 1836 – Stephen F. Austin, American soldier and politician (b. 1793)\nBULLET::::- 1858 – Alexandre Pierre François Boëly, French pianist and composer (b. 1785)\nBULLET::::- 1896 – John Brown, English businessman and politician (b. 1816)\nBULLET::::- 1900 – William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong, English engineer and businessman, founded Armstrong Whitworth (b. 1810)\nBULLET::::- 1914 – Charles Martin Hall, American chemist and engineer (b. 1863)\nBULLET::::- 1919 – Achilles Alferaki, Russian-Greek composer and politician, Governor of Taganrog (b. 1846)\nBULLET::::- 1923 – Gustave Eiffel, French architect and engineer, co-designed the Eiffel Tower (b. 1832)\nBULLET::::- 1924 – Agda Meyerson, Swedish nurse and healthcare activist (b. 1866)\nBULLET::::- 1936 – Mehmet Akif Ersoy, Turkish poet, academic, and politician (b. 1873)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Calvin Bridges, American geneticist and academic (b. 1889)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Osip Mandelstam, Polish-Russian poet and critic (b. 1891)\nBULLET::::- 1938 – Zona Gale, American novelist, short story writer, and playwright (b. 1874)\nBULLET::::- 1939 – Rinaldo Cuneo, American painter (b. 1877)\nBULLET::::- 1943 – Ants Kurvits, Estonian general and politician, 10th Estonian Minister of War (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1950 – Max Beckmann, German-American painter and sculptor (b. 1884)\nBULLET::::- 1952 – Patrick Joseph Hartigan, Australian priest, author, and educator (b. 1878)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Şükrü Saracoğlu, Turkish soldier and politician, 6th Prime Minister of Turkey (b. 1887)\nBULLET::::- 1953 – Julian Tuwim, Polish poet and author (b. 1894)\nBULLET::::- 1955 – Alfred Carpenter, English admiral, Victoria Cross recipient (b. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1956 – Lambert McKenna, Irish priest and lexicographer (b. 1870)\nBULLET::::- 1958 – Harry Warner, Polish-American film producer, co-founded Warner Bros. (b. 1881)\nBULLET::::- 1965 – Edgar Ende, German painter (b. 1901)\nBULLET::::- 1972 – Lester B. Pearson, Canadian historian and politician, 14th Prime Minister of Canada, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1897)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Vladimir Fock, Russian physicist and mathematician (b. 1898)\nBULLET::::- 1974 – Amy Vanderbilt, American author (b. 1908)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Chris Bell, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Houari Boumediene, Algerian colonel and politician, 2nd President of Algeria (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 1978 – Bob Luman, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1937)\nBULLET::::- 1979 – Hafizullah Amin, Afghan educator and politician, 2nd President of Afghanistan (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1981 – Hoagy Carmichael, American singer-songwriter, pianist, and actor (b. 1899)\nBULLET::::- 1982 – Jack Swigert, American pilot, astronaut, and politician (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 1985 – Jean Rondeau, French race car driver (b. 1946)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – George Dangerfield, English-American historian and journalist (b. 1904)\nBULLET::::- 1986 – Dumas Malone, American historian and author (b. 1892)\nBULLET::::- 1988 – Hal Ashby, American director and producer (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 1992 – Kay Boyle, American novelist, poet, and educator (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Feliks Kibbermann, Estonian chess player and philologist (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – Evald Mikson, Estonian footballer (b. 1911)\nBULLET::::- 1993 – André Pilette, Belgian race car driver (b. 1918)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – Fanny Cradock, English author and critic (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1994 – J. B. L. Reyes, Filipino lawyer and jurist (b. 1902)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Shura Cherkassky, Ukrainian-American pianist (b. 1909)\nBULLET::::- 1995 – Genrikh Kasparyan, Armenian chess player and composer (b. 1910)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Brendan Gill, American journalist and essayist (b. 1914)\nBULLET::::- 1997 – Billy Wright, Northern Irish loyalist leader (b. 1960)\nBULLET::::- 1999 – Michael McDowell, American author and screenwriter (b. 1950)\nBULLET::::- 2002 – George Roy Hill, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Alan Bates, English actor (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2003 – Iván Calderón, Puerto Rican-American baseball player (b. 1962)\nBULLET::::- 2004 – Hank Garland, American guitarist (b. 1930)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Benazir Bhutto, Pakistani financier and politician, 11th Prime Minister of Pakistan (b. 1953)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Jerzy Kawalerowicz, Polish director and screenwriter (b. 1922)\nBULLET::::- 2007 – Jaan Kross, Estonian author and poet (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Delaney Bramlett, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2008 – Robert Graham, Mexican-American sculptor (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2009 – Isaac Schwartz, Ukrainian-Russian composer and educator (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Catê, Brazilian footballer and manager (b. 1973)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Michael Dummett, English soldier, philosopher, and academic (b. 1925)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Helen Frankenthaler, American painter and educator (b. 1928)\nBULLET::::- 2011 – Johnny Wilson, Canadian-American ice hockey player and coach (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Harry Carey, Jr., American actor, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1921)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Lloyd Charmers, Jamaican singer, keyboard player, and producer (b. 1938)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Tingye Li, Chinese-American physicist and engineer (b. 1931)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Archie Roy, Scottish astronomer and academic (b. 1924)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr., American general and engineer (b. 1934)\nBULLET::::- 2012 – Salt Walther, American race car driver (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Richard Ambler, English-Scottish biologist and academic (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Mohamad Chatah, Lebanese economist and politician, Lebanese Minister of Finance (b. 1951)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Gianna D'Angelo, American soprano and educator (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – John Matheson, Canadian colonel, lawyer, and politician (b. 1917)\nBULLET::::- 2013 – Farooq Sheikh, Indian actor, philanthropist and a popular television presenter (b. 1948)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Ben Ammi Ben-Israel, American-Israeli religious leader, founded the African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Ulises Estrella, Ecuadorian poet and academic (b. 1939)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Ronald Li, Hong Kong accountant and businessman (b. 1929)\nBULLET::::- 2014 – Karel Poma, Belgian bacteriologist and politician (b. 1920)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Stein Eriksen, Norwegian-American skier (b. 1927)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Dave Henderson, American baseball player and sportscaster (b. 1958)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Ellsworth Kelly, American painter and sculptor (b. 1923)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Meadowlark Lemon, American basketball player and minister (b. 1932)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Alfredo Pacheco, Salvadoran footballer (b. 1982)\nBULLET::::- 2015 – Stevie Wright, English-Australian singer-songwriter (b. 1947)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Carrie Fisher, American actress, screenwriter, author, producer, and speaker (b. 1956)\nBULLET::::- 2016 – Ratnasiri Wickremanayake, Sri Lankan politician (b. 1933)\nBULLET::::- Christian feast day:\nBULLET::::- Blessed Francesco Spoto\nBULLET::::- Blessed Sára Salkaházi\nBULLET::::- Fabiola\nBULLET::::- John the Apostle\nBULLET::::- Pope Maximus of Alexandria\nBULLET::::- Nicarete\nBULLET::::- Theodorus and Theophanes\nBULLET::::- December 27 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)\nBULLET::::- Constitution Day (North Korea)\nBULLET::::- Emergency Rescuer's Day (Russia)\nBULLET::::- St. Stephen's Day (Eastern Orthodox Church; a public holiday in Romania)\nBULLET::::- The third of the Twelve Days of Christmas (Western Christianity)\n\nBULLET::::- BBC: On This Day\nBULLET::::- Today in Canadian History\n"}
{"id": "8454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8454", "title": "Double planet", "text": "Double planet\n\nIn astronomy, a double planet (also binary planet) is a binary system where both objects are of planetary mass. The term is not recognized by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) and is therefore not an official classification. At its 2006 General Assembly, the International Astronomical Union considered a proposal that Pluto and Charon be reclassified as a double planet, but the proposal was abandoned in favor of the current definition of planet. In promotional materials advertising the SMART-1 mission and pre-dating the IAU planet definition, the European Space Agency once referred to the Earth–Moon system as a double planet.\n\nSome binary asteroids with components of roughly equal mass are sometimes informally referred to as double minor planets. These include binary asteroids 69230 Hermes and 90 Antiope and binary Kuiper belt objects (KBOs) 79360 Sila–Nunam and .\n\nThere is debate as to what criteria should be used to distinguish \"double planet\" from a \"planet–moon system\". The following are considerations.\n\nA definition proposed in the Astronomical Journal calls for both bodies to individually satisfy an orbit-clearing criterion in order to be called a double planet.\n\nOne important consideration in defining \"double planet\" is the ratio of the masses of the two bodies. A mass ratio of 1 would indicate bodies of equal mass, and bodies with mass ratios closer to 1 are more attractive to label as \"doubles\". Using this definition, the satellites of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune can all easily be excluded; they all have masses less than 0.00025 () of the planets around which they revolve. Some dwarf planets, too, have satellites substantially less massive than the dwarf planets themselves.\n\nThe most notable exception is the Pluto–Charon system. The Charon-to-Pluto mass ratio of 0.117 (≈ ) is close enough to 1 that Pluto and Charon have frequently been described by many scientists as \"double dwarf planets\" (\"double planets\" prior to the 2006 definition of \"planet\"). The International Astronomical Union (IAU) currently calls Charon a satellite of Pluto, but has explicitly expressed a willingness to reconsider the bodies double dwarf planets at a future time.\n\nThe Moon-to-Earth mass ratio of 0.01230 (≈ ) is also notably close to 1 when compared to all other satellite-to-planet ratios. Consequently, some scientists view the Earth-Moon system as a double planet as well, though this is a minority view. Eris's lone satellite, Dysnomia, has a radius somewhere around that of Eris; assuming similar densities (Dysnomia's compositional make-up may or may not differ substantially from Eris's), the mass ratio would be near , a value intermediate to the Moon–Earth and Charon–Pluto ratios.\n\nThe next criteria both attempt to answer the question \"How close to 1 must the mass ratio be?\"\n\nCurrently, the most commonly proposed definition for a double-planet system is one in which the barycenter, around which both bodies orbit, lies outside both bodies. Under this definition, Pluto and Charon are double dwarf planets, since they orbit a point clearly outside of Pluto, as visible in animations created from images of the \"New Horizons\" space probe in June 2015.\n\nUnder this definition, the Earth–Moon system is not currently a double planet; although the Moon is massive enough to cause the Earth to make a noticeable revolution around this center of mass, this point nevertheless lies well within Earth. However, the Moon currently migrates outward from Earth at a rate of approximately per year; in a few billion years, the Earth–Moon system's center of mass will lie outside Earth, which would make it a double-planet system.\n\nThe center of mass of the Jupiter–Sun system lies outside the surface of the Sun, though arguing that Jupiter and the Sun are a double star is \"not\" analogous to arguing Pluto-Charon is a double dwarf planet. The problem is that Jupiter is not a star, or even a brown dwarf, and due to its low mass it is unable to achieve any form of fusion.\n\nIsaac Asimov suggested a distinction between planet–moon and double-planet structures based in part on what he called a \"tug-of-war\" value, which does not consider their relative sizes. This quantity is simply the ratio of the force exerted on the smaller body by the larger (primary) body to the force exerted on the smaller body by the Sun. This can be shown to equal\n\nwhere is the mass of the primary (the larger body), is the mass of the Sun, is the distance between the smaller body and the Sun, and is the distance between the smaller body and the primary. The tug-of-war value does not rely on the mass of the satellite (the smaller body).\n\nThis formula actually reflects the relation of the gravitational effects on the smaller body from the larger body and from the Sun. The tug-of-war figure for Saturn's moon Titan is 380, which means that Saturn's hold on Titan is 380 times as strong as the Sun's hold on Titan. Titan's tug-of-war value may be compared with that of Saturn's moon Phoebe, which has a tug-of-war value of just 3.5. So Saturn's hold on Phoebe is only 3.5 times as strong as the Sun's hold on Phoebe.\n\nAsimov calculated tug-of-war values for several satellites of the planets. He showed that even the largest gas giant, Jupiter, had only a slightly better hold than the Sun on its outer captured satellites, some with tug-of-war values not much higher than one. In nearly every one of Asimov's calculations the tug-of-war value was found to be greater than one, so in those cases the Sun loses the tug-of-war with the planets. The one exception was Earth's Moon, where the Sun wins the tug-of-war with a value of 0.46, which means that Earth's hold on the Moon is less than half that of the Sun's. Asimov included this with his other arguments that Earth and the Moon should be considered a binary planet.\nSee the Path of Earth and Moon around Sun section in the \"Orbit of the Moon\" article for a more detailed explanation.\n\nThis definition of double planet depends on the pair's distance from the Sun. If the Earth–Moon system happened to orbit farther away from the Sun than it does now, then Earth would win the tug of war. For example, at the orbit of Mars, the Moon's tug-of-war value would be 1.05. Also, several tiny moons discovered since Asimov's proposal would qualify as double planets by this argument. Neptune's small outer moons Neso and Psamathe, for example, have tug-of-war values of 0.42 and 0.44, less than that of Earth's Moon. Yet their masses are tiny compared to Neptune's, with an estimated ratio of 1.5 () and 0.4 ().\n\nA final consideration is the way in which the two bodies came to form a system. Both the Earth-Moon and Pluto-Charon systems are thought to have been formed as a result of giant impacts: one body was impacted by a second body, resulting in a debris disk, and through accretion, either two new bodies formed or one new body formed, with the larger body remaining (but changed). However, a giant impact is not a sufficient condition for two bodies being \"double planets\" because such impacts can also produce tiny satellites, such as the four small outer satellites of Pluto.\n\nA now-abandoned hypothesis for the origin of the Moon was actually called the \"double-planet hypothesis\"; the idea was that the Earth and the Moon formed in the same region of the Solar System's proto-planetary disk, forming a system under gravitational interaction. This idea, too, is a problematic condition for defining two bodies as \"double planets\" because planets can \"capture\" moons through gravitational interaction. For example, the moons of Mars (Phobos and Deimos) are thought to be asteroids captured long ago by Mars. Such a definition would also deem Neptune-Triton a double planet, since Triton was a Kuiper belt body the same size and of similar composition to Pluto, later captured by Neptune.\n\nBULLET::::- 2006 definition of planet\nBULLET::::- 3753 Cruithne\nBULLET::::- Co-orbital configuration\nBULLET::::- Definition of a planet\n\nBULLET::::- Ecliptic\nBULLET::::- Hill sphere\nBULLET::::- Natural satellite\nBULLET::::- Orbit of the Moon\nInformational notes\nCitations\nBibliography\n\nFurther reading\n"}
{"id": "8456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8456", "title": "Denaturation (biochemistry)", "text": "Denaturation (biochemistry)\n\nDenaturation is a process in which proteins or nucleic acids lose the quaternary structure, tertiary structure, and secondary structure which is present in their native state, by application of some external stress or compound such as a strong acid or base, a concentrated inorganic salt, an organic solvent (e.g., alcohol or chloroform), radiation or heat. If proteins in a living cell are denatured, this results in disruption of cell activity and possibly cell death. Protein denaturation is also a consequence of cell death. Denatured proteins can exhibit a wide range of characteristics, from conformational change and loss of solubility to aggregation due to the exposure of hydrophobic groups. Denatured proteins lose their 3D structure and therefore cannot function.\n\nProtein folding is key to whether a globular or membrane protein can do its job correctly; it must be folded into the right shape to function. However, hydrogen bonds, which play a big part in folding, are rather weak and thus easily affected by heat, acidity, varying salt concentrations, and other stressors which can denature the protein. This is one reason why homeostasis is physiologically necessary in many life forms.\n\nThis concept is unrelated to denatured alcohol, which is alcohol that has been mixed with additives to make it unsuitable for human consumption.\n\nWhen food is cooked, some of its proteins become denatured. This is why boiled eggs become hard and cooked meat becomes firm.\n\nA classic example of denaturing in proteins comes from egg whites, which are typically largely egg albumins in water. Fresh from the eggs, egg whites are transparent and liquid. Cooking the thermally unstable whites turns them opaque, forming an interconnected solid mass. The same transformation can be effected with a denaturing chemical. Pouring egg whites into a beaker of acetone will also turn egg whites translucent and solid. The skin that forms on curdled milk is another common example of denatured protein. The cold appetizer known as ceviche is prepared by chemically \"cooking\" raw fish and shellfish in an acidic citrus marinade, without heat.\n\nDenatured proteins can exhibit a wide range of characteristics, from loss of solubility to protein aggregation.\n\nProteins or Polypeptides are polymers of amino acids. A protein is created by ribosomes that \"read\" RNA that is encoded by codons in the gene and assemble the requisite amino acid combination from the genetic instruction, in a process known as translation. The newly created protein strand then undergoes posttranslational modification, in which additional atoms or molecules are added, for example copper, zinc, or iron. Once this post-translational modification process has been completed, the protein begins to fold (sometimes spontaneously and sometimes with enzymatic assistance), curling up on itself so that hydrophobic elements of the protein are buried deep inside the structure and hydrophilic elements end up on the outside. The final shape of a protein determines how it interacts with its environment.\n\nProtein folding consists of a balance between a substantial amount of weak intra-molecular interactions within a protein (Hydrophobic, electrostatic, and Van Der Waals Interactions) and protein-solvent interactions. As a result, this process is heavily reliant on environmental state that the protein resides in. These environmental conditions include, and are not limited to, temperature, salinity, pressure, and the solvents that happen to be involved. Consequently, any exposure to extreme stresses (e.g. heat or radiation, high inorganic salt concentrations, strong acids and bases) can disrupt a protein's interaction and inevitably lead to denaturation.\n\nWhen a protein is denatured, secondary and tertiary structures are altered but the peptide bonds of the primary structure between the amino acids are left intact. Since all structural levels of the protein determine its function, the protein can no longer perform its function once it has been denatured. This is in contrast to intrinsically unstructured proteins, which are unfolded in their native state, but still functionally active and tend to fold upon binding to their biological target.\n\nBULLET::::- In quaternary structure denaturation, protein sub-units are dissociated and/or the spatial arrangement of protein subunits is disrupted.\nBULLET::::- Tertiary structure denaturation involves the disruption of:\nBULLET::::- Covalent interactions between amino acid side-chains (such as disulfide bridges between cysteine groups)\nBULLET::::- Non-covalent dipole-dipole interactions between polar amino acid side-chains (and the surrounding solvent)\nBULLET::::- Van der Waals (induced dipole) interactions between nonpolar amino acid side-chains.\nBULLET::::- In secondary structure denaturation, proteins lose all regular repeating patterns such as alpha-helices and beta-pleated sheets, and adopt a random coil configuration.\nBULLET::::- Primary structure, such as the sequence of amino acids held together by covalent peptide bonds, is not disrupted by denaturation.\n\nMost biological substrates lose their biological function when denatured. For example, enzymes lose their activity, because the substrates can no longer bind to the active site, and because amino acid residues involved in stabilizing substrates' transition states are no longer positioned to be able to do so. The denaturing process and the associated loss of activity can be measured using techniques such as dual-polarization interferometry, CD, QCM-D and MP-SPR.\n\nBy targeting proteins, heavy metals have been known to disrupt the function and activity carried out by proteins. It is important to note that heavy metals fall into categories consisting of transition metals as well as a select amount of metalloid. These metals, when interacting with native, folded proteins, tend to play a role in obstructing their biological activity. This interference can be carried out in a different number of ways. These heavy metals can form a complex with the functional side chain groups present in a protein or form bonds to free thiols. Heavy metals also play a role in oxidizing amino acid side chains present in protein. Along with this, when interacting with metalloproteins, heavy metals can dislocate and replace key metal ions. As a result, heavy metals can interfere with folded proteins, which can strongly deter protein stability and activity.\n\nIn many cases, denaturation is reversible (the proteins can regain their native state when the denaturing influence is removed). This process can be called renaturation. This understanding has led to the notion that all the information needed for proteins to assume their native state was encoded in the primary structure of the protein, and hence in the DNA that codes for the protein, the so-called \"Anfinsen's thermodynamic hypothesis\".\n\nDenaturation can also be irreversible. This irreversibility is typically a kinetic, not thermodynamic irreversibility, as generally when a protein is folded it has lower free energy. Through kinetic irreversibility, the fact that the protein is stuck in a local minimum can stop it from ever refolding after it has been irreversibly denatured.\n\nDenaturation can also be caused by changes in the pH which can affect the chemistry of the amino acids and their residues. The ionizable groups in amino acids are able to become ionized when changes in pH occur. A pH change to more acidic or more basic conditions can induce unfolding. Acid-induced unfolding often occurs between pH 2 and 5, base-induced unfolding usually requires pH 10 or higher.\n\nNucleic acids (including RNA and DNA) are nucleotide polymers synthesized by polymerase enzymes during either transcription or DNA replication. Following 5'-3' synthesis of the backbone, individual nitrogenous bases are capable of interacting with one another via hydrogen bonding, thus allowing for the formation of higher-order structures. Nucleic acid denaturation occurs when hydrogen bonding between nucleotides is disrupted, and results in the separation of previously annealed strands. For example, denaturation of DNA due to high temperatures results in the disruption of base pairs and the separation of the double stranded helix into two single strands. Nucleic acid strands are capable of re-annealling when \"normal\" conditions are restored, but if restoration occurs too quickly, the nucleic acid strands may re-anneal imperfectly resulting in the improper pairing of bases.\n\nThe non-covalent interactions between antiparallel strands in DNA can be broken in order to \"open\" the double helix when biologically important mechanisms such as DNA replication, transcription, DNA repair or protein binding are set to occur. The area of partially separated DNA is known as the denaturation bubble, which can be more specifically defined as the opening of a DNA double helix through the coordinated separation of base pairs.\n\nThe first model that attempted to describe the thermodynamics of the denaturation bubble was introduced in 1966 and called the Poland-Scheraga Model. This model describes the denaturation of DNA strands as a function of temperature. As the temperature increases, the hydrogen bonds between the Watson and Crick base pairs are increasingly disturbed and \"denatured loops\" begin to form. However, the Poland-Scheraga Model is now considered elementary because it fails to account for the confounding implications of DNA sequence, chemical composition, stiffness and torsion.\n\nRecent thermodynamic studies have inferred that the lifetime of a singular denaturation bubble ranges from 1 microsecond to 1 millisecond. This information is based on established timescales of DNA replication and transcription. Currently, biophysical and biochemical research studies are being performed to more fully elucidate the thermodynamic details of the denaturation bubble.\n\nWith polymerase chain reaction (PCR) being among the most popular contexts in which DNA denaturation is desired, heating is the most frequent method of denaturation. Other than denaturation by heat, nucleic acids can undergo the denaturation process through various chemical agents such as formamide, guanidine, sodium salicylate, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), propylene glycol, and urea. These chemical denaturing agents lower the melting temperature (T) by competing for hydrogen bond donors and acceptors with pre-existing nitrogenous base pairs. Some agents are even able to induce denaturation at room temperature. For example, alkaline agents (e.g. NaOH) have been shown to denature DNA by changing pH and removing hydrogen-bond contributing protons. These denaturants have been employed to make Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis gel (DGGE), which promotes denaturation of nucleic acids in order to eliminate the influence of nucleic acid shape on their electrophoretic mobility.\n\nThe optical activity (absorption and scattering of light) and hydrodynamic properties (translational diffusion, sedimentation coefficients, and rotational correlation times) of formamide denatured nucleic acids are similar to those of heat-denatured nucleic acids. Therefore, depending on the desired effect, chemically denaturing DNA can provide a gentler procedure for denaturing nucleic acids than denaturation induced by heat. Studies comparing different denaturation methods such as heating, beads mill of different bead sizes, probe sonification, and chemical denaturation show that chemical denaturation can provide quicker denaturation compared to the other physical denaturation methods described. Particularly in cases where rapid renaturation is desired, chemical denaturation agents can provide an ideal alternative to heating. For example, DNA strands denatured with alkaline agents such as NaOH renature as soon as phosphate buffer is added.\n\nSmall, electronegative molecules such as nitrogen and oxygen, which are the primary gases in air, significantly impact the ability of surrounding molecules to participate in hydrogen bonding. These molecules compete with surrounding hydrogen bond acceptors for hydrogen bond donors, therefore acting as \"hydrogen bond breakers\" and weakening interactions between surrounding molecules in the environment. Antiparellel strands in DNA double helices are non-covalently bound by hydrogen bonding between Watson and Crick base pairs; nitrogen and oxygen therefore maintain the potential to weaken the integrity of DNA when exposed to air. As a result, DNA strands exposed to air require less force to separate and exemplify lower melting temperatures.\n\nMany laboratory techniques rely on the ability of nucleic acid strands to separate. By understanding the properties of nucleic acid denaturation, the following methods were created:\nBULLET::::- PCR\nBULLET::::- Southern blot\nBULLET::::- Northern blot\nBULLET::::- DNA Sequencing\n\nAcidic protein denaturants include:\nBULLET::::- Acetic acid\nBULLET::::- Trichloroacetic acid 12% in water\nBULLET::::- Sulfosalicylic acid\n\nBases work similarly to acids in denaturation. They include:\nBULLET::::- Sodium bicarbonate\n\nMost organic solvents are denaturing, including:\nBULLET::::- Ethanol\nBULLET::::- Alcohol\n\nCross-linking agents for proteins include:\nBULLET::::- Formaldehyde\nBULLET::::- Glutaraldehyde\n\nChaotropic agents include:\nBULLET::::- Urea 6 – 8 mol/l\nBULLET::::- Guanidinium chloride 6 mol/l\nBULLET::::- Lithium perchlorate 4.5 mol/l\nBULLET::::- Sodium dodecyl sulfate\n\nAgents that break disulfide bonds by reduction include:\nBULLET::::- 2-Mercaptoethanol\nBULLET::::- Dithiothreitol\nBULLET::::- TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine)\n\nBULLET::::- Mechanical agitation\nBULLET::::- Picric acid\nBULLET::::- Radiation\nBULLET::::- Temperature\n\nAcidic nucleic acid denaturants include:\nBULLET::::- Acetic acid\nBULLET::::- HCl\nBULLET::::- Nitric Acid\nBasic nucleic acid denaturants include:\nBULLET::::- NaOH\nOther nucleic acid denaturants include:\nBULLET::::- DMSO\nBULLET::::- Formamide\nBULLET::::- Guanidine\nBULLET::::- Sodium salicylate\nBULLET::::- Propylene glycol\nBULLET::::- Urea\n\nBULLET::::- Thermal denaturation\nBULLET::::- Beads mill\nBULLET::::- Probe sonication\nBULLET::::- Radiation\n\nBULLET::::- Denatured alcohol\nBULLET::::- Fixation (histology)\nBULLET::::- Protein folding\nBULLET::::- Random coil\n\nBULLET::::- McGraw-Hill Online Learning Center — Animation: Protein Denaturation\n"}
{"id": "8459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8459", "title": "Dwight L. Moody", "text": "Dwight L. Moody\n\nDwight Lyman Moody (February 5, 1837 – December 22, 1899), also known as D. L. Moody, was an American evangelist and publisher connected with the Holiness Movement, who founded the Moody Church, Northfield School and Mount Hermon School in Massachusetts (now Northfield Mount Hermon School), Moody Bible Institute and Moody Publishers. One of his most famous quotes was “Faith makes all things possible... Love makes all things easy.“\n\nDwight Moody was born in Northfield, Massachusetts, as the seventh child in a large family. His father, Edwin J. Moody (1800–1841), was a small farmer and stonemason. His mother was Betsey Moody (née Holton; 1805–1896). They had five sons and a daughter before Dwight's birth. His father died when Dwight was age four; fraternal twins, a boy and a girl, were born one month after the father's death. Their mother struggled to support the nine children, but had to send some off to work for their room and board. Dwight too was sent off, where he received cornmeal, porridge, and milk three times a day. He complained to his mother, but when she learned that he was getting all he wanted to eat, she sent him back. During this time, she continued to send the children to church. Together with his eight siblings, Dwight was raised in the Unitarian church. His oldest brother ran away and was not heard from by the family until many years later.\nWhen Moody turned 17, he moved to Boston to work (after receiving many job rejections locally) in an uncle's shoe store. One of the uncle's requirements was that Moody attend the Congregational Church of Mount Vernon, where Dr. Edward Norris Kirk served as the pastor. In April 1855 Moody was converted to evangelical Christianity when his Sunday school teacher, Edward Kimball, talked to him about how much God loved him. His conversion sparked the start of his career as an evangelist. Moody was not received by the church when he first applied in May 1855. He was not received as a church member until May 4, 1856.\n\nAccording to Moody's memoir, his teacher, Edward Kimball, said:\n\nD. L. Moody \"could not conscientiously enlist\" in the Union Army during the Civil War, later describing himself as \"a Quaker\" in this respect. After the Civil War started, he became involved with the United States Christian Commission of the YMCA. He paid nine visits to the battlefront, being present among the Union soldiers after the Battle of Shiloh (a.k.a. Pittsburg Landing) and the Battle of Stones River; he also entered Richmond, Virginia, with the troops of General Grant.\n\nOn August 28, 1862, Moody married Emma C. Revell, with whom he had a daughter, Emma Reynolds Moody, and two sons, William Revell Moody and Paul Dwight Moody.\n\nThe growing Sunday School congregation needed a permanent home, so Moody started a church in Chicago, the Illinois Street Church.\n\nIn June 1871 at an International Sunday School Convention in Indianapolis, Indiana, Dwight Moody met Ira D. Sankey. He was a gospel singer, with whom Moody soon began to cooperate and collaborate.\nFour months later, in October 1871, the Great Chicago Fire destroyed Moody's church building, as well as his house and those of most of his congregation. Many had to flee the flames, saving only their lives, and ending up completely destitute. Moody, reporting on the disaster, said about his own situation that: \"...he saved nothing but his reputation and his Bible.\"\n\nIn the years after the fire, Moody's wealthy Chicago patron John V. Farwell tried to persuade him to make his permanent home in the city, offering to build a new house for Moody and his family. But the newly famous Moody, also sought by supporters in New York, Philadelphia, and elsewhere, chose a tranquil farm he had purchased near his birthplace in Northfield, Massachusetts. He felt he could better recover in a rural setting from his lengthy preaching trips.\n\nNorthfield became an important location in evangelical Christian history in the late 19th century as Moody organized summer conferences. These were led and attended by prominent Christian preachers and evangelists from around the world. Western Massachusetts has had a rich evangelical tradition including Jonathan Edwards preaching in colonial Northampton and C.I. Scofield preaching in Northfield. A protégé of Moody founded Moores Corner Church, in Leverett, Massachusetts, and it continues to be evangelical.\n\nMoody founded two schools here: Northfield School for Girls, founded in 1879, and the Mount Hermon School for Boys, founded in 1881. In the late 20th century, these merged, forming today's co-educational, nondenominational Northfield Mount Hermon School.\n\nDuring a trip to the United Kingdom in the spring of 1872, Moody became well known as an evangelist. Literary works published by the Moody Bible Institute claim that he was the greatest evangelist of the 19th century. He preached almost a hundred times and came into communion with the Plymouth Brethren. On several occasions, he filled stadia of a capacity of 2,000 to 4,000. According to his memoir, in the Botanic Gardens Palace, he attracted an audience estimated at between 15,000 and 30,000.\n\nThat turnout continued throughout 1874 and 1875, with crowds of thousands at all of his meetings. During his visit to Scotland, Moody was helped and encouraged by Andrew A. Bonar. The famous London Baptist preacher, Charles Spurgeon, invited him to speak, and he promoted the American as well. When Moody returned to the US, he was said to frequently attract crowds of 12,000 to 20,000 were as common as they had been in England. President Grant and some of his cabinet officials attended a Moody meeting on January 19, 1876. He held evangelistic meetings from Boston to New York, throughout New England, and as far west as San Francisco, also visiting other West Coast towns from Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada to San Diego.\n\nMoody aided the work of cross-cultural evangelism by promoting \"The Wordless Book,\" a teaching tool developed in 1866 by Charles Spurgeon. In 1875, Moody added a fourth color to the design of the three-color evangelistic device: gold — to \"represent heaven.\" This \"book\" has been and is still used to teach uncounted thousands of illiterate people, young and old, around the globe about the gospel message.\nMoody visited Britain with Ira D. Sankey, with Moody preaching and Sankey singing at meetings. Together they published books of Christian hymns. In 1883 they visited Edinburgh and raised £10,000 for the building of a new home for the Carrubbers Close Mission. Moody later preached at the laying of the foundation stone for what is now called the Carrubbers Christian Centre, one of the few buildings on the Royal Mile which continues to be used for its original purpose.\n\nMoody greatly influenced the cause of cross-cultural Christian missions after he met Hudson Taylor, a pioneer missionary to China. He actively supported the China Inland Mission and encouraged many of his congregation to volunteer for service overseas.\n\nHis influence was felt among Swedes. Being of English heritage, never visiting Sweden or any other Scandinavian country, and never speaking a word of Swedish, nonetheless he became a hero revivalist among Swedish Mission Friends in Sweden and America.\n\nNews of Moody's large revival campaigns in Great Britain from 1873 through 1875 traveled quickly to Sweden, making \"Mr. Moody\" a household name in homes of many Mission Friends. Moody's sermons published in Sweden were distributed in books, newspapers, and colporteur tracts, and they led to the spread of Sweden's \"Moody fever\" from 1875 through 1880.\n\nHe preached his last sermon on November 16, 1899, in Kansas City, Missouri. Becoming ill, he returned home by train to Northfield. During the preceding several months, friends had observed he had added some to his already ample frame. Although his illness was never diagnosed, it has been speculated that he suffered from congestive heart failure. He died on December 22, 1899, surrounded by his family. Already installed as the leader of his Chicago Bible Institute. R. A. Torrey succeeded Moody as its pastor.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Heaven\" Diggory Press\nBULLET::::- \"Prevailing Prayer—What Hinders it?\" Diggory Press\nBULLET::::- \"Secret Power\" Diggory Press\nBULLET::::- \"The Ten Commandments\"\nBULLET::::- Also, A Life for Christ—What a Normal Christian Life Looks Like.\n\nTen years after Moody's death the Chicago Avenue Church was renamed the Moody Church in his honor, and the Chicago Bible Institute was likewise renamed the Moody Bible Institute.\n\nDuring World War II the Liberty ship was built in Panama City, Florida, and named in his honor.\n\nBULLET::::- Horatio Spafford, a friend of Moody who wrote the words to the hymn \"It Is Well With My Soul\"\nBULLET::::- Northfield Mount Hermon School\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dwight Moody: evangelist with a common touch\" \"Christianity Today\", 8 August 2008.\nBULLET::::- Christian Biography Resources\nBULLET::::- Austin, Alvyn. \"China's Millions: The China Inland Mission and Late Qing Society.\" Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company (March 5, 2007)\nBULLET::::- Beadenkopf, T. M.; Stricklen, W. R. \"Moody in Baltimore\", \"Students of Johns Hopkins\", Baltimore, 1879, 2nd ed.\nBULLET::::- Dorsett, L. W. \"A Passion for Souls: The Life of D. L. Moody.\" 1997\nBULLET::::- Findlay, J. F. Jr. \"Dwight L. Moody: American Evangelist 1837–1899.\" 1969\nBULLET::::- Gundry, S. N. \"Love them in: The Proclamation Theology of D. L. Moody.\" 1976\nBULLET::::- Evensen, B. J. \"God's Man for Gilded Age: D. L. Moody and the Rise of Mass Evangelism.\" 2003\nBULLET::::- Gustafson, D. M. \"D. L. Moody and Swedes: Shaping Evangelical Identity among Swedish Missions Friends 1867–1899.\" (Linköping Studies in Arts and Sciences 419. / Linköping Studies in Identity and Pluralism 7.) 2008. Ph.D. Dissertation\nBULLET::::- Moody, Paul Dwight. \"The Shorter Life of D. L. Moody.\" 1900\nBULLET::::- Schlachter, Franz Eugen. \"D. L. Moody, ein Lebensbild\" (1894)\nBULLET::::- Simons, M. Laird. \"Holding the Fort: comprising sermons and addresses at the Great Revival meetings conducted by Moody and Sankey, with the lives and labors of Dwight L. Moody, Ira D. Sankey, and P. P. Bliss\", Norwich, Connecticut: Henry Bill Publishing Co., 1877.\n\nBULLET::::- Recording of Moody reading the Beatitudes\nBULLET::::- Sample sermons by D. L. Moody\nBULLET::::- \"Shall I enter the Army?\" Moody said, \"No.\"\nBULLET::::- Glad Tidings, sermons by D. L. Moody\nBULLET::::- The Gospel Awakening, sermons by D. L. Moody\nBULLET::::- books by D. L. Moody\n"}
{"id": "8460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8460", "title": "Dieting", "text": "Dieting\n\nDieting is the practice of eating food in a regulated and supervised fashion to decrease, maintain, or increase body weight, or to prevent and treat diseases, such as diabetes and obesity. A restricted diet is more often pursued by those wanting to lose weight. Continuous dieting is recommended by US guidelines for obese or diabetic individuals to reduce body weight and improve general health. Some people follow a diet to gain weight (usually in the form of muscle). Diets can also be used to maintain a stable body weight and improve health.\n\nSeveral diets to promote weight loss have been devised: low-fat, low-carbohydrate, low-calorie, very low calorie and more recently flexible dieting. A meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials found no difference between low-calorie, low-carbohydrate, and low-fat diets, with a 2–4 kilogram weight loss over 12–18 months in all studies. At two years, all calorie-reduced diet types cause equal weight loss irrespective of the macronutrients emphasized. In general, the most effective diet is any which reduces calorie consumption. Several diets are effective for weight loss of obese individuals with similar results, diet success being most predicted by adherence with little effect of the type or brand of diet. Dieting appears more effective than exercise for weight loss, but combining both provides even greater long-term results.\n\nShort-term dieting result on average in a meaningful long-term weight-loss, although more limited because of gradual 1 to 2 kg/year weight regain. For each individual, the result will be different, with some even regaining more weight than they lost, while a few others achieve a tremendous loss, so that the \"average weight loss\" of a diet is not indicative of the results other dieters may achieve.\n\nThe first popular diet was \"Banting\", named after William Banting. In his 1863 pamphlet, \"Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public\", he outlined the details of a particular low-carbohydrate, low-calorie diet that had led to his own dramatic weight loss.\n\nAccording to Foxcroft, the word diet comes from the Greek \"diaita\", which represents a notion of a whole way healthy lifestyle including both mental and physical health, rather than a narrow weight-loss regimen.\n\nOne of the first dietitians was the English doctor George Cheyne. He himself was tremendously overweight and would constantly eat large quantities of rich food and drink. He began a meatless diet, taking only milk and vegetables, and soon regained his health. He began publicly recommending his diet for everyone suffering from obesity. In 1724, he wrote \"An Essay of Health and Long Life\", in which he advises exercise and fresh air and avoiding luxury foods.\n\nThe Scottish military surgeon, John Rollo, published \"Notes of a Diabetic Case\" in 1797. It described the benefits of a meat diet for those suffering from diabetes, basing this recommendation on Matthew Dobson's discovery of glycosuria in diabetes mellitus. By means of Dobson's testing procedure (for glucose in the urine) Rollo worked out a diet that had success for what is now called type 2 diabetes.\n\nThe first popular diet was \"Banting\", named after the English undertaker William Banting. In 1863, he wrote a booklet called \"Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public\", which contained the particular plan for the diet he had successfully followed. His own diet was four meals per day, consisting of meat, greens, fruits, and dry wine. The emphasis was on avoiding sugar, sweet foods, starch, beer, milk and butter. Banting's pamphlet was popular for years to come, and would be used as a model for modern diets. The pamphlet's popularity was such that the question \"Do you bant?\" referred to his method, and eventually to dieting in general. His booklet remains in print as of 2007.\n\nThe first weight-loss book to promote calorie counting, and the first weight-loss book to become a bestseller, was the 1918 \"Diet and Health: With Key to the Calories\" by American physician and columnist Lulu Hunt Peters.\n\nIt was estimated that over 1000 weight loss diets have been developed up to 2014.\n\nLow-fat diets involve the reduction of the percentage of fat in one's diet. Calorie consumption is reduced because less fat is consumed. Diets of this type include NCEP Step I and II. A meta-analysis of 16 trials of 2–12 months' duration found that low-fat diets (without intentional restriction of caloric intake) resulted in average weight loss of over habitual eating.\n\nLow-carbohydrate diets are relatively high in protein and fats. Low-carbohydrate diets are sometimes \"ketogenic\" (i.e., they restrict carbohydrate intake sufficiently to cause ketosis).\n\nLow-calorie diets usually produce an energy deficit of 500–1,000 calories per day, which can result in a weight loss per week. One of the most commonly used low-calorie diets is Weight Watchers. The National Institutes of Health reviewed 34 randomized controlled trials to determine the effectiveness of low-calorie diets. They found that these diets lowered total body mass by 8% in the short term, over 3–12 months. Women doing low-calorie diets should have at least 1,000 calories per day and men should have approximately 1,200 calories per day. These caloric intake values vary depending on additional factors, such as age and weight.\n\nVery low calorie diets provide 200–800 calories per day, maintaining protein intake but limiting calories from both fat and carbohydrates. They subject the body to starvation and produce an average loss of per week. \"2-4-6-8\", a popular diet of this variety, follows a four-day cycle in which only 200 calories are consumed the first day, 400 the second day, 600 the third day, 800 the fourth day, and then totally fasting, after which the cycle repeats. These is some evidence that these diets results in considerable weight loss. These diets are not recommended for general use and should be reserved for the management of obesity as they are associated with adverse side effects such as loss of lean muscle mass, increased risks of gout, and electrolyte imbalances. People attempting these diets must be monitored closely by a physician to prevent complications.\n\nMeals timing schedule is known to be an important factor of any diet. Recent evidence suggest that new scheduling strategies, such as intermittent fasting or skipping meals, and strategically placed snacks before meals, may be recommendable to reduce cardiovascular risks as part of a broader lifestyle and dietary change.\n\nDetox diets are promoted with unsubstantiated claims that they can eliminate \"toxins\" from the human body. Many of these diets use herbs or celery and other juicy low-calorie vegetables.\n\nReligious prescription may be a factor in motivating people to adopt a specific restrictive diet. For example, the Biblical Book of Daniel (1:2-20, and 10:2-3) refers to a 10- or 21-day avoidance of foods (Daniel Fast) declared unclean by God in the laws of Moses. In modern versions of the Daniel Fast, food choices may be limited to whole grains, fruits, vegetables, pulses, nuts, seeds and oil. The Daniel Fast resembles the vegan diet in that it excludes foods of animal origin. The passages strongly suggest that the Daniel Fast will promote good health and mental performance.\n\nFasting is practiced in various religions. Examples include Lent in Christianity; Yom Kippur, Tisha B'av, Fast of Esther, Tzom Gedalia, the Seventeenth of Tamuz, and the Tenth of Tevet in Judaism. Muslims refrain from eating during the hours of daytime for one month, Ramadan, every year.\n\nDetails of fasting practices differ. Eastern Orthodox Christians fast during specified fasting seasons of the year, which include not only the better-known Great Lent, but also fasts on every Wednesday and Friday (except on special holidays), together with extended fasting periods before Christmas (the Nativity Fast), after Easter (the Apostles Fast) and in early August (the Dormition Fast). Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) generally fast for 24 hours on the first Sunday of each month. Like Muslims, they refrain from all drinking and eating unless they are children or are physically unable to fast. Fasting is also a feature of ascetic traditions in religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism. Mahayana traditions that follow the Brahma's Net Sutra may recommend that the laity fast \"during the six days of fasting each month and the three months of fasting each year\" [Brahma's Net Sutra, minor precept 30]. Members of the Baha'i Faith observe a Nineteen Day Fast from sunrise to sunset during March each year.\n\nAnother kind of diet focuses not on the dieter's health effects, but on its environment. The One Blue Dot plan of the BDA offers recommendations towards reducing diets' environmental impacts, by:\nBULLET::::1. Reducing meat to 70g per person per day.\nBULLET::::2. Prioritising plant proteins.\nBULLET::::3. Promoting fish from sustainable sources.\nBULLET::::4. Moderate dairy consumption.\nBULLET::::5. Focusing on wholegrain starchy foods.\nBULLET::::6. Promoting seasonal locally sourced fruits and vegetables.\nBULLET::::7. Reducing high fat, sugar and salty foods overconsumption.\nBULLET::::8. Promoting tap water and unsweetened tea/coffee as the de facto choice for healthy hydration.\nBULLET::::9. Reducing food waste.\n\nWeight loss diets that manipulate the proportion of macronutrients (low-fat, low-carbohydrate, etc.) have been shown to be no more effective than diets that maintain a typical mix of foods with smaller portions and perhaps some substitutions (e.g. low-fat milk, or less salad dressing). Extreme diets may, in some cases, lead to malnutrition.\n\nThe Dietary Guidelines for Americans is a set of recommendations about a healthy diet written for policy makers, nutrition scientists, and dieticians and other clinicians, produced by the US Department of Agriculture, in concert with the US Department of Health and Human Services and quintannually-revised. The current guidelines are written for the period 2015 - 2020 and were used to produce the MyPlate recommendations on a healthy diet for the general public.\n\nOne of the most important things to take into consideration when either trying to lose or put on weight is output versus input. It is important to know the amount of energy your body is using every day, so that your intake fits the needs of one's personal weight goal. Someone wanting to lose weight would want a smaller energy intake than what they put out. There is increasing research-based evidence that low-fat vegetarian diets consistently lead to healthy weight loss and management, a decrease in diabetic symptoms as well as improved cardiac health.\n\nSeveral diets are effective for weight loss of obese individuals with similar results, diet success being most predicted by adherence with little effect of the type or brand of diet.\n\nWhen the body is expending more energy than it is consuming (e.g. when exercising), the body's cells rely on internally stored energy sources, such as complex carbohydrates and fats, for energy. The first source to which the body turns is glycogen (by glycogenolysis). Glycogen is a complex carbohydrate, 65% of which is stored in skeletal muscles and the remainder in the liver (totaling about 2,000 kcal in the whole body). It is created from the excess of ingested macronutrients, mainly carbohydrates. When glycogen is nearly depleted, the body begins lipolysis, the mobilization and catabolism of fat stores for energy. In this process fats, obtained from adipose tissue, or fat cells, are broken down into glycerol and fatty acids, which can be used to generate energy. The primary by-products of metabolism are carbon dioxide and water; carbon dioxide is expelled through the respiratory system.\n\nSome weight loss groups aim to make money, others work as charities. The former include Weight Watchers and Peertrainer. The latter include Overeaters Anonymous, TOPS Club and groups run by local organizations.\n\nThese organizations' customs and practices differ widely. Some groups are modelled on twelve-step programs, while others are quite informal. Some groups advocate certain prepared foods or special menus, while others train dieters to make healthy choices from restaurant menus and while grocery-shopping and cooking.\n\nA 2008 study published in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine showed that dieters who kept a daily food diary (or diet journal), lost twice as much weight as those who did not keep a food log, suggesting that if a person records their eating, they are more aware of what they consume and therefore eat fewer calories.\n\nA 2009 review found limited evidence suggesting that encouraging water consumption and substituting energy-free beverages for energy-containing beverages (i.e., reducing caloric intake) may facilitate weight management. A 2009 article found that drinking 500 ml of water prior to meals for a 12-week period resulted in increased long-term weight reduction. (References given in main article.)\n\nFasting is when there is a long time interval between the meals. In dieting, long term (periodic) fasting is not recommended, instead, having small portions of food after small intervals is encouraged. Lengthy fasting can also be dangerous due to the risk of malnutrition and should be carried out only under medical supervision. During prolonged fasting or very low calorie diets the reduction of blood glucose, the preferred energy source of the brain, causes the body to deplete its glycogen stores. Once glycogen is depleted the body begins to fuel the brain using ketones, while also metabolizing body protein (including but not limited to skeletal muscle) to be used to synthesize sugars for use as energy by the rest of the body. Most experts believe that a prolonged fast can lead to muscle wasting, although some dispute this. The use of short-term fasting, or various forms of intermittent fasting, have been used as a form of dieting to circumvent the issues of long fasting.\n\nThe concept of crash dieting is to drastically reduce calories, using a very-low-calorie diet. Crash dieting can highly be dangerous because it can cause various kind of issues for the human body. Crash dieting can produce weight loss but without professional supervision all along, the extreme reduction in calories and potential unbalance in the diet's composition can lead to detrimental effects, including sudden death.\n\nWhile there are studies that show the health and medical benefits of weight loss, a study in 2005 of around 3000 Finns over an 18-year period showed that weight loss from dieting can result in increased mortality, while those who maintained their weight fared the best. Similar conclusion is drawn by other studies, and although other studies suggest that intentional weight loss has a small benefit for individuals classified as unhealthy, it is associated with slightly increased mortality for healthy individuals and the slightly overweight but not obese.\n\nLow-carbohydrate and low-fat diets perform similarly in the long term as weight maintenance depends on calorie intake, not macronutrient ration.\n\n\"The glycemic index (GI) factor is a ranking of foods based on their overall effect on blood sugar levels. The diet based around this research is called the Low GI diet. Low glycemic index foods, such as lentils, provide a slower, more consistent source of glucose to the bloodstream, thereby stimulating less insulin release than high glycemic index foods, such as white bread.\"\n\nThe glycemic load is \"the mathematical product of the glycemic index and the carbohydrate amount\".\n\nIn a randomized controlled trial that compared four diets that varied in carbohydrate amount and glycemic index found complicated results:\nBULLET::::- Diet 1 and 2 were high carbohydrate (55% of total energy intake)\nBULLET::::- Diet 1 was high-glycemic index\nBULLET::::- Diet 2 was low-glycemic index\nBULLET::::- Diet 3 and 4 were high protein (25% of total energy intake)\nBULLET::::- Diet 3 was high-glycemic index\nBULLET::::- Diet 4 was low-glycemic index\n\nDiets 2 and 3 lost the most weight and fat mass; however, low density lipoprotein fell in Diet 2 and rose in Diet 3. Thus the authors concluded that the high-carbohydrate, low-glycemic index diet was the most favorable.\n\nA meta-analysis by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that low glycemic index or low glycemic load diets led to more weight loss and better lipid profiles. \"However\", the Cochrane Collaboration grouped low glycemic index and low glycemic load diets together and did not try to separate the effects of the load versus the index.\n\nThe Set-Point Theory, first introduced in 1953, postulated that each body has a preprogrammed fixed weight, with regulatory mechanisms to compensate. This theory was quickly adopted and used to explain failures in developing effective and sustained weight loss procedures. A 2019 systematic review of multiple weight change procedures, including alternate day fasting and time-restricted feeding but also exercise and overeating, found systematic \"energetic errors\" for all these procedures. This shows that the body cannot precisely compensate for errors in energy/calorie intake, countering the Set-Point Theory and potentially explaining both weight loss and weight gain such as obesity. This review was conducted on short term studies, therefore such a mechanism cannot be excluded in the long term, as evidence is currently lacking on this timeframe.\n\nThere is a common figure saying that «95% of dieters regain their weight after a few years», but this is not backed by scientific evidence.\n\nThe view of weight loss as a health goal is criticized by some who propose to rather seek health benefits, such as cardiovascular biomarkers improvements, without necessarily seeking weight loss. This hypothesis and movement is commonly named Health at Every Size, and it argues that weight loss and dieting do not reliably produce positive health outcomes, and that the benefits of lifestyle interventions are real but independent of weight loss.\n\nThere is however a considerate amount of evidence that overweight is associated with increased all-causes mortality, and significant weight loss (>10%) improves or reverses metabolic syndromes and other health outcomes.\n\nIt is estimated that about 1 out of 3 Americans is dieting at any given time. 85% of dieters are women. Approximately, sixty billion dollars are spent every year in USA on diet products, including \"diet foods,\" such as light sodas, gym memberships or specific regimes. 80% of dieters start by themselves, whereas 20% see a professional or join a paid program. The typical dieter attempts 4 tries per year.\n\nBULLET::::- Body image\nBULLET::::- Carbon footprint\nBULLET::::- Eating disorder\nBULLET::::- Food faddism\nBULLET::::- High residue diet\nBULLET::::- List of diets\nBULLET::::- National Weight Control Registry\nBULLET::::- Nutrigenomics\nBULLET::::- Nutrition psychology\nBULLET::::- Nutrition scale\nBULLET::::- Nutritional rating systems\nBULLET::::- Online weight loss plans\nBULLET::::- Superfood\nBULLET::::- Table of food nutrients\nBULLET::::- Underweight\nBULLET::::- Dansinger, M. L., Gleason, J. L., Griffith, J. L., \"et al.\", \"One Year Effectiveness of the Atkins, Ornish, Weight Watchers, and Zone Diets in Decreasing Body Weight and Heart Disease Risk\", Presented at the American Heart Association Scientific Sessions, Orlando, Florida, 12 November 2003.\nBULLET::::- Schwartz, Hillel. \"Never Satisfied: A Cultural History of Diets, Fantasies, and Fat\". New York: Free Press/Macmillan, 1986.\n\nBULLET::::- Diet reviews by the Harvard School of Public Health\nBULLET::::- A PBS Frontline interview with Prof. Walter Willett, Chair of Harvard's nutrition department (2004)\nBULLET::::- \"Not All Calories Are Created Equal, Author Says\". Excerpt from \"Good Calories, Bad Calories\" and NPR interview with Gary Taubes and Dr. Ronald Krauss (2 November 2007).\n"}
{"id": "8461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8461", "title": "Diet", "text": "Diet\n\nDiet may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Diet (nutrition), the sum of the food consumed by an organism or group\nBULLET::::- Dieting, the deliberate selection of food to control body weight or nutrient intake\nBULLET::::- Diet food, foods that aid in creating a diet for weight loss\nBULLET::::- Healthy diet, the process of helping to maintain or improve overall health\n\nBULLET::::- Diet (assembly), a formal deliberative assembly\n\nBULLET::::- National Diet, Japan's bicameral legislature, in its current form since 1947, composed of the House of Representatives and the House of Councillors\nBULLET::::- Landtag, a diet of states and provinces in Germany, Austria, South Tyrol in Italy, and the national parliament of Liechtenstein\nBULLET::::- Bundestag (\"Deutscher Bundestag\"), the lower house of Germany's Parliament, established in West Germany in 1949, and all of Germany in 1990\n\nBULLET::::- Diet of Finland, the legislative assembly of the Grand Duchy of Finland from 1809 to 1906\nBULLET::::- Diet of Hungary, the legislative assembly of the Kingdom of Hungary from 15th century to 1946\nBULLET::::- Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire), the imperial assembly of the princes of the Holy Roman Empire until 1806\nBULLET::::- Reichstag\nBULLET::::- Reichstag (German Empire) (\"Reichstag\"), the Diet of the Empire, the legislative assembly of the German Empire, 1871–1917\nBULLET::::- Reichstag (Weimar Republic), (\"Reichstag\"), the Diet of the Weimar Republic, from 1919 to 1933\nBULLET::::- Reichstag (Nazi Germany), (\"Reichstag\"), the Diet of Nazi Germany, from 1933 to 1945, a purely ceremonial \"parliament\" in a totalitarian dictatorship without elections\n\nBULLET::::- \"Diet\", an episode of the Adult Swim animated television series, \"Aqua Teen Hunger Force\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Diet\" (cartoon), a Beetle Bailey animated short\n\nBULLET::::- DIET, an open-source middleware for high-performance computing\nBULLET::::- District Institute of Education and Training, in India\n\nBULLET::::- Diets, a historical name for the Dutch language in general\nBULLET::::- Dietsch (disambiguation), distinguishes the southern dialects in the Middle Dutch language\n"}
{"id": "8463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8463", "title": "Dubnium", "text": "Dubnium\n\nDubnium is a synthetic chemical element with the symbol Db and atomic number 105. Dubnium is highly radioactive: the most stable known isotope, dubnium-268, has a half-life of about 28 hours. This greatly limits the extent of research on dubnium.\n\nDubnium does not occur naturally on Earth and is produced artificially. The Soviet Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) claimed the first discovery of the element in 1968, followed by the American Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in 1970. Both teams proposed their names for the new element and used them without formal approval. The long-standing dispute was resolved in 1993 by an official investigation of the discovery claims by the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party, resulting in credit for the discovery being officially shared between both teams. The element was formally named \"dubnium\" in 1997 after the town of Dubna, the site of the JINR.\n\nTheoretical research establishes dubnium as a member of group 5 in the 6d series of transition metals, placing it under vanadium, niobium, and tantalum. Dubnium should share most properties, such as its valence electron configuration and having a dominant +5 oxidation state, with the other group 5 elements, with a few anomalies due to relativistic effects. A limited investigation of dubnium chemistry has confirmed this. Solution chemistry experiments have revealed that dubnium often behaves more like niobium rather than tantalum, breaking periodic trends.\n\nUranium, element 92, is the heaviest element to occur in significant quantity in nature; heavier elements can only be produced practically by synthesis. The first synthesis of a new element—neptunium, element 93—was achieved in 1940 by a team of researchers in the United States. In the following years, American scientists synthesized the elements up to mendelevium, element 101, which was synthesized in 1955. From element 102, the priority of discoveries was contested between American and Soviet physicists. Their rivalry resulted in a race for new elements and credit for their discoveries, later named the Transfermium Wars.\n\nThe first report of the discovery of element 105 came from the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, Moscow Oblast, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union, in April 1968. The scientists bombarded Am with a beam of Ne ions, and reported 9.4 MeV (with a half-life of 0.1–3 seconds) and 9.7 MeV (\"t\" > 0.05 s) alpha activities followed by alpha activities similar to those of either 103 or 103. Based on prior theoretical predictions, the two activity lines were assigned to 105 and 105, respectively.\n\nAfter observing the alpha decays of element 105, the researchers aimed to observe spontaneous fission (SF) of the element and study the resulting fission fragments. They published a paper in February 1970, reporting multiple examples of two such activities, with half-lives of 14 ms and . They assigned the former activity to Am and ascribed the latter activity to an isotope of element 105. They suggested that it was unlikely that this activity could come from a transfer reaction instead of element 105, because the yield ratio for this reaction was significantly lower than that of the Am-producing transfer reaction, in accordance with theoretical predictions. To establish that this activity was not from a (Ne,\"x\"n) reaction, the researchers bombarded a Am target with O ions; reactions producing 103 and 103 showed very little SF activity (matching the established data), and the reaction producing heavier 103 and 103 produced no SF activity at all, in line with theoretical data. The researchers concluded that the activities observed came from SF of element 105.\n\nIn April 1970, a team at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL), in Berkeley, California, United States, claimed to have synthesized element 105 by bombarding californium-249 with nitrogen-15 ions, with an alpha activity of 9.1 MeV. To ensure this activity was not from a different reaction, the team attempted other reactions: bombarding Cf with N, Pb with N, and Hg with N. They stated no such activity was found in those reactions. The characteristics of the daughter nuclei matched those of 103, implying that the parent nuclei were of 105.\n\nThese results did not confirm the JINR findings regarding the 9.4 MeV or 9.7 MeV alpha decay of 105, leaving only 105 as a possibly produced isotope.\n\nJINR then attempted another experiment to create element 105, published in a report in May 1970. They claimed that they had synthesized more nuclei of element 105 and that the experiment confirmed their previous work. According to the paper, the isotope produced by JINR was probably 105, or possibly 105. This report included an initial chemical examination: the thermal gradient version of the gas-chromatography method was applied to demonstrate that the chloride of what had formed from the SF activity nearly matched that of niobium pentachloride, rather than hafnium tetrachloride. The team identified a 2.2-second SF activity in a volatile chloride portraying eka-tantalum properties, and inferred that the source of the SF activity must have been element 105.\n\nIn June 1970, JINR made improvements on their first experiment, using a purer target and reducing the intensity of transfer reactions by installing a collimator before the catcher. This time, they were able to find 9.1 MeV alpha activities with daughter isotopes identifiable as either 103 or 103, implying that the original isotope was either 105 or 105.\n\nJINR did not propose a name after their first report claiming synthesis of element 105, which would have been the usual practice. This led LBL to believe that JINR did not have enough experimental data to back their claim. After collecting more data, JINR proposed the name \"nielsbohrium\" (Ns) in honor of the Danish nuclear physicist Niels Bohr, a founder of the theories of atomic structure and quantum theory. When LBL first announced their synthesis of element 105, they proposed that the new element be named \"hahnium\" (Ha) after the German chemist Otto Hahn, the \"father of nuclear chemistry\", thus creating an element naming controversy.\n\nIn the early 1970s, both teams reported synthesis of the next element, element 106, but did not suggest names. JINR suggested establishing an international committee to clarify the discovery criteria. This proposal was accepted in 1974 and a neutral joint group formed. Neither team showed interest in resolving the conflict through a third party, so the leading scientists of LBL—Albert Ghiorso and Glenn Seaborg—traveled to Dubna in 1975 and met with the leading scientists of JINR—Georgy Flerov, Yuri Oganessian, and others— to try to resolve the conflict internally and render the neutral joint group unnecessary; after two hours of discussions, this failed. The joint neutral group never assembled to assess the claims and the conflict remained unsolved. In 1979, IUPAC suggested systematic element names to be used as placeholders until permanent names were established; under it, element 105 would be \"unnilpentium\", from the Latin roots \"un-\" and \"nil-\" and the Greek root \"pent-\" (meaning \"one\", \"zero\", and \"five\", respectively, the digits of the atomic number). Both teams ignored it as they did not wish to weaken their outstanding claims.\n\nIn 1981, the Gesellschaft für Schwerionenforschung (GSI; \"Society for Heavy Ion Research\") in Darmstadt, West Germany, claimed synthesis of element 107; their report came out five years after the first report from JINR but with greater precision, making a more solid claim on discovery. GSI acknowledged JINR's efforts by suggesting the name \"nielsbohrium\" for the new element. JINR did not suggest a new name for element 105, stating it was more important to determine its discoverers first.\n\nIn 1985, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) and the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) formed a Joint Working Party (JWP) to assess discoveries and establish final names for the controversial elements. The party held meetings with delegates from the three competing institutes; in 1990, they established criteria on recognition of an element, and in 1991, they finished the work on assessing discoveries and disbanded. These results were published in 1993. According to the report, the first definitely successful experiment was the April 1970 LBL experiment, closely followed by the June 1970 JINR experiment, so credit for the discovery of the element should be shared between the two teams.\n\nLBL said that the input from JINR was overrated in the review. They claimed JINR was only able to unambiguously demonstrate the synthesis of element 105 a year after they did. JINR and GSI endorsed the report.\n\nIn 1994, IUPAC published a recommendation on naming the disputed elements. For element 105, they proposed \"joliotium\" (Jl) after the French physicist Frédéric Joliot-Curie, a contributor to the development of nuclear physics and chemistry; this name was originally proposed by the Soviet team for element 102, which by then had long been called nobelium. This recommendation was criticized by the American scientists for several reasons. Firstly, their suggestions were scrambled: the names \"rutherfordium\" and \"hahnium\", originally suggested by Berkeley for elements 104 and 105, were respectively reassigned to elements 106 and 108. Secondly, elements 104 and 105 were given names favored by JINR, despite earlier recognition of LBL as an equal co-discoverer for both of them. Thirdly and most importantly, IUPAC rejected the name \"seaborgium\" for element 106, having just approved a rule that an element could not be named after a living person, even though the 1993 report had given the LBL team the sole credit for its discovery.\n\nIn 1995, IUPAC abandoned the controversial rule and established a committee of national representatives aimed at finding a compromise. They suggested \"seaborgium\" for element 106 in exchange for the removal of all the other American proposals, except for the established name \"lawrencium\" for element 103. The equally entrenched name \"nobelium\" for element 102 was replaced by \"flerovium\" after Georgy Flerov, following the recognition by the 1993 report that that element had been first synthesized in Dubna. This was rejected by American scientists and the decision was retracted. The name \"flerovium\" was later used for element 114.\n\nIn 1996, IUPAC held another meeting, reconsidered all names in hand, and accepted another set of recommendations; it was approved and published in 1997. Element 105 was named \"dubnium\" (Db), after Dubna in Russia, the location of the JINR; the American suggestions were used for elements 102, 103, 104, and 106. The name \"dubnium\" had been used for element 104 in the previous IUPAC recommendation. The American scientists \"reluctantly\" approved this decision. IUPAC pointed out that the Berkeley laboratory had already been recognized several times, in the naming of berkelium, californium, and americium, and that the acceptance of the names \"rutherfordium\" and \"seaborgium\" for elements 104 and 106 should be offset by recognizing JINR's contributions to the discovery of elements 104, 105, and 106.\n\nDubnium, having an atomic number of 105, is a superheavy element; like all elements with such high atomic numbers, it is very unstable. The longest-lasting known isotope of dubnium, Db, has a half-life of around a day. No stable isotopes have been seen, and a 2012 calculation by JINR suggested that the half-lives of all dubnium isotopes would not significantly exceed a day. Dubnium can only be obtained by artificial production.\n\nThe short half-life of dubnium limits experimentation. This is exacerbated by the fact that the most stable isotopes are the hardest to synthesize. Elements with a lower atomic number have stable isotopes with a lower neutron–proton ratio than those with higher atomic number, meaning that the target and beam nuclei that could be employed to create the superheavy element have fewer neutrons than needed to form these most stable isotopes. (Different techniques based on rapid neutron capture and transfer reactions are being considered as of the 2010s, but those based on the collision of a large and small nucleus still dominate research in the area.)\n\nOnly a few atoms of Db can be produced in each experiment, and thus the measured lifetimes vary significantly during the process. During three experiments, 23 atoms were created in total, with a resulting half-life of . The second most stable isotope, Db, has been produced in even smaller quantities: three atoms in total, with lifetimes of 33.4 h, 1.3 h, and 1.6 h. These two are the heaviest isotopes of dubnium to date, and both were produced as a result of decay of the heavier nuclei Mc and Ts rather than directly, because the experiments that yielded them were originally designed in Dubna for Ca beams. For its mass, Ca has by far the greatest neutron excess of all practically stable nuclei, both quantitative and relative, which correspondingly helps synthesize superheavy nuclei with more neutrons, but this gain is compensated by the decreased likelihood of fusion for high atomic numbers.\n\nAccording to the periodic law, dubnium should belong to group 5, with vanadium, niobium, and tantalum. Several studies have investigated the properties of element 105 and found that they generally agreed with the predictions of the periodic law. Significant deviations may nevertheless occur, due to relativistic effects, which dramatically change physical properties on both atomic and macroscopic scales. These properties have remained challenging to measure for several reasons: the difficulties of production of superheavy atoms, the low rates of production, which only allows for microscopic scales, requirements for a radiochemistry laboratory to test the atoms, short half-lives of those atoms, and the presence of many unwanted activities apart from those of synthesis of superheavy atoms. So far, studies have only been performed on single atoms.\n\nA direct relativistic effect is that as the atomic numbers of elements increase, the innermost electrons begin to revolve faster around the nucleus as a result of an increase of electromagnetic attraction between an electron and a nucleus. Similar effects have been found for the outermost s orbitals (and p ones, though in dubnium they are not occupied): for example, the 7s orbital contracts by 25% in size and is stabilized by 2.6 eV.\n\nA more indirect effect is that the contracted s and p orbitals shield the charge of the nucleus more effectively, leaving less for the outer d and f electrons, which therefore move in larger orbitals. Dubnium is greatly affected by this: unlike the previous group 5 members, its 7s electrons are slightly more difficult to extract than its 6d electrons.\nAnother effect is the spin–orbit interaction, particularly spin–orbit splitting, which splits the 6d subshell—the azimuthal quantum number ℓ of a d shell is 2—into two subshells, with four of the ten orbitals having their ℓ lowered to 3/2 and six raised to 5/2. All ten energy levels are raised; four of them are lower than the other six. (The three 6d electrons normally occupy the lowest energy levels, 6d.)\n\nA singly ionized atom of dubnium (Db) should lose a 6d electron compared to a neutral atom; the doubly (Db) or triply (Db) ionized atoms of dubnium should eliminate 7s electrons, unlike its lighter homologs. Despite the changes, dubnium is still expected to have five valence electrons; 7p energy levels have not been shown to influence dubnium and its properties. As the 6d orbitals of dubnium are more destabilized than the 5d ones of tantalum, and Db is expected to have two 6d, rather than 7s, electrons remaining, the resulting +3 oxidation state is expected to be unstable and even rarer than that of tantalum. The ionization potential of dubnium in its maximum +5 oxidation state should be slightly lower than that of tantalum and the ionic radius of dubnium should increase compared to tantalum; this has a significant effect on dubnium's chemistry.\n\nAtoms of dubnium in the solid state should arrange themselves in a body-centered cubic configuration, like the previous group 5 elements. The predicted density of dubnium is 29 g/cm.\n\nComputational chemistry is simplest in gas-phase chemistry, in which interactions between molecules may be ignored as negligible. Multiple authors have researched dubnium pentachloride; calculations show it to be consistent with the periodic laws by exhibiting the properties of a compound of a group 5 element. For example, the molecular orbital levels indicate that dubnium uses three 6d electron levels as expected. Compared to its tantalum analog, dubnium pentachloride is expected to show increased covalent character: a decrease in the effective charge on an atom and an increase in the overlap population (between orbitals of dubnium and chlorine).\n\nCalculations of solution chemistry indicate that the maximum oxidation state of dubnium, +5, will be more stable than those of niobium and tantalum and the +3 and +4 states will be less stable. The tendency towards hydrolysis of cations with the highest oxidation state should continue to decrease within group 5 but is still expected to be quite rapid. Complexation of dubnium is expected to follow group 5 trends in its richness. Calculations for hydroxo-chlorido- complexes have shown a reversal in the trends of complex formation and extraction of group 5 elements, with dubnium being more prone to do so than tantalum.\n\nExperimental results of the chemistry of dubnium date back to 1974 and 1976. JINR researchers used a thermochromatographic system and concluded that the volatility of dubnium bromide was less than that of niobium bromide and about the same as that of hafnium bromide. It is not certain that the detected fission products confirmed that the parent was indeed element 105. These results may imply that dubnium behaves more like hafnium than niobium.\n\nThe next studies on the chemistry of dubnium were conducted in 1988, in Berkeley. They examined whether the most stable oxidation state of dubnium in aqueous solution was +5. Dubnium was fumed twice and washed with concentrated nitric acid; sorption of dubnium on glass cover slips was then compared with that of the group 5 elements niobium and tantalum and the group 4 elements zirconium and hafnium produced under similar conditions. The group 5 elements are known to sorb on glass surfaces; the group 4 elements do not. Dubnium was confirmed as a group 5 member. Surprisingly, the behavior on extraction from mixed nitric and hydrofluoric acid solution into methyl isobutyl ketone differed between dubnium, tantalum, and niobium. Dubnium did not extract and its behavior resembled niobium more closely than tantalum, indicating that complexing behavior could not be predicted purely from simple extrapolations of trends within a group in the periodic table.\n\nThis prompted further exploration of the chemical behavior of complexes of dubnium. Various labs jointly conducted thousands of repetitive chromatographic experiments between 1988 and 1993. All group 5 elements and protactinium were extracted from concentrated hydrochloric acid; after mixing with lower concentrations of hydrogen chloride, small amounts of hydrogen fluoride were added to start selective re-extraction. Dubnium showed behavior different from that of tantalum but similar to that of niobium and its pseudohomolog protactinium at concentrations of hydrogen chloride below 12 moles per liter. This similarity to the two elements suggested that the formed complex was either or . After extraction experiments of dubnium from hydrogen bromide into diisobutyl carbinol (2,6-dimethylheptan-4-ol), a specific extractant for protactinium, with subsequent elutions with the hydrogen chloride/hydrogen fluoride mix as well as hydrogen chloride, dubnium was found to be less prone to extraction than either protactinium or niobium. This was explained as an increasing tendency to form non‐extractable complexes of multiple negative charges. Further experiments in 1992 confirmed the stability of the +5 state: Db(V) was shown to be extractable from cation‐exchange columns with α‐hydroxyisobutyrate, like the group 5 elements and protactinium; Db(III) and Db(IV) were not. In 1998 and 1999, new predictions suggested that dubnium would extract nearly as well as niobium and better than tantalum from halide solutions, which was later confirmed.\n\nThe first isothermal gas chromatography experiments were performed in 1992 with Db (half-life 35 seconds). The volatilities for niobium and tantalum were similar within error limits, but dubnium appeared to be significantly less volatile. It was postulated that traces of oxygen in the system might have led to formation of , which was predicted to be less volatile than . Later experiments in 1996 showed that group 5 chlorides were more volatile than the corresponding bromides, with the exception of tantalum, presumably due to formation of . Later volatility studies of chlorides of dubnium and niobium as a function of controlled partial pressures of oxygen showed that formation of oxychlorides and general volatility are dependent on concentrations of oxygen. The oxychlorides were shown to be less volatile than the chlorides.\n\nIn 2004–05, researchers from Dubna and Livermore identified a new dubnium isotope, Db, as a fivefold alpha decay product of the newly created element 115. This new isotope proved to be long-lived enough to allow further chemical experimentation, with a half-life of over a day. In the 2004 experiment, a thin layer with dubnium was removed from the surface of the target and dissolved in aqua regia with tracers and a lanthanum carrier, from which various +3, +4, and +5 species were precipitated on adding ammonium hydroxide. The precipitate was washed and dissolved in hydrochloric acid, where it converted to nitrate form and was then dried on a film and counted. Mostly containing a +5 species, which was immediately assigned to dubnium, it also had a +4 species; based on that result, the team decided that additional chemical separation was needed. In 2005, the experiment was repeated, with the final product being hydroxide rather than nitrate precipitate, which was processed further in both Livermore (based on reverse phase chromatography) and Dubna (based on anion exchange chromatography). The +5 species was effectively isolated; dubnium appeared three times in tantalum-only fractions and never in niobium-only fractions. It was noted that these experiments were insufficient to draw conclusions about the general chemical profile of dubnium.\n\nIn 2009, at the JAEA tandem accelerator in Japan, dubnium was processed in nitric and hydrofluoric acid solution, at concentrations where niobium forms and tantalum forms . Dubnium's behavior was close to that of niobium but not tantalum; it was thus deduced that dubnium formed . From the available information, it was concluded that dubnium often behaved like niobium, sometimes like protactinium, but rarely like tantalum.\n"}
{"id": "8464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8464", "title": "Disaccharide", "text": "Disaccharide\n\nA disaccharide (also called a double sugar or bivose) is the sugar formed when two monosaccharides (simple sugars) are joined by glycosidic linkage. Like monosaccharides, disaccharides are soluble in water. Three common examples are sucrose, lactose, and maltose.\n\nDisaccharides are one of the four chemical groupings of carbohydrates (monosaccharides, disaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides). The most common types of disaccharides—sucrose, lactose, and maltose—have 12 carbon atoms, with the general formula CHO. The differences in these disaccharides are due to atomic arrangements within the molecule.\n\nThe joining of simple sugars into a double sugar happens by a condensation reaction, which involves the elimination of a water molecule from the functional groups only. Breaking apart a double sugar into its two simple sugars is accomplished by hydrolysis with the help of a type of enzyme called a disaccharidase. As building the larger sugar ejects a water molecule, breaking it down consumes a water molecule. These reactions are vital in metabolism. Each disaccharide is broken down with the help of a corresponding disaccharidase (sucrase, lactase, and maltase).\n\nThere are two functionally different classes of disaccharides: \nBULLET::::- Reducing disaccharides, in which one monosaccharide, the reducing sugar of the pair, still has a free hemiacetal unit that can perform as a reducing aldehyde group; lactose, maltose and cellobiose are examples of reducing disaccharides, each with one hemiacetal unit, the other occupied by the glycosidic bond, which prevents it from acting as a reducing agent. They can easily be detected by the Woehlk test or Fearon's test on methylamine.\nBULLET::::- Non-reducing disaccharides, in which the component monosaccharides bond through an acetal linkage between their anomeric centers. This results in neither monosaccharide being left with a hemiacetal unit that is free to act as a reducing agent. Sucrose and trehalose are examples of non-reducing disaccharides because their glycosidic bond is between their respective hemiacetal carbon atoms. The reduced chemical reactivity of the non-reducing sugars in comparison to reducing sugars, may be an advantage where stability in storage is important.\n\nThe formation of a disaccharide molecule from two monosaccharide molecules proceeds by displacing a hydroxyl radical from one molecule and a hydrogen nucleus (a proton) from the other, so that the now vacant bonds on the monosaccharides join the two monomers together. The vacant bonds on the hydroxyl radical and the proton unite in their turn, forming a molecule of water, that then goes free. Because of the removal of the water molecule from the product, the term of convenience for such a process is \"dehydration reaction\" (also \"condensation reaction\" or \"dehydration synthesis\"). For example, milk sugar (lactose) is a disaccharide made by condensation of one molecule of each of the monosaccharides glucose and galactose, whereas the disaccharide sucrose in sugar cane and sugar beet, is a condensation product of glucose and fructose. Maltose, another common disaccharide, is condensed from two glucose molecules. \n\nThe dehydration reaction that bonds monosaccharides into disaccharides (and also bonds monosaccharides into more complex polysaccharides) forms what are called glycosidic bonds.\n\nThe glycosidic bond can be formed between any hydroxyl group on the component monosaccharide. So, even if both component sugars are the same (e.g., glucose), different bond combinations (regiochemistry) and stereochemistry (\"alpha-\" or \"beta-\") result in disaccharides that are diastereoisomers with different chemical and physical properties.\n\nDepending on the monosaccharide constituents, disaccharides are sometimes crystalline, sometimes water-soluble, and sometimes sweet-tasting and sticky-feeling.\n\nDigestion involves breakdown to the monosaccharides.\n\n! Disaccharide !! Unit 1 !! Unit 2 !! Bond\n\nMaltose, cellobiose, and chitobiose are hydrolysis products of the polysaccharides starch, cellulose, and chitin, respectively.\n\nLess common disaccharides include:\n\n! Disaccharide !! Units !! Bond\n"}
{"id": "8465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8465", "title": "Dactylic hexameter", "text": "Dactylic hexameter\n\nDactylic hexameter (also known as \"heroic hexameter\" and \"the meter of epic\") is a form of meter or rhythmic scheme in poetry. It is traditionally associated with the quantitative meter of classical epic poetry in both Greek and Latin and was consequently considered to be \"the\" grand style of Western classical poetry. Some premier examples of its use are Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", Virgil's \"Aeneid\", and Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". Hexameters also form part of elegiac poetry in both languages, alternating with dactylic pentameters.\n\nA dactylic hexameter has six (in Greek ἕξ, \"hex\") feet. In strict dactylic hexameter, each foot would be a dactyl (a long and two short syllables), but classical meter allows for the substitution of a spondee (two long syllables) in place of a dactyl in most positions. Specifically, the first four feet can either be dactyls or spondees more or less freely. The fifth foot is usually a dactyl (around 95% of the time in Homer).\n\nThe sixth foot can be filled by either a trochee (a long then short syllable) or a spondee. Thus the dactylic line most normally is scanned as follows:\n\nHexameters also have a primary caesura—a break between words, sometimes (but not always) coinciding with a break in sense—at one of several normal positions: After the first syllable of the second foot; after the first syllable in the third foot (the \"masculine\" caesura); after the second syllable in the third foot if the third foot is a dactyl (the \"feminine\" caesura); after the first syllable of the fourth foot (the hephthemimeral caesura).\n\nHexameters are frequently enjambed—the meaning runs over from one line to the next, without terminal punctuation—which helps to create the long, flowing narrative of epic. They are generally considered the most grandiose and formal meter.\n\nAn English-language example of the dactylic hexameter, in quantitative meter:\n\nThe preceding line follows the rules of Greek and Latin prosody. Syllables containing long vowels, diphthongs and short vowels followed by two or more consonants count as long; all other syllables count as short. Such values may not correspond with the rhythms of ordinary spoken English.\n\nThe hexameter was first used by early Greek poets of the oral tradition, and the most complete extant examples of their works are the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\", which influenced the authors of all later classical epics that survive today. Early epic poetry was also accompanied by music, and pitch changes associated with the accented Greek must have highlighted the melody, though the exact mechanism is still a topic of discussion.\n\nThe Homeric poems arrange words so as to create an interplay between the metrical ictus—the first syllable of each foot—and the natural, spoken accent of words. If the ictus and accent coincide too frequently the hexameter becomes \"sing-songy\". Thus in general, word breaks occur in the middle of metrical feet, while ictus and accent coincide more often near the end of the line.\nThe first line of Homer’s \"Iliad\"—\"Sing, goddess, the anger of Peleus’ son Achilles\"—provides an example:\n\nDividing the line into metrical units:\n\nNote how the word endings do not coincide with the end of a metrical foot; for the early part of the line this forces the accent of each word to lie in the middle of a foot, playing against the ictus.\n\nThis line also includes a masculine caesura after , a break that separates the line into two parts. Homer employs a feminine caesura more commonly than later writers: an example occurs in \"Iliad\" I.5 \"...and every bird; thus the plan of Zeus came to fulfillment\":\n\nHomer’s hexameters contain a higher proportion of dactyls than later hexameter poetry. They are also characterised by a laxer following of verse principles than later epicists almost invariably adhered to. For example, Homer allows spondaic fifth feet (albeit not often), whereas many later authors never do. \n\nHomer also altered the forms of words to allow them to fit the hexameter, typically by using a dialectal form: \"ptolis\" is an epic form used instead of the Attic \"polis\" as necessary for the meter. Proper names sometimes take forms to fit the meter, for example \"Pouludamas\" instead of the metrically unviable \"Poludamas\".\nNote also that some lines require a knowledge of the digamma for their scansion, e.g. \"Iliad\" I.108 \"you have not yet spoken a good word nor brought one to pass\":\n\nHere the word was originally in Ionian; the digamma, later lost, lengthened the last syllable of the preceding and removed the apparent defect in the meter. A digamma also saved the hiatus in the third foot. This example demonstrates the oral tradition of the Homeric epics that flourished before they were written down sometime in the 7th century BC.\n\nIn spite of the occasional exceptions in early epic, most of the later rules of hexameter composition have their origins in the methods and practices of Homer.\n\nThe hexameter came into Latin as an adaptation from Greek long after the practice of singing the epics had faded. Consequentially, the properties of the meter were learned as specific \"rules\" rather than as a natural result of musical expression. Also, because the Latin language generally has a higher proportion of long syllables than Greek, it is by nature more spondaic. Thus the Latin hexameter took on characteristics of its own.\n\nThe earliest example of hexameter in Latin poetry is the \"Annales\" of Ennius, which established it as the standard for later Latin epics. Later Republican writers, such as Lucretius, Catullus and even Cicero, wrote hexameter compositions, and it was at this time that many of the principles of Latin hexameter were firmly established, and followed by later writers such as Virgil, Ovid, Lucan, and Juvenal. Virgil's opening line for the \"Aeneid\" is a classic example::\n\nAs in Greek, lines were arranged so that the metrically long syllables—those occurring at the beginning of a foot—often avoided the natural stress of a word. In the earlier feet of a line, meter and stress were expected to clash, while in the later feet they were expected to resolve and coincide—an effect that gives each line a natural \"dum-ditty-dum-dum\" (\"shave and a haircut\") rhythm to close. Such an arrangement is a balance between an exaggerated emphasis on the metre—which would cause the verse to be sing-songy—and the need to provide some repeated rhythmic guide for skilled recitation.\n\nIn the following example of Ennius's early Latin hexameter composition, metrical weight (') falls on the first and last syllables of '; the ictus is therefore opposed to the natural stress on the second syllable when the word is pronounced. Similarly, the second syllable of the words ' and ' carry the metrical ictus even though the first is naturally stressed in typical pronunciation. In the closing feet of the line, the natural stress that falls on the third syllable of ' and the second syllable of ' coincide with the metrical ictus and produce the characteristic \"shave and a haircut\" ending:\n\nLike their Greek predecessors, classical Latin poets avoided a large number of word breaks at the ends of foot divisions except between the fourth and fifth, where it was encouraged. In order to preserve the rhythmic close, Latin poets avoided the placement of a single syllable or four-syllable word at the end of a line. The caesura is also handled far more strictly, with Homer's feminine caesura becoming exceedingly rare, and the second-foot caesura always paired with one in the fourth.\n\nOne example of the evolution of the Latin verse form can be seen in a comparative analysis of the use of spondees in Ennius' time vs. the Augustan age. The repeated use of the heavily spondaic line came to be frowned upon, as well as the use of a high proportion of spondees in both of the first two feet. The following lines of Ennius would not have been felt admissible by later authors since they both contain repeated spondees at the beginning of consecutive lines:\n\nHowever, it is from Virgil that the following famous, heavily spondaic line comes:\n\nBy the age of Augustus, poets like Virgil closely followed the rules of the meter and approached it in a highly rhetorical way, looking for effects that can be exploited in skilled recitation. For example, the following line from the \"Aeneid\" (VIII.596) describes the movement of rushing horses and how \"a hoof shakes the crumbling field with a galloping sound\":\n\nThis line is made up of five dactyls and a closing spondee, an unusual rhythmic arrangement that imitates the described action. A similar effect is found in VIII.452, where Virgil describes how the blacksmith sons of Vulcan \"lift their arms with great strength one to another\" in forging Aeneas' shield:\n\nThe line consists of all spondees except for the usual dactyl in the fifth foot, and is meant to mimic the pounding sound of the work. A third example that mixes the two effects comes from I.42, where Juno pouts that Athena was allowed to use Jove's thunderbolts to destroy Ajax (\"she hurled Jove's quick fire from the clouds\"):\n\nThis line is nearly all dactyls except for the spondee at \"-lata e\". This change in rhythm paired with the harsh elision is intended to emphasize the crash of Athena's thunderbolt.\n\nVirgil will occasionally deviate from the strict rules of the meter to produce a special effect. One example from I.105 describing a ship at sea during a storm has Virgil violating metrical standards to place a single-syllable word at the end of the line:\n\nThe boat \"gives its side to the waves; there comes next in a heap a steep mountain of water.\" By placing the monosyllable \"mons\" at the end of the line, Virgil interrupts the usual \"shave and a haircut\" pattern to produce a jarring rhythm, an effect that echoes the crash of a large wave against the side of a ship. The Roman poet Horace uses a similar trick to highlight the comedic irony that \"Mountains will be in labor, and bring forth a ridiculous mouse\" in this famous line from his \"Ars Poetica\" (line 139):\n\nAnother amusing example that comments on the importance of these verse rules comes later in the same poem (line 263):\n\nThis line, which lacks a proper caesura, is translated \"Not every critic sees an inharmonious verse.\"\n\nThe verse innovations of the Augustan writers were carefully imitated by their successors in the Silver Age of Latin literature. The verse form itself then was little changed, as the quality of a poet's hexameter was judged against the standard set by Virgil and the other Augustan poets, a respect for literary precedent encompassed by the Latin word '. Deviations were generally regarded as idiosyncrasies or hallmarks of personal style, and were not imitated by later poets. Juvenal, for example, was fond of occasionally creating verses that placed a sense break between the fourth and fifth foot (instead of in the usual caesura positions), but this technique—known as the bucolic diaeresis—did not catch on with other poets.\n\nIn the late empire, writers experimented again by adding unusual restrictions to the standard hexameter. The rhopalic verse of Ausonius is a good example; besides following the standard hexameter pattern, each word in the line is one syllable longer than the previous, e.g.:\n\nAlso notable is the tendency among late grammarians to thoroughly dissect the hexameters of Virgil and earlier poets. A treatise on poetry by Diomedes Grammaticus is a good example, as this work (among other things) categorizes dactylic hexameter verses in ways that were later interpreted under the golden line rubric. Independently, these two trends show the form becoming highly artificial—more like a puzzle to solve than a medium for personal poetic expression.\n\nBy the Middle Ages, some writers adopted more relaxed versions of the meter. Bernard of Cluny, for example, employs it in his \"De Contemptu Mundi\", but ignores classical conventions in favor of accentual effects and predictable rhyme both within and between verses, e.g.:\n\nNot all medieval writers are so at odds with the Virgilian standard, and with the rediscovery of classical literature, later Medieval and Renaissance writers are far more orthodox, but by then the form had become an academic exercise. Petrarch, for example, devoted much time to his \"Africa\", a dactylic hexameter epic on Scipio Africanus, but this work was unappreciated in his time and remains little read today. In contrast, Dante decided to write his epic, the \"Divine Comedy\" in Italian—a choice that defied the traditional epic choice of Latin dactylic hexameters—and produced a masterpiece beloved both then and now.\n\nWith the New Latin period, the language itself came to be regarded as a medium only for \"serious\" and learned expression, a view that left little room for Latin poetry. The emergence of Recent Latin in the 20th century restored classical orthodoxy among Latinists and sparked a general (if still academic) interest in the beauty of Latin poetry. Today, the modern Latin poets who use the dactylic hexameter are generally as faithful to Virgil as Rome's Silver Age poets.\n\nMany poets have attempted to write dactylic hexameters in English, though few works composed in the meter have stood the test of time. Most such works are accentual rather than quantitative. Perhaps the most famous is Longfellow's \"Evangeline\", whose first line is as follows:\n\nPoets who have written quantitative hexameters in English include Robert Bridges.\n\nDactylic hexameter has proved more successful in German than in most modern languages. Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock's epic \"Der Messias\" popularized accentual dactylic hexameter in German. Subsequent German poets to employ the form include Goethe (notably in his \"Reineke Fuchs\") and Schiller.\n\"The Seasons\" (\"Metai\") by Kristijonas Donelaitis is a famous Lithuanian poem in quantitative dactylic hexameters. Because of the nature of Lithuanian, more than half of the lines of the poem are entirely spondaic save for the mandatory dactyl in the fifth foot.\nJean-Antoine de Baïf elaborated a system which used original graphemes for regulating French versification by quantity on the Greco-Roman model, a system which came to be known as \"vers mesurés\", or \"vers mesurés à l'antique\", which the French language of the Renaissance permitted. In works like his \"Étrénes de poézie Franzoęze an vęrs mezurés\" (1574) or \"Chansonnettes\" he used dactylic hexameter, Sapphic stanzas, etc., in quantitative meters.\n\nBULLET::::- Introduction to dactylic hexameter for Latin verse.\nBULLET::::- Reading dactylic hexameter, specifically Homer.\nBULLET::::- Recitation of Homer Iliad 23.62-107 (in Greek), by Stanley Lombardo.\nBULLET::::- Oral reading of Virgil's \"Aeneid\", by Robert Sonkowsky, University of Minnesota.\nBULLET::::- Greek hexameter analysis online tool, University of Vilnius.\nBULLET::::- Audio/Visual Tutorials for Vergil's Hexameter, by Dale Grote, UNC Charlotte.\nBULLET::::- Hexameter.co, practice scanning lines of dactylic hexameter from a variety of Latin authors\nBULLET::::- Rodney Merrill reading his translation of Homer's Iliad, in English dactylic hexameter verse\n"}
{"id": "8466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8466", "title": "Dorado", "text": "Dorado\n\nDorado () is a constellation in the southern sky. It was named in the late 16th century and is now one of the 88 modern constellations. Its name refers to the dolphinfish (\"Coryphaena hippurus\"), which is known as \"dorado\" in Portuguese, although it has also been depicted as a swordfish. Dorado contains most of the Large Magellanic Cloud, the remainder being in the constellation Mensa. The South Ecliptic pole also lies within this constellation.\n\nEven though the name Dorado is not Latin but Portuguese, astronomers give it the Latin genitive form \"Doradus\" when naming its stars; it is treated (like the adjacent asterism Argo Navis) as a feminine proper name of Greek origin ending in -ō (like \"Io\" or \"Callisto\" or \"Argo\"), which have a genitive ending \"-ūs\".\n\nDorado was one of twelve constellations named by Petrus Plancius from the observations of Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman. It appeared:\nBULLET::::- On Plancius's maps of 1592 and 1594, figured as an elderly bearded man named Polophylax (Greek for \"guardian of the pole\").\nBULLET::::- On a celestial globe published in 1597 (or 1598) in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius.\nBULLET::::- First depiction in a celestial atlas, in Johann Bayer's \"Uranometria\" of 1603, where it was named Dorado.\nBULLET::::- In Johannes Kepler's edition of Tycho Brahe's star list in the \"Rudolphine Tables\" of 1627: first time that it was named Xiphias, the swordfish.\nDorado has been represented historically as a dolphinfish and a swordfish; the latter depiction is inaccurate. It has also been represented as a goldfish. The constellation was also known in the 17th and 18th century as Xiphias. The name \"Dorado\" ultimately become dominant and was adopted by the IAU.\n\nAlpha Doradus is a blue-white star of magnitude 3.3, 176 light-years from Earth. It is the brightest star in Dorado. Beta Doradus is a notably bright Cepheid variable star. It is a yellow-tinged supergiant star that has a minimum magnitude of 4.1 and a maximum magnitude of 3.5. One thousand and forty light-years from Earth, Beta Doradus has a period of 9 days and 20 hours.\n\nR Doradus is one of the many variable stars in Dorado. S Dor, 9.721 hypergiant in the Large Magellanic Cloud, is the prototype of S Doradus variable stars. The variable star R Doradus 5.73 has the largest known apparent size of any star other than the Sun. Gamma Doradus is the prototype of the Gamma Doradus variable stars.\n\nSupernova 1987A was the closest supernova to occur since the invention of the telescope. SNR 0509-67.5 is the remnant of an unusually energetic Type 1a supernova from about 400 years ago.\n\nHE 0437-5439 is a hypervelocity star escaping from the Milky Way/Magellanic Cloud system.\n\nDorado is also the location of the South Ecliptic pole, which lies near the fish's head. The pole was called \"Polus Doradinalis\" by Willem Jansson Blaeu.\n\nBecause Dorado contains part of the Large Magellanic Cloud, it is rich in deep sky objects. The Large Magellanic Cloud, 25,000 light-years in diameter, is a satellite galaxy of the Milky Way Galaxy, located at a distance of 179,000 light-years. It has been deformed by its gravitational interactions with the larger Milky Way. In 1987, it became host to SN 1987A, the first supernova of 1987 and the closest since 1604. This 25,000-light-year-wide galaxy contains over 10,000 million stars. All coordinates given are for Epoch J2000.0.\n\nBULLET::::- N 180B is an emission nebula located in the Large Magellanic Cloud.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1566 (RA 04h 20m 00s Dec -56° 56.3′) is a face-on spiral galaxy. It gives its name to the NGC 1566 Group of galaxies.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1755 (RA 04h 55m 13s Dec -68° 12.2′) is a globular cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1763 (RA 04h 56m 49s Dec -68° 24.5′) is a bright nebula associated with three type B stars.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1820 (RA 05h 04m 02s Dec -67° 15.9′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1850 (RA 05h 08m 44s Dec -68° 45.7′) is a globular cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1854 (RA 05h 09m 19s Dec -68° 50.8′) is a globular cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1869 (RA 05h 13m 56s Dec -67° 22.8′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1901 (RA 05h 18m 15s Dec -68° 26.2′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1910 (RA 05h 18m 43s Dec -69° 13.9′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1936 (RA 05h 22m 14s Dec -67° 58.7′) is a bright nebula and is one of four NGC objects in close proximity, the others being NGC 1929, NGC 1934 and NGC 1935.\nBULLET::::- NGC 1978 (RA 05h 28m 36s Dec -66° 14.0′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 2002 (RA 05h 30m 17s Dec -66° 53.1′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 2027 (RA 05h 35m 00s Dec -66° 55.0′) is an open cluster.\nBULLET::::- NGC 2032 (RA 05h 35m 21s Dec -67° 34.1′; also known as \"Seagull Nebula\") is a nebula complex that contains four NGC designations: NGC 2029, NGC 2032, NGC 2035 and NGC 2040.\n\nBULLET::::- NGC 2074 (RA 05h 39m 03.0s, Dec −69° 29′ 54″) is an emission nebula.\nBULLET::::- NGC 2080, also called the \"Ghost Head Nebula\", is an emission nebula that is 50 light-years wide in the Large Magellanic Cloud. It is named for the two distinct white patches that it possesses, which are regions of recent star formation. The western portion is colored green from doubly ionized oxygen, the southern portion is red from hydrogen alpha emissions, and the center region is colored yellow from both oxygen and hydrogen emissions. The western white patch, A1, has one massive, recently formed star inside. The eastern patch, A2, has several stars hidden in its dust.\nBULLET::::- Tarantula Nebula is in the Large Magellanic Cloud, named for its spiderlike shape. It is also designated 30 Doradus, as it is visible to the naked eye as a slightly out-of-focus star. Larger than any nebula in the Milky Way at 1000 light-years in diameter, it is also brighter, because it is illuminated by the open star cluster NGC 2070, which has at its center the star cluster R136. The illuminating stars are supergiants.\n\nBULLET::::- NGC 2164 (RA 05h 58m 53s Dec -68° 30.9′) is a globular cluster.\nBULLET::::- N44 is a superbubble in the Large Magellanic Cloud that is 1,000 light-years wide. Its overall structure is shaped by the 40 hot stars towards its center. Within the superbubble of N44 is a smaller bubble catalogued as N44F. It is approximately 35 light-years in diameter and is shaped by an incredibly hot star at its center, which has a stellar wind speed of 7 million kilometers per hour. N44F also features dust columns with probable star formation hidden inside.\n\nIn Chinese astronomy, the stars of Dorado are in two of Xu Guangqi's Southern Asterisms (近南極星區, \"Jìnnánjíxīngōu\"): the White Patches Attached (夾白, \"Jiābái\") and the Goldfish (金魚, \"Jīnyú\").\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dorado \"(SS-248) and \"Dorado\" (SS-526), two United States Navy submarines, were named after the same sea creature as the constellation.\n\nBULLET::::- Dorado (Chinese astronomy)\n\nBULLET::::- Notes\nBULLET::::- The above deep sky objects appear in \"Norton's Star Atlas\", 1973 edition.\nBULLET::::- Co-ordinates are obtained from Uranometria Chart Index and Skyview.\nBULLET::::- Images of the deep sky objects described herein may be viewed at Skyview.\n\nBULLET::::- Citations\n\nBULLET::::- The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Dorado\nBULLET::::- Peoria Astronomical Society - Dorado\nBULLET::::- Star Tales – Dorado\n"}
{"id": "8467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8467", "title": "Draco (lawgiver)", "text": "Draco (lawgiver)\n\nDraco (; , \"Drakōn\"; fl. c. 7th century BC), also called Drako or Drakon, was the first recorded legislator of Athens in Ancient Greece. He replaced the prevailing system of oral law and blood feud by a written code to be enforced only by a court of law. Draco was the first democratic legislator, requested by the Athenian citizens to be a lawgiver for the city-state, but the citizens were fully unaware that Draco would establish laws characterized by their harshness. Since the 19th century, the adjective \"draconian\" (Greek: \"δρακόντειος\" \"drakónteios\") refers to similarly unforgiving rules or laws, in Greek, English and other European languages.\n\nDuring the 39th Olympiad, in 622 or 621 BC, Draco established the legal code with which he is identified.\n\nLittle is known about his life. He may have belonged to the Greek nobility of Attica, with which the 10th-century Suda text records him as contemporaneous, prior to the period of the Seven Sages of Greece. It also relates a folkloric story of his death in the Aeginetan theatre. In a traditional ancient Greek show of approval, his supporters \"threw so many hats and shirts and cloaks on his head that he suffocated, and was buried in that same theatre\". The truth about his death is still unclear, but it is known that Draco was driven out of Athens by the Athenians to the neighbouring island of Aegina, where he spent the remainder of his life.\n\nThe laws ( - \"thesmoi\") that he laid were the first written constitution of Athens. So that no one would be unaware of them, they were posted on wooden tablets ( - \"axones\"), where they were preserved for almost two centuries on steles of the shape of three-sided pyramids ( - \"kyrbeis\"). The tablets were called \"axones\", perhaps because they could be pivoted along the pyramid's axis to read any side.\n\nThe constitution featured several major innovations:\nBULLET::::- Instead of oral laws known to a special class, arbitrarily applied and interpreted, all laws were written, thus being made known to all literate citizens (who could appeal to the Areopagus for injustices): \"the constitution formed under Draco, when the first code of laws was drawn up\". (Aristotle: Athenian Constitution, Part 5, Section 41)\nBULLET::::- The laws distinguish between murder and involuntary homicide.\n\nThe laws were particularly harsh. For example, any debtor whose status was lower than that of his creditor was forced into slavery. The punishment was more lenient for those owing a debt to a member of a lower class. The death penalty was the punishment for even minor offences, such as stealing a cabbage. Concerning the liberal use of the death penalty in the Draconic code, Plutarch states: \"It is said that Drakon himself, when asked why he had fixed the punishment of death for most offences, answered that he considered these lesser crimes to deserve it, and he had no greater punishment for more important ones\".\n\nAll his laws were repealed by Solon in the early 6th century BC, with the exception of the homicide law.\n\nAfter much debate, the Athenians decided to revise the laws, including the homicide law, in 409 BC. The homicide law is a highly fragmented inscription but states that it is up to the victim's relatives to prosecute a killer. According to the preserved part of the inscription, unintentional homicides received a sentence of exile.\n\nIt is not clear whether Draco's law specified the punishment for intentional homicide. In 409 BC, intentional homicide was punished by death, but Draco's law begins, 'καὶ ἐὰμ μὲ ‘κ [π]ρονοί[α]ς [κ]τ[ένει τίς τινα, φεύγ]ε[ν]', which is ambiguous and difficult to translate. One possible translation offers, \"Even if a man not intentionally kills another, he is exiled\".\n\nDraco introduced the lot-chosen Council of Four Hundred, distinct from the Areopagus, which evolved in later constitutions to play a large role in Athenian democracy. Aristotle notes that Draco, while having the laws written, merely legislated for an existing unwritten Athenian constitution such as setting exact qualifications for eligibility for office.\n\nDraco extended the franchise to all free men who could furnish themselves with a set of military equipment. They elected the Council of Four Hundred from among their number; nine archons and the treasurers were drawn from persons possessing an unencumbered property of not less than ten \"minas\", the generals (\"strategoi\") and commanders of cavalry (\"hipparchoi\") from those who could show an unencumbered property of not less than a hundred \"minas\" and had children born in lawful wedlock over ten years of age. Thus, in the event of their death, their estate could pass to a competent heir. These officers were required to hold to account the \"prytanes\" (councillors), \"strategoi\" (generals) and \"hipparchoi\" (cavalry officers) of the preceding year until their accounts had been audited. \"The Council of Areopagus was guardian of the laws, and kept watch over the magistrates to see that they executed their offices in accordance with the laws. Any person who felt himself wronged might lay an information before the Council of Areopagus, on declaring what law was broken by the wrong done to him. But, as has been said before, loans were secured upon the persons of the debtors, and the land was in the hands of a few.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Ancient Greek law\nBULLET::::- Hammurabi, a Babylonian who wrote some of the earliest codes of law\nBULLET::::- Cruel and unusual punishment\nBULLET::::- Retributive justice\nBULLET::::- List of Ancient Greeks\nBULLET::::- List of eponymous laws (those named after their inventor)\n\nBULLET::::- Roisman, Joseph, and translated by J.C. Yardley, \"Ancient Greece from Homer to Alexander\" (Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2011)\n\n\nBULLET::::- Decree to republish Draco’s law on homicide—Translation of original inscription\n"}
{"id": "8468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8468", "title": "Determinant", "text": "Determinant\n\nIn linear algebra, the determinant is a scalar value that can be computed from the elements of a square matrix and encodes certain properties of the linear transformation described by the matrix. The determinant of a matrix is denoted , , or . Geometrically, it can be viewed as the volume scaling factor of the linear transformation described by the matrix. This is also the signed volume of the \"n\"-dimensional parallelepiped spanned by the column or row vectors of the matrix. The determinant is positive or negative according to whether the linear mapping preserves or reverses the orientation of \"n\"-space.\n\nIn the case of a matrix the determinant may be defined as\n\nSimilarly, for a 3 × 3 matrix \"A\", its determinant is\n\nEach determinant of a matrix in this equation is called a minor of the matrix . This procedure can be extended to give a recursive definition for the determinant of an matrix, the \"minor expansion formula\".\n\nDeterminants occur throughout mathematics. For example, a matrix is often used to represent the coefficients in a system of linear equations, and the determinant can be used to solve those equations, although other methods of solution are much more computationally efficient. In linear algebra, a matrix (with entries in a field) is singular (not invertible) if and only if its determinant is zero. This leads to the use of determinants in defining the characteristic polynomial of a matrix, whose roots are the eigenvalues. In analytic geometry, determinants express the signed \"n\"-dimensional volumes of \"n\"-dimensional parallelepipeds. This leads to the use of determinants in calculus, the Jacobian determinant in the change of variables rule for integrals of functions of several variables. Determinants appear frequently in algebraic identities such as the Vandermonde identity.\n\nDeterminants possess many algebraic properties, including that the determinant of a product of matrices is equal to the product of determinants. Special types of matrices have special determinants; for example, the determinant of an orthogonal matrix is always plus or minus one, and the determinant of a complex Hermitian matrix is always real.\n\nIf an real matrix \"A\" is written in terms of its column vectors formula_3 then \n\nThis means that formula_5 maps the unit \"n\"-cube to the \"n\"-dimensional parallelotope defined by the vectors formula_6 the region formula_7\n\nThe determinant gives the signed \"n\"-dimensional volume of this parallelotope, formula_8 and hence describes more generally the \"n\"-dimensional volume scaling factor of the linear transformation produced by \"A\". (The sign shows whether the transformation preserves or reverses orientation.) In particular, if the determinant is zero, then this parallelotope has volume zero and is not fully \"n\"-dimensional, which indicates that the dimension of the image of \"A\" is less than \"n\". This means that \"A\" produces a linear transformation which is neither onto nor one-to-one, and so is not invertible.\n\nThere are various equivalent ways to define the determinant of a square matrix \"A\", i.e. one with the same number of rows and columns. Perhaps the simplest way to express the determinant is by considering the elements in the top row and the respective minors; starting at the left, multiply the element by the minor, then subtract the product of the next element and its minor, and alternate adding and subtracting such products until all elements in the top row have been exhausted. For example, here is the result for a 4 × 4 matrix:\nAnother way to define the determinant is expressed in terms of the columns of the matrix. If we write an matrix \"A\" in terms of its column vectors\n\nwhere the formula_11 are vectors of size \"n\", then the determinant of \"A\" is defined so that\n\nwhere \"b\" and \"c\" are scalars, \"v\" is any vector of size \"n\" and \"I\" is the identity matrix of size \"n\". These equations say that the determinant is a linear function of each column, that interchanging adjacent columns reverses the sign of the determinant, and that the determinant of the identity matrix is 1. These properties mean that the determinant is an alternating multilinear function of the columns that maps the identity matrix to the underlying unit scalar. These suffice to uniquely calculate the determinant of any square matrix. Provided the underlying scalars form a field (more generally, a commutative ring with unity), the definition below shows that such a function exists, and it can be shown to be unique.\n\nEquivalently, the determinant can be expressed as a sum of products of entries of the matrix where each product has \"n\" terms and the coefficient of each product is −1 or 1 or 0 according to a given rule: it is a polynomial expression of the matrix entries. This expression grows rapidly with the size of the matrix (an matrix contributes \"n\"! terms), so it will first be given explicitly for the case of matrices and matrices, followed by the rule for arbitrary size matrices, which subsumes these two cases.\n\nAssume \"A\" is a square matrix with \"n\" rows and \"n\" columns, so that it can be written as\n\nThe entries can be numbers or expressions (as happens when the determinant is used to define a characteristic polynomial); the definition of the determinant depends only on the fact that they can be added and multiplied together in a commutative manner.\n\nThe determinant of \"A\" is denoted by det(\"A\"), or it can be denoted directly in terms of the matrix entries by writing enclosing bars instead of brackets:\n\nThe Leibniz formula for the determinant of a matrix is\n\nIf the matrix entries are real numbers, the matrix \"A\" can be used to represent two linear maps: one that maps the standard basis vectors to the rows of \"A\", and one that maps them to the columns of \"A\". In either case, the images of the basis vectors form a parallelogram that represents the image of the unit square under the mapping. The parallelogram defined by the rows of the above matrix is the one with vertices at , , , and , as shown in the accompanying diagram.\n\nThe absolute value of is the area of the parallelogram, and thus represents the scale factor by which areas are transformed by \"A\". (The parallelogram formed by the columns of \"A\" is in general a different parallelogram, but since the determinant is symmetric with respect to rows and columns, the area will be the same.)\n\nThe absolute value of the determinant together with the sign becomes the \"oriented area\" of the parallelogram. The oriented area is the same as the usual area, except that it is negative when the angle from the first to the second vector defining the parallelogram turns in a clockwise direction (which is opposite to the direction one would get for the identity matrix).\n\nTo show that is the signed area, one may consider a matrix containing two vectors and representing the parallelogram's sides. The signed area can be expressed as for the angle \"θ\" between the vectors, which is simply base times height, the length of one vector times the perpendicular component of the other. Due to the sine this already is the signed area, yet it may be expressed more conveniently using the cosine of the complementary angle to a perpendicular vector, e.g. , so that , which can be determined by the pattern of the scalar product to be equal to :\n\nThus the determinant gives the scaling factor and the orientation induced by the mapping represented by \"A\". When the determinant is equal to one, the linear mapping defined by the matrix is equi-areal and orientation-preserving.\n\nThe object known as the \"bivector\" is related to these ideas. In 2D, it can be interpreted as an \"oriented plane segment\" formed by imagining two vectors each with origin , and coordinates and . The bivector magnitude (denoted by ) is the \"signed area\", which is also the determinant .\n\nThe Laplace formula for the determinant of a matrix is\n\nthis can be expanded out to give\n\nwhich is the Leibniz formula for the determinant of a matrix.\n\nThe rule of Sarrus is a mnemonic for the matrix determinant: the sum of the products of three diagonal north-west to south-east lines of matrix elements, minus the sum of the products of three diagonal south-west to north-east lines of elements, when the copies of the first two columns of the matrix are written beside it as in the illustration. This scheme for calculating the determinant of a matrix does not carry over into higher dimensions.\n\nThe determinant of a matrix of arbitrary size can be defined by the Leibniz formula or the Laplace formula.\n\nThe Leibniz formula for the determinant of an matrix \"A\" is\n\nHere the sum is computed over all permutations σ of the set A permutation is a function that reorders this set of integers. The value in the \"i\" position after the reordering σ is denoted by σ. For example, for , the original sequence 1, 2, 3 might be reordered to , with , , and . The set of all such permutations (also known as the symmetric group on \"n\" elements) is denoted by S. For each permutation σ, sgn(σ) denotes the signature of σ, a value that is +1 whenever the reordering given by σ can be achieved by successively interchanging two entries an even number of times, and −1 whenever it can be achieved by an odd number of such interchanges.\n\nIn any of the formula_20 summands, the term\n\nis notation for the product of the entries at positions , where \"i\" ranges from 1 to \"n\":\n\nFor example, the determinant of a matrix \"A\" () is\n\nIt is sometimes useful to extend the Leibniz formula to a summation in which not only permutations, but all sequences of \"n\" indices in the range occur, ensuring that the contribution of a sequence will be zero unless it denotes a permutation. Thus the totally antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol formula_24 extends the signature of a permutation, by setting formula_25 for any permutation σ of \"n\", and formula_26 when no permutation σ exists such that formula_27 for formula_28 (or equivalently, whenever some pair of indices are equal). The determinant for an matrix can then be expressed using an \"n\"-fold summation as\n\nor using two epsilon symbols as\n\nwhere now each \"i\" and each \"j\" should be summed over .\n\nHowever, through the use of tensor notation and the suppression of the summation symbol (Einstein's summation convention) we can obtain a much more compact expression of the determinant of the second order system of formula_31 dimensions, formula_32;\n\nwhere formula_34 and formula_35 represent 'e-systems' that take on the values 0, +1 and -1 given the number of permutations of formula_36 and formula_37. More specifically, formula_35 is equal to 0 when there is a repeated index in formula_36; +1 when an even number of permutations of formula_36 is present; -1 when an odd number of permutations of formula_36 is present. The number of indices present in the e-systems is equal to formula_42 and thus can be generalized in this manner .\n\nThe determinant has many properties. Some basic properties of determinants are\n\nBULLET::::1. formula_43, where formula_44 is the formula_45 identity matrix.\nBULLET::::2. formula_46, where formula_47 denotes the transpose of formula_5.\nBULLET::::3. formula_49\nBULLET::::4. For square matrices formula_5 and formula_51 of equal size,\nBULLET::::- formula_52\n\nProperty 5 says that the determinant on matrices is homogeneous of degree \"n\". These properties can be used to facilitate the computation of determinants by simplifying the matrix to the point where the determinant can be determined immediately. Specifically, for matrices with coefficients in a field, properties 13 and 14 can be used to transform any matrix into a triangular matrix, whose determinant is given by property 7; this is essentially the method of Gaussian elimination.\n\nFor example, the determinant of\n\ncan be computed using the following matrices:\n\nHere, \"B\" is obtained from \"A\" by adding −1/2×the first row to the second, so that . \"C\" is obtained from \"B\" by adding the first to the third row, so that . Finally, \"D\" is obtained from \"C\" by exchanging the second and third row, so that . The determinant of the (upper) triangular matrix \"D\" is the product of its entries on the main diagonal: . Therefore, .\n\nThe following identity holds for a Schur complement of a square matrix:\n\nThe Schur complement arises as the result of performing a block Gaussian elimination by multiplying the matrix \"M\" from the right with a \"block lower triangular\" matrix\n\nHere \"I\" denotes a \"p\"×\"p\" identity matrix. After multiplication with the matrix \"L\" the Schur complement appears in the upper \"p\"×\"p\" block. The product matrix is\n\nThat is, we have effected a Gaussian decomposition\n\nThe first and last matrices on the RHS have determinant unity, so we have\n\nThis is Schur's determinant identity.\n\nThe determinant of a matrix product of square matrices equals the product of their determinants:\n\nThus the determinant is a \"multiplicative map\". This property is a consequence of the characterization given above of the determinant as the unique \"n\"-linear alternating function of the columns with value 1 on the identity matrix, since the function that maps can easily be seen to be \"n\"-linear and alternating in the columns of \"M\", and takes the value det(\"A\") at the identity. The formula can be generalized to (square) products of rectangular matrices, giving the Cauchy–Binet formula, which also provides an independent proof of the multiplicative property.\n\nThe determinant det(\"A\") of a matrix \"A\" is non-zero if and only if \"A\" is invertible or, yet another equivalent statement, if its rank equals the size of the matrix. If so, the determinant of the inverse matrix is given by\n\nIn particular, products and inverses of matrices with determinant one still have this property. Thus, the set of such matrices (of fixed size \"n\") form a group known as the special linear group. More generally, the word \"special\" indicates the subgroup of another matrix group of matrices of determinant one. Examples include the special orthogonal group (which if \"n\" is 2 or 3 consists of all rotation matrices), and the special unitary group.\n\nLaplace's formula expresses the determinant of a matrix in terms of its minors. The minor \"M\" is defined to be the determinant of the -matrix that results from \"A\" by removing the \"i\"-th row and the \"j\"-th column. The expression is known as a cofactor. The determinant of \"A\" is given by\n\nCalculating det(\"A\") by means of this formula is referred to as expanding the determinant along a row, the \"i\"-th row using the first form with fixed \"i\", or expanding along a column, using the second form with fixed \"j\". For example, the Laplace expansion of the matrix\n\nalong the second column ( and the sum runs over \"i\") is given by,\n\nHowever, Laplace expansion is efficient for small matrices only.\n\nThe adjugate matrix adj(\"A\") is the transpose of the matrix consisting of the cofactors, i.e.,\n\nIn terms of the adjugate matrix, Laplace's expansion can be written as \n\nSylvester's determinant theorem states that for \"A\", an matrix, and \"B\", an matrix (so that \"A\" and \"B\" have dimensions allowing them to be multiplied in either order forming a square matrix):\n\nwhere \"I\" and \"I\" are the and identity matrices, respectively.\n\nFrom this general result several consequences follow.\n\nLet be an arbitrary matrix of complex numbers with eigenvalues formula_70. (Here it is understood that an eigenvalue with algebraic multiplicity occurs times in this list.) Then the determinant of is the product of all eigenvalues,\nThe product of all non-zero eigenvalues is referred to as pseudo-determinant.\n\nConversely, determinants can be used to find the eigenvalues of the matrix : they are the solutions of the characteristic equation\nwhere \"I\" is the identity matrix of the same dimension as and is a (scalar) number which solves the equation (there are no more than solutions, where is the dimension of ).\n\nA Hermitian matrix is positive definite if all its eigenvalues are positive. Sylvester's criterion asserts that this is equivalent to the determinants of the submatrices\n\nbeing positive, for all between 1 and .\n\nThe trace tr(\"A\") is by definition the sum of the diagonal entries of and also equals the sum of the eigenvalues. Thus, for complex matrices ,\n\nor, for real matrices ,\n\nHere exp() denotes the matrix exponential of , because every eigenvalue of corresponds to the eigenvalue exp() of exp(). In particular, given any logarithm of , that is, any matrix satisfying\n\nthe determinant of is given by\n\nFor example, for , , and , respectively,\n\ncf. Cayley-Hamilton theorem. Such expressions are deducible from combinatorial arguments, Newton's identities, or the Faddeev–LeVerrier algorithm. That is, for generic , the signed constant term of the characteristic polynomial, determined recursively from\n\nIn the general case, this may also be obtained from\n\nwhere the sum is taken over the set of all integers \"k\" ≥ 0 satisfying the equation\n\nThe formula can be expressed in terms of the complete exponential Bell polynomial of \"n\" arguments \"s\" = −(\"l\" – 1)! tr(\"A\") as\n\nThis formula can also be used to find the determinant of a matrix with multidimensional indices and . The product and trace of such matrices are defined in a natural way as\n\nAn important arbitrary dimension identity can be obtained from the Mercator series expansion of the logarithm when the expansion converges. If every eigenvalue of \"A\" is less than 1 in absolute value,\n\nwhere is the identity matrix. More generally, if \n\nis expanded as a formal power series in then all coefficients of for are zero and the remaining polynomial is .\n\nFor a positive definite matrix , the trace operator gives the following tight lower and upper bounds on the log determinant\n\nwith equality if and only if . This relationship can be derived via the formula for the KL-divergence between two multivariate normal distributions.\n\nAlso,\n\nThese inequalities can be proved by bringing the matrix \"A\" to the diagonal form. As such, they represent the well-known fact that the harmonic mean is less than the geometric mean, which is less than the arithmetic mean, which is, in turn, less than the root mean square.\n\nFor a matrix equation\n\nthe solution is given by Cramer's rule:\nwhere \"A\" is the matrix formed by replacing the \"i\"th column of \"A\" by the column vector \"b\". This follows immediately by column expansion of the determinant, i.e.\nwhere the vectors formula_11 are the columns of \"A\". The rule is also implied by the identity\n\nIt has recently been shown that Cramer's rule can be implemented in O(\"n\") time, which is comparable to more common methods of solving systems of linear equations, such as LU, QR, or singular value decomposition.\n\nSuppose \"A\", \"B\", \"C\", and \"D\" are matrices of dimension , , , and , respectively. Then\n\nThis can be seen from the Leibniz formula for determinants, or from a decomposition like (for the former case)\n\nWhen \"A\" is invertible, one has\n\nas can be seen by employing the decomposition\n\nWhen \"D\" is invertible, a similar identity with formula_97 factored out can be derived analogously, that is,\n\nWhen the blocks are square matrices of the same order further formulas hold. For example, if \"C\" and \"D\" commute (i.e., ), then the following formula comparable to the determinant of a matrix holds:\n\nGenerally, if all pairs of matrices of the block matrix commute, then the determinant of the block matrix is equal to the determinant of the matrix obtained by computing the determinant of the block matrix considering its entries as the entries of a matrix. As the previous formula shows, for \"p\" = 2, this criterion is sufficient, but not necessary.\n\nWhen \"A\" = \"D\" and \"B\" = \"C\", the blocks are square matrices of the same order and the following formula holds (even if \"A\" and \"B\" do not commute)\n\nWhen \"D\" is a 1×1 matrix, \"B\" is a column vector, and \"C\" is a row vector then\n\nLet formula_102 be a scalar complex number. If a block matrix is square, its characteristic polynomial can be factored with\n\nIt can be seen, e.g. using the Leibniz formula, that the determinant of real (or analogously for complex) square matrices is a polynomial function from to R, and so it is everywhere differentiable. Its derivative can be expressed using Jacobi's formula:\n\nwhere adj(\"A\") denotes the adjugate of \"A\". In particular, if \"A\" is invertible, we have\n\nExpressed in terms of the entries of \"A\", these are\n\nYet another equivalent formulation is\n\nusing big O notation. The special case where formula_108, the identity matrix, yields\n\nThis identity is used in describing the tangent space of certain matrix Lie groups.\n\nIf the matrix A is written as formula_110 where a, b, c are column vectors of length 3, then the gradient over one of the three vectors may be written as the cross product of the other two:\n\nThe above identities concerning the determinant of products and inverses of matrices imply that similar matrices have the same determinant: two matrices \"A\" and \"B\" are similar, if there exists an invertible matrix \"X\" such that . Indeed, repeatedly applying the above identities yields\n\nThe determinant is therefore also called a similarity invariant. The determinant of a linear transformation\nfor some finite-dimensional vector space \"V\" is defined to be the determinant of the matrix describing it, with respect to an arbitrary choice of basis in \"V\". By the similarity invariance, this determinant is independent of the choice of the basis for \"V\" and therefore only depends on the endomorphism \"T\".\n\nThe determinant of a linear transformation of an \"n\"-dimensional vector space \"V\" can be formulated in a coordinate-free manner by considering the \"n\"th exterior power Λ\"V\" of \"V\". \"A\" induces a linear map\n\nAs Λ\"V\" is one-dimensional, the map ΛA is given by multiplying with some scalar. This scalar coincides with the determinant of \"A\", that is to say\n\nThis definition agrees with the more concrete coordinate-dependent definition. This follows from the characterization of the determinant given above. For example, switching two columns changes the sign of the determinant; likewise, permuting the vectors in the exterior product to , say, also changes its sign.\n\nFor this reason, the highest non-zero exterior power Λ(\"V\") is sometimes also called the determinant of \"V\" and similarly for more involved objects such as vector bundles or chain complexes of vector spaces. Minors of a matrix can also be cast in this setting, by considering lower alternating forms Λ\"V\" with .\n\nThe vector space \"W\" of all alternating multilinear \"n\"-forms on an \"n\"-dimensional vector space \"V\" has dimension one. To each linear transformation \"T\" on \"V\" we associate a linear transformation \"T\"′ on \"W\", where for each \"w\" in \"W\" we define . As a linear transformation on a one-dimensional space, \"T\"′ is equivalent to a scalar multiple. We call this scalar the determinant of \"T\".\n\nThe determinant can also be characterized as the unique function\nfrom the set of all matrices with entries in a field \"K\" to that field satisfying the following three properties: first, \"D\" is an \"n\"-linear function: considering all but one column of \"A\" fixed, the determinant is linear in the remaining column, that is\nfor any column vectors \"v\", ..., \"v\", and \"w\" and any scalars (elements of \"K\") \"a\" and \"b\". Second, \"D\" is an alternating function: for any matrix \"A\" with two identical columns, . Finally, , where \"I\" is the identity matrix.\n\nThis fact also implies that every other \"n\"-linear alternating function satisfies\n\nThis definition can also be extended where \"K\" is a commutative ring \"R\", in which case a matrix is invertible if and only if its determinant is an invertible element in \"R\". For example, a matrix \"A\" with entries in Z, the integers, is invertible (in the sense that there exists an inverse matrix with integer entries) if the determinant is +1 or −1. Such a matrix is called unimodular.\n\nThe determinant defines a mapping\nbetween the group of invertible matrices with entries in \"R\" and the multiplicative group of units in \"R\". Since it respects the multiplication in both groups, this map is a group homomorphism. Secondly, given a ring homomorphism , there is a map given by replacing all entries in \"R\" by their images under \"f\". The determinant respects these maps, i.e., given a matrix with entries in \"R\", the identity\nholds. In other words, the following diagram commutes:\n\nFor example, the determinant of the complex conjugate of a complex matrix (which is also the determinant of its conjugate transpose) is the complex conjugate of its determinant, and for integer matrices: the reduction modulo \"m\" of the determinant of such a matrix is equal to the determinant of the matrix reduced modulo \"m\" (the latter determinant being computed using modular arithmetic). In the language of category theory, the determinant is a natural transformation between the two functors GL and (⋅) (see also Natural transformation#Determinant). Adding yet another layer of abstraction, this is captured by saying that the determinant is a morphism of algebraic groups, from the general linear group to the multiplicative group,\n\nFor matrices with an infinite number of rows and columns, the above definitions of the determinant do not carry over directly. For example, in the Leibniz formula, an infinite sum (all of whose terms are infinite products) would have to be calculated. Functional analysis provides different extensions of the determinant for such infinite-dimensional situations, which however only work for particular kinds of operators.\n\nThe Fredholm determinant defines the determinant for operators known as trace class operators by an appropriate generalization of the formula\n\nAnother infinite-dimensional notion of determinant is the functional determinant.\n\nFor operators in a finite factor, one may define a positive real-valued determinant called the Fuglede−Kadison determinant using the canonical trace. In fact, corresponding to every tracial state on a von Neumann algebra there is a notion of Fuglede−Kadison determinant.\n\nFor square matrices with entries in a non-commutative ring, there are various difficulties in defining determinants analogously to that for commutative rings. A meaning can be given to the Leibniz formula provided that the order for the product is specified, and similarly for other definitions of the determinant, but non-commutativity then leads to the loss of many fundamental properties of the determinant, such as the multiplicative property or the fact that the determinant is unchanged under transposition of the matrix. Over non-commutative rings, there is no reasonable notion of a multilinear form (existence of a nonzero with a regular element of \"R\" as value on some pair of arguments implies that \"R\" is commutative). Nevertheless, various notions of non-commutative determinant have been formulated that preserve some of the properties of determinants, notably quasideterminants and the Dieudonné determinant. For some classes of matrices with non-commutative elements, one can define the determinant and prove linear algebra theorems that are very similar to their commutative analogs. Examples include the \"q\"-determinant on quantum groups, the Capelli determinant on Capelli matrices, and the Berezinian on supermatrices. Manin matrices form the class closest to matrices with commutative elements.\n\nDeterminants of matrices in superrings (that is, Z-graded rings) are known as Berezinians or superdeterminants.\n\nThe permanent of a matrix is defined as the determinant, except that the factors sgn(\"σ\") occurring in Leibniz's rule are omitted. The immanant generalizes both by introducing a character of the symmetric group S in Leibniz's rule.\n\nDeterminants are mainly used as a theoretical tool. They are rarely calculated explicitly in numerical linear algebra, where for applications like checking invertibility and finding eigenvalues the determinant has largely been supplanted by other techniques. Computational geometry, however, does frequently use calculations related to determinants.\n\nNaive methods of implementing an algorithm to compute the determinant include using the Leibniz formula or Laplace's formula. Both these approaches are extremely inefficient for large matrices, though, since the number of required operations grows very quickly: it is of order \"n\"! (\"n\" factorial) for an matrix \"M\". For example, Leibniz's formula requires calculating \"n\"! products. Therefore, more involved techniques have been developed for calculating determinants.\n\nGiven a matrix \"A\", some methods compute its determinant by writing \"A\" as a product of matrices whose determinants can be more easily computed. Such techniques are referred to as decomposition methods. Examples include the LU decomposition, the QR decomposition or the Cholesky decomposition (for positive definite matrices). These methods are of order O(\"n\"), which is a significant improvement over O(\"n\"!)\n\nThe LU decomposition expresses \"A\" in terms of a lower triangular matrix \"L\", an upper triangular matrix \"U\" and a permutation matrix \"P\":\nThe determinants of \"L\" and \"U\" can be quickly calculated, since they are the products of the respective diagonal entries. The determinant of \"P\" is just the sign formula_124 of the corresponding permutation (which is +1 for an even number of permutations and is −1 for an uneven number of permutations). The determinant of \"A\" is then\n\n(See determinant identities.) Moreover, the decomposition can be chosen such that \"L\" is a unitriangular matrix and therefore has determinant 1, in which case the formula further simplifies to\n\nIf the determinant of \"A\" and the inverse of \"A\" have already been computed, the matrix determinant lemma allows rapid calculation of the determinant of , where \"u\" and \"v\" are column vectors.\n\nSince the definition of the determinant does not need divisions, a question arises: do fast algorithms exist that do not need divisions? This is especially interesting for matrices over rings. Indeed, algorithms with run-time proportional to \"n\" exist. An algorithm of Mahajan and Vinay, and Berkowitz is based on closed ordered walks (short \"clow\"). It computes more products than the determinant definition requires, but some of these products cancel and the sum of these products can be computed more efficiently. The final algorithm looks very much like an iterated product of triangular matrices.\n\nIf two matrices of order \"n\" can be multiplied in time \"M\"(\"n\"), where for some , then the determinant can be computed in time O(\"M\"(\"n\")). This means, for example, that an O(\"n\") algorithm exists based on the Coppersmith–Winograd algorithm.\n\nCharles Dodgson (i.e. Lewis Carroll of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland fame) invented a method for computing determinants called Dodgson condensation. Unfortunately this interesting method does not always work in its original form.\n\nAlgorithms can also be assessed according to their bit complexity, i.e., how many bits of accuracy are needed to store intermediate values occurring in the computation. For example, the Gaussian elimination (or LU decomposition) method is of order O(\"n\"), but the bit length of intermediate values can become exponentially long. The Bareiss Algorithm, on the other hand, is an exact-division method based on Sylvester's identity is also of order \"n\", but the bit complexity is roughly the bit size of the original entries in the matrix times \"n\".\n\nHistorically, determinants were used long before matrices: originally, a determinant was defined as a property of a system of linear equations. \nThe determinant \"determines\" whether the system has a unique solution (which occurs precisely if the determinant is non-zero). \nIn this sense, determinants were first used in the Chinese mathematics textbook \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\" (九章算術, Chinese scholars, around the 3rd century BCE). \nIn Europe, determinants were considered by Cardano at the end of the 16th century and larger ones by Leibniz.\n\nIn Japan, Seki Takakazu (関 孝和) is credited with the discovery of the resultant and the determinant (at first in 1683, the complete version no later than 1710). \nIn Europe, Cramer (1750) added to the theory, treating the subject in relation to sets of equations. \nThe recurrence law was first announced by Bézout (1764).\n\nIt was Vandermonde (1771) who first recognized determinants as independent functions. Laplace (1772) gave the general method of expanding a determinant in terms of its complementary minors: Vandermonde had already given a special case. Immediately following, Lagrange (1773) treated determinants of the second and third order and applied it to questions of elimination theory; he proved many special cases of general identities.\n\nGauss (1801) made the next advance. Like Lagrange, he made much use of determinants in the theory of numbers. He introduced the word determinant (Laplace had used \"resultant\"), though not in the present signification, but rather as applied to the discriminant of a quantic. Gauss also arrived at the notion of reciprocal (inverse) determinants, and came very near the multiplication theorem.\n\nThe next contributor of importance is Binet (1811, 1812), who formally stated the theorem relating to the product of two matrices of \"m\" columns and \"n\" rows, which for the special case of reduces to the multiplication theorem. On the same day (November 30, 1812) that Binet presented his paper to the Academy, Cauchy also presented one on the subject. (See Cauchy–Binet formula.) In this he used the word determinant in its present sense, summarized and simplified what was then known on the subject, improved the notation, and gave the multiplication theorem with a proof more satisfactory than Binet's. With him begins the theory in its generality.\n\nThe next important figure was Jacobi (from 1827). He early used the functional determinant which Sylvester later called the Jacobian, and in his memoirs in \"Crelle's Journal\" for 1841 he specially treats this subject, as well as the class of alternating functions which Sylvester has called \"alternants\". About the time of Jacobi's last memoirs, Sylvester (1839) and Cayley began their work.\n\nThe study of special forms of determinants has been the natural result of the completion of the general theory. Axisymmetric determinants have been studied by Lebesgue, Hesse, and Sylvester; persymmetric determinants by Sylvester and Hankel; circulants by Catalan, Spottiswoode, Glaisher, and Scott; skew determinants and Pfaffians, in connection with the theory of orthogonal transformation, by Cayley; continuants by Sylvester; Wronskians (so called by Muir) by Christoffel and Frobenius; compound determinants by Sylvester, Reiss, and Picquet; Jacobians and Hessians by Sylvester; and symmetric gauche determinants by Trudi. Of the textbooks on the subject Spottiswoode's was the first. In America, Hanus (1886), Weld (1893), and Muir/Metzler (1933) published treatises.\n\nAs mentioned above, the determinant of a matrix (with real or complex entries, say) is zero if and only if the column vectors (or the row vectors) of the matrix are linearly dependent. Thus, determinants can be used to characterize linearly dependent vectors. For example, given two linearly independent vectors \"v\", \"v\" in R, a third vector \"v\" lies in the plane spanned by the former two vectors exactly if the determinant of the matrix consisting of the three vectors is zero. The same idea is also used in the theory of differential equations: given \"n\" functions \"f\"(\"x\"), …, \"f\"(\"x\") (supposed to be times differentiable), the Wronskian is defined to be\n\nIt is non-zero (for some \"x\") in a specified interval if and only if the given functions and all their derivatives up to order \"n\"−1 are linearly independent. If it can be shown that the Wronskian is zero everywhere on an interval then, in the case of analytic functions, this implies the given functions are linearly dependent. See the Wronskian and linear independence.\n\nThe determinant can be thought of as assigning a number to every sequence of \"n\" vectors in R, by using the square matrix whose columns are the given vectors. For instance, an orthogonal matrix with entries in R represents an orthonormal basis in Euclidean space. The determinant of such a matrix determines whether the orientation of the basis is consistent with or opposite to the orientation of the standard basis. If the determinant is +1, the basis has the same orientation. If it is −1, the basis has the opposite orientation.\n\nMore generally, if the determinant of \"A\" is positive, \"A\" represents an orientation-preserving linear transformation (if \"A\" is an orthogonal or matrix, this is a rotation), while if it is negative, \"A\" switches the orientation of the basis.\n\nAs pointed out above, the absolute value of the determinant of real vectors is equal to the volume of the parallelepiped spanned by those vectors. As a consequence, if is the linear map represented by the matrix \"A\", and \"S\" is any measurable subset of R, then the volume of \"f\"(\"S\") is given by times the volume of \"S\". More generally, if the linear map is represented by the matrix \"A\", then the \"n\"-dimensional volume of \"f\"(\"S\") is given by:\n\nBy calculating the volume of the tetrahedron bounded by four points, they can be used to identify skew lines. The volume of any tetrahedron, given its vertices a, b, c, and d, is , or any other combination of pairs of vertices that would form a spanning tree over the vertices.\n\nFor a general differentiable function, much of the above carries over by considering the Jacobian matrix of \"f\". For\n\nthe Jacobian matrix is the matrix whose entries are given by\n\nIts determinant, the Jacobian determinant, appears in the higher-dimensional version of integration by substitution: for suitable functions \"f\" and an open subset \"U\" of R (the domain of \"f\"), the integral over \"f\"(\"U\") of some other function is given by\n\nThe Jacobian also occurs in the inverse function theorem.\n\nThe third order Vandermonde determinant is\nIn general, the \"n\"th-order Vandermonde determinant is\n\nwhere the right-hand side is the continued product of all the differences that can be formed from the \"n\"(\"n\"−1)/2 pairs of numbers taken from \"x\", \"x\", …, \"x\", with the order of the differences taken in the reversed order of the suffixes that are involved.\n\nSecond order\n\nThird order\n\nwhere \"ω\" and \"ω\" are the complex cube roots of 1. In general, the \"n\"th-order circulant determinant is\n\nwhere \"ω\" is an \"n\"th root of 1.\n\nBULLET::::- Cauchy determinant\nBULLET::::- Cayley–Menger determinant\nBULLET::::- Dieudonné determinant\nBULLET::::- Immanant\nBULLET::::- Permanent\nBULLET::::- Slater determinant\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- G. Baley Price (1947) \"Some identities in the theory of determinants\", American Mathematical Monthly 54:75–90\n\nBULLET::::- Determinant Interactive Program and Tutorial\nBULLET::::- Linear algebra: determinants. Compute determinants of matrices up to order 6 using Laplace expansion you choose.\nBULLET::::- Matrices and Linear Algebra on the Earliest Uses Pages\nBULLET::::- Determinants explained in an easy fashion in the 4th chapter as a part of a Linear Algebra course.\nBULLET::::- Instructional Video on taking the determinant of an nxn matrix (Khan Academy)\n"}
{"id": "8470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8470", "title": "David Ricardo", "text": "David Ricardo\n\nDavid Ricardo (18 April 1772 – 11 September 1823) was a British political economist, one of the most influential of the classical economists along with Thomas Malthus, Adam Smith and James Mill.\n\nBorn in London, England, Ricardo was the third surviving of the 17 children of Abigail Delvalle (1753–1801) and her husband Abraham Israel Ricardo (1733?–1812). His family were Sephardic Jewis of Portuguese origin who had recently relocated from the Dutch Republic. His father was a successful stockbroker and Ricardo began working with him at the age of 14. At the age of 21, Ricardo eloped with a Quaker, Priscilla Anne Wilkinson, and, against his father's wishes, converted to the Unitarian faith. This religious difference resulted in estrangement from his family, and he was led to adopt a position of independence. His father disowned him and his mother apparently never spoke to him again.\n\nFollowing this estrangement he went into business for himself with the support of Lubbocks and Forster, an eminent banking house. He made the bulk of his fortune as a result of speculation on the outcome of the Battle of Waterloo. \"The Sunday Times\" reported in Ricardo's obituary, published on 14 September 1823, that during the Battle of Waterloo Ricardo \"netted upwards of a million sterling\", a huge sum at the time. He immediately retired, his position on the floor no longer tenable, and subsequently purchased Gatcombe Park, an estate in Gloucestershire, now owned by Princess Anne, the Princess Royal and retired to the country. He was appointed High Sheriff of Gloucestershire for 1818–19.\n\nIn August 1818 he bought Lord Portarlington's seat in Parliament for £4,000, as part of the terms of a loan of £25,000. His record in Parliament was that of an earnest reformer. He held the seat until his death five years later.\n\nRicardo was a close friend of James Mill. Other notable friends included Jeremy Bentham and Thomas Malthus, with whom Ricardo had a considerable debate (in correspondence) over such things as the role of landowners in a society. He also was a member of Malthus' Political Economy Club, and a member of the King of Clubs. He was one of the original members of The Geological Society. His youngest sister was author Sarah Ricardo-Porter (e.g., \"Conversations in Arithmetic\").\n\nHe voted with the opposition in support of the liberal movements in Naples, 21 February, and Sicily, 21 June, and for inquiry into the administration of justice in Tobago, 6 June. He divided for repeal of the Blasphemous and Seditious Libels Act, 8 May, inquiry into the Peterloo massacre, 16 May, and abolition of the death penalty for forgery, 25 May, 4 June 1821.\n\nHe adamantly supported the implementation of free trade. He voted against renewal of the sugar duties, 9 Feb, and objected to the higher duty on East as opposed to West Indian produce, 4 May 1821. He opposed the timber duties. He voted silently for parliamentary reform, 25 Apr 3 June, and spoke in its favour at the Westminster anniversary reform dinner, 23 May 1822. He again voted for criminal law reform, 4 June.\n\nHis friend John Louis Mallett commented: \" … he meets you upon every subject that he has studied with a mind made up, and opinions in the nature of mathematical truths. He spoke of parliamentary reform and ballot as a man who would bring such things about, and destroy the existing system tomorrow, if it were in his power, and without the slightest doubt on the result … It is this very quality of the man’s mind, his entire disregard of experience and practice, which makes me doubtful of his opinions on political economy.\"\n\nTen years after retiring and four years after entering Parliament Ricardo died from an infection of the middle ear that spread into his brain and induced septicaemia. He was 51.\n\nHe and his wife Priscilla had eight children together including Osman Ricardo (1795–1881; MP for Worcester 1847–1865), David Ricardo (1803–1864, MP for Stroud 1832–1833) and Mortimer Ricardo, who served as an officer in the Life Guards and was a deputy lieutenant for Oxfordshire.\n\nRicardo is buried in an ornate grave in the churchyard of Saint Nicholas in Hardenhuish, now a suburb of Chippenham, Wiltshire. At the time of his death his assets were estimated at between £675,000–£775,000.\n\nHe wrote his first economics article at age 37, firstly in The Morning Chronicle advocating reduction in the note-issuing of the Bank of England and then publishing \"\"The High Price of Bullion, a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes\"\" in 1810.\n\nHe was also an abolitionist, speaking at a meeting of the Court of the East India Company in March 1823, where he said he regarded slavery as a stain on the character of the nation. \n\nRicardo's most famous work is his \"Principles of Political Economy and Taxation\" (1817). He advanced a labor theory of value:\n\nThe value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour.\n\nRicardo's note to Section VI:\n\nMr. Malthus appears to think that it is a part of my doctrine, that the cost and value of a thing be the same;—it is, if he means by cost, \"cost of production\" including profit.\n\nRicardo contributed to the development of theories of rent, wages, and profits. He defined rent as \"the difference between the produce obtained by the employment of two equal quantities of capital and labor.\" Ricardo believed that the process of economic development, which increased land utilization and eventually led to the cultivation of poorer land, principally benefited landowners. According to Ricardo, such premium over \"real social value\" that is reaped due to ownership constitutes value to an individual but is at best a paper monetary return to \"society\". The portion of such purely individual benefit that accrues to scarce resources Ricardo labels \"rent\".\n\nIn his \"Theory of Profit\", Ricardo stated that as real wages increase, real profits decrease because the revenue from the sale of manufactured goods is split between profits and wages. He said in his \"Essay on Profits\", \"Profits depend on high or low wages, wages on the price of necessaries, and the price of necessaries chiefly on the price of food.\"\n\nBetween 1500 and 1750 most economists advocated Mercantilism which promoted the idea of international trade for the purpose of earning bullion by running a trade surplus with other countries. Ricardo challenged the idea that the purpose of trade was merely to accumulate gold or silver. With \"comparative advantage\" Ricardo argued in favour of industry specialisation and free trade. He suggested that industry specialization combined with free international trade always produces positive results. This theory expanded on the concept of absolute advantage.\n\nRicardo suggested that there is mutual national benefit from trade even if one country is more competitive in every area than its trading counterpart and that a nation should concentrate resources only in industries where it has a comparative advantage, that is in those industries in which it has the greatest competitive edge. Ricardo suggested that national industries which were, in fact, profitable and internationally competitive should be jettisoned in favour of the most competitive industries, the assumption being that subsequent economic growth would more than offset any economic dislocation which would result from closing profitable and competitive national industries.\n\nRicardo attempted to prove theoretically that international trade is always beneficial. Paul Samuelson called the numbers used in Ricardo's example dealing with trade between England and Portugal the \"four magic numbers\". \"In spite of the fact that the Portuguese could produce both cloth and wine with less amount of labor, Ricardo suggested that both countries would benefit from trade with each other\".\n\nAs for recent extensions of Ricardian models, see Ricardian trade theory extensions.\n\nRicardo's theory of international trade was reformulated by John Stuart Mill. The term \"comparative advantage\" was started by J. S. Mill and his contemporaries. \nJohn Stuart Mill started a neoclassical turn of international trade theory, i.e. his formulation was inherited by Alfred Marshall and others and contributed to the resurrection of anti-Ricardian concept of law of supply and demand and induce the arrival neoclassical theory of value.\n\nRicardo's four magic numbers has long been interpreted as comparison of two ratios of labor input coefficients. This interpretation is now considered as erroneous. This point was first pointed by Roy J. Ruffin in 2002 and examined and explained in detail in Andrea Maneschi in 2004. This is now known as \"new interpretation\" but it has been mentioned by P. Sraffa in 1930 and by Kenzo Yukizawa in 1974. The new interpretation affords totally new reading of Ricardo's \"Principles of Political Economy and Taxation\" with regards to trade theory.\n\nLike Adam Smith, Ricardo was an opponent of protectionism for national economies, especially for agriculture. He believed that the British \"Corn Laws\" — tariffs on agricultural products — ensured that less-productive domestic land would be harvested and rents would be driven up . Thus, profits would be directed toward landlords and away from the emerging industrial capitalists. Ricardo believed landlords tended to squander their wealth on luxuries, rather than invest. He believed the Corn Laws were leading to the stagnation of the British economy. In 1846, his nephew John Lewis Ricardo, MP for Stoke-upon-Trent, advocated free trade and the repeal of the Corn Laws.\n\nModern empirical analysis of the Corn Laws yields mixed results. Parliament repealed the Corn Laws in 1846.\n\nRicardo was concerned about the impact of technological change on labor in the short-term. In 1821, he wrote that he had become \"convinced that the substitution of machinery for human labour, is often very injurious to the interests of the class of labourers,\" and that \"the opinion entertained by the labouring class, that the employment of machinery is frequently detrimental to their interests, is not founded on prejudice and error, but is conformable to the correct principles of political economy.\"\n\nRicardo himself was the first to recognize that comparative advantage is a domain-specific theory, meaning that it only applies when certain conditions are met. Ricardo noted that the theory only applies in situations where capital is immobile. Regarding his famous example, he wrote:\"it would undoubtedly be advantageous to the capitalists [and consumers] of England… [that] the wine and cloth should both be made in Portugal [and that] the capital and labour of England employed in making cloth should be removed to Portugal for that purpose.\"Ricardo recognized that applying his theory in situations where capital was mobile would result in offshoring, and therefore economic decline and job loss. To correct for this, he argued that (i) \"most men of property [will be] satisfied with a low rate of profits in their own country, rather than seek[ing] a more advantageous employment for their wealth in foreign nations,\" and (ii) that capital was functionally immobile.\n\nRicardo's argument in favour of free trade has also been attacked by those who believe trade restriction can be necessary for the economic development of a nation. Utsa Patnaik claims that Ricardian theory of international trade contains a logical fallacy. Ricardo assumed that in both countries two goods are producible and actually are produced, but developed and underdeveloped countries often trade those goods which are not producible in their own country. In these cases, one cannot define which country has comparative advantage.\n\nCritics also argue that Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage is flawed in that it assumes production is continuous and absolute. In the real world, events outside the realm of human control (e.g. natural disasters) can disrupt production. In this case, specialisation could cripple a country that depends on imports from foreign, naturally disrupted countries. For example, if an industrially based country trades its manufactured goods with an agrarian country in exchange for agricultural products, a natural disaster in the agricultural country (e.g. drought) may cause an industrially based country to starve.\n\nAs Joan Robinson pointed out, following the opening of free trade with England, Portugal endured centuries of economic underdevelopment: \"the imposition of free trade on Portugal killed off a promising textile industry and left her with a slow-growing export market for wine, while for England, exports of cotton cloth led to accumulation, mechanisation and the whole spiralling growth of the industrial revolution\". Robinson argued that Ricardo's example required that economies were in static equilibrium positions with full employment and that there could not be a trade deficit or a trade surplus. These conditions, she wrote, were not relevant to the real world. She also argued that Ricardo's math did not take into account that some countries may be at different levels of development and that this raised the prospect of 'unequal exchange' which might hamper a country's development, as we saw in the case of Portugal.\n\nThe development economist Ha-Joon Chang challenges the argument that free trade benefits every country:\nAnother idea associated with Ricardo is Ricardian equivalence, an argument suggesting that in some circumstances a government's choice of how to pay for its spending (\"i.e.,\" whether to use tax revenue or issue debt and run a deficit) might have no effect on the economy. This is due to the fact the public saves its excess money to pay for expected future tax increases that will be used to pay off the debt. Ricardo notes that the proposition is theoretically implied in the presence of intertemporal optimisation by rational tax-payers: but that since tax-payers do not act so rationally, the proposition fails to be true in practice. Thus, while the proposition bears his name, he does not seem to have believed it. Economist Robert Barro is responsible for its modern prominence.\n\nDavid Ricardo's ideas had a tremendous influence on later developments in economics. US economists rank Ricardo as the second most influential economic thinker, behind Adam Smith, prior to the twentieth century.\n\nRicardo became the theoretical father of classical political economy. However, Schumpeter coined an expression \"Ricardian vice\", which indicates that rigorous logic does not provide a good economic theory. This criticism applies also to most neoclassical theories, which make heavy use of mathematics, but are, according to him, theoretically unsound, because the conclusion being drawn does not logically follow from the theories used to defend it.\n\nRicardo's writings fascinated a number of early socialists in the 1820s, who thought his value theory had radical implications. They argued that, in view of labor theory of value, labor produces the entire product, and the profits capitalists get are a result of exploitations of workers. These include Thomas Hodgskin, William Thompson, John Francis Bray, and Percy Ravenstone.\n\nGeorgists believe that rent, in the sense that Ricardo used, belongs to the community as a whole. Henry George was greatly influenced by Ricardo, and often cited him, including in his most famous work, Progress and Poverty from 1879. In the preface to the fourth edition, he wrote: \"\"What I have done in this book, if I have correctly solved the great problem I have sought to investigate, is, to unite the truth perceived by the school of Smith and Ricardo to the truth perceived by the school of Proudhon and Lasalle; to show that laissez faire (in its full true meaning) opens the way to a realization of the noble dreams of socialism; to identify social law with moral law, and to disprove ideas which in the minds of many cloud grand and elevating perceptions.\"\"\n\nAfter the rise of the 'neoclassical' school, Ricardo's influence declined temporarily. It was Piero Sraffa, the editor of the Collected Works of David Ricardo and the author of seminal \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\", who resurrected Ricardo as the originator of another strand of economics thought, which was effaced with the arrival of the neoclassical school. The new interpretation of Ricardo and Sraffa's criticism against the marginal theory of value gave rise to a new school, now named neo-Ricardian or Sraffian school. Major contributors to this school includes Luigi Pasinetti (1930–), Pierangelo Garegnani (1930–2011), Ian Steedman (1941–), Geoffrey Harcourt (1931–), Heinz Kurz (1946–), Neri Salvadori (1951–), Pier Paolo Saviotti (–) among others. See also Neo-Ricardianism. The Neo-Ricardian school is sometimes seen to be a component of Post-Keynesian economics.\n\nInspired by Piero Sraffa, a new strand of trade theory emerged and was named neo-Ricardian trade theory. The main contributors include Ian Steedman and Stanley Metcalfe. They have criticised neoclassical international trade theory, namely the Heckscher–Ohlin model on the basis that the notion of capital as primary factor has no method of measuring it before the determination of profit rate (thus trapped in a logical vicious circle). This was a second round of the Cambridge capital controversy, this time in the field of international trade. Depoortère and Ravix judge that neo-Ricardian contribution failed without giving effective impact on neoclassical trade theory, because it could not offer \"a genuine alternative approach from a classical point of view.\"\n\nSeveral distinctive groups have sprung out of the neo-Ricardian school. One is the evolutionary growth theory, developed notably by Luigi Pasinetti, J.S. Metcalfe, Pier Paolo Saviotti, and Koen Frenken and others.\n\nPasinetti argued that the demand for any commodity came to stagnate and frequently decline, demand saturation occurs. Introduction of new commodities (goods and services) is necessary to avoid economic stagnation.\n\nRicardo's idea was even expanded to the case of continuum of goods by Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson This formulation is employed for example by Matsuyama and others.\n\nRicardian trade theory ordinarily assumes that the labour is the unique input. This is a deficiency as intermediate goods are a great part of international trade. The situation changed after the appearance of 's work of 2007. He has succeeded to incorporate traded input goods in his model.\n\nYeats found that 30% of world trade in manufacturing is intermediate inputs. Bardhan and Jafee found that intermediate inputs occupy 37 to 38% in the imports to the US for the years from 1992 to 1997, whereas the percentage of intrafirm trade grew from 43% in 1992 to 52% in 1997.\n\nChris Edward includes Emmanuel's unequal exchange theory among variations of neo-Ricardian trade theory. Arghiri Emmanuel argued that the Third World is poor because of the international exploitation of labour.\n\nThe unequal exchange theory of trade has been influential to the (new) dependency theory.\n\nRicardo's publications included:\nBULLET::::- \"The High Price of Bullion, a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes\" (1810), which advocated the adoption of a metallic currency.\nBULLET::::- \"Essay on the Influence of a Low Price of Corn on the Profits of Stock\" (1815), which argued that repealing the Corn Laws would distribute more wealth to the productive members of society.\nBULLET::::- \"On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation\" (1817), an analysis that concluded that land rent grows as population increases. It also clearly laid out the theory of comparative advantage, which argued that all nations could benefit from free trade, even if a nation was less efficient at producing all kinds of goods than its trading partners.\n\nHis works and writings were collected in \n\nBULLET::::- Samuel Hollander (1979). \"The Economics of David Ricardo\". University of Toronto Press.\nBULLET::::- G. de Vivo (1987). \"Ricardo, David,\" \"\", v. 4, pp. 183–98\nBULLET::::- Samuelson, P. A. (2001). \"Ricardo, David (1772–1823),\" \"International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences\", pp. 13330–34. Abstract.\nBULLET::::- Éric Pichet, \"David RICARDO, le premier théoricien de l'économie\", Les éditions du siècle, 2004*\n\nBULLET::::- Biography at New School University\nBULLET::::- Biography at EH.Net Encyclopedia of Economic History\nBULLET::::- \"Ricardo on Value: the Three Chapter Ones\". A presentation tracing the changes in the \"Principles\"' (University of Southampton).\n"}
{"id": "8471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8471", "title": "Delphinus", "text": "Delphinus\n\nDelphinus (Eng. U.S. ) Eng. oth: ) is a constellation in the northern sky, close to the celestial equator. Its name is the Latin version for the Greek word for dolphin (δελφίνι). Delphinus was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains among the 88 modern constellations recognized by the International Astronomical Union. It is one of the smaller constellations, ranked 69th in size.\n\nDelphinus' brightest stars form a distinctive asterism that can easily be recognized. It is bordered (clockwise from north) by Vulpecula the fox, Sagitta the arrow, Aquila the eagle, Aquarius the water-carrier, Equuleus the foal and Pegasus the flying horse.\n\nDelphinus lacks stars above fourth (apparent) magnitude; its brightest star is of magnitude 3.8. The main asterism in Delphinus is Job's Coffin, nearly a 45°-apex lozenge diamond of the four brightest stars: Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta Delphini. Delphinus is in a rich Milky Way star field. Alpha and Beta Delphini have 19th century names Sualocin and Rotanev, read backwards: Nicolaus Venator, the Latinized name of a Palermo Observatory director, Niccolò Cacciatore (d. 1841).\n\nAlpha Delphini is a blue-white hued main sequence star of magnitude 3.8, 241 light-years from Earth.\n\nBeta Delphini, called Rotanev. The gap between its close binary stars is visible from large amateur telescopes. To the unaided eye, it appears to be a white star of magnitude 3.6. It has a period of 27 years and is 97 light-years from Earth.\n\nGamma Delphini is a celebrated binary star among amateur astronomers. The primary is orange-gold of magnitude 4.3; the secondary is a light yellow star of magnitude 5.1. The pair form a true binary with an estimated orbital period of over 3,000 years. 125 light-years away, the two components are visible in a small amateur telescope. The secondary, also described as green, is 10 arcseconds from the primary. Struve 2725, called the \"Ghost Double\", is a pair that appears similar but dimmer. Its components of magnitudes 7.6 and 8.4 are separated by 6 arcseconds and are 15 arcminutes from Gamma Delphini itself.\n\nDelta Delphini is a type A7 IIIp star of magnitude 4.43.\n\nEpsilon Delphini, Deneb Dulfim (lit. \"tail [of the] Dolphin\"), or Aldulfin, is a star of stellar class B6 III and magnitude 4, at 330 ly.\n\nIn Delphinus, in extremes of distance, Gliese 795 is the closest known star at 54.95 ly and rapidly moves east over a period of centuries (863±3 arcseconds per year); whereas the giant of blue colour, W Delphini is at 2203.81 ly at 9.76 magnitude. Its brightness ranges from a magnitude of 12.3 to a magnitude of 9.7 over its variable period as it is a Beta Persei star-type semi-detached system. Other variable stars of large amateur telescopic visibility include R Delphini, a Mira-type variable star with a period of 285.5 days. Its magnitude ranges between a maximum 7.6 and a minimum 13.8.\n\nRho Aquilae at magnitude 4.94 is at about 150 light years. Due to its proper motion it has been in the (round-figure parameter) bounds of the constellation since 1992.\n\nHR Delphini was a nova that brightened to magnitude 3.5 in December 1967. A nova was discovered by amateur astronomer Koichi Itagaki, Nova Delphini 2013.\n\nBULLET::::- Giants\nGiants within our galaxy in Delphinus aside from Delta, Gamma and Epsilon include:\n!Name!!Colour!!Type!!Distance (in \"ly\")\nEta DelphiniWhitesubgiant236.18\nKappa DelphiniYellowsubgiant98.24\n10 DelphiniOrangegiant507.25\n17 DelphiniOrangegiant479.65\nMusica or 18 DelphiniYellowgiant245.60\nEU DelphiniRedgiant381.03 \nLU DelphiniYellowgiant485.36 \nU DelphiniRedgiant1568.09\nTheta DelphiniOrange supergiant2013.35\n\nIts rich Milky Way star field means many modestly deep-sky objects. NGC 6891 is a planetary nebula of magnitude 10.5; another is NGC 6905 or the Blue Flash nebula. NGC 6934 is a globular cluster of magnitude 9.75. At a distance of about 185,000 light-years, the globular cluster NGC 7006 is at the outer reaches of the galaxy. It is also fairly dim at magnitude 11.5.\n\nDelphinus is associated with two stories from Greek mythology.\n\nAccording to the first Greek god Poseidon wanted to marry Amphitrite, a beautiful nereid. However, wanting to protect her virginity, she fled to the Atlas mountains. Her suitor then sent out several searchers, among them a certain Delphinus. Delphinus accidentally stumbled upon her and was able to persuade Amphitrite to accept Poseidon's wooing. Out of gratitude the god placed the image of a dolphin among the stars.\n\nThe second story tells of the Greek poet Arion of Lesbos (7th century BC), who was saved by a dolphin. He was a court musician at the palace of Periander, ruler of Corinth. Arion had amassed a fortune during his travels to Sicily and Italy. On his way home from Tarentum his wealth caused the crew of his ship to conspire against him. Threatened with death, Arion asked to be granted a last wish which the crew granted: he wanted to sing a dirge. This he did, and while doing so, flung himself into the sea. There, he was rescued by a dolphin which had been charmed by Arion's music. The dolphin carried Arion to the coast of Greece and left.\n\nIn Chinese astronomy, the stars of Delphinus are located within \"the Black Tortoise of the North\" (北方玄武, \"Běi Fāng Xuán Wǔ\").\n\nIn Polynesia, two cultures recognized Delphinus as a constellation. In Pukapuka, it was called \"Te Toloa\" and in the Tuamotus, it was called \"Te Uru-o-tiki\".\n\nUSS Delphinus (AF-24) and USS Delphinus (PHM-1), two United States Navy ships, are named after the constellation.\n\nA house at Sutton Girls is named Delphinus\n\nBULLET::::- Delphinus (Chinese astronomy)\n\nBULLET::::- Ian Ridpath and Wil Tirion (2017). \"Stars and Planets Guide\", Collins, London. . Princeton University Press, Princeton. .\nBULLET::::- University of Wisconsin, \"Delphinus\"\n\nBULLET::::- The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Delphinus\nBULLET::::- Star Tales – Delphinus\nBULLET::::- Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (over 150 medieval and early modern images of Delphinus)\n"}
{"id": "8472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8472", "title": "Disk storage", "text": "Disk storage\n\nDisk storage (also sometimes called drive storage) is a general category of storage mechanisms where data is recorded by various electronic, magnetic, optical, or mechanical changes to a surface layer of one or more rotating disks. A disk drive is a device implementing such a storage mechanism. Notable types are the hard disk drive (HDD) containing a non-removable disk, the floppy disk drive (FDD) and its removable floppy disk, and various optical disc drives (ODD) and associated optical disc media.\n\n(The spelling disk and disc are used interchangeably except where trademarks preclude one usage, e.g. the Compact Disc logo. The choice of a particular form is frequently historical, as in IBM's usage of the \"disk\" form beginning in 1956 with the \"IBM 350 disk storage unit\").\n\nAudio information was originally recorded by analog methods (see Sound recording and reproduction). Similarly the first video disc used an analog recording method. In the music industry, analog recording has been mostly replaced by digital optical technology where the data is recorded in a digital format with optical information.\n\nThe first commercial digital disk storage device was the IBM 350 which shipped in 1956 as a part of the IBM 305 RAMAC computing system. The random-access, low-density storage of disks was developed to complement the already used sequential-access, high-density storage provided by tape drives using magnetic tape. Vigorous innovation in disk storage technology, coupled with less vigorous innovation in tape storage, has reduced the difference in acquisition cost per terabyte between disk storage and tape storage; however, the total cost of ownership of data on disk including power and management remains larger than that of tape.\n\nDisk storage is now used in both computer storage and consumer electronic storage, e.g., audio CDs and video discs (standard DVD and Blu-ray).\n\nData on modern disks is stored in fixed length blocks, usually called sectors and varying in length from a few hundred to many thousands of bytes. Gross disk drive capacity is simply the number of disk surfaces times the number of blocks/surface times the number of bytes/block. In certain legacy IBM CKD drives the data was stored on magnetic disks with variable length blocks, called records; record length could vary on and between disks. Capacity decreased as record length decreased due to the necessary gaps between blocks.\n\nDigital disk drives are block storage devices. Each disk is divided into logical blocks (collection of sectors). Blocks are addressed using their logical block addresses (LBA). Read from or writing to disk happens at the granularity of blocks.\n\nOriginally the disk capacity was quite low and has been improved in one of several ways. Improvements in mechanical design and manufacture allowed smaller and more precise heads, meaning that more tracks could be stored on each of the disks. Advancements in data compression methods permitted more information to be stored in each of the individual sectors.\n\nThe drive stores data onto cylinders, heads, and sectors. The sectors unit is the smallest size of data to be stored in a hard disk drive and each file will have many sectors units assigned to it. The smallest entity in a CD is called a frame, which consists of 33 bytes and contains six complete 16-bit stereo samples (two bytes × two channels × six samples = 24 bytes). The other nine bytes consist of eight CIRC error-correction bytes and one subcode byte used for control and display.\n\nThe information is sent from the computer processor to the BIOS into a chip controlling the data transfer. This is then sent out to the hard drive via a multi-wire connector. Once the data is received onto the circuit board of the drive, they are translated and compressed into a format that the individual drive can use to store onto the disk itself. The data is then passed to a chip on the circuit board that controls the access to the drive. The drive is divided into sectors of data stored onto one of the sides of one of the internal disks. An HDD with two disks internally will typically store data on all four surfaces.\n\nThe hardware on the drive tells the actuator arm where it is to go for the relevant track and the compressed information is then sent down to the head which changes the physical properties, optically or magnetically for example, of each byte on the drive, thus storing the information. A file is not stored in a linear manner, rather, it is held in the best way for quickest retrieval.\n\nMechanically there are two different motions occurring inside the drive. One is the rotation of the disks inside the device. The other is the side-to-side motion of the head across the disk as it moves between tracks.\n\nThere are two types of disk rotation methods:\nBULLET::::- constant linear velocity (used mainly in optical storage) varies the rotational speed of the optical disc depending upon the position of the head, and\nBULLET::::- constant angular velocity (used in HDDs, standard FDDs, a few optical disc systems, and vinyl audio records) spins the media at one constant speed regardless of where the head is positioned.\n\nTrack positioning also follows two different methods across disk storage devices. Storage devices focused on holding computer data, e.g., HDDs, FDDs, Iomega zip drives, use concentric tracks to store data. During a sequential read or write operation, after the drive accesses all the sectors in a track it repositions the head(s) to the next track. This will cause a momentary delay in the flow of data between the device and the computer. In contrast, optical audio and video discs use a single spiral track that starts at the inner most point on the disc and flows continuously to the outer edge. When reading or writing data there is no need to stop the flow of data to switch tracks. This is similar to vinyl records except vinyl records started at the outer edge and spiraled in toward the center.\n\nThe disk drive interface is the mechanism/protocol of communication between the rest of the system and the disk drive itself. Storage devices intended for desktop and mobile computers typically use ATA (PATA) and SATA interfaces. Enterprise systems and high-end storage devices will typically use SCSI, SAS, and FC interfaces in addition to some use of SATA.\n\nBULLET::::- Disk - Generally refers to magnetic media and devices.\nBULLET::::- Disc - Required by trademarks for certain optical media and devices.\nBULLET::::- Platter – An individual recording disk. A hard disk drive contains a set of platters. Developments in optical technology have led to multiple recording layers on DVDs.\nBULLET::::- Spindle – the spinning axle on which the platters are mounted.\nBULLET::::- Rotation – Platters rotate; two techniques are common:\nBULLET::::- Constant angular velocity (CAV) keeps the disk spinning at a fixed rate, measured in revolutions per minute (RPM). This means the heads cover more distance per unit of time on the outer tracks than on the inner tracks. This method is typical with computer hard drives.\nBULLET::::- Constant linear velocity (CLV) keeps the distance covered by the heads per unit time fixed. Thus the disk has to slow down as the arm moves to the outer tracks. This method is typical for CD drives.\nBULLET::::- Track – The circle of recorded data on a single recording surface of a platter.\n\nBULLET::::- Sector – A segment of a track\nBULLET::::- Low level formatting – Establishing the tracks and sectors.\nBULLET::::- Head – The device that reads and writes the information—magnetic or optical—on the disk surface.\nBULLET::::- Arm – The mechanical assembly that supports the head as it moves in and out.\nBULLET::::- Seek time – Time needed to move the head to a new position (specific track).\nBULLET::::- Rotational latency – Average time, once the arm is on the right track, before a head is over a desired sector.\nBULLET::::- Data transfer rate - The rate at which user data bits are transferred from or to the medium. Technically, this would more accurately be entitled the \"gross\" data transfer rate.\n\nBULLET::::- Disk array\nBULLET::::- Disk drive performance characteristics\nBULLET::::- Disk read-and-write head\nBULLET::::- Magnetic storage\nBULLET::::- RAID\nBULLET::::- USB flash drive\n"}
{"id": "8474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8474", "title": "Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington", "text": "Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington\n\nArthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, (1 May 1769 – 14 September 1852), commonly known as the Duke of Wellington, was an Anglo-Irish soldier and Tory statesman who was one of the leading military and political figures of 19th-century Britain, serving twice as Prime Minister. He won a notable victory against Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.\n\nWellesley was born in Dublin into the Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland. He was commissioned as an ensign in the British Army in 1787, serving in Ireland as aide-de-camp to two successive Lords Lieutenant of Ireland. He was also elected as a Member of Parliament in the Irish House of Commons. He was a colonel by 1796 and saw action in the Netherlands and in India, where he fought in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War at the Battle of Seringapatam. He was appointed governor of Seringapatam and Mysore in 1799 and, as a newly appointed major-general, won a decisive victory over the Maratha Confederacy at the Battle of Assaye in 1803.\n\nWellesley rose to prominence as a general during the Peninsular campaign of the Napoleonic Wars, and was promoted to the rank of field marshal after leading the allied forces to victory against the French Empire at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813. Following Napoleon's exile in 1814, he served as the ambassador to France and was granted a dukedom. During the Hundred Days in 1815, he commanded the allied army which, together with a Prussian Army under Blücher, defeated Napoleon at Waterloo. Wellington's battle record is exemplary; he ultimately participated in some 60 battles during the course of his military career.\n\nWellington is famous for his adaptive defensive style of warfare, resulting in several victories against numerically superior forces while minimising his own losses. He is regarded as one of the greatest defensive commanders of all time, and many of his tactics and battle plans are still studied in military academies around the world. After the end of his active military career, he returned to politics. He was twice British prime minister as a member of the Tory party: from 1828 to 1830, and for a little less than a month in 1834. He oversaw the passage of the Catholic Relief Act 1829, but opposed the Reform Act 1832. He continued as one of the leading figures in the House of Lords until his retirement and remained Commander-in-Chief of the British Army until his death.\nWellesley was born into an aristocratic Anglo-Irish family in Ireland as The Hon. Arthur Wesley, the third of five surviving sons (fourth otherwise) of Anne and Garret Wesley, 1st Earl of Mornington. His mother was the eldest daughter of Arthur Hill-Trevor, 1st Viscount Dungannon, after whom Wellesley was named. As such, he belonged to the Protestant Ascendancy. His biographers mostly follow the same contemporary newspaper evidence in saying that he was born on 1 May 1769, the day before he was baptised. His birthplace is uncertain. He was most likely born at his parents' townhouse, 24 Upper Merrion Street, Dublin, now the Merrion Hotel. But his mother Anne, Countess of Mornington, recalled in 1815 that he had been born at 6 Merrion Street, Dublin. Other places have been put forward as the location of his birth, including Mornington House (the house next door on Upper Merrion), as his father had asserted; the Dublin packet boat; and the mansion in the family estate of Athy (consumed in the fires of 1916), as the Duke apparently put on his 1851 census return.\n\nHe spent most of his childhood at his family's two homes, the first a large house in Dublin and the second Dangan Castle, north of Summerhill on the Trim Road (now the R158) in County Meath. In 1781, Arthur's father died and his eldest brother Richard inherited his father's earldom.\n\nHe went to the diocesan school in Trim when at Dangan, Mr Whyte's Academy when in Dublin, and Brown's School in Chelsea when in London. He then enrolled at Eton College, where he studied from 1781 to 1784. His loneliness there caused him to hate it, and makes it highly unlikely that he actually said \"The Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton\", a quotation which is often attributed to him. Moreover, Eton had no playing fields at the time. In 1785, a lack of success at Eton, combined with a shortage of family funds due to his father's death, forced the young Wellesley and his mother to move to Brussels. Until his early twenties, Arthur showed little sign of distinction and his mother grew increasingly concerned at his idleness, stating, \"I don't know what I shall do with my awkward son Arthur.\"\n\nA year later, Arthur enrolled in the French Royal Academy of Equitation in Angers, where he progressed significantly, becoming a good horseman and learning French, which later proved very useful. Upon returning to England in late 1786, he astonished his mother with his improvement.\n\nDespite his new promise, he had yet to find a job and his family was still short of money, so upon the advice of his mother, his brother Richard asked his friend the Duke of Rutland (then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) to consider Arthur for a commission in the Army. Soon afterward, on 7 March 1787, he was gazetted ensign in the 73rd Regiment of Foot. In October, with the assistance of his brother, he was assigned as \"aide-de-camp\", on ten shillings a day (twice his pay as an ensign), to the new Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Buckingham. He was also transferred to the new 76th Regiment forming in Ireland and on Christmas Day, 1787, was promoted lieutenant. During his time in Dublin his duties were mainly social; attending balls, entertaining guests and providing advice to Buckingham. While in Ireland, he overextended himself in borrowing due to his occasional gambling, but in his defence stated that \"I have often known what it was to be in want of money, but I have never got helplessly into debt\".\n\nOn 23 January 1788, he transferred into the 41st Regiment of Foot, then again on 25 June 1789, still a lieutenant, he transferred to the 12th (Prince of Wales's) Regiment of (Light) Dragoons and, according to military historian Richard Holmes, he also dipped a reluctant toe into politics. Shortly before the general election of 1789, he went to the rotten borough of Trim to speak against the granting of the title \"Freeman\" of Dublin to the parliamentary leader of the Irish Patriot Party, Henry Grattan. Succeeding, he was later nominated and duly elected as a Member of Parliament (MP) for Trim in the Irish House of Commons. Because of the limited suffrage at the time, he sat in a parliament where at least two-thirds of the members owed their election to the landowners of fewer than a hundred boroughs. Wellesley continued to serve at Dublin Castle, voting with the government in the Irish parliament over the next two years. He became a captain on 30 January 1791, and was transferred to the 58th Regiment of Foot.\n\nOn 31 October, he transferred to the 18th Light Dragoons and it was during this period that he grew increasingly attracted to Kitty Pakenham, the daughter of Edward Pakenham, 2nd Baron Longford. She was described as being full of 'gaiety and charm'. In 1793, he sought her hand, but was turned down by her brother Thomas, Earl of Longford, who considered Wellesley to be a young man, in debt, with very poor prospects. An aspiring amateur musician, Wellesley, devastated by the rejection, burnt his violins in anger, and resolved to pursue a military career in earnest. He became a major by purchase in the 33rd Regiment in 1793. A few months later, in September, his brother lent him more money and with it he purchased a lieutenant-colonelcy in the 33rd.\n\nIn 1793, the Duke of York was sent to Flanders in command of the British contingent of an allied force destined for the invasion of France. In June 1794, Wellesley with the 33rd regiment set sail from Cork bound for Ostend as part of an expedition bringing reinforcements for the army in Flanders. They arrived too late and joined the Duke of York as he was pulling back towards the Netherlands. On 15 September 1794, at the Battle of Boxtel, east of Breda, Wellington, in temporary command of his brigade, had his first experience of battle. During General Abercromby's withdrawal in the face of superior French forces, the 33rd held off enemy cavalry, allowing neighbouring units to retreat safely. During the extremely harsh winter that followed, Wellesley and his regiment formed part of an allied force holding the defence line along the Waal River. The 33rd, along with the rest of the army, suffered heavy losses from sickness and exposure. Wellesley's health was also affected by the damp environment. Though the campaign was to end disastrously, with the British army driven out of the United Provinces into Germany, Wellesley was to learn several valuable lessons, including the use of steady lines of infantry against advancing columns and of the merits of supporting sea-power. He understood that the failure of the campaign was due in part to the faults of the leaders and the poor organisation at headquarters. He remarked later of his time in the Netherlands that \"At least I learned what not to do, and that is always a valuable lesson\".\n\nReturning to England in March 1795, he was returned as a member of parliament for Trim for a second time. He hoped to be given the position of secretary of war in the new Irish government but the new lord-lieutenant, Lord Camden, was only able to offer him the post of Surveyor-General of the Ordnance. Declining the post, he returned to his regiment, now at Southampton preparing to set sail for the West Indies. After seven weeks at sea, a storm forced the fleet back to Poole. The 33rd was given time to recuperate and a few months later, Whitehall decided to send the regiment to India. Wellesley was promoted full colonel by seniority on 3 May 1796 and a few weeks later set sail for Calcutta with his regiment.\n\nArriving in Calcutta in February 1797 he spent several months there, before being sent on a brief expedition to the Philippines, where he established a list of new hygiene precautions for his men to deal with the unfamiliar climate. Returning in November to India, he learnt that his elder brother Richard, now known as Lord Mornington, had been appointed as the new Governor-General of India.\n\nIn 1798, he changed the spelling of his surname to \"Wellesley\"; up to this time he was still known as Wesley, which his eldest brother considered the ancient and proper spelling.\n\nAs part of the campaign to extend the rule of the British East India Company, the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War broke out in 1798 against the Sultan of Mysore, Tipu Sultan. Arthur's brother Richard ordered that an armed force be sent to capture Seringapatam and defeat Tipu. Under the command of General Harris, some 24,000 troops were dispatched to Madras (to join an equal force being sent from Bombay in the west). Arthur and the 33rd sailed to join them in August.\n\nAfter extensive and careful logistic preparation (which would become one of Wellesley's main attributes) the 33rd left with the main force in December and travelled across of jungle from Madras to Mysore. On account of his brother, during the journey, Wellesley was given an additional command, that of chief advisor to the Nizam of Hyderabad's army (sent to accompany the British force). This position was to cause friction among many of the senior officers (some of whom were senior to Wellesley). Much of this friction was put to rest after the Battle of Mallavelly, some from Seringapatam, in which Harris's army attacked a large part of the sultan's army. During the battle, Wellesley led his men, in a line of battle of two ranks, against the enemy to a gentle ridge and gave the order to fire. After an extensive repetition of volleys, followed by a bayonet charge, the 33rd, in conjunction with the rest of Harris's force, forced Tipu's infantry to retreat.\n\nImmediately after their arrival at Seringapatam on 5 April 1799, the Battle of Seringapatam began and Wellesley was ordered to lead a night attack on the village of Sultanpettah, adjacent to the fortress to clear the way for the artillery. Because of the enemy's strong defensive preparations, and the darkness, with the resulting confusion, the attack failed with 25 casualties. Wellesley suffered a minor injury to his knee from a spent musket-ball. Although they would re-attack successfully the next day, after time to scout ahead the enemy's positions, the affair affected Wellesley. He resolved \"never to attack an enemy who is preparing and strongly posted, and whose posts have not been reconnoitered by daylight\".\n\nLewin Bentham Bowring gives this alternative account:\n\nA few weeks later, after extensive artillery bombardment, a breach was opened in the main walls of the fortress of Seringapatam. An attack led by Major-General Baird secured the fortress. Wellesley secured the rear of the advance, posting guards at the breach and then stationed his regiment at the main palace. After hearing news of the death of the Tipu Sultan, Wellesley was the first at the scene to confirm his death, checking his pulse. Over the coming day, Wellesley grew increasingly concerned over the lack of discipline among his men, who drank and pillaged the fortress and city. To restore order, several soldiers were flogged and four hanged.\n\nAfter battle and the resulting end of the war, the main force under General Harris left Seringapatam and Wellesley, aged 30, stayed behind to command the area as the new Governor of Seringapatam and Mysore. While in India, Wellesley was ill for a considerable time, first with severe diarrhoea from the water and then with fever, followed by a serious skin infection caused by trichophyton.\n\nWellesley was in charge of raising an Anglo-Indian expeditionary force in Trincomali in early 1801 for the capture of Batavia and Mauritius from the French. However, on the eve of its departure, orders arrived from England that it was to be sent to Egypt to co-operate with Sir Ralph Abercromby in the expulsion of the French from Egypt. Wellesley had been appointed second in command to Baird, but owing to ill-health did not accompany the expedition on 9 April 1801. This turned out fortunately for Wellesley, since the very vessel on which he was to have sailed foundered with all hands in the Red Sea.\n\nHe was promoted to brigadier-general on 17 July 1801. He took residence within the Sultan's summer palace and reformed the tax and justice systems in his province to maintain order and prevent bribery. He also hunted down the mercenary and self-proclaimed 'King' Dhoondiah Waugh, who had escaped from prison in Seringapatam during the battle.\n\nIn 1800, whilst serving as Governor of Mysore, Wellesley was tasked with putting down an insurgency led by Dhoondiah Waugh, formerly a Patan trooper for Tipu Sultan. After the fall of Seringapatam he became a powerful brigand, raiding villages along the Maratha–Mysore border region. Despite initial setbacks, the East India Company having pursued and destroyed his forces once already, forcing him into retreat in August 1799, he raised a sizeable force composed of disbanded Mysore soldiers, captured small outposts and forts in Mysore, and was receiving the support of several Maratha \"killedars\" opposed to British occupation. This drew the attention of the British administration, who were beginning to recognise him as more than just a bandit, as his raids, expansion and threats to destabilise British authority suddenly increased in 1800. The death of Tipu Sultan had created a power vacuum and Waugh was seeking to fill it.\n\nGiven independent command of a combined East India Company and British Army force, Wellesley ventured north to confront Waugh in June 1800, with an army of 8,000 infantry and cavalry, having learned that Waugh's forces numbered over 50,000, although the majority (around 30,000) were irregular light cavalry and unlikely to pose a serious threat to British infantry and artillery.\n\nThroughout June–August 1800, Wellesley advanced through Waugh's territory, his troops escalading forts in turn and capturing each one with \"trifling loss\". The forts generally offered little resistance due to their poor construction and design. Wellesley did not have sufficient troops to garrison each fort, and had to clear the surrounding area of insurgents before advancing to the next fort. On 31 July, he had \"taken and destroyed Dhoondiah's baggage and six guns, and driven into the Malpoorba (where they were drowned) about five thousand people\". Dhoondiah continued to retreat, but his forces were rapidly deserting, he had no infantry and due to the monsoon weather flooding river crossings he could no longer outpace the British advance. On 10 September, at the Battle of Conaghul, Wellesley personally led a charge of 1,400 British dragoons and Indian cavalry, in single line with no reserve, against Dhoondiah and his remaining 5,000 cavalry. Dhoondiah was killed during the clash, his body was discovered and taken to the British camp tied to a cannon. With this victory Wellesley's campaign was concluded, British authority had been restored.\n\nWellesley, with command of four regiments, had defeated Dhoondiah's larger rebel force, along with Dhoondiah himself, who was killed in the final battle. Wellesley then paid for the future upkeep of Dhoondiah's orphaned son.\n\nIn September 1802, Wellesley learnt that he had been promoted to the rank of major-general. He had been gazetted on 29 April 1802, but the news took several months to reach him by sea. He remained at Mysore until November when he was sent to command an army in the Second Anglo-Maratha War.\n\nWhen he determined that a long defensive war would ruin his army, Wellesley decided to act boldly to defeat the numerically larger force of the Maratha Empire. With the logistic assembly of his army complete (24,000 men in total) he gave the order to break camp and attack the nearest Maratha fort on 8 August 1803. The fort surrendered on 12 August after an infantry attack had exploited an artillery-made breach in the wall. With the fort now in British control Wellesley was able to extend control southwards to the river Godavari.\n\nSplitting his army into two forces, to pursue and locate the main Marathas army, (the second force, commanded by Colonel Stevenson was far smaller) Wellesley was preparing to rejoin his forces on 24 September. His intelligence, however, reported the location of the Marathas' main army, between two rivers near Assaye. If he waited for the arrival of his second force, the Marathas would be able to mount a retreat, so Wellesley decided to launch an attack immediately.\n\nOn 23 September, Wellesley led his forces over a ford in the river Kaitna and the Battle of Assaye commenced. After crossing the ford the infantry was reorganised into several lines and advanced against the Maratha infantry. Wellesley ordered his cavalry to exploit the flank of the Maratha army just near the village. During the battle Wellesley himself came under fire; two of his horses were shot from under him and he had to mount a third. At a crucial moment, Wellesley regrouped his forces and ordered Colonel Maxwell (later killed in the attack) to attack the eastern end of the Maratha position while Wellesley himself directed a renewed infantry attack against the centre.\n\nAn officer in the attack wrote of the importance of Wellesley's personal leadership: \"The General was in the thick of the action the whole time ... I never saw a man so cool and collected as he was ... though I can assure you, 'til our troops got the order to advance the fate of the day seemed doubtful ...\" With some 6,000 Marathas killed or wounded, the enemy was routed, though Wellesley's force was in no condition to pursue. British casualties were heavy: the British losses were counted as 409 soldiers being killed out of which 164 were Europeans and the remaining 245 were Indian; a further 1,622 British soldiers were wounded and 26 soldiers were reported missing (the British casualty figures were taken from Wellesley's own despatch). Wellesley was troubled by the loss of men and remarked that he hoped \"I should not like to see again such loss as I sustained on 23 September, even if attended by such gain\". Years later, however, he remarked that Assaye, and not Waterloo, was the best battle he ever fought.\n\nDespite the damage done to the Maratha army, the battle did not end the war. A few months later in November, Wellesley attacked a larger force near Argaum, leading his army to victory again, with an astonishing 5,000 enemy dead at the cost of only 361 British casualties. A further successful attack at the fortress at Gawilghur, combined with the victory of General Lake at Delhi forced the Maratha to sign a peace settlement at Anjangaon (not concluded until a year later) called the Treaty of Surji-Anjangaon.\n\nMilitary historian Richard Holmes remarked that Wellesley's experiences in India had an important influence on his personality and military tactics, teaching him much about military matters that would prove vital to his success in the Peninsular War. These included a strong sense of discipline through drill and order, the use of diplomacy to gain allies, and the vital necessity for a secure supply line. He also established a high regard for the acquisition of intelligence through scouts and spies. His personal tastes also developed, including dressing himself in white trousers, a dark tunic, with Hessian boots and black cocked hat (that later became synonymous as his style).\n\nWellesley had grown tired of his time in India, remarking \"I have served as long in India as any man ought who can serve anywhere else\". In June 1804 he applied for permission to return home and as a reward for his service in India he was made a Knight of the Bath in September. While in India, Wellesley had amassed a fortune of £42,000 (considerable at the time), consisting mainly of prize money from his campaign. When his brother's term as Governor-General of India ended in March 1805, the brothers returned together to England on HMS \"Howe\". Arthur, coincidentally, stopped on his voyage at the little island of Saint Helena and stayed in the same building to which Napoleon I would later be exiled.\n\nIn September 1805, Major-General Wellesley was newly returned from his campaigns in India and was not yet particularly well known to the public. He reported to the office of the Secretary for War to request a new assignment. In the waiting room, he met Vice-Admiral Horatio Nelson, already a legendary figure after his victories at the Nile and Copenhagen, who was briefly in England after months chasing the French Toulon fleet to the West Indies and back. Some 30 years later, Wellington recalled a conversation that Nelson began with him which Wellesley found \"almost all on his side in a style so vain and silly as to surprise and almost disgust me\". Nelson left the room to inquire who the young general was and, on his return, switched to a very different tone, discussing the war, the state of the colonies, and the geopolitical situation as between equals. On this second discussion, Wellington recalled, \"I don't know that I ever had a conversation that interested me more\". This was the only time that the two men met; Nelson was killed at his great victory at Trafalgar just seven weeks later.\n\nWellesley then served in the abortive Anglo-Russian expedition to north Germany in 1805, taking a brigade to Elbe.\n\nHe then took a period of extended leave from the army and was elected as a Tory member of the British parliament for Rye in January 1806. A year later, he was elected MP for Newport on the Isle of Wight and was then appointed to serve as Chief Secretary for Ireland, under the Duke of Richmond. At the same time, he was made a privy counsellor. While in Ireland, he gave a verbal promise that the remaining Penal Laws would be enforced with great moderation, perhaps an indication of his later willingness to support Catholic Emancipation.\n\nWellesley was in Ireland in May 1807 when he heard of the British expedition to Denmark. He decided to go, while maintaining his political appointments and was appointed to command an infantry brigade in the Second Battle of Copenhagen which took place in August. He fought at the Køge, during which the men under his command took 1,500 prisoners, with Wellesley later present during the surrender.\n\nBy 30 September, he had returned to England and was raised to the rank of lieutenant general on 25 April 1808. In June 1808 he accepted the command of an expedition of 9,000 men. Preparing to sail for an attack on the Spanish colonies in South America (to assist the Latin American patriot Francisco de Miranda) his force was instead ordered to sail for Portugal, to take part in the Peninsular Campaign and rendezvous with 5,000 troops from Gibraltar.\n\nReady for battle, Wellesley left Cork on 12 July 1808 to participate in the war against French forces in the Iberian Peninsula, with his skills as a commander tested and developed. According to the historian Robin Neillands, \"Wellesley had by now acquired the experience on which his later successes were founded. He knew about command from the ground up, about the importance of logistics, about campaigning in a hostile environment. He enjoyed political influence and realised the need to maintain support at home. Above all, he had gained a clear idea of how, by setting attainable objectives and relying on his own force and abilities, a campaign could be fought and won.\"\n\nWellesley defeated the French at the Battle of Roliça and the Battle of Vimeiro in 1808 but was superseded in command immediately after the latter battle. General Dalrymple then signed the controversial Convention of Sintra, which stipulated that the Royal Navy transport the French army out of Lisbon with all their loot, and insisted on the association of the only available government minister, Wellesley.\nDalrymple and Wellesley were recalled to Britain to face a Court of Enquiry. Wellesley had agreed to sign the preliminary armistice, but had not signed the convention, and was cleared.\n\nMeanwhile, Napoleon himself entered Spain with his veteran troops to put down the revolt; the new commander of the British forces in the Peninsula, Sir John Moore, died during the Battle of Corunna in January 1809.\n\nAlthough overall the land war with France was not going well from a British perspective, the Peninsula was the one theatre where they, with the Portuguese, had provided strong resistance against France and her allies. This contrasted with the disastrous Walcheren expedition, which was typical of the mismanaged British operations of the time. Wellesley submitted a memorandum to Lord Castlereagh on the defence of Portugal. He stressed its mountainous frontiers and advocated Lisbon as the main base because the Royal Navy could help to defend it. Castlereagh and the cabinet approved the memo and appointed him head of all British forces in Portugal.\n\nWellesley arrived in Lisbon on 22 April 1809 on board HMS \"Surveillante\", after narrowly escaping shipwreck. Reinforced, he took to the offensive. In the Second Battle of Porto he crossed the Douro river in a daylight \"coup de main\", and routed Marshal Soult's French troops in Porto.\n\nWith Portugal secured, Wellesley advanced into Spain to unite with General Cuesta's forces. The combined allied force prepared for an assault on Marshal Victor's I Corps at Talavera, 23 July. Cuesta, however, was reluctant to agree, and was only persuaded to advance on the following day. The delay allowed the French to withdraw, but Cuesta sent his army headlong after Victor, and found himself faced by almost the entire French army in New Castile—Victor had been reinforced by the Toledo and Madrid garrisons. The Spanish retreated precipitously, necessitating the advance of two British divisions to cover their retreat.\n\nThe next day, 27 July, at the Battle of Talavera the French advanced in three columns and were repulsed several times throughout the day by Wellesley, but at a heavy cost to the British force. In the aftermath Marshal Soult's army was discovered to be advancing south, threatening to cut Wellesley off from Portugal. Wellesley moved east on 3 August to block it, leaving 1,500 wounded in the care of the Spanish, intending to confront Soult before finding out that the French were in fact 30,000 strong. The British commander sent the Light Brigade on a dash to hold the bridge over the Tagus at Almaraz. With communications and supply from Lisbon secured for now, Wellesley considered joining with Cuesta again but found out that his Spanish ally had abandoned the British wounded to the French and was thoroughly uncooperative, promising and then refusing to supply the British forces, aggravating Wellesley and causing considerable friction between the British and their Spanish allies. The lack of supplies, coupled with the threat of French reinforcement (including the possible inclusion of Napoleon himself) in the spring, led to the British deciding to retreat into Portugal.\n\nFollowing his victory at Talavera, Wellesley was elevated to the Peerage of the United Kingdom on 26 August 1809 as Viscount Wellington of Talavera and of Wellington, in the County of Somerset, with the subsidiary title of Baron Douro of Wellesley.\n\nIn 1810, a newly enlarged French army under Marshal André Masséna invaded Portugal. British opinion both at home and in the army was negative and there were suggestions that they must evacuate Portugal. Instead, Lord Wellington first slowed the French down at Buçaco; he then prevented them from taking the Lisbon Peninsula by the construction of his massive earthworks, the Lines of Torres Vedras, which had been assembled in complete secrecy and had flanks guarded by the Royal Navy. The baffled and starving French invasion forces retreated after six months. Wellington's pursuit was frustrated by a series of reverses inflicted by Marshal Ney in a much-lauded rear guard campaign.\n\nIn 1811, Masséna returned toward Portugal to relieve Almeida; Wellington narrowly checked the French at the Battle of Fuentes de Onoro. Simultaneously, his subordinate, Viscount Beresford, fought Soult's 'Army of the South' to a mutual bloody standstill at the Battle of Albuera in May. Wellington was promoted to full general on 31 July for his services. The French abandoned Almeida, slipping away from British pursuit, but retained the twin Spanish fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, the 'Keys' guarding the roads through the mountain passes into Portugal.\n\nIn 1812, Wellington finally captured Ciudad Rodrigo by a rapid movement as the French went into winter quarters, storming it before they could react. He then moved south quickly, besieged the fortress of Badajoz for a month and captured it during one bloody night. On viewing the aftermath of the Storming of Badajoz, Wellington lost his composure and cried at the sight of the bloody carnage in the breaches.\n\nHis army now was a veteran British force reinforced by units of the retrained Portuguese army. Campaigning in Spain, he routed the French at the Battle of Salamanca, taking advantage of a minor French mispositioning. The victory liberated the Spanish capital of Madrid. As a reward, he was created Earl of Wellington, in the county of Somerset on 22 February 1812, and then Marquess of Wellington, in the said county on 18 August 1812, and given command of all Allied armies in Spain.\n\nWellington attempted to take the vital fortress of Burgos, which linked Madrid to France. But failure, due in part to a lack of siege guns, forced him into a headlong retreat with the loss of over 2,000 casualties.\n\nThe French abandoned Andalusia, and combined the troops of Soult and Marmont. Thus combined, the French outnumbered the British, putting the British forces in a precarious position. Wellington withdrew his army and, joined with the smaller corps commanded by Rowland Hill, began to retreat to Portugal. Marshal Soult declined to attack.\n\nIn 1813, Wellington led a new offensive, this time against the French line of communications. He struck through the hills north of Burgos, the Tras os Montes, and switched his supply line from Portugal to Santander on Spain's north coast; this led to the French abandoning Madrid and Burgos. Continuing to outflank the French lines, Wellington caught up with and smashed the army of King Joseph Bonaparte in the Battle of Vitoria, for which he was promoted to field marshal on 21 June. He personally led a column against the French centre, while other columns commanded by Sir Thomas Graham, Rowland Hill and the Earl of Dalhousie looped around the French right and left (this battle became the subject of Beethoven's orchestral piece, the \"Wellington's Victory\" (Opus 91). The British troops broke ranks to loot the abandoned French wagons instead of pursuing the beaten foe. This gross abandonment of discipline caused an enraged Wellington to write in a famous dispatch to Earl Bathurst, \"We have in the service the scum of the earth as common soldiers\".\n\nAlthough later, when his temper had cooled, he extended his comment to praise the men under his command saying that though many of the men were, \"the scum of the earth; it is really wonderful that we should have made them to the fine fellows they are\".\n\nAfter taking the small fortresses of Pamplona, Wellington invested San Sebastián but was frustrated by the obstinate French garrison, losing 693 dead and 316 captured in a failed assault and suspending the siege at the end of July. Soult's relief attempt was blocked by the Spanish Army of Galicia at San Marcial, allowing the Allies to consolidate their position and tighten the ring around the city, which fell in September after a second spirited defence. Wellington then forced Soult's demoralised and battered army into a fighting retreat into France, punctuated by battles at the Pyrenees, Bidassoa and Nivelle. Wellington invaded southern France, winning at the Nive and Orthez. Wellington's final battle against his rival Soult occurred at Toulouse, where the Allied divisions were badly mauled storming the French redoubts, losing some 4,600 men. Despite this momentary victory, news arrived of Napoleon's defeat and abdication and Soult, seeing no reason to continue the fighting, agreed on a ceasefire with Wellington, allowing Soult to evacuate the city.\n\nHailed as the conquering hero by the British, on 3 May 1814 Wellington was made Duke of Wellington, in the county of Somerset, together with the subsidiary title of Marquess Douro, in the said County.\n\nHe received some recognition during his lifetime (the title of \"Duque de Ciudad Rodrigo\" and \"Grandee of Spain\") and the Spanish King Ferdinand VII allowed him to keep part of the works of art from the Royal Collection which he had recovered from the French. His equestrian portrait features prominently in the Monument to the Battle of Vitoria, in present-day Vitoria-Gasteiz.\n\nHis popularity in Britain was due to his image and his appearance as well as to his military triumphs. His victory fitted well with the passion and intensity of the Romantic movement, with its emphasis on individuality. His personal style influenced the fashions on Britain at the time: his tall, lean figure and his plumed black hat and grand yet classic uniform and white trousers became very popular.\n\nIn late 1814, the Prime Minister wanted him to take command in Canada and with the assignment of winning the War of 1812 against the United States. Wellesley replied that he would go to America, but he believed that he was needed more in Europe. He stated:\n\nHe was appointed Ambassador to France, then took Lord Castlereagh's place as first plenipotentiary to the Congress of Vienna, where he strongly advocated allowing France to keep its place in the European balance of power. On 2 January 1815 the title of his Knighthood of the Bath was converted to Knight Grand Cross upon the expansion of that order.\n\nOn 26 February 1815, Napoleon escaped from Elba and returned to France. He regained control of the country by May and faced a renewed alliance against him. Wellington left Vienna for what became known as the Waterloo Campaign. He arrived in the Netherlands to take command of the British-German army and their allied Dutch, all stationed alongside the Prussian forces of Generalfeldmarschall Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher.\n\nNapoleon's strategy was to isolate the Allied and Prussian armies and annihilate each one separately before the Austrians and Russians arrived. In doing so the vast superiority in numbers of the Coalition would be greatly diminished. He would then seek the possibility of peace with Austria and Russia.\n\nThe French invaded the Netherlands, with Napoleon defeating the Prussians at Ligny, and Marshal Ney engaging indecisively with Wellington, at the Battle of Quatre Bras. The Prussians retreated 18 miles north to Wavre whilst Wellington's Anglo-Allied army withdrew 15 miles north to a site he had noted the previous year as favourable for a battle: the north ridge of a shallow valley on the Brussels road, just south of the small town of Waterloo. On 17 June there was torrential rain, which severely hampered movement and had a considerable effect the next day, 18 June, when the Battle of Waterloo was fought. This was the first time Wellington had encountered Napoleon; he commanded an Anglo-Dutch-German army that consisted of approximately 73,000 troops, 26,000 of whom were British. Approximately 30 percent of that 26,000 were Irish.\n\nThe Battle of Waterloo commenced with a diversionary attack on Hougoumont by a division of French soldiers. After a barrage of 80 cannons, the first French infantry attack was launched by Comte D'Erlon's I Corps. D'Erlon's troops advanced through the Allied centre, resulting in Allied troops in front of the ridge retreating in disorder through the main position. D'Erlon's corps stormed the most fortified Allied position, La Haye Sainte, but failed to take it. An Allied division under Thomas Picton met the remainder of D'Erlon's corps head to head, engaging them in an infantry duel in which Picton fell. During this struggle Lord Uxbridge launched two of his cavalry brigades at the enemy, catching the French infantry off guard, driving them to the bottom of the slope, and capturing two French Imperial Eagles. The charge, however, over-reached itself, and the British cavalry, crushed by fresh French horsemen hurled at them by Napoleon, were driven back, suffering tremendous losses.\n\nA little before 16:00, Marshal Ney noted an apparent exodus from Wellington's centre. He mistook the movement of casualties to the rear for the beginnings of a retreat, and sought to exploit it. Ney at this time had few infantry reserves left, as most of the infantry had been committed either to the futile Hougoumont attack or to the defence of the French right. Ney therefore tried to break Wellington's centre with a cavalry charge alone.\n\nAt about 16:30, the first Prussian corps arrived. Commanded by Freiherr von Bülow, IV Corps arrived as the French cavalry attack was in full spate. Bülow sent the 15th Brigade to link up with Wellington's left flank in the Frichermont–La Haie area while the brigade's horse artillery battery and additional brigade artillery deployed to its left in support. Napoleon sent Lobau's corps to intercept the rest of Bülow's IV Corps proceeding to Plancenoit. The 15th Brigade sent Lobau's corps into retreat to the Plancenoit area. Von Hiller's 16th Brigade also pushed forward with six battalions against Plancenoit. Napoleon had dispatched all eight battalions of the Young Guard to reinforce Lobau, who was now seriously pressed by the enemy. Napoleon's Young Guard counter-attacked and, after very hard fighting, secured Plancenoit, but were themselves counter-attacked and driven out. Napoleon then resorted to sending two battalions of the Middle and Old Guard into Plancenoit and after ferocious fighting they recaptured the village.\nThe French cavalry attacked the British infantry squares many times, each at a heavy cost to the French but with few British casualties. Ney himself was displaced from his horse four times. Eventually, it became obvious, even to Ney, that cavalry alone were achieving little. Belatedly, he organised a combined-arms attack, using Bachelu's division and Tissot's regiment of Foy's division from Reille's II Corps plus those French cavalry that remained in a fit state to fight. This assault was directed along much the same route as the previous heavy cavalry attacks.\nMeanwhile, at approximately the same time as Ney's combined-arms assault on the centre-right of Wellington's line, Napoleon ordered Ney to capture La Haye Sainte at whatever the cost. Ney accomplished this with what was left of D'Erlon's corps soon after 18:00. Ney then moved horse artillery up towards Wellington's centre and began to destroy the infantry squares at short-range with canister. This all but destroyed the 27th (Inniskilling) Regiment, and the 30th and 73rd Regiments suffered such heavy losses that they had to combine to form a viable square. Wellington's centre was now on the verge of collapse and wide open to an attack from the French. Luckily for Wellington, Pirch I's and Zieten's corps of the Prussian Army were now at hand. Zieten's corps permitted the two fresh cavalry brigades of Vivian and Vandeleur on Wellington's extreme left to be moved and posted behind the depleted centre. Pirch I Corps then proceeded to support Bülow and together they regained possession of Plancenoit, and once more the Charleroi road was swept by Prussian round shot. The value of this reinforcement at this particular moment can hardly be overestimated.\nThe French army now fiercely attacked the Coalition all along the line with the culminating point being reached when Napoleon sent forward the Imperial Guard at 19:30. The attack of the Imperial Guards was mounted by five battalions of the Middle Guard, and not by the Grenadiers or Chasseurs of the Old Guard. Marching through a hail of canister and skirmisher fire and severely outnumbered, the 3,000 or so Middle Guardsmen advanced to the west of La Haye Sainte and proceeded to separate into three distinct attack forces. One, consisting of two battalions of Grenadiers, defeated the Coalition's first line and marched on. Chassé's relatively fresh Dutch division was sent against them and Allied artillery fired into the victorious Grenadiers' flank. This still could not stop the Guard's advance, so Chassé ordered his first brigade to charge the outnumbered French, who faltered and broke.\n\nFurther to the west, 1,500 British Foot Guards under Maitland were lying down to protect themselves from the French artillery. As two battalions of Chasseurs approached, the second prong of the Imperial Guard's attack, Maitland's guardsmen rose and devastated them with point-blank volleys. The Chasseurs deployed to counter-attack but began to waver. A bayonet charge by the Foot Guards then broke them. The third prong, a fresh Chasseur battalion, now came up in support. The British guardsmen retreated with these Chasseurs in pursuit, but the latter were halted as the 52nd Light Infantry wheeled in line onto their flank and poured a devastating fire into them and then charged. Under this onslaught, they too broke.\n\nThe last of the Guard retreated headlong. A ripple of panic passed through the French lines as the astounding news spread: \"\"La Garde recule. Sauve qui peut!\"\" (\"The Guard retreats. Save yourself if you can!\"). Wellington then stood up in Copenhagen's stirrups, and waved his hat in the air to signal an advance of the Allied line just as the Prussians were overrunning the French positions to the east. What remained of the French army then abandoned the field in disorder. Wellington and Blücher met at the inn of La Belle Alliance, on the north-south road which bisected the battlefield, and it was agreed that the Prussians should pursue the retreating French army back to France. The Treaty of Paris was signed on 20 November 1815.\n\nAfter the victory, the Duke supported proposals that a medal be awarded to all British soldiers who participated in the Waterloo campaign, and on 28 June 1815 he wrote to the Duke of York suggesting: ... the expediency of giving to the non commissioned officers and soldiers engaged in the Battle of Waterloo a medal. I am convinced it would have the best effect in the army, and if the battle should settle our concerns, they will well deserve it.The Waterloo Medal was duly authorised and distributed to all ranks in 1816.\n\nMuch historical discussion has been made about Napoleon's decision to send 33,000 troops under Marshal Grouchy to intercept the Prussians, but—having defeated Blücher at Ligny on 16 June and forced the Allies to retreat in divergent directions—Napoleon may have been strategically astute in a judgement that he would have been unable to beat the combined Allied forces on one battlefield. Wellington's comparable strategic gamble was to leave 17,000 troops and artillery, mostly Dutch, away at Halle, north-west of Mont-Saint-Jean, in case of a French advance up the Mons-Hal-Brussels road.\nThe campaign led to numerous other controversies, especially concerning the Prussians. For example: Were Wellington's troop dispositions prior to Napoleon's invasion of the Netherlands sound? Did Wellington somehow mislead or betray Blücher by promising, then failing, to come directly to Blücher's aid at Ligny? Who deserved the lion's share of credit for the victory—Wellington or the Prussians? These and other such issues concerning Blücher's, Wellington's, and Napoleon's decisions during the campaign were the subject of a major strategic-level study by the famous Prussian political-military theorist Carl von Clausewitz, \"Feldzug von 1815: Strategische Uebersicht des Feldzugs von 1815\", English title: \"The Campaign of 1815: Strategic Overview of the Campaign\". Written c.1827, this study was Clausewitz's last such work and is widely considered to be the best example of Clausewitz's mature theories concerning such analyses. It attracted the attention of Wellington's staff, who prompted the Duke to write his only published essay on the campaign (other than his immediate, official after-action report, \"The Waterloo Dispatch\"), his 1842 \"Memorandum on the Battle of Waterloo\". While Wellington disputed Clausewitz on several points, the Prussian writer largely absolved Wellington of accusations levelled against him by nationalistic German axe-grinders. This exchange with Clausewitz was quite famous in Britain in the 19th century (it was heavily discussed in, for example, Chesney's \"Waterloo Lectures\" (1868).) It seems, however, to have been systematically ignored by British historians writing since 1914, which is odd considering that it was one of only two discussions of the battle that Wellington wrote. The explanation, unfortunately, is probably that it drew too much attention to the decisive German role in Wellington's victory—which Wellington himself was perfectly happy to acknowledge, but which became an awkward subject given Anglo-German hostilities in the 20th century.\n\nWellington entered politics again when he was appointed Master-General of the Ordnance in the Tory government of Lord Liverpool on 26 December 1818. He also became Governor of Plymouth on 9 October 1819. He was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the British Army on 22 January 1827 and Constable of the Tower of London on 5 February 1827.\n\nAlong with Robert Peel, Wellington became an increasingly influential member of the Tory party, and in 1828 he resigned as Commander-in-Chief and became Prime Minister.\n\nDuring his first seven months as prime minister, he chose not to live in the official residence at 10 Downing Street, finding it too small. He moved in only because his own home, Apsley House, required extensive renovations. During this time he was largely instrumental in the foundation of King's College London. On 20 January 1829 Wellington was appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports.\n\nHis term was marked by Catholic emancipation: the granting of almost full civil rights to Catholics in Great Britain and Ireland. The change was prompted by the landslide by-election win of Daniel O'Connell, an Irish Catholic proponent of emancipation, who was elected despite not being legally allowed to sit in Parliament. In the House of Lords, facing stiff opposition, Wellington spoke for Catholic Emancipation, and according to some sources, gave one of the best speeches of his career. He was born in Ireland and so had some understanding of the grievances of the Catholic communities there; as Chief Secretary, he had given an undertaking that the remaining Penal Laws would only be enforced as \"mildly\" as possible. In 1811 Catholic soldiers were given freedom of worship and 18 years later the Catholic Relief Act 1829 was passed with a majority of 105. Many Tories voted against the Act, and it passed only with the help of the Whigs. Wellington had threatened to resign as Prime Minister if the King (George IV) did not give his Royal Assent.\n\nThe Earl of Winchilsea accused the Duke of \"an insidious design for the infringement of our liberties and the introduction of Popery into every department of the State\". Wellington responded by immediately challenging Winchilsea to a duel. On 21 March 1829, Wellington and Winchilsea met on Battersea fields. When the time came to fire, the Duke took aim and Winchilsea kept his arm down. The Duke fired wide to the right. Accounts differ as to whether he missed on purpose, an act known in dueling as a \"delope\". Wellington claimed he did. However, he was noted for his poor aim and reports more sympathetic to Winchilsea claimed he had aimed to kill. Winchilsea did not fire, a plan he and his second had almost certainly decided upon before the duel. Honour was saved and Winchilsea wrote Wellington an apology.\n\nThe nickname \"Iron Duke\" originates from this period, when he experienced a high degree of personal and political unpopularity. Its repeated use in \"Freeman's Journal\" throughout June 1830 appears to bear reference to his resolute political will, with taints of disapproval from its Irish editors. During this time, Wellington was greeted by a hostile reaction from the crowds at the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.\n\nWellington's government fell in 1830. In the summer and autumn of that year, a wave of riots swept the country. The Whigs had been out of power for most years since the 1770s, and saw political reform in response to the unrest as the key to their return. Wellington stuck to the Tory policy of no reform and no expansion of suffrage, and as a result, lost a vote of no confidence on 15 November 1830.\n\nThe Whigs introduced the first Reform Bill while Wellington and the Tories worked to prevent its passage. The Whigs could not get the bill past its second reading in the British House of Commons, and the bill failed. An election followed in direct response and the Whigs were returned with a landslide majority. A second Reform Act was introduced and passed in the House of Commons but was defeated in the Tory-controlled House of Lords. Another wave of near insurrection swept the country. Wellington's residence at Apsley House was targeted by a mob of demonstrators on 27 April 1831 and again on 12 October, leaving his windows smashed. Iron shutters were installed in June 1832 to prevent further damage by crowds angry over rejection of the Reform Bill, which he strongly opposed. The Whig Government fell in 1832 and Wellington was unable to form a Tory Government partly because of a run on the Bank of England. This left King William IV no choice but to restore Earl Grey to the premiership. Eventually, the bill passed the House of Lords after the King threatened to fill that House with newly created Whig peers if it were not. Wellington was never reconciled to the change; when Parliament first met after the first election under the widened franchise, Wellington is reported to have said \"I never saw so many shocking bad hats in my life\".\n\nWellington opposed the Jewish Civil Disabilities Repeal Bill, and he stated in Parliament on 1 August 1833 that England \"is a Christian country and a Christian legislature, and that the effect of this measure would be to remove that peculiar character.\" The Bill was defeated 104 votes to 54.\n\nWellington was gradually superseded as leader of the Tories by Robert Peel, while the party evolved into the Conservatives. When the Tories were returned to power in 1834, Wellington declined to become Prime Minister because he thought membership in Commons had become essential. The king reluctantly approved Peel, who was in Italy. So for three weeks in November and December 1834, Wellington acted as interim leader, taking the responsibilities of Prime Minister and most of the other ministries. In Peel's first cabinet (1834–1835), Wellington became Foreign Secretary, while in the second (1841–1846) he was a Minister without Portfolio and Leader of the House of Lords. Wellington was also re-appointed Commander-in-Chief of the British Army on 15 August 1842 following the resignation of Lord Hill.\n\nWellington served as the leader of the Conservative party in the House of Lords, 1828–1846. Some historians have belittled him as a befuddled reactionary, but a consensus in the late 20th century depicts him as a shrewd operator who hid his cleverness behind the facade of a poorly informed old soldier. Wellington worked to transform the Lords from unstinting support of the Crown to an active player in political maneuvering, with a commitment to the landed aristocracy. He used his London residence as a venue for intimate dinners and private consultations, together with extensive correspondence that kept him in close touch with party leaders in the Commons, and the main persona in the Lords. He gave public rhetorical support to Ultra-Tory anti-reform positions, but then deftly changed positions toward the party's center, especially when Peel needed support from the upper house. Wellington's success was based on the 44 Elected peers from Scotland and Ireland, whose election he controlled.\n\nWellesley married Kitty Pakenham in Dublin on 10 April 1806. The marriage proved unsatisfactory and the two spent years apart while he was campaigning. Kitty grew depressed, and Wellesley pursued other sexual and romantic partners.\nThey had Arthur in 1807 and Charles in 1808. The couple lived apart most of the time and occupied separate rooms when they were together. Her brother Edward Pakenham served under Wellesley throughout the Peninsular War, and Wellesley's regard for him helped to smooth his relations with Kitty, until Pakenham's death at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815.\n\nWellington retired from political life in 1846, although he remained Commander-in-Chief, and returned briefly to the spotlight in 1848 when he helped organise a military force to protect London during that year of European revolution.\n\nThe Conservative Party had split over the Repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, with Wellington and most of the former Cabinet still supporting Peel, but most of the MPs led by Lord Derby supporting a protectionist stance. Early in 1852 Wellington, by then very deaf, gave Derby's first government its nickname by shouting \"Who? Who?\" as the list of inexperienced Cabinet Ministers was read out in the House of Lords.\n\nHe became Chief Ranger and Keeper of Hyde Park and St. James's Park on 31 August 1850. He was also colonel of the 33rd Regiment of Foot from 1 February 1806 and colonel of the Grenadier Guards from 22 January 1827.\n\nKitty died of cancer in 1831; despite their generally unhappy relations, which had led to an effective separation, Wellington was said to have been greatly saddened by her death, his one comfort being that after \"half a lifetime together, they had come to understand each other at the end\". He had found consolation for his unhappy marriage in his warm friendship with the diarist Harriet Arbuthnot, wife of his colleague Charles Arbuthnot. Harriet's death in the cholera epidemic of 1834 was almost as great a blow to Wellington as it was to her husband. The two widowers spent their last years together at Apsley House.\n\nWellington died at Walmer Castle in Deal on 14 September 1852. This was his residence as Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. Walmer Castle was said to have been his favourite residence. He was found to be unwell on that morning and was aided from his military campaign bed (the same one he used throughout his historic military career) and seated in his chair where he died. His death was recorded as being due to the after-effects of a stroke culminating in a series of seizures. He was aged 83.\n\nAlthough in life he hated travelling by rail (after witnessing the death of William Huskisson, one of the first railway accident casualties), his body was then taken by train to London, where he was given a state funeral – one of only a handful of British subjects to be honoured in that way (other examples are Lord Nelson and Sir Winston Churchill) – and the last heraldic state funeral to be held in Britain. The funeral took place on 18 November 1852. At his funeral there was hardly any space to stand because of the number of people attending, and the effusive praise given him in Tennyson's \"Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington\" attests to his stature at the time of his death. He was buried in a sarcophagus of luxulyanite in St Paul's Cathedral next to Lord Nelson. A bronze memorial was sculpted by Alfred Stevens, and features two intricate supports: \"Truth tearing the tongue out of the mouth of False-hood\", and \"Valour trampling Cowardice underfoot\". Stevens did not live to see it placed in its home under one of the great arches of the Cathedral.\n\nWellington's casket was decorated with banners which were made for his funeral procession. Originally, there was one from Prussia, which was removed during World War I and never reinstated. In the procession, the \"Great Banner\" was carried by General Sir James Charles Chatterton of the 4th Dragoon Guards on the orders of Queen Victoria.\n\nMost of the book \"A Biographical Sketch of the Military and Political Career of the Late Duke of Wellington\" by Weymouth newspaper proprietor Joseph Drew is a detailed contemporary account of his death, lying in state and funeral.\n\nAfter his death, Irish and English newspapers disputed whether Wellington had been born an Irishman or an Englishman. In 2002, he was number 15 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.\n\nOwing to its links with Wellington, as the former commanding officer and colonel of the regiment, the title \"33rd (The Duke of Wellington's) Regiment\" was granted to the 33rd Regiment of Foot, on 18 June 1853 (the 38th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo) by Queen Victoria. Wellington's battle record is exemplary; he participated in some 60 battles during the course of his military career.\n\nWellington always rose early; he \"couldn't bear to lie awake in bed\", even if the army was not on the march. Even when he returned to civilian life after 1815, he slept in a camp bed, reflecting his lack of regard for creature comforts; it remains on display in Walmer Castle. General Miguel de Álava complained that Wellington said so often that the army would march \"at daybreak\" and dine on \"cold meat\", that he began to dread those two phrases. While on campaign, he seldom ate anything between breakfast and dinner. During the retreat to Portugal in 1811, he subsisted on \"cold meat and bread\", to the despair of his staff who dined with him. He was, however, renowned for the quality of the wine that he drank and served, often drinking a bottle with his dinner (not a great quantity by the standards of his day).\n\nHe rarely showed emotion in public, and often appeared condescending to those less competent or less well-born than himself (which was nearly everyone). However, Álava was a witness to an incident just before the Battle of Salamanca. Wellington was eating a chicken leg while observing the manoeuvres of the French army through a spyglass. He spotted an overextension in the French left flank, and realised that he could launch a successful attack there. He threw the drumstick in the air and shouted \"\"Les français sont perdus!\"\" (\"The French are lost!\"). After the Battle of Toulouse, an aide brought him the news of Napoleon's abdication, and Wellington broke into an impromptu flamenco dance, spinning around on his heels and clicking his fingers.\nMilitary historian Charles Dalton recorded that, after a hard-fought battle in Spain, a young officer made the comment, \"I am going to dine with Wellington tonight\", which was overheard by the Duke as he rode by. \"Give me at least the prefix of Mr. before my name,\" Wellington said. \"My Lord,\" replied the officer, \"we do not speak of Mr. Caesar or Mr. Alexander, so why should I speak of Mr. Wellington?\"\n\nHis stern countenance and iron-handed discipline were renowned; he was said to disapprove of soldiers cheering as \"too nearly an expression of opinion.\" Nevertheless, Wellington cared for his men; he refused to pursue the French after the battles of Porto and Salamanca, foreseeing an inevitable cost to his army in chasing a diminished enemy through rough terrain. The only time that he ever showed grief in public was after the storming of Badajoz; he cried at the sight of the British dead in the breaches. In this context, his famous dispatch after the Battle of Vitoria, calling them the \"scum of the earth,\" can be seen to be fuelled as much by disappointment at their breaking ranks as by anger. He expressed his grief openly the night after Waterloo before his personal physician, and later with his family; unwilling to be congratulated for his victory, he broke down in tears, his fighting spirit diminished by the high cost of the battle and great personal loss.\n\nWellington's soldier servant, a gruff German called Beckerman, and his long-serving valet, James Kendall, who served him for 25 years and was with him when he died, were both devoted to him. (A story that he never spoke to his servants and preferred instead to write his orders on a note pad on his dressing table in fact probably refers to his son, the 2nd Duke. It was recorded by the 3rd Duke's niece, Viva Seton Montgomerie (1879-1959), as being an anecdote she heard from an old retainer, Charles Holman who was said greatly to resemble Napoleon. Holman is recorded as a servant of the Dukes of Wellington from 1871 to 1905).\n\nFollowing an incident when, as Master-General of the Ordnance he had been close to a large explosion, Wellington began to experience deafness and other ear-related problems. In 1822, he had an operation to improve the hearing of the left ear. The result, however, was that he became permanently deaf on that side. It is claimed that he was \"never quite well afterwards\".\n\nWellington had a \"vigorous sexual appetite\" and many amorous liaisons during his marriage to Kitty. He enjoyed the company of intellectual and attractive women for many decades, particularly after the Battle of Waterloo and his subsequent ambassadorial position in Paris. The British press lampooned this side of the national hero. In 1824, one liaison came back to haunt him, when Wellington received a letter from a publisher offering to refrain from issuing an edition of the rather racy memoirs of one of his mistresses Harriette Wilson, in exchange for financial consideration. It is said that the Duke promptly returned the letter, after scrawling across it, \"Publish and be damned\". However, Hibbert notes in his biography that the letter can be found among the Duke's papers, with nothing written on it. It is certain that Wellington \"did\" reply, and the tone of a further letter from the publisher, quoted by Longford, suggests that he had refused in the strongest language to submit to blackmail.\n\nHe was also a remarkably practical man who spoke concisely. In 1851, it was discovered that there were a great many sparrows flying about in the Crystal Palace just before the Great Exhibition was to open. His advice to Queen Victoria was \"Sparrowhawks, ma'am\".\n\nWellington has often been portrayed as a defensive general, even though many, perhaps most, of his battles were offensive (Argaum, Assaye, Oporto, Salamanca, Vitoria, Toulouse). But for most of the Peninsular War, where he earned his fame, his army lacked the numbers for a strategically offensive posture.\n\nBULLET::::- Mount Wellington, a mountain located in Otsego County, New York is named after him.\nBULLET::::- Wellington, the capital city of New Zealand.\nBULLET::::- Wellington College, Berkshire, a British public school, was founded by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in his honour in 1859.\n\nThis commonly used nickname originally related to his consistent political resolve rather than to any particular incident. In various cases its editorial use appears to be disparaging. It is likely that its use became more widespread after an incident in 1832 in which he installed metal shutters to prevent rioters breaking windows at Apsley House. The term may have been made increasingly popular by \"Punch\" cartoons published in 1844–45.\n\nWellington had various other nicknames:\nBULLET::::- In the popular ballads of the day Wellington was called \"\"Nosey\"\" or \"\"Old Nosey\"\".\nBULLET::::- Tsar Alexander I of Russia called Wellington \"\"Le vainqueur du vainqueur du monde\"\", the conqueror of the world's conqueror, the phrase \"the world's conqueror\" obviously referring to Napoleon. Lord Tennyson uses a similar reference in his \"Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington,\" referring to him as \"The great World-victor's victor.\"\nBULLET::::- Officers under his command called him \"\"The Beau\"\", as he was a fine dresser.\nBULLET::::- Spanish troops called him \"\"The Eagle\"\", while Portuguese troops called him \"\"Douro Douro\"\" after his river crossing at Oporto in 1809.\nBULLET::::- \"\"Beau Douro\"\"; Wellington found this amusing when hearing it used by a Colonel of the Coldstream Guards.\nBULLET::::- \"\"Sepoy General\"\"; Napoleon used this term as an insult to Wellington's military service in India, publicly considering him an unworthy opponent. The name was used in the French newspaper \"Le Moniteur Universel\", as a means of propaganda.\nBULLET::::- \"\"The Beef\"\"; It is a theory that the Beef Wellington dish is a reference to Wellington, although some chefs dispute this.\n\nIn addition:\nBULLET::::- His name was given to Wellington boots, after the custom-made boots he wore instead of traditional Hessian boots.\n\nBULLET::::- Military career of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington\nBULLET::::- Army Gold Medal\nBULLET::::- Military General Service Medal\nBULLET::::- Seringapatam medal\nBULLET::::- Cotiote War\nBULLET::::- Hippodrome Wellington\nBULLET::::- Equestrian statue of the Duke of Wellington, Glasgow\nBULLET::::- Wellington's Column, Liverpool\nBULLET::::- Wellington Statue, Aldershot\nBULLET::::- Wellington Square, North Adelaide\nBULLET::::- Wellington Square, Perth\nBULLET::::- Vickers Wellesley\nBULLET::::- Vickers Wellington\n\nBULLET::::- This on-line text contains Clausewitz's 58-chapter study of the \"Campaign of 1815\" and Wellington's lengthy 1842 essay written in response to Clausewitz, as well as supporting documents and essays by the editors.\nBULLET::::- Davies, Huw J. (2012). \"Wellington's Wars: The Making of a Military Genius.\" London: Yale University Press. .\nBULLET::::- Weller, Jac (1993) [1st pub. 1972]. \"Wellington in India.\" London: Greenhill Books. .\n\nBULLET::::- Longford, Elizabeth. \"Wellington: Pillar of State\" (1972), vol 2 of her biography; online\nBULLET::::- Muir, Rory. \"Wellington: The Path to Victory 1769–1814\" (2013) vol 1 of two-volume scholarly biography excerpt and text search\n\nBULLET::::- Duke of Wellington's Regiment – West Riding\nBULLET::::- Papers of Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington (MS 61) at the University of Southampton\nBULLET::::- More about Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington on the Downing Street website\nBULLET::::- \"Napoleon and Wellington\", BBC Radio 4 discussion with Andrew Roberts, Mike Broer and Belinda Beaton (\"In Our Time\", Oct. 25, 2001)\n"}
{"id": "8476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8476", "title": "Disk operating system", "text": "Disk operating system\n\nA disk operating system (abbreviated DOS) is a computer operating system that can use a disk storage device, such as a floppy disk, hard disk drive, or optical disc. A disk operating system must provide a file system for organizing, reading, and writing files on the storage disk. Strictly speaking, this definition does not apply to current generations of operating systems, such as versions of Microsoft Windows in use, and is more appropriately used only for older generations of operating systems.\n\nDisk operating systems were available for mainframes, microprocessors and home computers and were usually loaded from the disks themselves as part of the boot process.\n\nIn the early days of computers, there were no disk drives, floppy disks or modern flash storage devices. Early storage devices such as delay lines, core memories, punched cards, punched tape, magnetic tape, and magnetic drums were used instead. And in the early days of microcomputers and home computers, paper tape or audio cassette tape (see Kansas City standard) or nothing were used instead. In the latter case, program and data entry was done at front panel switches directly into memory or through a computer terminal / keyboard, sometimes controlled by a BASIC interpreter in ROM; when power was turned off any information was lost.\n\nBoth hard disks and floppy disk drives require software to manage rapid access to block storage of sequential and other data. For most microcomputers, a disk drive of any kind was an optional peripheral; systems could be used with a tape drive or booted without a storage device at all. The disk operating system component of the operating system was only needed when a disk drive was used.\n\nThe DOS concept began with DOS/360 in 1966 for IBM's System/360 mainframes. Most home and personal computers of the late 1970s and 1980s used a disk operating system, most often with \"DOS\" in the name and simply referred to as \"DOS\" within their respective communities: CBM DOS for Commodore 8-bit systems, Atari DOS for the Atari 8-bit family, TRS-DOS for the TRS-80, and Apple DOS for the Apple II, and MS-DOS for IBM PC compatibles.\n\nUsually, a disk operating system was loaded from a disk. Among the exceptions were Commodore, whose DOS resided on ROM chips in the disk drives. The Lt. Kernal hard disk subsystem for the Commodore 64 and Commodore 128 models stored its DOS on the disk, as is the case with modern systems, and loaded the DOS into RAM at boot time; the British BBC Micro's optional Disc Filing System, DFS, offered as a kit with a disk controller chip, a ROM chip, and a handful of logic chips, to be installed inside the computer.\n\nBULLET::::- Apple DOS was the primary operating system for the Apple II series of computers, from 1979 with the introduction of the floppy disk drive, until 1983 when it was replaced by ProDOS.\nBULLET::::- Commodore DOS was used on 8-bit Commodore computers such as the Commodore 64. Unlike most other DOS systems, it was integrated into the disk drives, not loaded into the computer's own memory.\nBULLET::::- Atari DOS was used by the Atari 8-bit family of computers. The Atari OS only offered low-level disk-access, so an extra layer called \"DOS\" was booted from a floppy and offered higher level functions such as filesystems. Third-party replacements for Atari DOS were also available: DOS XL, SpartaDOS, MyDOS, TurboDOS, Top-DOS.\nBULLET::::- MSX-DOS for the MSX computer standard. Initial version, released in 1984, was nothing but MS-DOS 1.0 ported to Z80; but in 1988 it evolved to version 2, offering facilities such as subdirectories, memory management and environment strings. The MSX-DOS kernel resided in ROM (built-in on the disk controller) so basic file access capacity was available even without the command interpreter, by using BASIC extended commands.\nBULLET::::- Disc Filing System (DFS) This was an optional component for the Acorn BBC Micro, offered as a kit with a disk controller chip, a ROM chip, and a handful of logic chips, to be installed inside the computer\nBULLET::::- Advanced Disc Filing System (ADFS) was a successor to Acorn's DFS.\nBULLET::::- AMSDOS for the Amstrad CPC computers.\nBULLET::::- GDOS and G+DOS, for the +D and DISCiPLE disk interfaces for the ZX Spectrum.\n\nSome disk operating systems were the operating system for the entire computer system.\nBULLET::::- The DOS/360 initial/simple operating system for the IBM System/360 family of mainframe computers (it later became DOS/VSE, and was eventually just called VSE).\nBULLET::::- The DOS-11 operating system for DEC PDP-11 minicomputers.\nBULLET::::- CP/M was a disk operating system--even though it was named as such--used as the main or alternate operating system for numerous microcomputers of the 1970s and 1980s.\nBULLET::::- TRSDOS was the operating system for the TRS-80 line of computers from Tandy.\nBULLET::::- MS-DOS for IBM PC compatibles with Intel x86 CPUs. It started as 86-DOS, which was modeled on CP/M, and then itself served as the basis for Microsoft's MS-DOS, and was rebranded by IBM as IBM PC DOS until 1993. Various compatible systems were later produced by different organizations, starting with DR-DOS in 1988.\n\nBULLET::::- Live CD\n"}
{"id": "8477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8477", "title": "Dual", "text": "Dual\n\nDual or Duals may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Dual (mathematics), a notion of paired concepts that mirror one another\nBULLET::::- Dual (category theory), a formalization of mathematical duality\nBULLET::::- . . . see more cases in\nBULLET::::- Dual (grammatical number), a grammatical category used in some languages\nBULLET::::- Dual-Ghia, US-brand of luxury-car of the late 1950s\nBULLET::::- Dual impedance, electrical circuits that are the dual of each other\nBULLET::::- Dual diagnosis, a psychiatric diagnosis of co-occurrence of substance abuse and a mental problem\nBULLET::::- Dual fertilization, simultaneous application of a P-type and N-type fertilizer\nBULLET::::- DUAL (cognitive architecture), an artificial intelligence design model\nBULLET::::- DUAL algorithm, or diffusing update algorithm, used to update Internet protocol routing tables\nBULLET::::- DUAL table, a special one-row and one-column database table\nBULLET::::- Dual SIM cellphone\nBULLET::::- Dual (brand), a manufacturer of Hifi equipment\nBULLET::::- Dual county, referring to a Gaelic Athletic Association county which traditionally competes at a similar level in both Gaelic football and hurling\nBULLET::::- Aerochute International Dual a two-seat Australian powered parachute design\n\nBULLET::::- \"Dual\" (film), 2008\nBULLET::::- \"Dual\" (\"Heroes\"), an episode of \"Heroes\"\nBULLET::::- Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure, an anime series\nBULLET::::- \"Dual\" (album), an album of traditional Scottish and Irish music recorded by Éamonn Doorley, Muireann Nic Amhlaoibh, Julie Fowlis and Ross Martin, released 2008\nBULLET::::- \"Dual\" (Sampha EP)\nBULLET::::- \"Duals\", an album by U2\nBULLET::::- The Duals band\nBULLET::::- \"Dual\", a South Korean TV Series\n\nBULLET::::- Duality (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Duel (disambiguation), a homonym\nBULLET::::- Double (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "8478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8478", "title": "Doublespeak", "text": "Doublespeak\n\nDoublespeak is language that deliberately obscures, disguises, distorts, or reverses the meaning of words. Doublespeak may take the form of euphemisms (e.g. \"downsizing\" for layoffs and \"servicing the target\" for bombing), in which case it is primarily meant to make the truth sound more palatable. It may also refer to intentional ambiguity in language or to actual inversions of meaning. In such cases, doublespeak disguises the nature of the truth. Doublespeak is most closely associated with political language.\n\nThe term \"doublespeak\" originates in George Orwell's book \"1984\" (Nineteen Eighty-Four). Although the term is not used in the book, it is a close relative of two of the book's central concepts, \"doublethink\" and \"Newspeak\". Another variant, \"doubletalk\", also referring to deliberately ambiguous speech, did exist at the time Orwell wrote his book, but the usage of \"doublespeak\", as well as of \"doubletalk\", in the sense emphasizing ambiguity clearly postdates the publication of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". Parallels have also been drawn between doublespeak and Orwell's classic essay \"Politics and the English Language\", which discusses the distortion of language for political purposes. In it he observes that political language serves to distort and obfuscate reality. Orwell's description of political speech is extremely similar to the contemporary definition of doublespeak: \n\nThe writer Edward S. Herman cited what he saw as examples of doublespeak and doublethink in modern society. Herman describes in his book \"Beyond Hypocrisy\" the principal characteristics of doublespeak:\nTerrence P. Moran of the US National Council of Teachers of English has compared the use of doublespeak in the mass media to a set of laboratory experiments conducted on rats. In the experiment, a sample of rats was first deprived of food, before one group was fed sugar and water and the other group a saccharin solution. Both groups exhibited behavior indicating that their hunger was satisfied, but rats in the second group (which were fed saccharin solution) died of malnutrition. Moran parallels doublespeak's effects on the social masses to the second group of rats upon whom an illusionary effect was created. He also highlights the structural nature of doublespeak, and notes that the mass media and other social institutions employ an active, downward-aimed approach in managing the opinions of society at large: Doublespeak also has close connections with some contemporary theories. Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky comment in their book \"\" that Orwellian doublespeak is an important component of the manipulation of the English language in American media, through a process called \"dichotomization,\" a component of media propaganda involving \"deeply embedded double standards in the reporting of news.\" For example, the use of state funds by the poor and financially needy is commonly referred to as \"social welfare\" or \"handouts,\" which the \"coddled\" poor \"take advantage of.\" These terms, however, are not as often applied to other beneficiaries of government spending such as military spending.\n\nThe National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) Committee on Public Doublespeak was formed in 1971, in the midst of the Watergate scandal. It was at a point when there was widespread skepticism about the degree of truth which characterized relationships between the public and the worlds of politics, the military, and business. NCTE passed two resolutions. One called for the Council to find means to study dishonest and inhumane uses of language and literature by advertisers, to bring offenses to public attention, and to propose classroom techniques for preparing children to cope with commercial propaganda. The other called for the Council to find means to study the relationships between language and public policy and to track, publicize, and combat semantic distortion by public officials, candidates for office, political commentators, and all others whose language is transmitted through the mass media. The two resolutions were accomplished by forming NCTE's Committee on Public Doublespeak, a body which has made significant contributions in describing the need for reform where clarity in communication has been deliberately distorted.\n\nHugh Rank helped form the Doublespeak committee in 1971 and was its first chairman. Under his editorship, the committee produced a book called \"Language and Public Policy\" (1974), with the aim of informing readers of the extensive scope of doublespeak being used to deliberately mislead and deceive the audience. He highlighted the deliberate public misuses of language and provided strategies for countering doublespeak by focusing on educating people in the English language so as to help them identify when doublespeak is being put into play. He was also the founder of the Intensify/Downplay pattern that has been widely used to identify instances of doublespeak being used.\n\nDaniel Dieterich served as the second chairman of the Doublespeak committee after Hugh Rank in 1975. He served as editor of its second publication, \"Teaching about Doublespeak\" (1976), which carried forward the Committee's charge to inform teachers of ways of teaching students how to recognize and combat language designed to mislead and misinform.\n\nWilliam D. Lutz has served as the third chairman of the Doublespeak Committee since 1975. In 1989, both his own book \"Doublespeak\" and, under his editorship, the committee's third book, \"Beyond Nineteen Eighty-Four\", were published. \"Beyond Nineteen Eighty-Four\" consists of 220 pages and eighteen articles contributed by long-time Committee members and others whose bodies of work have contributed to public understanding about language, as well as a bibliography of 103 sources on doublespeak. Lutz was also the former editor of the now defunct \"Quarterly Review of Doublespeak\", which examined the use of vocabulary by public officials to obscure the underlying meaning of what they tell the public. Lutz is one of the main contributors to the committee as well as promoting the term \"doublespeak\" to a mass audience to inform them of its deceptive qualities. He mentions:\n\nA. M. Tibbetts is one of the main critics of the NCTE, claiming that \"the Committee's very approach to the misuse of language and what it calls 'doublespeak' may in the long run limit its usefulness\". According to him, the \"Committee's use of Orwell is both confused and confusing\". The NCTE's publications resonate with George Orwell's name, and allusions to him abound in statements on doublespeak; for example, the committee quoted Orwell's remark that \"language is often used as an instrument of social control\" in \"Language and Public Policy\". Tibbetts argues that such a relation between NCTE and Orwell's work is contradictory because \"the Committee's attitude towards language is liberal, even radical\" while \"Orwell's attitude was conservative, even reactionary\". He also criticizes the Committee's \"continual attack\" against linguistic \"purism\".\n\nWhereas in the early days of the practice it was considered wrong to construct words to disguise meaning, this is now an established practice. There is a thriving industry in constructing words without explicit meaning but with particular connotations for new products or companies. Doublespeak is also employed in the field of politics.\n\nAdvertisers can use doublespeak to mask their commercial intent from users, as users' defenses against advertising become more entrenched. Some are attempting to counter this technique with a number of systems offering diverse views and information to highlight the manipulative and dishonest methods that advertisers employ.\n\nAccording to Jacques Ellul, \"the aim is not to even modify people’s ideas on a given subject, rather, it is to achieve conformity in the way that people act.\" He demonstrates this view by offering an example from drug advertising. Use of doublespeak in advertisements resulted in aspirin production rates rising by almost 50 percent from over 23 million pounds in 1960 to over 35 million pounds in 1970.\n\nCharles Weingartner, one of the founding members of the NCTE committee on Public Doublespeak mentioned: \"people do not know enough about the subject (the reality) to recognize that the language being used conceals, distorts, misleads. Teachers of English should teach our students that words are not things, but verbal tokens or signs of things that should finally be carried back to the things that they stand for to be verified.\"\n\nAccording to William Lutz: \"Only by teaching respect and love for the language can teachers of English instill in students the sense of outrage they should experience when they encounter doublespeak.\" \"Only by using language well will we come to appreciate the perversion inherent in doublespeak.\"\nThis pattern was formulated by Hugh Rank and is a simple tool designed to teach some basic patterns of persuasion used in political propaganda and commercial advertising. The function of the intensify/downplay pattern is not to dictate what should be discussed but to encourage coherent thought and systematic organization. The pattern works in two ways: intensifying and downplaying. All people intensify and this is done via repetition, association and composition. Downplaying is commonly done via omission, diversion and confusion as they communicate in words, gestures, numbers, et cetera. Individuals can better cope with organized persuasion by recognizing the common ways whereby communication is intensified or downplayed, so as to counter doublespeak.\n\nDoublespeak is often used by politicians for the advancement of their agenda. The Doublespeak Award is an \"ironic tribute to public speakers who have perpetuated language that is grossly deceptive, evasive, euphemistic, confusing, or self-centered.\" It has been issued by the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) since 1974. The recipients of the Doublespeak Award are usually politicians, national administration or departments. An example of this is the United States Department of Defense, which won the award three times in 1991, 1993, and 2001. For the 1991 award, the United States Department of Defense \"swept the first six places in the Doublespeak top ten\" for using euphemisms like \"servicing the target\" (bombing) and \"force packages\" (warplanes). Among the other phrases in contention were \"difficult exercise in labor relations\", meaning a strike, and \"meaningful downturn in aggregate output\", an attempt to avoid saying the word \"recession\".\n\nDoublespeak, particularly when exaggerated, can be used as a device in satirical comedy and social commentary to ironically parody political or bureaucratic establishments intent on obfuscation or prevarication. The television series \"Yes Minister\" is notable for its use of this device. Oscar Wilde was an early proponent of this device and a significant influence on Orwell.\n\nBULLET::::- Aesopian language\nBULLET::::- Alternative facts\nBULLET::::- Business speak\nBULLET::::- Catachresis\nBULLET::::- Cognitive dissonance\nBULLET::::- Double bind\nBULLET::::- Double entendre\nBULLET::::- Double-talk\nBULLET::::- Doublespeak Award\nBULLET::::- Euphemism\nBULLET::::- Obscurantism\nBULLET::::- Polite fiction\nBULLET::::- Lutz, William. (1987). \"Doublespeak: From \"Revenue Enhancement\" to \"Terminal Living\": How Government, Business, Advertisers, and Others Use Language to Deceive You\". New York: Harper & Row\n\nBULLET::::- Business Doublespeak A short essay by William Lutz\nBULLET::::- DoubleSpeak Homepage by Michele Damron (1998)\nBULLET::::- National Council of Teachers of English Doublespeak Award established in 1974\n"}
{"id": "8481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8481", "title": "Dressed to Kill (1980 film)", "text": "Dressed to Kill (1980 film)\n\nDressed to Kill is a 1980 American neo-noir erotic slasher film written and directed by Brian De Palma and starring Michael Caine, Angie Dickinson, Nancy Allen, and Keith Gordon. A New York City housewife is brutally stabbed to death in an elevator, and the film subsequently follows her psychiatrist, her teenage son, and a prostitute who witnessed her murder. The original music score is composed by Pino Donaggio.\n\nReleased in the summer of 1980, \"Dressed to Kill\" was a box office hit in the United States, grossing over $30 million. It received largely favorable reviews, and critic David Denby of \"New York Magazine\" proclaimed it \"the first great American movie of the '80s.\" Allen received both a Golden Globe Award nomination for New Star of the Year, as well as a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress, while Dickinson received a Saturn Award for Best Actress for her performance.\n\nKate Miller is a sexually frustrated housewife who is in therapy with New York City psychiatrist Dr. Robert Elliott. During an appointment, Kate attempts to seduce him, but Elliott rejects her advances. Kate goes to the Metropolitan Museum of Art where she has an unexpected flirtation with a mysterious stranger. Kate and the stranger stalk each other through the museum until they finally wind up outside, where Kate joins him in a taxi. They begin to have sex and continue at his apartment.\n\nHours later, Kate awakens and decides to discreetly leave while the man, Warren Lockman, is asleep. Kate sits at his desk to leave him a note and finds a document indicating that Warren has contracted a sexually transmitted disease. Mortified, she leaves the apartment. In her haste, she forgets her wedding ring on the nightstand, and she returns to retrieve it. The elevator doors open on the figure of a tall, blond woman in dark sunglasses wielding a straight razor. Kate is violently stabbed to death in the elevator. A high-priced call girl, Liz Blake, happens upon the body. She catches a glimpse of the killer in the elevator's convex mirror, and subsequently becomes both the prime suspect and the killer's next target.\n\nDr. Elliott receives a bizarre message on his answering machine from \"Bobbi\", a transsexual patient. Bobbi taunts the psychiatrist for breaking off their therapy sessions, apparently because Elliott refuses to sign the necessary papers for Bobbi to get sex reassignment surgery. Elliott tries to convince Dr. Levy, the patient's new doctor, that Bobbi is a danger to herself and others.\n\nPolice Detective Marino (Dennis Franz) is skeptical about Liz's story, partly because of her profession, so Liz joins forces with Kate's revenge-minded son Peter (Keith Gordon) to find the killer. Peter, an inventor, uses a series of homemade listening devices and time-lapse cameras to track patients leaving Elliott's office. They catch Bobbi on camera, and soon Liz is being stalked by a tall blonde in sunglasses. Several attempts are subsequently made on Liz's life. One, in the New York City Subway, is thwarted by Peter, who sprays Bobbi with homemade Mace.\n\nLiz and Peter scheme to learn Bobbi's birth name by getting inside Dr. Elliott's office. Liz baits the therapist by stripping to lingerie and coming on to him, distracting him long enough to make a brief exit and leaf through his appointment book. Peter is watching through the window when a blonde pulls him away. When Liz returns, a blonde with a razor confronts her; the blonde outside shoots and wounds the blonde inside, the wig falls off, and it is Dr. Elliott, revealing that he is also Bobbi. The blonde who shot Bobbi is actually a female police officer, revealing herself to be the blonde who has been trailing Liz.\n\nElliott is arrested and placed in an insane asylum. Dr. Levy explains later to Liz that Elliott wanted to be a woman, but his male side would not allow him to go through with the operation. Whenever a woman sexually aroused Elliott, Bobbi, representing the unstable, female side of the doctor's personality, became threatened to the point that it finally became murderous. When Dr. Levy realized this through his last conversation with Elliott, he called the police on the spot, who then, with his help, did their duty.\n\nIn a final sequence, Elliott escapes from the asylum and slashes Liz's throat in a bloody act of vengeance. She wakes up screaming, Peter rushing to her side, realizing that it was just a nightmare.\n\nThe nude body in the opening scene, taking place in a shower, was not that of Angie Dickinson, but of 1977 \"Penthouse\" Pet of the Year model Victoria Lynn Johnson. De Palma originally wanted Norwegian actress Liv Ullmann to play Kate Miller, but she declined because of the violence. The role then went to Angie Dickinson. Sean Connery was offered the role of Robert Elliot and was enthusiastic about it, but declined on account of previous commitments. Connery would later work with De Palma on \"The Untouchables\". De Palma called the elevator killing the best murder scene he has ever done.\n\n\"Dressed to Kill\" premiered in Los Angeles and New York City on July 25, 1980. It grossed a total of $31.9 million at the U.S. box office, and was the 21st highest-grossing film of the year.\n\n\"Dressed to Kill\" currently holds an 83% \"fresh\" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 47 reviews, with an average rating of 6.63/10. The consensus states, \"With arresting visuals and an engrossingly lurid mystery, \"Dressed to Kill\" stylishly encapsulates writer-director Brian De Palma's signature strengths.\"\n\nRoger Ebert awarded the film three stars out of four, stating \"the museum sequence is brilliant\" and adding: \"\"Dressed to Kill\" is an exercise in style, not narrative; it would rather look and feel like a thriller than make sense, but DePalma has so much fun with the conventions of the thriller that we forgive him and go along.\" Gene Siskel also gave it three stars out of four, writing that there were scenes \"that are as exciting and as stylish as any ever put on film. Unfortunately, a good chunk of the film is a whodunit, and its mystery is so easy to solve that we merely end up watching the film's visual pyrotechnics at a distance, never getting all that involved.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"witty, romantic,\" and \"very funny, which helps to defuse the effect of the graphically photographed violence. In addition, the film is, in its own inside-out way, peculiarly moral.\" His review added that \"The performers are excellent, especially Miss Dickinson.\" \"Variety\" declared, \"Despite some major structural weaknesses, the cannily manipulated combination of mystery, gore and kinky sex adds up to a slick commercial package that stands to draw some rich blood money.\" David Denby of \"New York Magazine\" proclaimed the film \"the first great American movie of the '80s.\"\n\nSheila Benson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote, \"The brilliance of 'Dressed to Kill' is apparent within seconds of its opening gliding shot; it is a sustained work of terror—elegant, sensual, erotic, bloody, a directorial tour de force.\" Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" stated of De Palma that \"his timing is so great that when he wants you to feel something he gets you every time. His thriller technique, constantly refined, has become insidious, jewelled. It's hardly possible to find a point at which you could tear yourself away from this picture.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"This elegant new murder thriller promises to revive the lagging summer box office and enhance De Palma's reputation as the most exciting and distinctive manipulator of suspense since Alfred Hitchcock.\" In his movie guide, Leonard Maltin gave the film 3 1/2 stars out of four, calling it a \"High-tension melodrama\", and stating \"De Palma works on viewers' emotions, not logic, and maintains a fever pitch from start to finish.\" He also praised Pino Donaggio's \"chilling music score.\"\n\nJohn Simon of the National Review, after taking note of two paged advertisements full of superlatives in The New York Times, wrote 'What Dressed to Kill dispenses liberally, however, is sophomoric soft-core pornography, vulgar manipulation of the emotions for mere sensation, salacious but inept dialogue that is a cross between comic-strip Freudianism and sniggering double entendres, and a plot line so full of holes to be at best a dotted line'.\n\nTwo versions of the film exist in North America, an R-rated version and an unrated version. The unrated version is around 30 seconds longer and shows more pubic hair in the shower scene, more blood in the elevator scene (including a close-up shot of the killer slitting Kate's throat), and more explicit dialogue from Liz during the scene in Elliott's office. These scenes were trimmed when the MPAA originally gave the film an \"X\" rating.\n\nThe film is currently owned by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (successor to Orion Pictures, who bought Filmways and American International Pictures in 1982). The film saw a 1984 VHS release by Warner Home Video, and later another VHS release by Goodtimes under licence from Orion. In 2002, MGM released the film on DVD, including special features. In 2010, MGM released both R-rated and unrated versions on DVD and Blu-ray. The Criterion Collection released a deluxe Blu-ray edition of the film on September 8, 2015.\n\n! Award\n! Category\n! Subject\n! Result\nGolden Globe Award\nNew Star of the Year – Actress\nrowspan=3Nancy Allen\n\nStinkers Bad Movie Award\nWorst Actress\n\nrowspan=3Golden Raspberry Awards\nWorst Actress\n\nWorst Actor\nMichael Caine\n\nWorst Director\nrowspan=2Brian De Palma\n\nrowspan=4Saturn Awards\nBest Director\n\ncolspan=2Best Horror Film\n\nBest Actress\nAngie Dickinson\n\nBest Music\nPino Donaggio\n\nrowspan=2New York Film Critics Circle Awards\ncolspan=2Best Film\n\nBest Director\nBrian De Palma\n\nBULLET::::- Transgender in film and television\n\nBULLET::::- Film stills\nBULLET::::- \"Dressed to Kill: The Power of Two\" an essay by Michael Koresky at the Criterion Collection\n"}
{"id": "8483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8483", "title": "Diesel cycle", "text": "Diesel cycle\n\nThe Diesel cycle is a combustion process of a reciprocating internal combustion engine. In it, fuel is ignited by heat generated during the compression of air in the combustion chamber, into which fuel is then injected. This is in contrast to igniting the fuel-air mixture with a spark plug as in the Otto cycle (four-stroke/petrol) engine. Diesel engines are used in aircraft, automobiles, power generation, diesel-electric locomotives, and both surface ships and submarines.\n\nThe Diesel cycle is assumed to have constant pressure during the initial part of the combustion phase (formula_1 to formula_2 in the diagram, below). This is an idealized mathematical model: real physical diesels do have an increase in pressure during this period, but it is less pronounced than in the Otto cycle. In contrast, the idealized Otto cycle of a gasoline engine approximates a constant volume process during that phase.\n\nThe image shows a p-V diagram for the ideal Diesel cycle; where formula_3 is pressure and V the volume or formula_4 the specific volume if the process is placed on a unit mass basis. The \"idealized\" Diesel cycle assumes an ideal gas and ignores combustion chemistry, exhaust- and recharge procedures and simply follows four distinct processes:\n\nBULLET::::- 1→2 : isentropic compression of the fluid (blue)\nBULLET::::- 2→3 : reversible constant pressure heating (red)\nBULLET::::- 3→4 : isentropic expansion (yellow)\nBULLET::::- 4→1 : reversible constant volume cooling (green)\n\nThe Diesel engine is a heat engine: it converts heat into work. During the bottom isentropic processes (blue), energy is transferred into the system in the form of work formula_5, but by definition (isentropic) no energy is transferred into or out of the system in the form of heat. During the constant pressure (red, isobaric) process, energy enters the system as heat formula_6. During the top isentropic processes (yellow), energy is transferred out of the system in the form of formula_7, but by definition (isentropic) no energy is transferred into or out of the system in the form of heat. During the constant volume (green, isochoric) process, some of energy flows out of the system as heat through the right depressurizing process formula_8. The work that leaves the system is equal to the work that enters the system plus the difference between the heat added to the system and the heat that leaves the system; in other words, net gain of work is equal to the difference between the heat added to the system and the heat that leaves the system.\n\nBULLET::::- Work in (formula_5) is done by the piston compressing the air (system)\nBULLET::::- Heat in (formula_6) is done by the combustion of the fuel\nBULLET::::- Work out (formula_7) is done by the working fluid expanding and pushing a piston (this produces usable work)\nBULLET::::- Heat out (formula_8) is done by venting the air\nBULLET::::- Net work produced = formula_6 - formula_8\n\nThe net work produced is also represented by the area enclosed by the cycle on the P-V diagram. The net work is produced per cycle and is also called the useful work, as it can be turned to other useful types of energy and propel a vehicle (kinetic energy) or produce electrical energy. The summation of many such cycles per unit of time is called the developed power. The formula_7 is also called the gross work, some of which is used in the next cycle of the engine to compress the next charge of air\n\nThe maximum thermal efficiency of a Diesel cycle is dependent on the compression ratio and the cut-off ratio. It has the following formula under cold air standard analysis: \n\nformula_16\n\nwhere\n\nThe cut-off ratio can be expressed in terms of temperature as shown below:\n\nformula_26 can be approximated to the flame temperature of the fuel used. The flame temperature can be approximated to the adiabatic flame temperature of the fuel with corresponding air-to-fuel ratio and compression pressure, formula_27.\nformula_28 can be approximated to the inlet air temperature.\n\nThis formula only gives the ideal thermal efficiency. The actual thermal efficiency will be significantly lower due to heat and friction losses. The formula is more complex than the Otto cycle (petrol/gasoline engine) relation that has the following formula:\n\nformula_29\n\nThe additional complexity for the Diesel formula comes around since the heat addition is at constant pressure and the heat rejection is at constant volume. The Otto cycle by comparison has both the heat addition and rejection at constant volume.\n\nComparing the two formulae it can be seen that for a given compression ratio (), the \"ideal\" Otto cycle will be more efficient. However, a \"real\" diesel engine will be more efficient overall since it will have the ability to operate at higher compression ratios. If a petrol engine were to have the same compression ratio, then knocking (self-ignition) would occur and this would severely reduce the efficiency, whereas in a diesel engine, the self ignition is the desired behavior. Additionally, both of these cycles are only idealizations, and the actual behavior does not divide as clearly or sharply. Furthermore, the ideal Otto cycle formula stated above does not include throttling losses, which do not apply to diesel engines.\n\nDiesel engines have the lowest specific fuel consumption of any large internal combustion engine employing a single cycle, 0.26 lb/hp·h (0.16 kg/kWh) for very large marine engines (combined cycle power plants are more efficient, but employ two engines rather than one). Two-stroke diesels with high pressure forced induction, particularly turbocharging, make up a large percentage of the very largest diesel engines.\n\nIn North America, diesel engines are primarily used in large trucks, where the low-stress, high-efficiency cycle leads to much longer engine life and lower operational costs. These advantages also make the diesel engine ideal for use in the heavy-haul railroad and earthmoving environments.\n\nMany model airplanes use very simple \"glow\" and \"diesel\" engines. Glow engines use glow plugs. \"Diesel\" model airplane engines have variable compression ratios. Both types depend on special fuels.\n\nSome 19th-century or earlier experimental engines used external flames, exposed by valves, for ignition, but this becomes less attractive with increasing compression. (It was the research of Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot that established the thermodynamic value of compression.) A historical implication of this is that the diesel engine could have been invented without the aid of electricity.\n\nBULLET::::- Diesel engine\nBULLET::::- Hot bulb engine\nBULLET::::- Mixed/dual cycle\nBULLET::::- Partially premixed combustion\n"}
{"id": "8484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8484", "title": "Deus Ex (video game)", "text": "Deus Ex (video game)\n\nDeus Ex is a 2000 action role-playing video game developed by Ion Storm and published by Eidos Interactive. Set in a cyberpunk-themed dystopian world in the year 2052, the story follows JC Denton, an agent of the fictional agency United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO), who is given superhuman abilities by nanotechnology, as he sets out to combat hostile forces in a world ravaged by inequality and a deadly plague. His missions entangle him in a conspiracy that brings him into conflict with the Triads, Majestic 12, and the Illuminati.\n\n\"Deus Ex\"s gameplay combines elements of the first-person shooter with stealth elements, adventure, and role-playing genres, allowing for its tasks and missions to be completed in a variety of ways, that in turn lead to differing outcomes. Presented from the first-person perspective, the player can customize Denton's various abilities such as weapon skills or lockpicking, increasing his effectiveness in these areas; this opens up different avenues of exploration and methods of interacting with or manipulating other characters. The player can complete side missions away from the primary storyline by moving freely around the available areas, which can reward the player with experience points to upgrade abilities and alternative ways to tackle main missions.\n\nThe game was released for Microsoft Windows on June 2000, with a Mac OS port following the next month. A modified version of the game was released for the PlayStation 2 in 2002. In the years following its release, \"Deus Ex\" has received additional improvements and content from its fan community.\n\nThe game received critical acclaim, including repeatedly being named \"Best PC Game of All Time\" in \"PC Gamer\"s \"Top 100 PC Games\" in 2011 and a poll carried out by the UK gaming magazine \"PC Zone\". It received several Game of the Year awards, drawing praise for its pioneering designs in player choice and multiple narrative paths. It has sold more than 1 million copies, as of April 23, 2009. The game led to a series, which includes the sequel \"\" (2003), and three prequels: \"\" (2011), \"\" (2013), and \"\" (2016).\n\n\"Deus Ex\" incorporates elements from four video game genres: role-playing, first-person shooter, adventure, and \"immersive simulation,\" the last of which being a game where \"nothing reminds you that you're just playing a game.\" For example, the game uses a first-person camera during gameplay and includes exploration and character interaction as primary features.\n\nThe player assumes the role of JC Denton, a nanotech-augmented operative of the United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO). This nanotechnology is a central gameplay mechanism and allows players to perform superhuman feats.\n\nAs the player accomplishes objectives, the player character is rewarded with \"skill points.\" Skill points are used to enhance a character's abilities in eleven different areas, and were designed to provide players with a way to customize their characters; a player might create a combat-focused character by increasing proficiency with pistols or rifles, while a more furtive character can be created by focusing on lock picking and computer hacking abilities. There are four different levels of proficiency in each skill, with the skill point cost increasing for each successive level.\n\nWeapons may be customized through \"weapon modifications,\" which can be found or purchased throughout the game. The player might add scopes, silencers, or laser sights; increase the weapon's range, accuracy, or magazine size; or decrease its recoil and reload time; as appropriate to the weapon type.\n\nPlayers are further encouraged to customize their characters through nano-augmentations—cybernetic devices that grant characters superhuman powers. While the game contains eighteen different nano-augmentations, the player can install a maximum of nine, as each must be used on a certain part of the body: one in the arms, legs, eyes, and head; two underneath the skin; and three in the torso. This forces the player to choose carefully between the benefits offered by each augmentation. For example, the arm augmentation requires the player to decide between boosting their character's skill in hand-to-hand combat or his ability to lift heavy objects.\n\nInteraction with non-player characters (NPCs) was a significant design focus. When the player interacts with a non-player character, the game will enter a cutscene-like conversation mode where the player advances the conversation by selecting from a list of dialogue options. The player's choices often have a substantial effect on both gameplay and plot, as non-player characters will react in different ways depending on the selected answer (e.g., rudeness makes them less likely to assist the player).\n\n\"Deus Ex\" features combat similar to first-person shooters, with real-time action, a first-person perspective, and reflex-based gameplay. As the player will often encounter enemies in groups, combat often tends toward a tactical approach, including the use of cover, strafing, and \"hit-and-run.\" A \"USA Today\" reviewer found, \"At the easiest difficulty setting, your character is puréed again and again by an onslaught of human and robotic terrorists until you learn the value of stealth.\" However, through the game's role-playing systems, it is possible to develop a character's skills and augmentations to create a tank-like combat specialist with the ability to deal and absorb large amounts of damage. Non-player characters will praise or criticize the main character depending on the use of force, incorporating a moral element into the gameplay.\n\n\"Deus Ex\" features a head-up display crosshair, whose size dynamically shows where shots will fall based on movement, aim, and the weapon in use; the reticle expands while the player is moving or shifting their aim, and slowly shrinks to its original size while no actions are taken. How quickly the reticle shrinks depends on the character's proficiency with the equipped weapon the number of accuracy modifications added to the weapon, and the level of the \"Targeting\" nano-augmentation.\n\n\"Deus Ex\" features twenty-four weapons, ranging from crowbars, electroshock weapons, and riot baton, to laser-guided anti-tank rockets and assault rifles; both lethal and non-lethal weapons are available. The player can also make use of several weapons of opportunity, such as fire extinguishers.\n\nGameplay in \"Deus Ex\" emphasizes player choice. Objectives can be completed in numerous ways, including stealth, sniping, heavy frontal assault, dialogue, or engineering and computer hacking. This level of freedom requires that levels, characters, and puzzles be designed with significant redundancy, as a single play-through of the game will miss large sections of dialogue, areas, and other content. In some missions, the player is encouraged to avoid using deadly force, and specific aspects of the story may change depending on how violent or non-violent the player chooses to be. The game is also unusual in that two of its boss villains can be killed off early in the game, or left alive to be defeated later, and this too affects how other characters interact with the player.\n\nBecause of its design focus on player choice, \"Deus Ex\" has been compared with \"System Shock\", a game that inspired its design. Together, these factors give the game a high degree of replayability, as the player will have vastly different experiences, depending on which methods they use to accomplish objectives.\n\n\"Deus Ex\" was designed as a single-player game, and the initial releases of the Windows and Macintosh versions of the game did not include multiplayer functionality. Support for multiplayer modes was later incorporated through patches. The component consists of three game modes: deathmatch, basic team deathmatch, and advanced team deathmatch. Five maps, based on levels from the single-player portion of the game, were included with the original multiplayer patch, but many user-created maps exist. The PlayStation 2 release of \"Deus Ex\" does not offer a multiplayer mode. In April 2014 it was announced that GameSpy would cease their masterserver services, also affecting \"Deus Ex\". A community-made patch for the multiplayer mode has been created as a response to this.\n\n\"Deus Ex\" takes place in an unspecified near future in an alternate history where real-world conspiracy theories are true. These include speculations regarding black helicopters, vaccinations, and FEMA, as well as Area 51, the ECHELON network, Men in Black, chupacabras (in the form of \"greasels\"), and grey aliens. Mysterious groups such as Majestic 12, the Illuminati, the Knights Templar, the Bilderberg Group, and the Trilateral Commission also either play a central part in the plot or are alluded to during the course of the game.\n\nThe plot of \"Deus Ex\" depicts a society on a slow spiral into chaos. There is a massive division between the rich and the poor, not only socially, but in some cities physically. A lethal pandemic, known as the \"Gray Death,\" ravages the world's population, especially within the United States, and has no cure. A synthetic vaccine, \"Ambrosia,\" manufactured by the company VersaLife, nullifies the effects of the virus but is in critically short supply. Because of its scarcity, Ambrosia is available only to those deemed \"vital to the social order,\" and finds its way primarily to government officials, military personnel, the rich and influential, scientists, and the intellectual elite. With no hope for the common people of the world, riots occur worldwide, and some terrorist organizations have formed with the professed intent of assisting the downtrodden, among them the National Secessionist Forces (NSF) of the U.S. and a French group known as Silhouette.\n\nTo combat these threats to the world order, the United Nations has expanded its influence around the globe to form the United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO). It is headquartered near New York City in a bunker beneath Liberty Island, placed there after a terrorist strike on the Statue of Liberty.\n\nThe main character of \"Deus Ex\" is UNATCO agent JC Denton (voiced by Jay Franke), one of the first in a new line of agents physically altered with advanced nanotechnology to gain superhuman abilities, alongside his brother Paul (also voiced by Jay Franke), who joined UNATCO to avenge his parents' deaths at the hands of Majestic 12. His UNATCO colleagues include the mechanically-augmented and ruthlessly efficient field agents Gunther Hermann and Anna Navarre; Quartermaster General Sam Carter, and the bureaucratic UNATCO chief Joseph Manderley. Alex Jacobson's character model and name are based on Warren Spector's nephew, Alec Jacobson.\n\nJC's missions bring him into contact with various characters, including NSF leader Juan Lebedev, hacker and scientist Tracer Tong, nano-tech expert Gary Savage, Nicolette DuClare (daughter of an Illuminati member), former Illuminati leader Morgan Everett, the Artificial Intelligences (AI) Daedalus and Icarus, and Bob Page, owner of VersaLife and leader of Majestic 12, a clandestine organization that has usurped the infrastructure of the Illuminati, allowing him to control the world for his own ends.\n\nAfter completing his training, UNATCO agent JC Denton takes several missions given by Director Joseph Manderley to track down members of the National Secessionist Forces (NSF) and their stolen shipments of the \"Ambrosia\" vaccine, the treatment for the \"Gray Death\" virus. Through these missions, JC is reunited with his brother, Paul, who is also nano-augmented. JC tracks the Ambrosia shipment to a private terminal at LaGuardia Airport. Paul meets JC outside the plane and explains that he has defected from UNATCO and is working with the NSF after learning that the Gray Death is a human-made virus, with UNATCO using its power to make sure only the elite receive the vaccine.\n\nJC returns to UNATCO headquarters and is told by Manderley that both he and Paul have been outfitted with a 24-hour kill switch and that Paul's has been activated due to his betrayal. Manderley orders JC to fly to Hong Kong to eliminate Tracer Tong, a hacker whom Paul has contact with, and who can disable the kill switches. Instead, JC returns to Paul's apartment to find Paul hiding inside. Paul further explains his defection and encourages JC to also defect by sending out a distress call to alert the NSF's allies. Upon doing so, JC becomes a wanted man by UNATCO, and his kill switch is activated by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Director Walton Simons. JC is unable to escape UNATCO forces, and both he and Paul (provided he survived the raid on the apartment) are taken to a secret prison below UNATCO headquarters. An entity named \"Daedalus\" contacts JC and informs him that the prison is part of Majestic 12, and arranges for him and Paul to escape. The two flee to Hong Kong to meet with Tong, who deactivates their kill switches. Tong requests JC to infiltrate the VersaLife building. Doing so, JC discovers that the corporation is the source for the Gray Death, and he can steal the plans for the virus and destroy the \"universal constructor\" (UC) that produces it.\n\nAnalysis of the virus shows that it was manufactured by the Illuminati, prompting Tong to send JC to Paris to try to make contact with the organization and obtain their help fighting Majestic 12. JC meets with Illuminati leader Morgan Everett and learns that the Gray Death virus was intended to be used for augmentation technology, but Majestic 12, led by trillionaire businessman and former Illuminatus Bob Page, was able to steal and repurpose it into its viral form. Everett recognizes that without VersaLife's universal constructor, Majestic 12 can no longer create the virus, and will likely target Vandenberg Air Force Base, where X-51, a group of former Area 51 scientists, have built another one. After aiding the base personnel in repelling a Majestic 12 attack, JC meets X-51 leader Gary Savage, who reveals that Daedalus is an artificial intelligence (AI) borne out of the ECHELON program. Everett attempts to gain control over Majestic 12's communications network by releasing Daedalus onto the U.S. military networks, but Page counters by releasing his own AI, Icarus, which merges with Daedalus to form a new AI, Helios, with the ability to control all global communications. After this, Savage enlists JC's help in procuring schematics for reconstructing components for the UC that were damaged during Majestic 12's raid of Vandenberg. JC finds the schematics and electronically transmits them to Savage. Page intercepts the transmission and launches a nuclear missile at Vandenberg to ensure that Area 51 (now Majestic 12's headquarters) will be the only location in the world with an operational UC. However, JC can reprogram the missile to strike Area 51. JC travels there himself to confront Page.\n\nWhen JC locates him, Page reveals that he seeks to merge with Helios and gain full control over all nanotechnology. JC is contacted by Tong, Everett, and the Helios AI simultaneously. All three factions ask for his help in defeating Page while furthering their own objectives, and JC is forced to choose between them. Tong seeks to plunge the world into a Dark Age by destroying the global communications hub and preventing anyone from taking control of the world. Everett offers Denton the chance to bring the Illuminati back to power by killing Bob Page and using the technology of Area 51 to rule the world with an invisible hand. Helios wishes to merge with Denton and rule the world as a benevolent dictator with infinite knowledge and reason. The player's decision determines the course of the future and brings the game to a close.\n\nAfter Looking Glass Technologies and Origin Systems released \"\" in January 1993, producer Warren Spector began to plan \"Troubleshooter\", the game that would become \"Deus Ex\". In his 1994 proposal, he described the concept as \"\"Underworld\"-style first-person action\" in a real-world setting with \"big-budget, nonstop action.\" After Spector and his team were laid off from Looking Glass, John Romero of Ion Storm offered him the chance to make his \"dream game\" without any restrictions.\n\nPreproduction for \"Deus Ex\" began around August 1997 and lasted roughly six months. The game's working title was \"Shooter: Majestic Revelations\", and it was scheduled for release on Christmas 1998. The team developed the setting before the game mechanics. Noticing his wife's fascination with \"The X-Files\", Spector connected the \"real world, millennial weirdness, [and] conspiracy\" topics on his mind and decided to make a game about them that would appeal to a broad audience. The \"Shooter\" design document cast the player as an augmented agent working against an elite cabal in the \"dangerous and chaotic\" 2050s. It cited \"Half-Life\", \"Fallout\", \"\", and \"GoldenEye 007\" as game design influences, and used the stories and settings of \"\", \"The Manchurian Candidate\", \"Robocop\", \"The X-Files\", and \"Men in Black\" as reference points. The team designed a skill system that featured \"special powers\" derived from nanotechnological augmentation and avoided the inclusion of die rolling and skills that required micromanagement. Spector also cited Konami's 1995 role-playing video game \"Suikoden\" as an inspiration, stating that the limited choices in \"Suikoden\" inspired him to expand on the idea with more meaningful choices in \"Deux Ex\".\n\nIn early 1998, the \"Deus Ex\" team grew to 20 people, and the game entered a 28-month production phase. The development team consisted of three programmers, six designers, seven artists, a writer, an associate producer, a \"tech,\" and Spector. Two writers and four testers were hired as contractors. Chris Norden was the lead programmer and assistant director, Harvey Smith the lead designer, Jay Lee the lead artist, and Sheldon Pacotti the lead writer. Close friends of the team who understood the intentions behind the game were invited to playtest and give feedback. The wide range of input led to debates in the office and changes to the game. Spector later concluded that the team was \"blinded by promises of complete creative freedom,\" and by their belief that the game would have no budget, marketing, or time restraints. By mid-1998, the game's title had become \"Deus Ex\", derived from the Latin literary device \"deus ex machina\" (\"god from the machine\"), in which a plot is resolved by an unpredictable intervention.\n\nSpector felt that the best aspects of \"Deus Ex\"s development were the \"high-level vision\" and length of preproduction, flexibility within the project, testable \"proto-missions,\" and the Unreal Engine license. The team's pitfalls included the management structure, unrealistic goals, underestimating risks with artificial intelligence, their handling of proto-missions, and weakened morale from bad press. \"Deus Ex\" was released on June 23, 2000, and published by Eidos Interactive for Microsoft Windows. The team planned third-party ports for Mac OS 9 and Linux.\n\nThe original 1997 design document for \"Deus Ex\" privileges character development over all other features. The game was designed to be \"genre-busting\": in parts simulation, role-playing, first-person shooter, and adventure. The team wanted players to consider \"who they wanted to be\" in the game, and for that to alter how they behaved in the game. In this way, the game world was \"deeply simulated,\" or realistic and believable enough that the player would solve problems in creative, emergent ways without noticing distinct puzzles. However, the simulation ultimately failed to maintain the desired level of openness, and they had to brute force \"skill,\" \"action,\" and \"character interaction\" paths through each level. Playtesting also revealed that their idea of a role-playing game based on the real world was more interesting in theory than in reality, as certain aspects of the real world, such as hotels and office buildings, were not compelling in a game.\n\nOne of the things that Spector wanted to achieve in Deus Ex was to make JC Denton a cipher for the player, to create a better immersion and gameplay experience. He did not want the character to force any emotion, so that whatever feelings the player may be experiencing come from themselves rather than from JC Denton. To do this, Spector instructed voice actor Jay Anthony Franke to record his dialogue without any emotion but in a monotone voice, which is unusual for a voice acting role.\n\nOnce coded, the team's game systems did not work as intended. The early tests of the conversation system and user interface were flawed. The team also found augmentations and skills to be less interesting than they had seemed in the design document. In response, Harvey Smith substantially revised the augmentations and skills. Production milestones served as wake-up calls for the game's direction. A May 1998 milestone that called for a functional demo revealed that the size of the game's maps caused frame rate issues, which was one of the first signs that maps needed to be cut. A year later, the team reached a milestone for finished game systems, which led to better estimates for their future mission work and the reduction of the 500-page design document to 270 pages. Spector recalled Smith's mantra on this point: \"less is more.\" \n\nOne of the team's biggest blind spots was the AI programming for NPCs. Spector wrote that they considered it in preproduction, but that they did not figure out how to handle it until \"relatively late in development.\" This led to wasted time when the team had to discard their old AI code. The team built atop their game engine's shooter-based AI instead of writing new code that would allow characters to exhibit convincing emotions. As a result, NPC behavior was variable until the very end of development. Spector felt that the team's \"sin\" was their inconsistent display of a trustable \"human AI.\"\n\n The game was developed on systems including dual-processor Pentium Pro 200s and Athlon 800s with eight and nine gigabyte hard drives, some using SCSI. The team used \"more than 100 video cards\" throughout development. \"Deus Ex\" was built using Visual Studio, Lightwave, and Lotus Notes. They also made a custom dialogue editor, ConEdit. The team used UnrealEd atop the Unreal game engine for map design, which Spector wrote was \"superior to anything else available.\" Their trust in UnrealScript led them to code \"special-cases\" for their immediate mission needs instead of more generalized multi-case code. Even as concerned team members expressed misgivings, the team only addressed this later in the project. To Spector, this was a lesson to always prefer \"general solutions\" over \"special casing,\" such that the toolset works predictably.\n\nThey waited to license a game engine until after preproduction, expecting the benefits of licensing to be more time for the content and gameplay, which Spector reported to be the case. They chose the Unreal engine, as it did 80% of what they needed from an engine and was more economical than building from scratch. Their small programming team allowed for a larger design group. The programmers also found the engine accommodating, though it took about nine months to acclimate to the software. Spector felt that they would have understood the code better had they built it themselves, instead of \"treating the engine as a black box\" and coding conservatively. He acknowledged that this precipitated into the Direct3D issues in their final release, which slipped through their quality assurance testing. Spector also noted that the artificial intelligence, pathfinding, and sound propagation were designed for shooters and should have been rewritten from scratch instead of relying on the engine. He thought the licensed engine worked well enough that he expected to use the same for the game's sequel \"\" and \"Thief 3\". He added that developers should not attempt to force their technology to perform in ways it was not intended, and should find a balance between perfection and pragmatism.\n\nThe soundtrack of \"Deus Ex\", composed by Alexander Brandon (primary contributor, including main theme), Dan Gardopée (\"Naval Base\" and \"Vandenberg\"), Michiel van den Bos (\"UNATCO,\" \"Lebedev's Airfield,\" \"Airfield Action,\" \"DuClare Chateau,\" plus minor contribution to some of Brandon's tracks), and Reeves Gabrels (\"NYC Bar\"), was praised by critics for complementing the gritty atmosphere predominant throughout the game with melodious and ambient music incorporated from a number of genres, including techno, jazz, and classical. The music sports a basic dynamic element, similar to the iMUSE system used in early 1990s LucasArts games; during play, the music will change to a different iteration of the currently playing song based on the player's actions, such as when the player starts a conversation, engages in combat, or transitions to the next level. All the music in the game is tracked - Gabrels' contribution, \"NYC Bar,\" was converted to a module by Brandon.\n\n\"Deus Ex\" has been re-released in several iterations since its original publication and has also been the basis of several mods developed by its fan community.\n\nThe \"Deus Ex: Game of the Year Edition\", which was released on May 8, 2001, contains the latest game updates and a software development kit, a separate soundtrack CD, and a page from a fictional newspaper featured prominently in \"Deus Ex\" titled \"The Midnight Sun\", which recounts recent events in the game's world. However, later releases of said version do not include the soundtrack CD and contain a PDF version of the newspaper on the game's disc.\n\nThe Mac OS version of the game, released a month after the Windows version, was shipped with the same capabilities and can also be patched to enable multiplayer support. However, publisher Aspyr Media did not release any subsequent editions of the game or any additional patches. As such, the game is only supported in Mac OS 9 and the \"Classic\" environment in Mac OS X, neither of which are compatible with Intel-based Macs. The Windows version will run on Intel-based Macs using Crossover, Boot Camp, or other software to enable a compatible version of Windows to run on a Mac.\n\nA PlayStation 2 port of the game, retitled \"Deus Ex: The Conspiracy\" outside of Europe, was released on March 26, 2002. Along with motion-captured character animations and pre-rendered introductory and ending cinematics that replaced the original versions, it features a simplified interface with optional auto-aim. There are many minor changes in level design, some to balance gameplay, but most to accommodate loading transition areas, due to the memory limitations of the PlayStation 2. The PlayStation 2 version was re-released in Europe on the PlayStation 3 as a PlayStation 2 Classic on May 16, 2012.\n\nLoki Games worked on a Linux version of the game, but the company went out of business before releasing it. The OpenGL layer they wrote for the port, however, was sent out to Windows gamers through an online patch.\n\nThough their quality assurance did not see major Direct3D issues, players noted \"dramatic slowdowns\" immediately following the launch, and the team did not understand the \"black box\" of the Unreal engine well enough to make it do exactly what they needed. Spector characterized \"Deus Ex\" reviews into two categories based on how they begin with either how \"Warren Spector makes games all by himself\" or that \"\"Deus Ex\" couldn't possibly have been made by Ion Storm.\" He has said that the game won over 30 \"best of\" awards in 2001, and concluded that their final game was not perfect, but that they were much closer for having tried to \"do things right or not at all.\"\n\n\"Deus Ex\" was built on the Unreal Engine, which already had an active community of modders. In September 2000, Eidos Interactive and Ion Storm announced in a press release that they would be releasing the software development kit (SDK), which included all the tools used to create the original game. Several team members, as well as project director Warren Spector, stated that they were \"really looking forward to seeing what [the community] does with our tools.\" The kit was released on September 22, 2000, and soon gathered community interest, followed by the release of tutorials, small mods, up to announcements of large mods and conversions. While Ion Storm did not hugely alter the engine's rendering and core functionality, they introduced role-playing elements.\n\nIn 2009, a fan-made mod called \"The Nameless Mod\" (\"TNM\") was released by Off Topic Productions. The game's protagonist is a user of an Internet forum, with digital places represented as physical locations. The mod offers roughly the same amount of gameplay as Deus Ex and adds several new features to the game, with a more open world structure than \"Deus Ex\" and new weapons such as the player character's fists. The mod was developed over seven years and has thousands of lines of recorded dialogue and two different parallel story arcs. Upon its release, \"TNM\" earned a 9/10 overall from \"PC PowerPlay\" magazine. In Mod DB's 2009 Mod of the Year awards, \"The Nameless Mod\" won the Editor's Choice award for Best Singleplayer Mod.\n\nIn 2015, during the 15th anniversary of the game's release, Square Enix (who had acquired Eidos earlier) endorsed a free fan-created mod, \"Deus Ex: Revision\" which was released through Steam. The mod, created by Caustic Creative, is a graphical overhaul of the original game, adding in support for newer versions of DirectX, improving the textures and the soundtrack from the original game, and adding in more world-building aesthetics.\n\nAccording to \"Computer Gaming World\"s Stefan Janicki, \"Deus Ex\" had \"sold well in North America\" by early 2001. In the United States, it debuted at #6 on PC Data's sales chart for the week ending June 24, at an average retail price of $40. It fell to eighth place in its second week but rose again to position 6 in its third. It proceeded to place in the top 10 rankings for August 6–12 and the week ending September 2 and to secure 10th place overall for the months of July and August. \"Deus Ex\" achieved sales of 138,840 copies and revenues of $5 million in the United States by the end of 2000, according to PC Data. The firm tracked another 91,013 copies sold in the country during 2001.\n\nThe game was a larger hit in Europe; Janicki called it a \"blockbuster\" for the region, which broke a trend of weak sales for 3D games. He wrote, \"[I]n Europe—particularly in England—the action/RPG dominated the charts all summer, despite competition from heavyweights like \"Diablo II\" and \"The Sims\".\" In the German-speaking market, \"PC Player\" reported sales over 70,000 units for \"Deus Ex\" by early 2001. It debuted at #3 in the region for July 2000 and held the position in August, before dropping to #10, #12 and #27 over the following three months. In the United Kingdom, \"Deus Ex\" reached #1 on the sales charts during August and spent three months in the top 10. It received a \"Silver\" award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA) in February 2002, indicating lifetime sales of at least 100,000 units in the United Kingdom. The ELSPA later raised it to \"Gold\" status, for 200,000 sales.\n\nIn April 2009, Square-Enix revealed that \"Deus Ex\" had surpassed 1 million sales globally, but was outsold by \"\".\n\n\"Deus Ex\" received critical acclaim, attaining a score of 90 out of 100 from 28 critics on Metacritic. Thierry Nguyen from \"Computer Gaming World\" said that the game \"delivers moments of brilliance, idiocy, ingenuity, and frustration.\" \"Computer Games Magazine\" praised the title for its deep gameplay and its use of multiple solutions to situations in the game. Similarly, \"Edge\" highlighted the game's freedom of choice, saying that \"Deus Ex\" \"never tells you what to do. Goals are set, but alter according to your decisions.\" \"Eurogamer\"s Rob Fahey lauded the game, writing, \"Moody and atmospheric, compelling and addictive, this is first person gaming in grown-up form, and it truly is magnificent.\"\n\nFormer GameSpot reviewer Greg Kasavin, though awarding the game a score of 8.2 of 10, was disappointed by the security and lockpicking mechanics. \"Such instances are essentially noninteractive,\" he wrote. \"You simply stand there and spend a particular quantity of electronic picks or modules until the door opens or the security goes down.\" Kasavin made similar complaints about the hacking interface, noting that, \"Even with basic hacking skills, you'll still be able to bypass the encryption and password protection ... by pressing the 'hack' button and waiting a few seconds.\"\n\nThe game's graphics and voice acting were also met with muted enthusiasm. Kasavin complained of \"Deus Ex\"s relatively sub-par graphics, blaming them on the game's \"incessantly dark industrial environments.\" GamePro reviewer Chris Patterson took the time to note that despite being \"solid acoustically,\" \"Deus Ex\" had moments of weakness. He poked fun at JC's \"Joe Friday, 'just the facts, deadpan,\" and the \"truly cheesy accents\" of minor characters in Hong Kong and New York City. IGN called the graphics \"blocky,\" adding that \"the animation is stiff, and the dithering is just plain awful in some spots,\" referring to the limited capabilities of the Unreal Engine used to design the game. The website, later on, stated that \"overall Deus Ex certainly looks better than your average game.\"\n\nReviewers and players also complained about the size of \"Deus Ex\"s save files. An Adrenaline Vault reviewer noted that \"Playing through the entire adventure, [he] accumulated over 250 MB of save game data, with the average file coming in at over 15 MB.\"\n\nThe game developed a strong cult following, leading to a core modding and playing community that remained active over 15 years after its release. In an interview with IGN in June 2015, game director Warren Spector said he never expected \"Deus Ex\" to sell many copies, but he did expect it to become a cult classic among a smaller, active community, and he continues to receive fan mail from players to date regarding their experiences and thoughts about \"Deus Ex\".\n\n\"Deus Ex\" received over 30 \"best of\" awards in 2001, from outlets such as IGN, GameSpy, \"PC Gamer\", \"Computer Gaming World\", and The Adrenaline Vault. It won \"Excellence in Game Design\" and \"Game Innovation Spotlight\" at the 2001 Game Developers Choice Awards, and it was nominated for \"Game of the Year.\" At the Interactive Achievement Awards, it won in the \"Computer Innovation\" and \"Computer Action/Adventure\" categories and received nominations for \"Sound Design,\" \"PC Role-Playing,\" and \"Game of the Year\" in both the PC and overall categories. The British Academy of Film and Television Arts named it \"PC Game of the Year.\" The game also collected several \"Best Story\" accolades, including first prize in Gamasutra's 2006 \"Quantum Leap\" awards for storytelling in a video game.\n\nSince its release, \"Deus Ex\" has appeared in several \"Greatest Games of All Time\" lists and Hall of Fame features. It was included in IGN's \"100 Greatest Games of All Time\" (#40, #21 and #34 in 2003, 2005 and 2007, respectively), \"Top 25 Modern PC Games\" (4th place in 2010) and \"Top 25 PC Games of All Time\" (#20 and #21 in 2007 and 2009 respectively) lists. GameSpy featured the game in its \"Top 50 Games of All Time\" (18th place in 2001) and \"25 Most Memorable Games of the Past 5 Years\" (15th place in 2004) lists, and in the site's \"Hall of Fame.\" \"PC Gamer\" placed \"Deus Ex\" on its \"Top 100 PC Games of All Time\" (#2, #2, #1 by staff and #4 by readers in 2007, 2008, 2010 and 2010 respectively) and \"50 Best Games of All Time\" (#10 and #27 in 2001 and 2005) lists, and it was awarded 1st place in \"PC Zone\"s \"101 Best PC Games Ever\" feature. It was also included in Yahoo! UK Video Games' \"100 Greatest Computer Games of All Time\" (28th place) list, and in \"Edge\"s \"The 100 Best Videogames\" (29th place in 2007) and \"100 Best Games to Play Today\" (57th place in 2009) lists. \"Deus Ex\" was named the second-best game of the 2000s by Gamasutra. In 2012, \"Time\" named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time, and G4tv ranked it as the 53rd best game of all time for its \"complex and well-crafted story that was really the start of players making choices that genuinely affect the outcome.\" 1UP.com listed it as one of the most important games of all time, calling its influence \"too massive to properly gauge.\"\n\n+ List of awards and nominations \n! Year !! Award !! Category !! Recipient!! Result !! class=\"unsortable\"  Ref.\n\nA film adaptation based on the game was initially announced in May 2002 by Columbia Pictures. The film was being produced by Laura Ziskin, along with Greg Pruss attached with writing the screenplay. Peter Schlessel, president of the production for Columbia Pictures, and Paul Baldwin, president of marketing for Eidos Interactive, stated that they were confident in that the adaptation would be a successful development for both the studios and the franchise. In March 2003, during an interview with Greg Pruss, he informed IGN that the character of JC Denton would be \"a little bit filthier than he was in the game.\" He further stated that the script was shaping up to be darker in tone than the original game. Although a release date was scheduled for 2006, the film did not get past the scripting stage.\n\nIn 2012, CBS films revived the project, buying the rights and commissioning a film inspired by the \"Deux Ex\" series; its direct inspiration will be the 2011 game \"\". C. Robert Cargill and Scott Derrickson are writing the screenplay, and Derrickson will direct the film.\n\nA sequel to the game titled \"\", was released in the United States on December 2, 2003, and then in Europe in early 2004 for both the PC and the Xbox game console. A second sequel, titled \"Deus Ex: Clan Wars\", was initially conceived as a multiplayer-focused third game for the series. After the commercial performance and public reception of \"Deus Ex: Invisible War\" failed to meet expectations, the decision was made to set the game in a separate universe, and \"Deus Ex: Clan Wars\" was eventually published under the title \"Project: Snowblind\".\n\nOn March 29, 2007, Valve announced \"Deus Ex\" and its sequel would be available for purchase from their Steam service. Among the games announced are several other Eidos franchise titles, including \"\" and \"Tomb Raider\".\n\nEidos Montréal produced a prequel to \"Deus Ex\" called \"\". This was confirmed on November 26, 2007, when Eidos Montréal posted a teaser trailer for the title on their website. The game was released on August 23, 2011, for the PC, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 platforms and received critical acclaim.\n\nOn April 7, 2015, Eidos announced a sequel to \"Deus Ex: Human Revolution\" and second prequel to \"Deus Ex\" titled \"\". It was released on August 23, 2016.\n\nBULLET::::- Sources\n\nBULLET::::- Official page on Eidos site\n"}
{"id": "8485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8485", "title": "Diego Maradona", "text": "Diego Maradona\n\nDiego Armando Maradona (, born 30 October 1960) is an Argentine football manager and retired professional footballer. He is currently the coach of Argentine Primera División club Gimnasia de La Plata. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest football players of all time. He was one of the two joint winners of the FIFA Player of the 20th Century award. Maradona's vision, passing, ball control and dribbling skills were combined with his small stature (), which gave him a low center of gravity allowing him to maneuver better than most other football players; he would often dribble past multiple opposing players on a run. His presence and leadership on the field had a great effect on his team's general performance, while he would often be singled out by the opposition. A precocious talent, Maradona was given the nickname \"\"El Pibe de Oro\"\" (\"The Golden Boy\"), a name that stuck with him throughout his career.\n\nAn advanced playmaker who operated in the classic number 10 position, Maradona was the first player in football history to set the world record transfer fee twice, first when he transferred to Barcelona for a then world record £5 million, and second, when he transferred to Napoli for another record fee £6.9 million. He played for Argentinos Juniors, Boca Juniors, Barcelona, Napoli, Sevilla and Newell's Old Boys during his club career, and is most famous for his time at Napoli and Barcelona where he won numerous accolades.\n\nIn his international career with Argentina, he earned 91 caps and scored 34 goals. Maradona played in four FIFA World Cups, including the 1986 World Cup in Mexico where he captained Argentina and led them to victory over West Germany in the final, and won the Golden Ball as the tournament's best player. In the 1986 World Cup quarter final, he scored both goals in a 2–1 victory over England that entered football history for two different reasons. The first goal was an unpenalized handling foul known as the \"Hand of God\", while the second goal followed a dribble past five England players, voted \"Goal of the Century\" by FIFA.com voters in 2002.\n\nMaradona became coach of Argentina in November 2008. He was in charge of the team at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa before leaving at the end of the tournament. He coached Dubai-based club Al Wasl in the UAE Pro-League for the 2011–12 season. In 2017, Maradona became the coach of Fujairah before leaving at the end of the season. In May 2018, Maradona was announced as the new chairman of Belarusian club Dynamo Brest. He arrived in Brest and was presented by the club to start his duties in July. From September 2018 to June 2019, Maradona was coach of Mexican club Dorados.\n\nDiego Armando Maradona was born on 30 October 1960, at the Policlínico (Polyclinic) Evita Hospital in Lanús, Buenos Aires Province, but raised in Villa Fiorito, a shantytown on the southern outskirts of Buenos Aires, Argentina, to a poor family that had moved from Corrientes Province. He was the first son after three daughters. He has two younger brothers, Hugo (\"el Turco\") and Raúl (Lalo), both of whom were also professional football players. \nHe was the fifth child and first son of Diego Maradona \"Chitoro\" (d. 2015) and Dalma Salvadora Franco 'Doña Tota' (1930–2011). Maradona's parents were both born and brought up in the town of Esquina in the north-east province of Corrientes Province, living only two hundred metres from each other on the banks of the Corriente River. In 1950, they left Esquina and settled in Buenos Aires. At age eight, Maradona was spotted by a talent scout while he was playing in his neighbourhood club Estrella Roja. He became a staple of \"Los Cebollitas\" (The Little Onions), the junior team of Buenos Aires's Argentinos Juniors. As a 12-year-old ball boy, he amused spectators by showing his wizardry with the ball during the halftime intermissions of first division games. He named Brazilian playmaker Rivelino and Manchester United winger George Best among his inspirations growing up.\n\nOn 20 October 1976, Maradona made his professional debut for Argentinos Juniors, 10 days before his 16th birthday, vs. Talleres de Córdoba. He entered to the pitch wearing the number 16 jersey, and became the youngest player in the history of Argentine Primera División. Few minutes after debuting, Maradona kicked the ball through Juan Domingo Cabrera's legs, making a nutmeg that would become legendary. After the game, Maradona said, \"That day I felt I had held the sky in my hands.\" Thirty years later, Cabrera remembered Maradona's debut: \"I was on the right side of the field and went to press him, but he didn't give me a chance. He made the nutmeg and when I turned around, he was far away from me\". Maradona scored his first goal in the Primera División against Marplatense team San Lorenzo on 14 November 1976, two weeks after turning 16.\nMaradona spent five years at Argentinos Juniors, from 1976 to 1981, scoring 115 goals in 167 appearances before his US$ 4 million transfer to Boca Juniors. Maradona received offers to join other clubs, including River Plate who offered to make him the club's best paid player. Nevertheless, Maradona expressed his will to be transferred to Boca Juniors, the team he always wanted to play for.\n\nMaradona signed a contract with Boca Juniors on 20 February 1981. He made his debut two days later against Talleres de Córdoba, scoring twice in the club's 4–1 win. On 10 April, Maradona played his first \"Superclásico\" against River Plate at La Bombonera stadium. Boca defeated River 3–0 with Maradona scoring a goal after dribbling past Alberto Tarantini and Fillol. Despite the distrustful relationship between Maradona and Boca Juniors manager, Silvio Marzolini, Boca had a successful season, winning the league title after securing a point against Racing Club. That would be the only title won by Maradona in the Argentine domestic league.\n\nAfter the 1982 World Cup, in June, Maradona was transferred to Barcelona in Spain for a then world record fee of £5 million ($7.6 million). In 1983, under coach César Luis Menotti, Barcelona and Maradona won the Copa del Rey (Spain's annual national cup competition), beating Real Madrid, and the Spanish Super Cup, beating Athletic Bilbao. On 26 June 1983, Barcelona defeated Real Madrid on the road in one of the world's biggest club games, \"El Clásico\", a match where Maradona scored and became the first Barcelona player to be applauded by archrival Real Madrid fans. Maradona dribbled past Madrid goalkeeper Agustín, and as he approached the empty goal, he stopped just as Madrid defender Juan José came sliding in a desperate attempt to block the shot and ended up crashing into the post, before Maradona slotted the ball into the net. The manner of the goal led to many inside the stadium start applauding; only Ronaldinho (in November 2005) and Andrés Iniesta (in November 2015) have since been granted such an ovation as Barcelona players from Madrid fans at the Santiago Bernabéu. Due to illness and injury as well as controversial incidents on the field, Maradona had a difficult tenure in Barcelona. First a bout of hepatitis, then a broken ankle in a La Liga game at the Camp Nou in September 1983 caused by an ill-timed tackle by Athletic Bilbao's Andoni Goikoetxea, threatened to jeopardize Maradona's career, but with treatment and therapy, it was possible for him to return to the pitch after a three-month recovery period.\nThe end of the 1983–84 season included a violent and chaotic fight Maradona was directly involved in at the 1984 Copa del Rey final at the Santiago Bernabéu in Madrid against Athletic Bilbao. After receiving another rough tackle by Goikoetxea which wounded his leg, being taunted with xenophobic, racist insults related to his father's Native American ancestry throughout the match by Bilbao fans, and being provoked by Bilbao's Miguel Sola at full time as Barcelona lost 1–0, Maradona snapped. He aggressively got up, stood inches from Sola's face and the two exchanged words. This started a chain reaction of emotional reactions from both teams. Using expletives, Sola mimicked a gesture from the crowd towards Maradona by using a xenophobic term. Maradona then headbutted Sola, elbowed another Bilbao player in the face and kneed another player in the head, knocking him out cold. The Bilbao squad surrounded Maradona to exact some retribution with Goikoetxea connecting with a high kick to his chest, before the rest of the Barcelona squad joined in to help Maradona. From this point, Barcelona and Bilbao players brawled on the field with Maradona in the centre of the action, kicking and punching anyone in a Bilbao shirt.\n\nThe mass brawl was played out in front of the Spanish King Juan Carlos and an audience of 100,000 fans inside the stadium, and more than half of Spain watching on television. After fans began throwing solid objects on the field at the players, coaches and even photographers, sixty people were injured, with the incident effectively sealing Maradona's transfer out of the club in what was his last game in a Barcelona shirt. One Barcelona executive stated, \"When I saw those scenes of Maradona fighting and the chaos that followed I realized we couldn't go any further with him.\" Maradona got into frequent disputes with FC Barcelona executives, particularly club president Josep Lluís Núñez, culminating with a demand to be transferred out of Camp Nou in 1984. During his two injury-hit seasons at Barcelona, Maradona scored 38 goals in 58 games. Maradona transferred to Napoli in Italy's Serie A for another world record fee, £6.9 million ($10.48M).\n\nMaradona arrived in Naples and was presented to the world media as a Napoli player on 5 July 1984, where he was welcomed by 75,000 fans at his presentation at the Stadio San Paolo. Sports writer David Goldblatt commented, \"They [the fans] were convinced that the saviour had arrived.\" A local newspaper stated that despite the lack of a \"mayor, houses, schools, buses, employment and sanitation, none of this matters because we have Maradona\". Prior to Maradona's arrival, Italian football was dominated by teams from the north and centre of the country, such as A.C. Milan, Juventus, Inter Milan and Roma, and no team in the south of the Italian Peninsula had ever won a league title.\n\nAt Napoli, Maradona reached the peak of his professional career: he soon inherited the captain's armband from Napoli veteran defender Giuseppe Bruscolotti and quickly became an adored star among the club's fans; in his time there he elevated the team to the most successful era in its history. Maradona played for Napoli at a period when North-South tensions in Italy were at a peak due to a variety of issues, notably the economic differences between the two. Led by Maradona, Napoli won their first ever Serie A Italian Championship in 1986–87. Goldblatt wrote, \"The celebrations were tumultuous. A rolling series of impromptu street parties and festivities broke out contagiously across the city in a round-the-clock carnival which ran for over a week. The world was turned upside down. The Neapolitans held mock funerals for Juventus and Milan, burning their coffins, their death notices announcing 'May 1987, the other Italy has been defeated. A new empire is born.'\" Murals of Maradona were painted on the city's ancient buildings, and newborn children were named in his honor. The following season, the team's prolific attacking trio, formed by Maradona, Bruno Giordano and Careca, was later dubbed the \"Ma-Gi-Ca\" (\"magical\") front-line.\n\nNapoli would win their second league title in 1989–90, and finish runners up in the league twice, in 1987–88 and 1988–89. Other honors during the Maradona era at Napoli included the Coppa Italia in 1987, (second place in the Coppa Italia in 1989), the UEFA Cup in 1989 and the Italian Supercup in 1990. Despite primarily playing in a creative role as an attacking midfielder, Maradona was the top scorer in Serie A in 1987–88, with 15 goals, and was the all-time leading goalscorer for Napoli, with 115 goals, until his record was broken by Marek Hamšík in 2017. When asked who was the toughest player he ever faced, A.C. Milan central defender Franco Baresi stated, \"Maradona; when he was on form, there was almost no way of stopping him,\" a view shared by his Milan teammate Paolo Maldini, who stated, \"The best ever I played against was Maradona.\"\n\nWhile Maradona was successful on the field during his time in Italy, his personal problems increased. His cocaine use continued, and he received US$70,000 in fines from his club for missing games and practices, ostensibly because of \"stress\". He faced a scandal there regarding an illegitimate son, and he was also the object of some suspicion over an alleged friendship with the Camorra. Later on, in honour of Maradona and his achievements during his career at Napoli, the number 10 jersey of Napoli was officially retired.\n\nAfter serving a 15-month ban for failing a drug test for cocaine, Maradona left Napoli in disgrace in 1992. Despite interest from Real Madrid and Marseille, he signed for Sevilla, where he stayed for one year. In 1993, he played for Newell's Old Boys and in 1995 returned to Boca Juniors for a two-year stint. Maradona also appeared for Tottenham Hotspur in a testimonial match for Osvaldo Ardiles against Internazionale, shortly before the 1986 World Cup. Maradona was himself given a testimonial match in November 2001, played between an all-star World XI and the Argentina national team.\n\nDuring his time with the Argentina national team, Maradona scored 34 goals in 91 appearances. He made his full international debut at age 16, against Hungary, on 27 February 1977. Maradona was left off the Argentine squad for the 1978 World Cup on home soil by coach César Luis Menotti who felt he was too young at age 17. At age 18, Maradona played the 1979 FIFA World Youth Championship in Japan and emerged as the star of the tournament, shining in Argentina's 3–1 final win over the Soviet Union. On 2 June 1979, Maradona scored his first senior international goal in a 3–1 win against Scotland at Hampden Park. He went on to play for Argentina in two 1979 Copa América ties during August 1979, a 2–1 loss against Brazil and a 3–0 win over Bolivia in which he scored his side's third goal.\n\nSpeaking thirty years later on the impact of Maradona's performances in 1979, FIFA President Sepp Blatter stated, \"Everyone has an opinion on Diego Armando Maradona, and that’s been the case since his playing days. My most vivid recollection is of this incredibly gifted kid at the second FIFA U-20 World Cup in Japan in 1979. He left everyone open-mouthed every time he got on the ball.\" Maradona and his compatriot Lionel Messi are the only players to win the Golden Ball at both the FIFA U-20 World Cup and FIFA World Cup. Maradona did so in 1979 and 1986, which Messi emulated in 2005 and 2014.\n\nMaradona played his first World Cup tournament in 1982 in his new country of residence, Spain. Argentina played Belgium in the opening game of the 1982 Cup at the Camp Nou in Barcelona. The Catalan crowd was eager to see their new world-record signing Maradona in action, but he did not perform to expectations, as Argentina, the defending champions, lost 1–0. Although the team convincingly beat both Hungary and El Salvador in Alicante to progress to the second round, there were internal tensions within the team, with the younger, less experienced players at odds with the older, more experienced players. In a team that also included such players as Mario Kempes, Osvaldo Ardiles, Ramón Díaz, Daniel Bertoni, Alberto Tarantini, Ubaldo Fillol and Daniel Passarella, the Argentine side was defeated in the second round by Brazil and by eventual winners Italy. The Italian match is renowned for Maradona being aggressively man-marked by Claudio Gentile, as Italy beat Argentina at the Sarrià Stadium in Barcelona, 2–1.\n\nMaradona played in all five matches without being substituted, scoring twice against Hungary. He was fouled repeatedly in all five games and particularly in the last one against Brazil at the Sarrià, a game that was blighted by poor officiating and violent fouls. With Argentina already down 3–0 to Brazil, Maradona's temper eventually got the better of him and he was sent off with five minutes remaining for a serious retaliatory foul against Batista.\n\nMaradona captained the Argentine national team to victory in the 1986 World Cup in Mexico, winning the final in Mexico City against West Germany. Throughout the tournament, Maradona asserted his dominance and was the most dynamic player of the tournament. He played every minute of every Argentina game, scoring five goals and making five assists, three of those in the opening match against South Korea at the Olimpico Universitario Stadium in Mexico City. His first goal of the tournament came against Italy in the second group game in Puebla. Argentina eliminated Uruguay in the first knockout round in Puebla, setting up a match against England at the Azteca Stadium, also in Mexico City. After scoring two contrasting goals in the 2–1 quarter-final win against England, his legend was cemented. The majesty of his second goal and the notoriety of his first led to the French newspaper \"L'Equipe\" describing Maradona as \"half-angel, half-devil\". This match was played with the background of the Falklands War between Argentina and the United Kingdom. Replays showed that the first goal was scored by striking the ball with his hand. Maradona was coyly evasive, describing it as \"a little with the head of Maradona and a little with the hand of God\". It became known as the \"Hand of God\". Ultimately, on 22 August 2005, Maradona acknowledged on his television show that he had hit the ball with his hand purposely, and no contact with his head was made, and that he immediately knew the goal was illegitimate. This became known as an international fiasco in World Cup history. The goal stood, much to the wrath of the English players.\n\nMaradona's second goal, just four minutes after the hotly disputed hand-goal, was later voted by FIFA as the greatest goal in the history of the World Cup. He received the ball in his own half, swivelled around and with 11 touches ran more than half the length of the field, dribbling past five English outfield players (Peter Beardsley, Steve Hodge, Peter Reid, Terry Butcher and Terry Fenwick) before he left goalkeeper Peter Shilton on his backside with a feint, and slotted the ball into the net. This goal was voted \"Goal of the Century\" in a 2002 online poll conducted by FIFA. A 2002 Channel 4 poll in the UK saw his performance ranked number 6 in the list of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments.\nMaradona followed this with two more goals in a semi-final match against Belgium at the Azteca, including another virtuoso dribbling display for the second goal. In the final match, West Germany attempted to contain him by double-marking, but he nevertheless found the space past the West German player Lothar Matthäus to give the final pass to Jorge Burruchaga for the winning goal. Argentina beat West Germany 3–2 in front of 115,000 fans at the Azteca with Maradona lifting the World Cup as captain.\n\nDuring the course of the tournament, Maradona attempted or created more than half of Argentina's shots, attempted 90 dribbles some three times more than any other player and was fouled 53 times, winning his team twice as many free kicks as any player. Maradona scored or assisted 10 of Argentina's 14 goals, including the assist for the winning goal in the final, ensuring that he would be remembered as one of the greatest names in football history. By the end of the World Cup, Maradona went on to win the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament by unanimous vote and was widely regarded to have won the World Cup virtually single-handedly, something that he later stated he did not entirely agree with. Zinedine Zidane, watching the 1986 World Cup as a 14 year old, stated Maradona “was on another level”. In a tribute to him, Azteca Stadium authorities built a statue of him scoring the \"Goal of the Century\" and placed it at the entrance of the stadium.\n\nMaradona captained Argentina again in the 1990 World Cup in Italy to yet another World Cup final. An ankle injury affected his overall performance, and he was much less dominant than four years earlier. After losing their opening game to Cameroon at the San Siro in Milan, Argentina were almost eliminated in the first round, only qualifying in third position from their group. In the round of 16 match against Brazil in Turin, Claudio Caniggia scored the only goal after being set up by Maradona.\n\nIn the quarter-final, Argentina faced Yugoslavia in Florence; the match ended 0–0 after 120 minutes, with Argentina advancing in a penalty shootout even though Maradona's kick, a weak shot to the goalkeeper's right, was saved. The semi-final against the host nation Italy at Maradona's club stadium in Naples, the Stadio San Paolo, was also resolved on penalties after a 1–1 draw. This time, however, Maradona was successful with his effort, daringly rolling the ball into the net with an almost exact replica of his unsuccessful kick in the previous round. At the final in Rome, Argentina lost 1–0 to West Germany, the only goal being a penalty by Andreas Brehme in the 85th minute after a controversial foul on Rudi Völler.\n\nAt the 1994 World Cup in the United States, Maradona played in only two games (both at the Foxboro Stadium near Boston), scoring one goal against Greece, before being sent home after failing a drug test for ephedrine doping. After scoring against Greece, Maradona had one of the most infamous World Cup goal celebrations as he ran towards one of the sideline cameras shouting with a distorted face and bulging eyes. This turned out to be Maradona's last international goal for Argentina in what was his last appearance for his country.\n\nIn his autobiography, Maradona argued that the test result was due to his personal trainer giving him the power drink Rip Fuel. His claim was that the U.S. version, unlike the Argentine one, contained the chemical and that, having run out of his Argentine dosage, his trainer unwittingly bought the U.S. formula. FIFA expelled him from USA '94, and Argentina were subsequently eliminated in the second round by Romania in Los Angeles. Maradona has also separately claimed that he had an agreement with FIFA, on which the organization reneged, to allow him to use the drug for weight loss before the competition in order to be able to play. His failed drugs test at the 1994 World Cup signaled the end of his international career, which had lasted 17 years and yielded 34 goals from 91 games, as well as one winner's medal and one runners-up medal in the World Cup.\n\nA classic number 10, Maradona was renowned for his dribbling ability, vision, close ball control, passing and creativity, and is considered one of the most skillful players in the sport. He had a compact physique, and with his strong legs and low center of gravity he could withstand physical pressure well while running with the ball. Former Dutch player Johan Cruyff saw similarities between Maradona and Lionel Messi with the ball seemingly attached to their body when dribbling. His physical strengths were illustrated by his two goals against Belgium in the 1986 World Cup. He was a strategist and a team player, as well as highly technical with the ball. He could manage himself effectively in limited spaces, and would attract defenders only to quickly dash out of the melee (as in the second 1986-goal against England), or give an assist to a free teammate. Being short, but strong, he could hold the ball long enough with a defender on his back to wait for a teammate making a run or to find a gap for a quick shot. He showed leadership qualities on the field and captained Argentina in their World Cup campaigns of 1986, 1990 and 1994.\nThe team leader on and off the field – he would speak up on a range of issues on behalf of the players – Maradona's ability as a player and his overpowering personality had a major positive effect on his team, with his 1986 World Cup teammate Jorge Valdano stating: \"Maradona was a technical leader: a guy who resolved all difficulties that may come up on the pitch. Firstly, he was in charge of making the miracles happen, that's something that gives team-mates a lot of confidence. Secondly, the scope of his celebrity was such that he absorbed all the pressures on behalf of his team-mates. What I mean is: one slept soundly the night before a game not just because you knew you were playing next to Diego and Diego did things no other player in the world could do, but also because unconsciously we knew that if it was the case that we lost then Maradona would shoulder more of the burden, would be blamed more, than the rest of us. That was the kind of influence he exercised on the team.\" Lauding the “charisma” of Maradona, another of his Argentina teammates, prolific striker Gabriel Batistuta, stated, “Diego could command a stadium, have everyone watch him. I played with him and I can tell you how technically decisive he was for the team.”\nOne of Maradona's trademark moves was dribbling full-speed on the right wing, and on reaching the opponent's goal line, delivering accurate passes to his teammates. Another trademark was the \"rabona\", a reverse-cross pass shot behind the leg that holds all the weight. This maneuver led to several assists, such as the cross for Ramón Díaz's header against Switzerland in 1980. He was also a dangerous free kick and penalty kick taker. His free kick technique, which often saw him raise his knee at a high angle when striking the ball, thus enabling him to lift it high over the wall, allowed him to score free kicks even from close range, within 22 to 17 yards (20 to 16 metres) from the goal, or even just outside the penalty area.\n\nMaradona was famous for his cunning personality. Inherent within his nickname \"El Pibe de Oro\" (\"Golden Boy\") is a sense of mischief, with \"pibe\" being an anti-establishment rogue, street smart and full of guile. Some critics view his controversial \"Hand of God\" goal at the 1986 World Cup as a clever maneuver, with one of the opposition players, Glenn Hoddle, admitting that Maradona had disguised it by flicking his head at the same time as palming the ball. The goal itself has been viewed as an embodiment of the Buenos Aires shanty town Maradona was brought up in and its concept of \"viveza criolla\" — \"native cunning\". While critical of the illegitimate first goal, England striker Gary Lineker conceded, “When Diego scored that second goal against us, I felt like applauding. I'd never felt like that before, but it's true... and not just because it was such an important game. It was impossible to score such a beautiful goal. He's the greatest player of all time, by a long way. A genuine phenomenon.\" Maradona used his hand in the 1990 World Cup, again without punishment, and this time on his own goal line, to prevent the Soviet Union from scoring. A number of publications have referred to Maradona as the Artful Dodger, the urchin pickpocket from Charles Dickens' \"Oliver Twist\".\n\nMaradona was dominantly left-footed, often using his left foot even when the ball was positioned more suitably for a right-footed connection. His first goal against Belgium in the 1986 World Cup semi-final is a worthy indicator of such; he had run into the inside right channel to receive a pass but let the ball travel across to his left foot, requiring more technical ability. During his run past several England players in the previous round for the \"Goal of the Century\" he did not use his right foot once, despite spending the whole movement on the right-hand side of the pitch. In the 1990 World Cup second round tie against Brazil, he did use his right foot to set up the winning goal for Claudio Caniggia due to two Brazilian markers forcing him into a position that made use of his left foot less practical.\n\nHounded for years by the press, Maradona once fired a compressed-air rifle at reporters who he claimed were invading his privacy. This quote from former teammate Jorge Valdano summarizes the feelings of many:\nIn 1990, the Konex Foundation from Argentina granted him the Diamond Konex Award, one of the most prestigious culture awards in Argentina, as the most important personality in Sports in the last decade in his country. In 2000, Maradona published his autobiography \"Yo Soy El Diego\" (\"I am \"The Diego\"\"), which became a bestseller in Argentina. Two years later, Maradona donated the Cuban royalties of his book to \"the Cuban people and Fidel\".\n\nIn 2000, he won FIFA Player of the Century award which was to be decided by votes on their official website, their official magazine and a grand jury. Maradona won the Internet-based poll, garnering 53.6% of the votes against 18.53% for Pelé. In spite of this, and shortly before the ceremony, FIFA added a second award and appointed a \"Football Family\" committee composed of football journalists that also gave to Pelé the title of best player of the century to make it a draw. Maradona also came fifth in the vote of the IFFHS (International Federation of Football History and Statistics). In 2001, the Argentine Football Association (AFA) asked FIFA for authorization to retire the jersey number 10 for Maradona. FIFA did not grant the request, even though Argentine officials have maintained that FIFA hinted that it would.\n\nMaradona has topped a number of fan polls, including a 2002 FIFA poll in which his second goal against England was chosen as the best goal ever scored in a World Cup; he also won the most votes in a poll to determine the All-Time Ultimate World Cup Team. On 22 March 2010, Maradona was chosen number 1 in The Greatest 10 World Cup players of all time by the London-based newspaper \"The Times\". Argentinos Juniors named its stadium after Maradona on 26 December 2003. In 2003, Maradona was employed by the Libyan footballer Al-Saadi Gaddafi, the third son of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, as a \"technical consultant\", while Al-Saadi was playing for the Italian club, Perugia, which was playing in Serie A at the time.\n\nOn 22 June 2005, it was announced that Maradona would return to former club Boca Juniors as a sports vice president in charge of managing the First Division roster (after a disappointing 2004–05 season, which coincided with Boca's centenary). His contract began 1 August 2005, and one of his first recommendations proved to be very effective: advising the club to hire Alfio Basile as the new coach. With Maradona fostering a close relationship with the players, Boca won the 2005 Apertura, the 2006 Clausura, the 2005 Copa Sudamericana and the 2005 Recopa Sudamericana.\n\nOn 15 August 2005, Maradona made his debut as host of a talk-variety show on Argentine television, La Noche del 10 (\"The Night of the no. 10\"). His main guest on opening night was Pelé; the two had a friendly chat, showing no signs of past differences. However, the show also included a cartoon villain with a clear physical resemblance to Pelé. In subsequent evenings, he led the ratings on all occasions but one. Most guests were drawn from the worlds of football and show business, including Ronaldo and Zinedine Zidane, but also included interviews with other notable friends and personalities such as Cuban leader Fidel Castro and boxers Roberto Durán and Mike Tyson. Maradona gave each of his guests a signed Argentina jersey, which Tyson wore when he arrived in Brazil, Argentina's biggest rivals. In November 2005, however, Maradona rejected an offer to work with Argentina's national football team.\n\nIn May 2006, Maradona agreed to take part in UK's Soccer Aid (a program to raise money for Unicef). In September 2006, Maradona, in his famous blue and white number 10, was the captain for Argentina in a three-day World Cup of Indoor Football tournament in Spain. On 26 August 2006, it was announced that Maradona was quitting his position in the club Boca Juniors because of disagreements with the AFA, who selected Alfio Basile to be the new coach of the Argentina national team. In 2008, award-winning Serbian filmmaker Emir Kusturica made a documentary about Maradona's life, entitled \"Maradona\".\n\nOn 1 September 2014, Maradona, along with many current and former footballing stars, took part in the \"Match for Peace\", which was played at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, with the proceeds being donated entirely to charity. Maradona set up a goal for Roberto Baggio during the first half of the match, with a chipped through-ball over the defence with the outside of his left foot. Unusually, both Baggio and Maradona wore the number 10 shirt, despite playing on the same team. On 17 August 2015, Maradona visited Ali Bin Nasser, the Tunisian referee of the Argentina–England quarter-final match at the 1986 World Cup where Maradona scored his Hand of God, and paid tribute to him by giving him a signed Argentine jersey.\n\nMaradona began his managerial career alongside former Argentinos Juniors midfield teammate Carlos Fren. The pair led Mandiyú of Corrientes in 1994 and Racing Club in 1995, with little success. In May 2011 he became manager of Dubai club Al Wasl FC in the United Arab Emirates. Maradona was sacked on 10 July 2012. In August 2013, Maradona moved on to become mental coach at Argentine club Deportivo Riestra. Maradona departed this role in 2017 to become the head coach of Fujairah, in the UAE second division, before leaving at the end of the season upon failure to secure promotion at the club. In September 2018 he was appointed manager of Mexican second division side Dorados. He made his debut with Dorados on September 17, 2018 with a 4-1 victory over Cafetaleros de Tapachula. On June 13, 2019, after Dorados failed to clinch promotion to the Mexican top flight, Maradona's lawyer announced that he would be stepping down from the role, citing health reasons.\n\nOn 5 September 2019, Maradona was unveiled as the new head coach of Gimnasia de La Plata, signing a contract until the end of the season. After two months in charge he left the club on 19 November. However, two days later, Maradona rejoined the club as manager saying that \"we finally achieved political unity in the club\". Maradona insisted that Gabriel Pellegrino remain club President if he were to stay with Gimnisia de La Plata. However it is still not clear if Pellegrino, who declined to run for re-election, will stay on as club President. Originally scheduled to be held on November 23, 2019, the election was delayed 15 days.\n\nAfter the resignation of Argentina national team coach Alfio Basile in 2008, Maradona immediately proposed his candidacy for the vacant role. According to several press sources, his major challengers included Diego Simeone, Carlos Bianchi, Miguel Ángel Russo and Sergio Batista. On 29 October 2008, AFA chairman Julio Grondona confirmed that Maradona would be the head coach of the national team. On 19 November 2008, Maradona managed Argentina for the first time when they played against Scotland at Hampden Park in Glasgow, which Argentina won 1–0.\nAfter winning his first three matches in charge of the national team, he oversaw a 6–1 defeat to Bolivia, equalling the team's worst ever margin of defeat. With two matches remaining in the qualification tournament for the 2010 World Cup, Argentina was in fifth place and faced the possibility of failing to qualify, but victory in the last two matches secured qualification for the finals. After Argentina's qualification, Maradona used abusive language at the live post-game press conference, telling members of the media to \"suck it and keep on sucking it\". FIFA responded with a two-month ban on all footballing activity, which expired on 15 January 2010, and a CHF 25,000 fine, with a warning as to his future conduct. The friendly match scheduled to take place at home to the Czech Republic on 15 December, during the period of the ban, was cancelled. The only match Argentina played during Maradona's ban was a friendly away to Catalonia, which they lost 4–2.\n\nAt the World Cup finals in June 2010, Argentina started by winning 1–0 against Nigeria, followed by a 4–1 victory over South Korea on the strength of a Gonzalo Higuaín hat-trick. In the final match of the group stage, Argentina won 2–0 against Greece to win the group and advance to a second round, meeting Mexico. After defeating Mexico 3–1, however, Argentina was routed by Germany 4–0 in the quarter-finals to go out of the competition. Argentina was ranked fifth in the tournament. After the defeat to Germany, Maradona admitted that he was considering his future as Argentina coach, stating, \"I may leave tomorrow.\" On 15 July 2010, the AFA said that he would be offered a new four-year deal that would keep him in charge through to the summer of 2014 when Brazil stages the World Cup. On 27 July, however, the AFA announced that its board had unanimously decided not to renew his contract. Afterwards, on 29 July, Maradona claimed that AFA president Julio Grondona and director of national teams (as well as his former Argentine national team and Sevilla coach) Carlos Bilardo had \"lied to\", \"betrayed\" and effectively sacked him from the role. He said, \"They wanted me to continue, but seven of my staff should not go on, if he told me that, it meant he did not want me to keep working.\"\n\nBorn to a Roman Catholic family, his parents are Diego Maradona Senior and Dalma Salvadora Franco. Maradona married long-time fiancée Claudia Villafañe on 7 November 1984 in Buenos Aires, and they had two daughters, Dalma Nerea (born 2 April 1987) and Gianinna Dinorah (born 16 May 1989), by whom he became a grandfather in 2009.\n\nMaradona and Villafañe divorced in 2004. Daughter Dalma has since asserted that the divorce was the best solution for all, as her parents remained on friendly terms. They travelled together to Naples for a series of homages in June 2005 and were seen together on other occasions, including the Argentina games during 2006 World Cup.\n\nDuring the divorce proceedings, Maradona admitted he is the father of Diego Sinagra (born in Naples on 20 September 1986). The Italian courts had already ruled so in 1993, after Maradona refused to undergo DNA tests for proving or disproving his paternity. Diego Junior met Maradona for the first time in May 2003 after tricking his way onto a golf course in Italy where Maradona was playing. Sinagra is now a footballer playing in Italy. After the divorce, Claudia embarked on a career as a theatre producer, and Dalma was seeking an acting career; she had expressed her desire to attend the Actor's Studio in Los Angeles.\n\nMaradona's relationship with his immediate family was a close one, and in a 1990 interview with \"Sports Illustrated\" he showed phone bills where he had spent a minimum of 15,000 US dollars per month calling his parents and siblings. Maradona's mother, Dalma, died on 19 November 2011. He was in Dubai at the time, and desperately tried to fly back in time to see her, but was too late. She was 81 years old. His father, \"Don\" Diego, died on 25 June 2015 at age 87.\n\nMaradona's great-nephew, Hernán, is a professional footballer.\n\nFrom the mid-1980s until 2004, Maradona was addicted to cocaine. He allegedly began using the drug in Barcelona in 1983. By the time he was playing for Napoli, he had a regular addiction, which began to interfere with his ability to play football.\n\nMaradona has a tendency to put on weight and suffered increasingly from obesity, at one point weighing . He was obese from the end of his playing career until undergoing gastric bypass surgery in a clinic in Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, on 6 March 2005. His surgeon said that Maradona would follow a liquid diet for three months in order to return his normal weight. When Maradona resumed public appearances shortly thereafter, he displayed a notably thinner figure. On 29 March 2007, Maradona was readmitted to a hospital in Buenos Aires. He was treated for hepatitis and effects of alcohol abuse and was released on 11 April, but readmitted two days later. In the following days, there were constant rumors about his health, including three false claims of his death within a month. After transfer to a psychiatric clinic specialising in alcohol-related problems, he was discharged on 7 May. On 8 May 2007, Maradona appeared on Argentine television and stated that he had quit drinking and had not used drugs in two-and-a-half years. In January 2019, Maradona underwent surgery after a hernia caused internal bleeding in his stomach.\n\nHaving previously been vocal in his support of neoliberal Argentine President Carlos Menem and his Harvard University-educated economist Domingo Cavallo, Maradona has shown sympathy to left-wing ideologies. He became friends with Cuban leader Fidel Castro while receiving treatment on the island, with Castro stating, \"Diego is a great friend and very noble, too. There's also no question he’s a wonderful athlete and has maintained a friendship with Cuba to no material gain of his own.\" He has a portrait of Castro tattooed on his left leg and one of Fidel's second in command, fellow Argentine Che Guevara on his right arm. In his autobiography, \"El Diego\", he dedicated the book to various people, including Castro. He wrote, \"To Fidel Castro and, through him, all the Cuban people.\"\nMaradona was also a supporter of former Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez. In 2005, he came to Venezuela to meet Chávez, who received him in the Miraflores Palace. After this meeting, Maradona claimed that he had come with the aim of meeting a \"great man\" (\"\"un grande\"\" in Spanish), but he had met instead a gigantic man (\"\"un gigante\"\" in Spanish, meaning he was more than great). \"I believe in Chávez, I am Chavista. Everything Fidel does, everything Chávez does, for me is the best.\" Maradona was the guest of honor of Chávez at the opening game of the 2007 Copa América held in Venezuela.\n\nMaradona has declared his opposition to what he identifies as imperialism, notably during the 2005 Summit of the Americas in Mar del Plata, Argentina. There he protested George W. Bush's presence in Argentina, wearing a T-shirt labeled \"\" (with the \"s\" in \"Bush\" being replaced with a swastika) and referring to Bush as \"human garbage\". In August 2007, Maradona went further, making an appearance on Chávez's weekly television show \"Alo Presidente\" and saying, \"I hate everything that comes from the United States. I hate it with all my strength.\" In December 2008, however, Maradona had adopted a more pro-US attitude when he expressed admiration for Bush's successor, President-elect Barack Obama, and held great expectations for him.\nWith his poor shanty town upbringing, Maradona has cultivated a man of the people persona. During a meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican in 1987, they clashed on the issue of wealth disparity, with Maradona stating, \"I argued with him because I was in the Vatican and I saw all these golden ceilings and afterwards I heard the Pope say the Church was worried about the welfare of poor kids. Sell your ceiling then amigo, do something!\" In September 2014, Maradona met with Pope Francis in Rome, crediting Francis for inspiring him to return to religion after many years; he stated, \"We should all imitate Pope Francis. If each one of us gives something to someone else, no one in the world would be starving.\"\n\nIn December 2007, Maradona presented a signed shirt with a message of support to the people of Iran: it is displayed in the Iranian Ministry of Foreign Affairs' museum. In April 2013, Maradona visited the tomb of Hugo Chávez and urged Venezuelans to elect the late leader's designated successor, Nicolás Maduro, to continue the socialist leader's legacy; \"Continue the struggle,\" Maradona said on television. Maradona attended Maduro's final campaign rally in Caracas, signing footballs and kicking them to the crowd, and presented Maduro with an Argentina jersey. Having visited Chávez's tomb with Maradona, Maduro said, \"Speaking with Diego was very emotional because comandante Chávez also loved him very much.\" Maradona participated and danced at the electoral campaign rally during the 2018 presidential elections in Venezuela. During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis, the Mexican Football Federation fined him for violating their code of ethics and dedicating a team victory to Nicolás Maduro.\n\nIn October 2015, Maradona thanked Queen Elizabeth II and the Houses of Parliament in London for giving him the chance to provide \"true justice\" as head of an organisation designed to help young children. In a video released on his official Facebook page, Maradona confirmed he would accept their nomination for him to become Latin American director for the non-governmental organisation Football for Unity.\n\nIn March 2009, Italian officials announced that Maradona still owed the Italian government €37 million in local taxes; €23.5 million of which was accrued interest on his original debt. They reported that thus far, Maradona had paid only €42,000, two luxury watches and a set of earrings.\n\nThe American newspaper \"The Houston Chronicle\" wrote about Maradona:\nIn Argentina, Maradona is considered a sports hero. On the idolatry that exists in Argentina, former teammate Jorge Valdano said, \"At the time that Maradona retired from active football, left traumatized Argentina. Maradona was more than just a great footballer. It was a special compensation factor for a country that in a few years lived several military dictatorships and social frustrations of all kinds\". Valdano added that \"Maradona offered to the Argentines a way out of their collective frustration, and that's why people love him. There is a divine figure.\"\n\nEver since 1986, it is common for Argentines abroad to hear Maradona's name as a token of recognition, even in remote places. The Tartan Army sing a version of the Hokey Cokey in honour of the Hand of God goal against England. In Argentina, Maradona is often talked about in terms reserved for legends. In the Argentine film \"El Hijo de la Novia\" (\"Son of the Bride\"), somebody who impersonates a Catholic priest says to a bar patron, \"They idolized him and then crucified him.\" When a friend scolds him for taking the prank too far, the fake priest retorts, \"But I was talking about Maradona.\" He is the subject of the film \"El Camino de San Diego\", though he himself only appears in archive footage.\n\nMaradona was included in many cameos in the Argentine comic book El Cazador de Aventuras. After the closing of it, the authors started a new short-lived comic book titled \"El Die\", using Maradona as the main character. Maradona has had several online Flash games that are entirely dedicated to his legacy. In Rosario, Argentina, locals organized the parody religion of the \"Church of Maradona\". The organization reformulates many elements from Christian tradition, such as Christmas or prayers, reflecting instead details from Maradona. It had 200 founding members, and tens of thousands more have become members via the church's official web site.\n\nMany Argentine artists performed songs in tribute to Diego, such as \"Maradó\" by El Potro Rodrigo, \"Maradona\" by Andrés Calamaro, \"Para siempre Diego\" (Diego forever) by Los Ratones Paranoicos, \"Francotirador\" (Sniper) by Attaque 77, \"Maradona blues\" by Charly García, \"Santa Maradona\" (Saint Maradona) by Mano Negra, \"La Vida Tombola\" by Manu Chao, among others. There are also films, such as: \"Maradona, La Mano de Dios\" (Maradona, the Hand of God), \"El Camino de San Diego\" (Saint Diego's Road), \"Amando a Maradona\" (Loving Maradona), \"Maradona by Kusturica\".\n\nBy 1982, Maradona had become one of the biggest sports stars in the world and had endorsements with many companies, including Puma and Coca-Cola, earning him an additional $1.5 million per year on top of his club salary. In 1982, he featured in a World Cup commercial for Coca-Cola, and a Japanese commercial for Puma. In 2010 he appeared in a commercial for French fashion house Louis Vuitton, indulging in a game of table football with fellow World Cup winners Pelé and Zinedine Zidane. Maradona features in the music video to the 2010 World Cup song \"Waka Waka\" by Shakira, with footage shown of him celebrating Argentina winning the 1986 World Cup.\n\nA 2006 television commercial for Brazilian soft drink Guaraná Antarctica portrayed Maradona as a member of the Brazil national team, including wearing the yellow jersey and singing the Brazilian national anthem with Brazilian players Ronaldo and Kaká. Later on in the commercial he wakes up realizing it was a nightmare after having drunk too much of the drink. This generated some controversy in the Argentine media after its release (although the commercial was not supposed to air on the Argentine market, fans could see it online). Maradona replied that he has no problem in wearing the Brazilian national squad jersey despite Argentina and Brazil having a tense rivalry in football, but that he would refuse to wear the shirt of River Plate, Boca Juniors' traditional rival. There is a documented phenomenon of Brazilians being named in honour of Maradona, an example being footballer Diego Costa.\n\nIn 2017, Maradona featured as a legendary player in the football video games \"FIFA 18\" and \"Pro Evolution Soccer 2018\". In 2019, a documentary film titled \"Diego Maradona\" was released by Academy Award and BAFTA Award winning filmmaker Asif Kapadia, director of \"Amy\" (on singer Amy Winehouse) and \"Senna\" (on motor racing driver Ayrton Senna). Kapadia states, \"Maradona is the third part of a trilogy about child geniuses and fame.\" He added, \"I was fascinated by his journey, wherever he went there were moments of incredible brilliance and drama. He was a leader, taking his teams to the very top, but also many lows in his career. He was always the little guy fighting against the system... and he was willing to do anything, to use all of his cunning and intelligence to win.\"\n\n! rowspan=\"2\" width=\"125\" Club\n!rowspan=\"2\" width=\"75\"Season\n!rowspan=\"2\" width=\"125\"League\n!colspan=\"2\"League\n!colspan=\"2\"Cup\n!colspan=\"2\"Continental\n!colspan=\"2\"Other\n!colspan=\"2\"Total\n!width=\"40\"Apps\n!width=\"40\"Goals\n!width=\"40\"Apps\n!width=\"40\"Goals\n!width=\"40\"Apps\n!width=\"40\"Goals\n!width=\"40\"Apps\n!width=\"40\"Goals\n!width=\"40\"Apps\n!width=\"40\"Goals\n1976Primera División\n11200colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–132\n1977\nPrimera División\n491900colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–4919\n1978\nPrimera División\n352600colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–3526\n1979\nPrimera División\n262600colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–2626\n1980\nPrimera División\n454300colspan=\"2\"–colspan=\"2\"–4543\n! colspan=\"2\" Total\n!166\n!116\n!0\n!0\n!0\n!0\n!0\n!0\n!166\n!116\nBoca Juniors\n1981\nPrimera División\n402800 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –4028\n1982–83La Liga\n20115345643523\n1983–84\nLa Liga\n16114133 colspan=\"2\" –2315\n! colspan=\"2\" Total\n!36\n!22\n!9\n!4\n!7\n!8\n!6\n!4\n!58\n!38\n1984–85Serie A\n301463 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –3617\n1985–86\nSerie A\n291122 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –3113\n1986–87\nSerie A\n291010720 colspan=\"2\" –4117\n1987–88\nSerie A\n28159620 colspan=\"2\" –3921\n1988–89\nSerie A\n269127123 colspan=\"2\" –5019\n1989–90\nSerie A\n28163250 colspan=\"2\" –3618\n1990–91\nSerie A\n1863242102610\n! colspan=\"2\" Total\n!188\n!81\n!45\n!29\n!25\n!5\n!1\n!0\n!259\n!115\nSevilla\n1992–93La Liga\n26531 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –296\nNewell's Old Boys\n1993–94Primera División\n50 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –50\n1995–96\nPrimera División\n245 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –245\n1996–97\nPrimera División\n10 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –1020\n1997–98\nPrimera División\n52 colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" – colspan=\"2\" –52\n! colspan=\"2\" Total\n!70\n!35\n!0\n!0\n!0\n!0\n!1\n!0\n!71\n!35\n! colspan=\"3\" Career total\n!4922595734321384590310\n\nBULLET::::- Other – League Cup (Spain) and Super Cup (Italy)\nBULLET::::- His overall average of goals scored per match in domestic club competitions is 0.526.\n\nBULLET::::- Started in 21 consecutive matches for Argentina in four World Cups (1982, 1986, 1990, 1994)\nBULLET::::- Appeared 16 times as captain of the national team, a World Cup-record.\nBULLET::::- Scored 8 goals and provided 8 assists in 21 World Cup appearances, including 5 goals and 5 assists in 1986\nBULLET::::- Tied for second highest goal-scorer from Argentina in World Cup finals (equaled Guillermo Stábile's mark in 1994; surpassed by Gabriel Batistuta in 1998)\nBULLET::::- Was fouled 23 times in the match Argentina v Italy in the 1982 World Cup, a single-match World Cup-record;\nBULLET::::- Was fouled 50 times during 1990 World Cup, a single-tournament World-Cup record.\n\n! colspan=3  Argentina national team\n!Year\n!width=\"40\"Apps\n!width=\"40\"Goals\n1977\n30\n1978\n10\n1979\n83\n1980\n107\n1981\n21\n1982\n102\n1983\n\n1984\n\n1985\n106\n1986\n107\n1987\n64\n1988\n31\n1989\n70\n1990\n101\n1991\n\n1992\n\n1993\n40\n1994\n72\n!Total9134\n\n!rowspan=\"2\" width=\"150\"Team\n!rowspan=\"2\" Nat\n!rowspan=\"2\" width=\"125\"From\n!rowspan=\"2\" width=\"125\"To\n!colspan=\"5\"Record\n!width=\"35\"G\n!width=\"35\"W\n!width=\"35\"D\n!width=\"35\"L\n!width=\"50\"Win %\nalign=centerTextil Mandiyú\nalign=center\nalign=centerJanuary 1994\nalign=centerJune 1994\nalign=centerRacing Club\nalign=center\nalign=centerMay 1995\nalign=centerNovember 1995\nalign=centerArgentina\nalign=center\nalign=centerNovember 2008\nalign=centerJuly 2010\nalign=centerAl-Wasl\nalign=center\nalign=centerMay 2011\nalign=centerJuly 2012\nalign=centerFujairah\nalign=center\nalign=centerApril 2017 \nalign=centerApril 2018 \nalign=centerDorados\nalign=center\nalign=centerSeptember 2018\nalign=centerJune 2019\nalign=centerGimnasia de La Plata\nalign=center\nalign=centerSeptember 2019\nalign=centerPresent\n!colspan=4Total\n\nBoca Juniors\nBULLET::::- Argentine Primera División: 1981 Metropolitano\n\nBarcelona\nBULLET::::- Copa del Rey: 1983\nBULLET::::- Copa de la Liga: 1983\n\nNapoli\nBULLET::::- Serie A (2): 1986–87, 1989–90\nBULLET::::- Coppa Italia: 1986–87\nBULLET::::- UEFA Cup: 1988–89\nBULLET::::- Supercoppa Italiana: 1990\n\nArgentina Youth\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Youth Championship: 1979\n\nArgentina\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup: 1986\nBULLET::::- Artemio Franchi Trophy: 1993\n\nBULLET::::- Argentine Primera División top scorers (5): 1978 Metropolitano, 1979 Metropolitano, 1979 Nacional, 1980 Metropolitano, 1980 Nacional\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Youth Championship Golden Ball: 1979\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Youth Championship Silver Shoe: 1979\nBULLET::::- Argentine Football Writers' Footballer of the Year (4): 1979, 1980, 1981, 1986\nBULLET::::- South American Footballer of the Year (2): (official award) 1979, 1980\nBULLET::::- Olimpia de Oro (2): 1979, 1986\nBULLET::::- Guerin d'Oro (Serie A Footballer of the Year): 1985\nBULLET::::- UNICEF European Footballer of the Season: 1989–90\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup Golden Ball: 1986\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup Silver Shoe: 1986\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup Most Assists: 1986\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup All-Star Team (2): 1986, 1990\nBULLET::::- Onze d'Or (2): 1986, 1987\nBULLET::::- L'Équipe Champion of Champions: 1986\nBULLET::::- United Press International Athlete of the Year Award: 1986\nBULLET::::- \"World Soccer\" magazine's Player of the Year: 1986\nBULLET::::- Capocannoniere (Serie A top scorer): 1987–88\nBULLET::::- Coppa Italia top scorer: 1987–88\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup Bronze Ball: 1990\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup All-Time Team: 1994\nBULLET::::- South American Team of the Year: 1995\nBULLET::::- Ballon d'Or for services to football (France Football): 1996\nBULLET::::- World Team of the 20th Century: 1998\nBULLET::::- \"World Soccer\" magazine's Greatest Players of the 20th century: (#2) 1999\nBULLET::::- Argentine Sports Writers' Sportsman of the Century: 1999\nBULLET::::- Marca Leyenda: 1999\nBULLET::::- Number 10 retired by Napoli football team as a recognition to his contribution to the club: 2000\nBULLET::::- FIFA Player of the Century: 2000\nBULLET::::- FIFA Goal of the Century (for his second goal against England in 1986 FIFA World Cup quarter-final): 2002\nBULLET::::- FIFA World Cup Dream Team: 2002\nBULLET::::- Golden Foot: 2003, as football legend\nBULLET::::- FIFA 100 Greatest Living Players: 2004\nBULLET::::- Argentine Senate \"\"Domingo Faustino Sarmiento\"\" recognition for lifetime achievement: 2005\nBULLET::::- Greatest Footballers in World Cup History: #1, by \"The Times\", 2010\nBULLET::::- Best Athlete in History: #1, by \"Corriere dello Sport – Stadio\", 2012\nBULLET::::- Globe Soccer Awards Player Career Award: 2012\nBULLET::::- \"World Soccer\" magazine's Greatest XI of all time: 2013\nBULLET::::- Greatest Football Players of All-Time: #1 by \"FourFourTwo\" magazine, 2017\nBULLET::::- Greatest Football Players in World Cup History: #1, by \"FourFourTwo\" magazine, 2018\nBULLET::::- Napoli all-time Top Scorer (1991–2017)\nBULLET::::- Italian Football Hall of Fame: 2014\nBULLET::::- AFA Team of All Time: 2015\nBULLET::::- L'Équipe's top 50 South-American footballers in history: #2\nBULLET::::- International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) Legends\n\nBULLET::::- New Maradona\nBULLET::::- List of association football families\n\nBULLET::::- Diego Armando Maradona, \"Yo Soy el Diego\", Planeta Pub. Corp, 2000, (I am the Diego).\n\nBULLET::::- Official website\n"}
{"id": "8487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8487", "title": "David Brewster", "text": "David Brewster\n\nSir David Brewster (11 December 178110 February 1868) was a British scientist, inventor, author, and academic administrator. In science he is principally remembered for his experimental work in physical optics, mostly concerned with the study of the polarization of light and including the discovery of Brewster's angle. He studied the birefringence of crystals under compression and discovered photoelasticity, thereby creating the field of optical mineralogy. For this work, William Whewell dubbed him the \"father of modern experimental optics\" and \"the Johannes Kepler of optics.\"\n\nA pioneer in photography, Brewster invented an improved stereoscope, which he called \"lenticular stereoscope\" and which became the first portable 3D-viewing device. He also invented the binocular camera, two types of polarimeters, the polyzonal lens, the lighthouse illuminator, and the kaleidoscope.\n\nBrewster was a Presbyterian and walked arm in arm with his brother on the Disruption procession which formed the Free Church of Scotland. As a historian of science, Brewster focused on the life and work of his hero, Isaac Newton. Brewster published a detailed biography of Newton in 1831 and later became the first scientific historian to examine many of the papers in Newton's \"Nachlass\". Brewster also wrote numerous works of popular science, and was one of the founders of the British Science Association, of which he was elected President in 1849. He became the public face of higher education in Scotland, serving as Principal of the University of St Andrews (1837–59) and later of the University of Edinburgh (1859–68). Brewster also edited the 18-volume \"Edinburgh Encyclopædia\".\n\nDavid Brewster was born in the Canongate in Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, to Margaret Key (1753–1790) and James Brewster (c. 1735–1815), the rector of Jedburgh Grammar School and a teacher of high reputation. David was the third of six children, two daughters and four sons: James (1777–1847), minister at Craig, Ferryden; David; George (1784–1855), minister at Scoonie, Fife; and Patrick (1788–1859), minister at the abbey church, Paisley.\n\nAt the age of 12, David was sent to the University of Edinburgh (graduating MA in 1800), being intended for the clergy. He was licensed a minister of the Church of Scotland, and preached around Edinburgh on several occasions. He had already shown a strong inclination for natural science, and this had been fostered by his intimacy with a \"self-taught philosopher, astronomer and mathematician\", as Sir Walter Scott called him, of great local fame, James Veitch of Inchbonny, a man who was particularly skilful in making telescopes.\n\nThough Brewster duly finished his theological studies and was licensed to preach, his other interests distracted him from the duties of his profession. In 1799 fellow-student Henry Brougham persuaded him to study the diffraction of light. The results of his investigations were communicated from time to time in papers to the \"Philosophical Transactions\" of London and other scientific journals. The fact that other scientists – notably Étienne-Louis Malus and Augustin Fresnel – were pursuing the same investigations contemporaneously in France does not invalidate Brewster's claim to independent discovery, even though in one or two cases the priority must be assigned to others. A lesser-known classmate of his, Thomas Dick, also went on to become a popular astronomical writer.\n\nThe most important subjects of his inquiries can be enumerated under the following five headings:\nBULLET::::1. The laws of light polarization by reflection and refraction, and other quantitative laws of phenomena;\nBULLET::::2. The discovery of the polarising structure induced by heat and pressure;\nBULLET::::3. The discovery of crystals with two axes of double refraction, and many of the laws of their phenomena, including the connection between optical structure and crystalline forms;\nBULLET::::4. The laws of metallic reflection;\nBULLET::::5. Experiments on the absorption of light.\n\nIn this line of investigation, the prime importance belongs to the discovery of\nBULLET::::1. the connection between the refractive index and the polarizing angle;\nBULLET::::2. biaxial crystals, and\nBULLET::::3. the production of double refraction by irregular heating.\n\nThese discoveries were promptly recognised. As early as 1807 the degree of LL.D. was conferred upon Brewster by Marischal College, Aberdeen; in 1815 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London, and received the Copley Medal; in 1818 he received the Rumford Medal of the society; and in 1816 the French Institute awarded him one-half of the prize of three thousand francs for the two most important discoveries in physical science made in Europe during the two preceding years. In 1821, he was made a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and in 1822 a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nAmong the non-scientific public, his fame spread more effectually by his invention in about 1815 of the kaleidoscope, for which there was a great demand in both the United Kingdom, France, and the United States. As a reflection of this fame, Brewster portrait was later printed in some cigar boxes. Brewster chose renowned achromatic lens developer Philip Carpenter as the sole manufacturer of the kaleidoscope in 1817. Although Brewster patented the kaleidoscope in 1817 (GB 4136), a copy of the prototype was shown to London opticians and copied before the patent was granted. As a consequence, the kaleidoscope became produced in large numbers, but yielded no direct financial benefits to Brewster. It proved to be a massive success with two hundred thousand kaleidoscopes sold in London and Paris in just three months.\nAn instrument of more significance, the stereoscope, which – though of much later date (1849) – along with the kaleidoscope did more than anything else to popularise his name, was not as has often been asserted the invention of Brewster. Sir Charles Wheatstone discovered its principle and applied it as early as 1838 to the construction of a cumbersome but effective instrument, in which the binocular pictures were made to combine by means of mirrors. A dogged rival of Wheatstone's, Brewster was unwilling to credit him with the invention, however, and proposed that the true author of the stereoscope was a Mr. Elliot, a \"Teacher of Mathematics\" from Edinburgh, who, according to Brewster, had conceived of the principles as early as 1823 and had constructed a lensless and mirrorless prototype in 1839, through which one could view drawn landscape transparencies, since photography had yet to be invented. Brewster's personal contribution was the suggestion to use prisms for uniting the dissimilar pictures; and accordingly the lenticular stereoscope may fairly be said to be his invention.\n\nA much more valuable and practical result of Brewster's optical researches was the improvement of the British lighthouse system. Although Fresnel, who had also the satisfaction of being the first to put it into operation, perfected the dioptric apparatus independently, Brewster was active earlier in the field than Fresnel, describing the dioptric apparatus in 1812. Brewster pressed its adoption on those in authority at least as early as 1820, two years before Fresnel suggested it, and it was finally introduced into lighthouses mainly through Brewster's persistent efforts.\n\nAlthough Brewster's own discoveries were important, they were not his only service to science. He began writing in 1799 as a regular contributor to the \"Edinburgh Magazine\", of which he acted as editor at the age of twenty. In 1807, he undertook the editorship of the newly projected \"Edinburgh Encyclopædia\", of which the first part appeared in 1808, and the last not until 1830. The work was strongest in the scientific department, and many of its most valuable articles were from the pen of the editor. At a later period he was one of the leading contributors to the \"Encyclopædia Britannica\" (seventh and eighth editions) writing, among others, the articles on electricity, hydrodynamics, magnetism, microscope, optics, stereoscope, and voltaic electricity. He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1816.\n\nIn 1819 Brewster undertook further editorial work by establishing, in conjunction with Robert Jameson (1774–1854), the \"Edinburgh Philosophical Journal\", which took the place of the \"Edinburgh Magazine\". The first ten volumes (1819–1824) were published under the joint editorship of Brewster and Jameson, the remaining four volumes (1825–1826) being edited by Jameson alone. After parting company with Jameson, Brewster started the \"Edinburgh Journal of Science\" in 1824, 16 volumes of which appeared under his editorship during the years 1824–1832, with very many articles from his own pen.\n\nHe contributed around three hundred papers to the transactions of various learned societies, and few of his contemporaries wrote as much for the various reviews. In the \"North British Review\" alone, seventy-five articles of his appeared. A list of his larger separate works will be found below. Special mention, however, must be made of the most important of them all: his biography of Sir Isaac Newton. In 1831 he published the \"Life of Sir Isaac Newton\", a short popular account of the philosopher's life, in \"Murray's Family Library\", followed by an 1832 American edition in Harper's Family Library; but it was not until 1855 that he was able to issue the much fuller \"Memoirs of the Life, Writings and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton\", a work which embodied the results of more than 20 years' investigation of original manuscripts and other available sources.\n\nBrewster's position as editor brought him into frequent contact with the most eminent scientific men, and he was naturally among the first to recognise the benefit that would accrue from regular communication among those in the field of science. In a review of Charles Babbage's book \"Decline of Science in England\" in \"John Murray's Quarterly Review\", he suggested the creation of \"an association of our nobility, clergy, gentry and philosophers\". This was taken up by various \"Declinarians\" and found speedy realisation in the British Association for the Advancement of Science. Its first meeting was held at York in 1831; and Brewster, along with Babbage and Sir John Herschel, had the chief part in shaping its constitution.\n\nIn the same year in which the British Association held its first meeting, Brewster received the honour of knighthood and the decoration of the Royal Guelphic Order. In 1838, he was appointed principal of the united colleges of St Salvator and St Leonard, University of St Andrews. In 1849, he acted as president of the British Association and was elected one of the eight foreign associates of the Institute of France in succession to J. J. Berzelius; and ten years later, he accepted the office of principal of the University of Edinburgh, the duties of which he discharged until within a few months of his death. In 1855, the government of France made him an Officier de la Légion d'honneur.\n\nHe was a close friend of William Henry Fox Talbot, inventor of the calotype process, who sent Brewster early examples of his work. It was Brewster who suggested Talbot only patent his process in England, initiating the development of early photography in Scotland and eventually allowing for the formation of the first photographic society in the world, the Edinburgh Calotype Club, in 1843. Brewster was a prominent member of the club until its dissolution sometime in the mid-1850s; however, his interest in photography continued, and he was elected the first President of the Photographic Society of Scotland when it was founded in 1856.\n\nOf a high-strung and nervous temperament, Brewster was somewhat irritable in matters of controversy; but he was repeatedly subjected to serious provocation. He was a man of highly honourable and fervently religious character. In estimating his place among scientific discoverers, the chief thing to be borne in mind is that his genius was not characteristically mathematical. His method was empirical, and the laws that he established were generally the result of repeated experiment. To the ultimate explanation of the phenomena with which he dealt he contributed nothing, and it is noteworthy although he did not maintain to the end of his life the corpuscular theory he never explicitly adopted the wave theory of light. Few would dispute the verdict of James David Forbes, an editor of the eighth edition of the \"Encyclopædia Britannica\": \"His scientific glory is different in kind from that of Young and Fresnel; but the discoverer of the law of polarization of biaxial crystals, of optical mineralogy, and of double refraction by compression, will always occupy a foremost rank in the intellectual history of the age.\" In addition to the various works of Brewster already mentioned, the following may be added: \"Notes and Introduction to Carlyle's translation of Legendre's Elements of Geometry\" (1824); \"Treatise on Optics\" (1831); \" Letters on Natural Magic\", addressed to Sir Walter Scott (1832) \"The Martyrs of Science, or the Lives of Galileo, Tycho Brahe, and Kepler\" (1841); \"More Worlds than One\" (1854).\n\nIn his \"Treatise\" he demonstrated that vegetal colors were related with the absorption spectra and he described for the first time the red fluorescence of chlorophyll.\n\nAs well as his many scientific works and biographies of notable scientists, Brewster also wrote \"The History of Free Masonry, Drawn from Authentic Sources of Information; with an Account of the Grand Lodge of Scotland, from Its Institution in 1736, to the Present Time\", published in 1804, when he was only 23. The work was commissioned by Alexander Lawrie, publisher to the Grand Lodge of Scotland, to whom the work has been, frequently, mis-attributed. Given that the book bears Lawrie's name and not Brewster's this is understandable. The book became one of the standard works on early Scottish freemasonry although it has been largely superseded by later works. There is no evidence that Brewster was a Freemason at the time he wrote the book, nor any that he became one later.\n\nBrewster's Christian beliefs stirred him to respond against the idea of the transmutation of species and the theory of evolution. His opinion was that \"science and religion must be one since each dealt with Truth, which had only one and the same Author.\" In 1845 he wrote a highly critical review of the evolutionist work \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\", in the \"North British Review\". which he considered to be an insult to Christian revelation and a dangerous example of materialism.\n\nIn 1862, he responded to Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" and published the article \"\" in \"Good Words\". He stated that Darwin's book combined both \"interesting facts and idle fancies\" which made up a \"dangerous and degrading speculation\". He accepted adaptive changes, but he strongly opposed Darwin's statement about the \"primordial form\", which he considered an offensive idea to \"both the naturalist and the Christian.\"\n\nBrewster married twice. His first wife, Juliet Macpherson (c. 1776–1850), was a daughter of James Macpherson (1736–1796), a probable translator of Ossian poems. They married on 31 July 1810 in Edinburgh and had four sons and a daughter:\nBULLET::::- James (1812–)\nBULLET::::- Charles Macpherson (1813–1828), drowned.\nBULLET::::- David Edward Brewster (17 August 1815 –) became a military officer (Lieutenant Colonel) serving in India.\nBULLET::::- Henry Craigie (1816–1905) became a military officer and photographer.\nBULLET::::- Margaret Maria Gordon (1823–1907) wrote a book on Brewster, which is considered the most comprehensive description of his life.\n\nBrewster married a second time in Nice, on 26 (or 27) March 1857, to Jane Kirk Purnell (b. 1827), the second daughter of Thomas Purnell of Scarborough. Lady Brewster famously fainted at the Oxford evolution debate of 30 June 1860. Brewster died in 1868, and was buried at Melrose Abbey, next to his first wife and second son. The physics building at Heriot-Watt University is named in his honour.\n\nA bust of Brewster is in the Hall of Heroes of the National Wallace Monument in Stirling.\n\nBrewster's views on the possibility of evolution of intelligence on other planets, contrasted with the opinion of William Whewell, are cited in the novel \"Barchester Towers\".\n\nHe appears as a minor antagonist in the 2015 video game \"Assassin's Creed Syndicate\" as a scientist working for the game's opposing faction. He is assassinated by one of the protagonists, Evie Frye.\n\nA street within the Kings Buildings complex (science buildings linked to Edinburgh University) was named in his memory in 2015.\n\nBULLET::::- Brewster's angle\nBULLET::::- Coddington magnifier\nBULLET::::- Brewster crater\nBULLET::::- Brewsterite\n\nBULLET::::- Downloadable archive copy\n\nBULLET::::- Brewster, David (1854). \"The Creed of the Philosopher and the Hope of the Christian\". Murray (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; )\nBULLET::::- PDF copy\nBULLET::::- \"\"The Home Life of Sir David Brewster\"\" (1869). Written by his daughter Margaret Maria Gordon.\n\nBULLET::::- The Brewster Kaleidoscope Society\nBULLET::::- Brewster's (1831) \"On a new analysis of solar light, indicating three primary colours, forming coincident spectra of equal length,\" \"Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 12,\" p. 123-136. - digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library\nBULLET::::- Brewster's (1834) \"On the colours of natural bodies,\" \"Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 12,\" p. 538-545. - Linda Hall Library\nBULLET::::- Brewster's (1835) \"A treatise on optics\" - Linda Hall Library\nBULLET::::- Letters on Natural magic Addressed to Sir Walter Scott From the Rare Book and Special Collection Division at the Library of Congress\nBULLET::::- The Grand Lodge of Antient Free and Accepted Masons of Scotland.\n"}
{"id": "8488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8488", "title": "Dual-tone multi-frequency signaling", "text": "Dual-tone multi-frequency signaling\n\nDual-tone multi-frequency signaling (DTMF) is a telecommunication signaling system using the voice-frequency band over telephone lines between telephone equipment and other communications devices and switching centers. DTMF was first developed in the Bell System in the United States, and became known under the trademark Touch-Tone for use in push-button telephones supplied to telephone customers, starting in 1963. DTMF is standardized as ITU-T Recommendation Q.23. It is also known in the UK as \"MF4\".\n\nThe Touch-Tone system using a telephone keypad gradually replaced the use of rotary dial and has become the industry standard for landline and mobile service. Other multi-frequency systems are used for internal signaling within the telephone network.\n\nPrior to the development of DTMF, telephone numbers were dialed by users with a loop-disconnect (LD) signaling, more commonly known as pulse dialing (dial pulse, DP) in the U.S. It functions by interrupting the current in the local loop between the telephone exchange and the calling party's telephone at a precise rate with a switch in the telephone that is operated by the rotary dial as it spins back to its rest position after having been rotated to each desired number. The exchange equipment responds to the dial pulses either directly by operating relays, or by storing the number in a digit register recording the dialed number. The physical distance for which this type of dialing was possible was restricted by electrical distortions and was possible only on direct metallic links between end points of a line. Placing calls over longer distances required either operator assistance or provision of special subscriber trunk dialing equipment. Operators used an earlier type of multi-frequency signaling.\n\nMulti-frequency signaling (MF) is a group of signaling methods that use a mixture of two pure tone (pure sine wave) sounds. Various MF signaling protocols were devised by the Bell System and CCITT. The earliest of these were for in-band signaling between switching centers, where long-distance telephone operators used a 16-digit keypad to input the next portion of the destination telephone number in order to contact the next downstream long-distance telephone operator. This semi-automated signaling and switching proved successful in both speed and cost effectiveness. Based on this prior success with using MF by specialists to establish long-distance telephone calls, dual-tone multi-frequency signaling was developed for end-user signaling without the assistance of operators.\n\nThe DTMF system uses a set of eight audio frequencies transmitted in pairs to represent 16 signals, represented by the ten digits, the letters A to D, and the symbols \"#\" and \"*\". As the signals are audible tones in the voice frequency range, they can be transmitted through electrical repeaters and amplifiers, and over radio and microwave links, thus eliminating the need for intermediate operators on long-distance circuits.\n\nAT&T described the product as \"a method for pushbutton signaling from customer stations using the voice transmission path.\" In order to prevent consumer telephones from interfering with the MF-based routing and switching between telephone switching centers, DTMF frequencies differ from all of the pre-existing MF signaling protocols between switching centers: MF/R1, R2, CCS4, CCS5, and others that were later replaced by SS7 digital signaling. DTMF was known throughout the Bell System by the trademark \"Touch-Tone\". The term was first used by AT&T in commerce on July 5, 1960, and was introduced to the public on November 18, 1963, when the first push-button telephone was made available to the public. As a parent company of Bell Systems, AT&T held the trademark from September 4, 1962, to March 13, 1984. It is standardized by ITU-T Recommendation Q.23. In the UK, it is also known as MF4.\n\nOther vendors of compatible telephone equipment called the Touch-Tone feature \"tone dialing\" or \"DTMF\", or used their other trade names such as \"Digitone\" by Northern Electric Company in Canada.\n\nAs a method of in-band signaling, DTMF signals were also used by cable television broadcasters to indicate the start and stop times of local commercial insertion points during station breaks for the benefit of cable companies. Until out-of-band signaling equipment was developed in the 1990s, fast, unacknowledged DTMF tone sequences could be heard during the commercial breaks of cable channels in the United States and elsewhere. Previously, terrestrial television stations used DTMF tones to control remote transmitters. In IP telephony, DTMF signals can also be delivered as either in-band or out-of-band tones, or even as a part of signaling protocols, as long as both endpoints agree on a common approach to adopt.\n\nThe engineers had envisioned telephones being used to access computers and automated response systems. They consulted with companies to determine the requirements. This led to the addition of the number sign<nowiki> (#, \"pound\" or \"diamond\" in this context, \"hash\", \"square\" or \"gate\" in the UK, and \"</nowiki>octothorpe<nowiki>\" by the original engineers) and </nowiki>asterisk or \"star\" (*) keys as well as a group of keys for menu selection: A, B, C and D. In the end, the lettered keys were dropped from most phones, and it was many years before the two symbol keys became widely used for vertical service codes such as *67 in the United States of America and Canada to suppress caller ID.\n\nPublic payphones that accept credit cards use these additional codes to send the information from the magnetic strip.\n\nThe AUTOVON telephone system of the United States Armed Forces used these signals to assert certain privilege and priority levels when placing telephone calls. Precedence is still a feature of military telephone networks, but using number combinations. For example, entering 93 before a number is a priority call.\n\nPresent-day uses of the signals \"A\", \"B\", \"C\" and \"D\" are rare in telephone networks, and are exclusive to network control. For example, key \"A\" is used in some networks for cycling through a list of carriers. The signals are used in radio phone patch and repeater operations to allow, among other uses, control of the repeater while connected to an active telephone line.\n\nThe signals *, #, A, B, C and D are still widely used worldwide by amateur radio operators and commercial two-way radio systems for equipment control, repeater control, remote-base operations and some telephone communications systems.\n\nDTMF signaling tones can also be heard at the start or end of some VHS (Video Home System) cassette tapes. Information on the master version of the video tape is encoded in the DTMF tone. The encoded tone provides information to automatic duplication machines, such as format, duration and volume levels, in order to replicate the original video as closely as possible.\n\nDTMF tones are used in some caller ID systems to transfer the caller ID information, but in the United States the Bell 202 modulated frequency-shift keying (FSK) signaling is used to transfer the data.\n\nThe DTMF telephone keypad is laid out as a matrix of push buttons in which each row represents the low frequency component and each column represents the high frequency component of the DTMF signal. The commonly used keypad has four rows and three columns, but a fourth column is present for some applications. Pressing a key sends a combination of the row and column frequencies. For example, the \"1\" key produces a superimposition of a 697 Hz low tone and a 1209 Hz high tone. Initial pushbutton designs employed levers, enabling each button to activate one row and one column contact. The tones are decoded by the switching center to determine the keys pressed by the user.\n\n+ DTMF keypad frequencies (with sound clips)\n!align=center\n!align=center 1209 Hz\n!align=center 1336 Hz\n!align=center 1477 Hz\n!align=center 1633 Hz\n!align=center 697 Hz\nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \n!align=center 770 Hz\nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \n!align=center 852 Hz\nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \n!align=center 941 Hz\nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \nalign=center \n\nDTMF was originally decoded by tuned filter banks. By the end of the 20th century, digital signal processing became the predominant technology for decoding. DTMF decoding algorithms typically use the Goertzel algorithm. As DTMF signaling is often transmitted in-band with voice or other audio signals present simultaneously, the DTMF signal definition includes strict limits for timing (minimum duration and interdigit spacing), frequency deviations, harmonics, and amplitude relation of the two components with respect to each other (\"twist\").\n\nNational telephone systems define other tones, outside the DTMF specification, that indicate the status of lines, equipment, or the result of calls, and for control of equipment for troubleshooting or service purposes. Such call-progress tones are often also composed of multiple frequencies and are standardized in each country. The Bell System defined them in the Precise Tone Plan.\n\nBULLET::::- Selective calling\nBULLET::::- Special information tone\n\nBULLET::::- ITU's recommendations for implementing DTMF services\nBULLET::::- Frank Durda, Dual Tone Multi-Frequency (Touch-Tone®) Reference, 2006.\nBULLET::::- ITU-T Recommendation Q.24 - Multifrequency push-button signal reception\n"}
{"id": "8489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8489", "title": "Deuterocanonical books", "text": "Deuterocanonical books\n\nThe deuterocanonical books (from the Greek meaning \"belonging to the second canon\") are books and passages considered by the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches and the Assyrian Church of the East to be canonical books of the Old Testament but which are considered non-canonical by Protestant denominations. They are thought to have been written sometime between 200 BC and 100 AD, and most are seen in copies of the Christian Greek Old Testament dating from the 4th century AD. While the New Testament never quotes from or ascribes canonical authority to these books, some say there is a correspondence of thought, while others see texts from these books being paraphrased, referred or alluded to many times in the New Testament, particularly in the Pauline Epistles depending in large measure on what is counted as a reference.\n\nWhile one school of research holds that the Hebrew canon was established well before the first century AD, even as early as the fourth century BC, or by the Hasmonean dynasty (140–40 BC), others argue that with the rise of Rabbinic Judaism at the end of the Second Temple Period (516 BC and 70 AD), the Hebrew Canon was in flux, until the Masoretic Text, compiled between the 7th and 10th centuries, became the authoritative text of the mainstream Rabbinic Judaism. The Masoretic Text did not include the seven deuterocanonical books and formed the basis for their exclusion in the Protestant Old Testament. The term distinguished these texts both from those that were termed protocanonical books, which were the books of the Hebrew canon; and from the apocryphal books, which were those books of Jewish origin that were known sometimes to have been read in church as scripture but which were considered not to be canonical.\n\nThe deuterocanonical books of the Old Testament are:\n\n\"Canonical by the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church:\"\nBULLET::::- Tobit\nBULLET::::- Judith\nBULLET::::- Baruch including the Letter of Jeremiah\nBULLET::::- Sirach\nBULLET::::- 1 Maccabees\nBULLET::::- 2 Maccabees\nBULLET::::- Wisdom of Solomon\nBULLET::::- Additions to Esther\nBULLET::::- Additions to Daniel:\nBULLET::::- Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children (Septuagint Daniel 3:24–90)\nBULLET::::- Susanna (Septuagint prologue, Vulgate Daniel 13)\nBULLET::::- Bel and the Dragon (Septuagint epilogue, Vulgate Daniel 14)\n\"Canonical only by the Orthodox Church:\"\nBULLET::::- Prayer of Manasseh\nBULLET::::- 1 Esdras\nBULLET::::- 3 Maccabees\nBULLET::::- Psalm 151\n\nThis 16th-century debate drew on traditions witnessing a counterpart debate in the 4th and 5th centuries; occasioned then by the awareness that the Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, which the early church used as its Old Testament, included several books not recognised in the Jewish canon of the Bible as it had since been defined in Rabbinic Judaism. In this debate, which had preceded the dissemination of Jerome's Vulgate version, the books in the Hebrew Bible had been termed \"canonical\"; the additional books that were recognised by the Christian churches had been termed as \"canonical\" too (today termed as deuterocanonical), and those that were considered not to be in the Bible were termed \"apocryphal\".\n\nSince the 16th century, most Protestant Churches have accepted only works in the Masoretic Text of the Hebrew Bible as canonical books of the Old Testament, and hence classify all deuterocanonical texts (of whichever definition) with the Apocrypha.\n\nDeuterocanonical is a term coined in 1566 by the theologian Sixtus of Siena, who had converted to Catholicism from Judaism, to describe scriptural texts considered canonical by the Catholic Church, but which recognition was considered \"secondary\". For Sixtus, this term included portions of both Old and New Testaments (Sixtus considers the final chapter of the Gospel of Mark as 'deuterocanonical'); and he also applies the term to the Book of Esther from the canon of the Hebrew Bible. The term was then taken up by other writers to apply specifically to those books of the Old Testament which had been recognised as canonical by the Councils of Hippo (393), Carthage (397 and 419 AD), Council of Florence (1442 AD) and Council of Trent (1546 AD), but which were not in the Hebrew canon\n\nForms of the term \"deuterocanonical\" were adopted after the 16th century by the Eastern Orthodox Church to denote canonical books of the Septuagint not in the Hebrew Bible (a wider selection than that adopted by the Council of Trent), and also by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church to apply to works believed to be of Jewish origin translated in the Old Testament of the Ethiopic Bible; a wider selection still.\n\nThe acceptance of some of these books among early Christians was widespread, though not universal, and surviving Bibles from the early Church always include, with varying degrees of recognition, books now called \"deuterocanonical\". Some say that their canonicity seems not to have been doubted in the Church until it was challenged by Jews after AD 100, sometimes postulating a hypothetical Council of Jamnia. Regional councils in the West published official canons that included these books as early as the 4th and 5th centuries.\n\nThe \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states that:\n\nMeanwhile, \"the protocanonical books of the Old Testament correspond with those of the Bible of the Hebrews, and the Old Testament as received by Protestants. The deuterocanonical (deuteros, \"second\") are those whose Scriptural character was contested in some quarters, but which long ago gained a secure footing in the Bible of the Catholic Church, though those of the Old Testament are classed by Protestants as the \"Apocrypha\". These consist of seven books: Tobias, Judith, Baruch, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, First and Second Machabees; also certain additions to Esther and Daniel.\"\n\nFragments of three deuterocanonical books (\"Sirach\", \"Tobit\", and \"Letter of Jeremiah\") have been found among the Dead Sea Scrolls found at Qumran, in addition to several partial copies of \"I Enoch\" and \"Jubilees\" from the Ethiopic deuterocanon, and Psalm 151 from the Eastern Orthodox Church deuterocanon.\n\n\"Sirach\", whose Hebrew text was already known from the Cairo Geniza, has been found in two scrolls (2QSir or 2Q18, 11QPs_a or 11Q5) in Hebrew. Another Hebrew scroll of \"Sirach\" has been found in Masada (MasSir). Five fragments from the \"Book of Tobit\" have been found in Qumran written in Aramaic and in one written in Hebrew (papyri 4Q, nos. 196–200). The \"Letter of Jeremiah\" (or \"Baruch\" chapter 6) has been found in cave 7 (papyrus 7Q2) in Greek. It has been theorized by recent scholars that the Qumran library (of approximately 1,100 manuscripts found in the eleven caves at Qumran) was not entirely produced at Qumran, but may have included part of the library of the Jerusalem Temple, that may have been hidden in the caves for safekeeping at the time the Temple was destroyed by Romans in 70 AD.\n\nDeuterocanonical and Apocryphal books included in the Septuagint\n!colspan=3Deuterocanonical Books\n!colspan=3Apocryphal Books\n\nThe large majority of Old Testament references in the New Testament are taken from the Koine Greek Septuagint (LXX), editions of which include the deuterocanonical books, as well as apocrypha – both of which are called collectively \"anagignoskomena\" (\"\"Readable,\" namely worthy of reading\"). No two Septuagint codices contain the same apocrypha, and the three earliest manuscripts of the LXX show uncertainty as to which books constitute the complete list of biblical books. Codex Vaticanus (B) lacks any of the books of Maccabees, while Codex Sinaiticus (Aleph) omits Baruch and the letter of Jeremiah, but includes 1 and 4 Maccabees. Codex Alexandrinus includes the Psalms of Solomon and Maccabees 1–4. All three codices include Psalm 151 in addition to the canonical 150 Psalms; and all three codices include Greek Esdras as 'Ezra A', with the canonical Ezra–Nehemiah counted as 'Ezra B'.\n\nGreek Psalm manuscripts from the fifth century contain three New Testament \"psalms\": the Magnificat, the Benedictus, the Nunc dimittis from Luke's birth narrative, and the conclusion of the hymn that begins with the \"Gloria in Excelsis\". Beckwith states that manuscripts of anything like the capacity of Codex Alexandrinus were not used in the first centuries of the Christian era, and believes that the comprehensive codices of the Septuagint, which start appearing in the fourth century AD, are all of Christian origin.\n\nSome deuterocanonicals appear to have been written originally in Hebrew, but the original text has long been lost. Archaeological finds discovered both Psalm 151 and the Book of Tobit in Hebrew among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The Septuagint was widely accepted and used by Greek-speaking Jews in the 1st century, even in the region of Roman Judea, and therefore naturally became the text most widely used by early Christians, who were predominantly Greek speaking.\n\nIn the New Testament, Hebrews 11:35 is understood by some as referring to an event that was recorded in one of the deuterocanonical books, 2 Maccabees. For instance, the author of Hebrews references oral tradition which spoke of an Old Testament prophet who was sawn in half in Hebrews 11:37, two verses after the 2nd Maccabees reference. Other New Testament authors such as Paul also reference or quote period literature which was familiar to the audience but that was not included in the deuterocanonical or the protocanonical Old Testament books.\n\nThe Jewish historian Josephus (c. 94 AD) speaks of there being 22 books in the canon of the Hebrew Bible, reported also by the Christian bishop Athanasius.\n\nOrigen of Alexandria (c. 240 AD) also records 22 canonical books of the Hebrew Bible cited by Eusebius; among them are the Epistle of Jeremiah and the Maccabees as canonical books.\n\nIn the 7th century Latin document the Muratorian fragment, which some scholars actually believe to be a copy of an earlier 170 AD Greek original, the book of the Wisdom of Solomon is counted by the church.\n\nEusebius wrote in his \"Church History\" (c. 324 AD) that Bishop Melito of Sardis in the 2nd century AD considered the deuterocanonical Wisdom of Solomon as part of the Old Testament and that it was considered canonical by Jews and Christians. On the other hand, the contrary claim has been made: \"In the catalogue of Melito, presented by Eusebius, after Proverbs, the word Wisdom occurs, which nearly all commentators have been of opinion is only another name for the same book, and not the name of the book now called 'The Wisdom of Solomon'.\"\n\nCyril of Jerusalem (c. 350 AD) in his \"Catechetical Lectures\" cites as canonical books \"Jeremiah one, including Baruch and Lamentations and the Epistle (of Jeremiah)\".\n\nIn Athanasius's canonical books list (367 AD) the Book of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah are included and Esther is omitted. At the same time, he mentioned that certain other books, including four deuterocanonical books (the Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of Sirach, Judith and Tobit), the book of Esther and also the Didache and The Shepherd of Hermas, while not being part of the Canon, \"were appointed by the Fathers to be read\". He excluded what he called \"apocryphal writings\" entirely.\n\nEpiphanius of Salamis (c. 385 AD) mentions that \"there are 27 books given the Jews by God, but they are counted as 22, however, like the letters of their Hebrew alphabet, because ten books are doubled and reckoned as five\". He wrote in his \"Panarion\" that Jews had in their books the deuterocanonical Epistle of Jeremiah and Baruch, both combined with Jeremiah and Lamentations in only one book. While Wisdom of Sirach and the Wisdom of Solomon were books of disputed canonicity.\n\nAugustine (c. 397 AD) writes in his book \"On Christian Doctrine (Book II Chapter 8)\" that two books of Maccabees, Tobias, Judith, Wisdom of Solomon and Ecclesiasticus are canonical books.\n\nAccording to the monk Rufinus of Aquileia (c. 400 AD) the deuterocanonical books were not called canonical but ecclesiastical books. In this category Rufinus includes the Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach, Judith, Tobit and two books of Maccabees. Rufinus makes no mention of Baruch or the Epistle of Jeremiah.\n\nPope Innocent I (405 AD) sent a letter to the bishop of Toulouse citing deuterocanonical books as a part of the Old Testament Canon.\n\nIn later copyings of the canons of the Council of Laodicea (from 364 AD) a canon list became appended to Canon 59, likely before the mid fifth century, which affirmed that Jeremiah, and Baruch, the Lamentations, and the Epistle (of Jeremiah) were canonical, while excluding the other deuterocanonical books.\n\nThe Council of Rome (382 AD) in its Decretum Gelasianum, which is a work written by an anonymous scholar between 519 and 553, cites a list of books of Scripture presented as having been made canonical by the Council of Rome. This list mentions all the deuterocanonical books except Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah as a part of the Old Testament Canon.\n\nThe Synod of Hippo (in 393 AD), followed by the Council of Carthage (397) and the Council of Carthage (419), may be the first councils that explicitly accepted the first canon which includes a selection of books that did not appear in the Hebrew Bible; the councils were under significant influence of Augustine of Hippo, who regarded the canon as already closed. Canon XXIV from the Synod of Hippo records the Scriptures which are considered canonical; the Old Testament books as follows:\n\nOn 28 August 397, the Council of Carthage (397 AD) confirmed the canon issued at Hippo; the recurrence of the Old Testament part is stated:\nThe Council of Carthage (419 AD) in its canon 24 lists the deuterocanonical books except Baruch and the Epistle of Jeremiah as Canonical Scripture.\n\nThe Apostolic Canons approved by the Eastern Council in Trullo in 692 AD (not recognized by the Catholic Church) states as venerable and sacred the first three books of Maccabees and Wisdom of Sirach.\n\nIn the Council of Florence (1442 AD), a list was promulgated of the books of the Bible, including the books of Judith, Esther, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch and two books of the Maccabees as Canonical books.\n\nFinally the Council of Trent (1546 AD) adopted an understanding of the canons of these previous councils as corresponding to its own list of deuterocanonical books. This understanding rested on two historical presumptions which are contested in current research; that where these councils and synods noted the 'Book of Jeremiah', they intended the Book of Baruch to be silently understood (including the Letter of Jeremiah); and that where these synods and councils noted 'two books of Esdras', these two books were to be understood as Ezra and Nehemiah counted separately, not (as was universal in Septuagint manuscripts of the time, in the Old Latin Bible and in the works of Augustine) as 1 Esdras and Ezra–Nehemiah.\n\nJerome in the Vulgate's prologues describes a canon which excludes the deuterocanonical books. In these prologues, Jerome mentions all of the deuterocanonical and apocryphal works by name as being apocryphal or \"not in the canon\" except for \"Prayer of Manasses\" and \"Baruch\". He mentions \"Baruch\" by name in his \"Prologue to Jeremiah\" and notes that it is neither read nor held among the Hebrews, but does not explicitly call it apocryphal or \"not in the canon\". The inferior status to which the deuterocanonical books were relegated by authorities like Jerome is seen by some as being due to a rigid conception of canonicity, one demanding that a book, to be entitled to this supreme dignity, must be received by all, must have the sanction of Jewish antiquity, and must moreover be adapted not only to edification, but also to the \"confirmation of the doctrine of the Church\".\n\nJ. N. D. Kelly states that \"Jerome, conscious of the difficulty of arguing with Jews on the basis of books they spurned and anyhow regarding the Hebrew original as authoritative, was adamant that anything not found in it was 'to be classed among the apocrypha', not in the canon; later he grudgingly conceded that the Church read some of these books for edification, but not to support doctrine.\"\n\nEventually however, Jerome's Vulgate did include the deuterocanonical books as well as apocrypha. Jerome referenced and quoted from some as scripture despite describing them as \"not in the canon\". Michael Barber asserts that, although Jerome was once suspicious of the apocrypha, he later viewed them as Scripture. Barber argues that this is clear from Jerome's epistles; he cites Jerome's letter to Eustochium, in which Jerome quotes Sirach 13:2. Elsewhere Jerome apparently also refers to Baruch, the Story of Susannah and Wisdom as scripture. Henry Barker states that Jerome quotes the Apocrypha with marked respect, and even as \"Scripture\", giving them an ecclesiastical if not a canonical position and use. Luther also wrote introductions to the books of the Apocrypha, and occasionally quoted from some to support an argument.\n\nIn his prologue to Judith, without using the word canon, Jerome mentioned that Judith was held to be scriptural by the First Council of Nicaea.\n\nIn his reply to Rufinus, Jerome affirmed that he was consistent with the choice of the church regarding which version of the deuterocanonical portions of Daniel to use, which the Jews of his day did not include:\n\nThus Jerome acknowledged the principle by which the canon would be settled – the judgment of the Church (at least the local churches in this case) rather than his own judgment or the judgment of Jews; though concerning translation of Daniel to Greek, he wondered why one should use the version of a translator whom he regarded as a heretic and judaizer (Theodotion).\n\nThe Vulgate is also important as the touchstone of the canon concerning which parts of books are canonical. When the Council of Trent listed the books included in the canon, it qualified the books as being \"entire with all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the old Latin vulgate edition\". This decree was clarified somewhat by Pope Pius XI on 2 June 1927, who allowed that the Comma Johanneum was open to dispute, and it was further explicated by Pope Pius XII's \"Divino afflante Spiritu\".\n\nThe Council of Trent also promulgated the Vulgate Bible as the official Latin version of the Bible for the Roman Catholic Church. Jerome, the translator of most of this version in the early 5th century, had translated the Old Testament books afresh directly from the Hebrew Bible, rather than from the Greek Septuagint, and had then explicitly rejected all Septuagint books and passages not found in the Hebrew as \"apocryphal\"; and although he had subsequently translated some of these texts under sufferance (marking them with an obelus), he had maintained throughout that none of these books and additions were canonical and recorded this opinion in his prologues to each book. In the medieval period however, Latin translations of the Septuagint books that Jerome had refused altogether to translate had nevertheless become widely included in the Vulgate Bible; as too had Latin versions of other texts that had never been found in the Septuagint at all. The Council of Trent therefore needed to clarify which of the Old Testament books in 16th century Vulgate Bibles were in the canon; and which were not.\n\nDeuterocanonical and Apocryphal books included in the Latin Vulgate\n\n!colspan=3Deuterocanonical Books\n!colspan=3Apocryphal Books\n\nPhilip Schaff says that \"the Council of Hippo in 393, and the third (according to another reckoning the sixth) Council of Carthage in 397, under the influence of Augustine, who attended both, fixed the catholic canon of the Holy Scriptures, including the Apocrypha of the Old Testament, ...This decision of the transmarine church, however, was subject to ratification; and the concurrence of the Roman see it received when Innocent I and Gelasius I (AD 414) repeated the same index of biblical books.\" Schaff says that this canon remained undisturbed till the sixteenth century, and was sanctioned by the Council of Trent at its fourth session, although as the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" reports, \"in the Latin Church, all through the Middle Ages we find evidence of hesitation about the character of the deuterocanonicals. ... Few are found to unequivocally acknowledge their canonicity,\" but that the countless manuscript copies of the Vulgate produced by these ages, with a slight, probably accidental, exception, uniformly embrace the complete Roman Catholic Old Testament.. Subsequent research qualifies this latter statement, in that a distinct tradition of large format pandect bibles has been identified as having been promoted by the 11th and 12th century reforming Papacy for presentation to monasteries in Italy; and now commonly termed 'Atlantic Bibles' on account of their very great size. While not all these bibles present a consistent reformed Vulgate text, they generally exclude the deuterocanonical books. \n\nExceptions to this narrative are Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah, which appear in the Greek canon lists of the Council of Laodicea, Athanasius (367 AD), Cyril of Jerusalem (c. 350 AD), and Epiphanius of Salamis (c. 385 AD) but are not separately listed as canonical in the Latin accounts of the Canons of Laodicea or any other Western synods and councils, nor are specified as canonical by Innocent I and Gelasius I, nor are present in any complete Vulgate Bibles earlier than the 9th century; and even after that date, do not become common in the Vulgate Old Testament until the 13th century. In the Old Latin version of the Bible, these two works appear to have been incorporated into the Book of Jeremiah, and Latin Fathers of the 4th century and earlier always cite their texts as being from that book. However, when Jerome translated Jeremiah afresh from the Hebrew text, which is considerably longer than the Greek Septuagint text and with chapters in a different order, he steadfastly refused to incorporate either Baruch or the Letter of Jeremiah from the Greek. As the Vulgate Bible supplanted the Old Latin in Western church use in subsequent centuries, so Baruch and the letter of Jeremiah are no longer treated as canonical in the works of Fathers who favoured the Vulgate, Gregory the Great, Isidore of Seville and Bede. In the 9th century these two works were reintroduced into the Vulgate Bibles produced under the influence of Theodulf of Orleans, originally as additional chapters to the Vulgate book of Jeremiah. Subsequently, and especially in the Paris Bibles of the 13th century, they are found together as a single, combined book after Lamentations.\n\nThe canonical status of Greek Esdras in the Western church is less easy to track, as references to Esdras in canon lists may refer either to this book, or to Greek Ezra–Nehemiah, or both. Greek Esdras provides a free translation into Greek of the Hebrew canonical book of Ezra–Nehemiah plus chapters 35 and 36 of the Book of Chronicles with other additional matter, but with the sections specific to Nehemiah removed. In the surviving Greek pandect Bibles of the 4th and 5th centuries, this text always stands as 'Esdras A' while the Greek translation of the whole of canonical Ezra–Nehemiah stands as 'Esdras B'; and the same is found in the surviving witness of the Old Latin Bible. When Latin fathers of the early church cite quotations from the biblical 'Book of Ezra' it is overwhelmingly 'First Ezra/Esdras A' to which they refer, as in Augustine 'City of God' 18:36. Citations of the 'Nehemiah' sections of Old Latin Second Ezra/'Esdras B' are much rarer; and no Old Latin citations from the 'Ezra' sections of Second Ezra/'Esdras B' are known before Bede in the 8th century. Accordingly, Bogaert has proposed that all references to the 'two books of Ezra' in both Latin and Greek authorities and councils may be best understood as denoting Esdras A and Esdras B (where most previous scholars had interpreted this phrase as an early reference to Ezra and Nehemiah as separate works). In Jerome's Vulgate Bible however, there is only one Book of Ezra, translating Hebrew Ezra–Nehemiah but corresponding to Greek Esdras B; Esdras A is stated by Jerome to be a variant version, \"(exemplaria varietas)\" of the same Hebrew original. In the prologue to Ezra Jerome states that 3 Esdras and 4 Esdras are apocryphal. Bogaert notes that Ambrose cites 4 Esdras as the 'third book of Esdras', and consequently suggests that Jerome's 'third book of Esdras' is to be identified with '4 Ezra' of modern scholarship, while Jerome's 'fourth book of Esdras'may be modern '5 Ezra' and '6 Ezra' combined.\n\nFrom the 9th century, occasional Latin Vulgate manuscripts are found in which Jerome's single Ezra text is split to form the separate books of Ezra and Nehemiah; and in the Paris Bibles of the 13th century this split has become universal, with Esdras A being reintroduced as '3 Esdras' and Latin Esdras being added as '4 Esdras'. At the Council of Trent neither '3 Esdras' nor '4 Esdras' were accepted as deuterocanonical books, but were eventually printed in the section of 'Apocrypha' in the Sixto-Clementine Vulgate, along with the Prayer of Manasses.\n\nThe Council of Trent in 1546 restated the list of books included in the canon as it had been set out in the Council of Florence. In respect to the deuterocanonical books this list conformed with the canon lists of Western synods of the late 4th century, other than including Baruch with the Letter of Jeremiah as a separate book, and in excluding Greek Esdras. While the majority at Trent supported this decision there were participants in the minority who disagreed with accepting any other than the protocanonical books in the canon. Among the minority, at Trent, were Cardinals Seripando and Cajetan, the latter an opponent of Luther at Augsburg.\n\nOutside the Roman Catholic Church, the term deuterocanonical is sometimes used, by way of analogy, to describe books that Eastern Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy included in the Old Testament that are not part of the Jewish Tanakh, nor the Protestant Old Testament. Among Orthodox, the term is understood to mean that they were compiled separately from the primary canon, as explained in 2 Esdras, where Esdras is instructed to keep certain books separate and hidden.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Churches have traditionally included all the books of the Septuagint in their Old Testaments. The Greeks use the word \"Anagignoskomena\" (Ἀναγιγνωσκόμενα \"readable, worthy to be read\") to describe the books of the Greek Septuagint that are not present in the Hebrew Bible. When Orthodox theologians use the term \"deuterocanonical\", it is important to note that the meaning is not identical to the Roman Catholic usage. In Orthodox Christianity, deuterocanonical means that a book is part of the corpus of the Old Testament (i.e. is read during the services) but has secondary authority. In other words, deutero (second) applies to authority or witnessing power, whereas in Roman Catholicism, deutero applies to chronology (the fact that these books were confirmed later), not to authority.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox canon includes the deuterocanonical books accepted by Roman Catholics plus Psalm 151, the Prayer of Manasseh, 3 Maccabees and 1 Esdras (also included in the Clementine Vulgate), while Baruch is divided from the Epistle of Jeremiah, making a total of 49 Old Testament books in contrast with the Protestant 39-book canon.\n\nLike the Roman Catholic deuterocanonical books, these texts are integrated with the rest of the Old Testament, not printed in a separate section.\n\nOther texts printed in Orthodox Bibles are included as an appendix (like the Greek 4 Maccabees, and the Slavonic 2 Esdras).\n\nIn the Ethiopic Bible used by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church (an Oriental Orthodox Church), those books of the Old Testament that are still counted as canonical, but which are not agreed upon by all other Churches, are often set in a separate section titled \"\"Deeyutrokanoneekal\"\" (ዲዩትሮካኖኒካል), which is the same word as \"Deuterocanonical\". The Ethiopian Orthodox Deuterocanon, in addition to the standard set listed above, and with the books of Esdras and \"Prayer of Minasse\", also includes some books that are still held canonical by only the Ethiopian Church, including Enoch or \"Henok\" (I Enoch), \"Kufale\" (Jubilees) and 1, 2 and 3 Meqabyan (which are sometimes wrongly confused with the \"Books of Maccabees\").\n\nThere is a great deal of overlap between the Apocrypha section of the original 1611 King James Bible and the Catholic deuterocanon, but the two are distinct. The Apocrypha section of the original 1611 King James Bible includes, in addition to the deuterocanonical books, the following three books, which were not included in the list of the canonical books by the Council of Trent:\nBULLET::::- 1 Esdras (Vulgate 3 Esdras)\nBULLET::::- 2 Esdras (Vulgate 4 Esdras)\nBULLET::::- Prayer of Manasseh\n\nThese books make up the Apocrypha section of the Clementine Vulgate: 3 Esdras (1 Esdras); 4 Esdras (2 Esdras); and the Prayer of Manasseh, where they are specifically described as \"outside of the series of the canon\". The 1609 Douai Bible includes them in an appendix, but they have not been included in English Catholic Bibles since the Challoner revision of the Douai Bible in 1750. They are found, along with the deuterocanonical books, in the Apocrypha section of certain Protestant Bibles (some versions of the King James, for example).\n\nUsing the word apocrypha (Greek: hidden away) to describe texts, although not necessarily pejorative, implies to some people that the writings in question should not be included in the canon of the Bible. This classification commingles them with certain non-canonical gospels and New Testament apocrypha. \"The Society of Biblical Literature\" recommends the use of the term \"deuterocanonical books\" instead of \"Apocrypha\" in academic writing.\n\nThe Thirty-nine Articles of Religion of the Church of England lists the deuterocanonical books as suitable to be read for \"example of life and instruction of manners, but yet doth not apply them to establish any doctrine\". The early lectionaries of the Anglican Church (as included in the Book of Common Prayer of 1662) included the deuterocanonical books amongst the cycle of readings, and passages from them were used regularly in services (such as the Kyrie Pantokrator and the Benedicite).\n\nReadings from the deuterocanonical books are now included in most, if not all, of the modern lectionaries in the Anglican Communion, based on the Revised Common Lectionary (in turn based on the post-conciliar Roman Catholic lectionary), though alternative readings from protocanonical books are also provided.\n\nLuther did not accept deuterocanonical books in his Old Testament, terming them \"Apocrypha, that is, books which are not considered equal to the Holy Scriptures, but are useful and good to read.\"\n\nThe first Methodist liturgical book, \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists\", employs verses from the biblical apocrypha, such as in the Eucharistic liturgy.\n\nThe Revised Common Lectionary, in use by most mainline Protestants including Methodists and Moravians, lists readings from the biblical apocrypha in the liturgical kalendar, although alternate Old Testament scripture lessons are provided.\n\nThe Westminster Confession of Faith, a Calvinist document that serves as a systematic summary of doctrine for the Church of Scotland and other Presbyterian Churches worldwide, recognizes only the sixty-six books of the Protestant canon as authentic Scripture. Chapter 1, Article 3 of the Confession reads: \"The books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of divine inspiration, are no part of the Canon of Scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved, or made use of, than other human writings.\"\n\nThe Belgic Confession, used in Reformed churches, devotes a section (Article 6) to \"the difference between the canonical and apocryphal books\" and says of them: \"All which the Church may read and take instruction from, so far as they agree with the canonical books; but they are far from having such power and efficacy as that we may from their testimony confirm any point of faith or of the Christian religion; much less to detract from the authority of the other sacred books.\"\n\nJudaism excludes these books. It is commonly said that Judaism officially excluded the deuterocanonicals and the additional Greek texts listed here from their Scripture in the Council of Jamnia (c. 70–90 AD), but this claim is disputed.\n\nThe term \"deuterocanonical\" is sometimes used to describe the canonical antilegomena, those books of the New Testament which, like the deuterocanonicals of the Old Testament, were not universally accepted by the early Church. These books may be called the \"New Testament deuterocanonicals\", which are now included in the 27 books of the New Testament recognized by almost all Christians. The deuterocanonicals of the New Testament are as follows:\nBULLET::::- The Epistle to the Hebrews\nBULLET::::- The Epistle of James\nBULLET::::- The Second Epistle of Peter\nBULLET::::- The Second Epistle of John\nBULLET::::- The Third Epistle of John\nBULLET::::- The Epistle of Jude\nBULLET::::- The Apocalypse of John (also known as the Book of Revelation)\n\nLuther made an attempt to remove the books of Hebrews, James, Jude and Revelation from the canon (notably, he perceived them to go against the doctrines of \"sola gratia\" and \"sola fide\"), but this was not generally accepted among his followers. However, these books are ordered last in the German-language Luther Bible to this day.\n\nBULLET::::- Apocrypha\nBULLET::::- Biblical canon\nBULLET::::- Books of the Bible\nBULLET::::- Pseudepigrapha\n\nBULLET::::- Harrington, Daniel J. \"Invitation to the Apocrypha\". Grand Rapids, Michigan: W.B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.\nBULLET::::- Roach, Corwin C. \"The Apocrypha: the Hidden Books of the Bible\". Cincinnati, Ohio: Forward Forward Movement Publications, 1966. \"N.B\".: Concerns the Deuterocanonical writings (Apocrypha), according to Anglican usage.\n\nBULLET::::- Prophecies in the Deuterocanonical books\nBULLET::::- Protestants defending the Deuterocanonical books\nBULLET::::- Defending the Deuterocanonicals by Jimmy Akin\nBULLET::::- Five common arguments Protestants give for rejecting the Deuterocanonicals\nBULLET::::- Deuterocanon Use in New Testament\nBULLET::::- Deuterocanonical books – Full text from Saint Takla Haymanot Church Website (also available, the full text in Arabic)\nBULLET::::- The Apocrypha: Inspired of God?\n"}
{"id": "8490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8490", "title": "Discus throw", "text": "Discus throw\n\nThe discus throw (), also known as disc throw, is a track and field event in which an athlete throws a heavy disc—called a discus—in an attempt to mark a farther distance than their competitors. It is an ancient sport, as demonstrated by the fifth-century-BC Myron statue \"Discobolus\". Although not part of the modern pentathlon, it was one of the events of the ancient Greek pentathlon, which can be dated back to at least to 708 BC, and is part of the modern decathlon.\n\nThe sport of throwing the discus traces back to it being an event in the original Olympic Games of Ancient Greece. The discus as a sport was resurrected in Magdeburg, Germany, by Christian Georg Kohlrausch and his students in the 1870s. Organized Men's competition was resumed in the late 19th century, and has been a part of the modern Summer Olympic Games since the first modern competition, the 1896 Summer Olympics. Images of discus throwers figured prominently in advertising for early modern Games, such as fundraising stamps for the 1896 games, the main posters for the 1920 and 1948 Summer Olympics. Today the sport of discus is a routine part of modern track-and-field meets at all levels, and retains a particularly iconic place in the Olympic Games. \n\nThe first modern athlete to throw the discus while rotating the whole body was František Janda-Suk from Bohemia (present Czech Republic). He invented this technique when studying the position of the famous statue of Discobolus. After only one year of developing the technique he earned a silver medal in the 1900 Olympics.\n\nWomen's competition began in the first decades of the 20th century. Following competition at national and regional levels it was added to the Olympic program for the 1928 games.\n\nThe men's discus is a heavy lenticular disc with a weight of and diameter of , the women's discus has a weight of and diameter of .\n\nUnder IAAF (international) rules, Youth boys (16–17 years) throw the discus, the Junior men (18–19 years) throw the unique discus, and the girls/women of those ages throw the discus.\n\nIn international competition, men throw the 2 kg discus through to age 49. The discus is thrown by ages 50–59, and men age 60 and beyond throw the discus. Women throw the discus through to age 74. Starting with age 75, women throw the discus.\n\nThe typical discus has sides made of plastic, wood, fiberglass, carbon fiber or metal with a metal rim and a metal core to attain the weight. The rim must be smooth, with no roughness or finger holds. A discus with more weight in the rim produces greater angular momentum for any given spin rate, and thus more stability, although it is more difficult to throw. However, a higher rim weight, if thrown correctly, can lead to a farther throw. A solid rubber discus is sometimes used (see in the United States).\n\nTo make a throw, the competitor starts in a circle of diameter, which is recessed in a concrete pad by . The thrower typically takes an initial stance facing away from the direction of the throw. He then spins anticlockwise (for right-handers) around one and a half times through the circle to build momentum, then releases his throw. The discus must land within a 34.92-degree sector. The rules of competition for discus are virtually identical to those of shot put, except that the circle is larger, a stop board is not used and there are no form rules concerning how the discus is to be thrown.\n\nThe basic motion is a forehanded sidearm movement. The discus is spun off the index finger or the middle finger of the throwing hand. In flight the disc spins clockwise when viewed from above for a right-handed thrower, and anticlockwise for a left-handed thrower. As well as achieving maximum momentum in the discus on throwing, the discus' distance is also determined by the trajectory the thrower imparts, as well as the aerodynamic behavior of the discus. Generally, throws into a moderate headwind achieve the maximum distance. Also, a faster-spinning discus imparts greater gyroscopic stability. The technique of discus throwing is quite difficult to master and needs lots of experience to get right, thus most top throwers are 30 years old or more.\n\nThe discus technique can be broken down into phases. The purpose is to transfer from the back to the front of the throwing circle while turning through one and a half circles. The speed of delivery is high, and speed is built up during the throw (slow to fast). Correct technique involves the buildup of torque so that maximum force can be applied to the discus on delivery.\n\nInitially, the thrower takes up their position in the throwing circle, distributing their bodyweight evenly over both feet, which are roughly shoulder width apart. They crouch in order to adopt a more efficient posture to start from whilst also isometrically preloading their muscles; this will allow them to start faster and achieve a more powerful throw. They then begin the wind-up, which sets the tone for the entire throw; the rhythm of the wind-up and throw is very important.\n\nFocusing on rhythm can bring about the consistency to get in the right positions that many throwers lack. Executing a sound discus throw with solid technique requires perfect balance. This is due to the throw being a linear movement combined with a one and a half rotation and an implement at the end of one arm. Thus, a good discus thrower needs to maintain balance within the circle.\n\nFor a right handed thrower, the next stage is to move the weight over the left foot. From this position the right foot is raised, and the athlete 'runs' across the circle. There are various techniques for this stage where the leg swings out to a small or great extent, some athletes turn on their left heel (e.g. Ilke Wylluda) but turning on the ball of the foot is far more common.\n\nThe aim is to land in the 'power position', the right foot should be in the center and the heel should not touch the ground at any point. The left foot should land very quickly after the right. Weight should be mostly over the back foot with as much torque as possible in the body—so the right arm is high and far back. This is very hard to achieve.\n\nThe critical stage is the delivery of the discus, from this 'power position' the hips drive through hard, and will be facing the direction of the throw on delivery. Athletes employ various techniques to control the end-point and recover from the throw, such as fixing feet (to pretty much stop dead), or an active reverse spinning onto the left foot (e.g. Virgilijus Alekna).\n\nSports scientist Richard Ganslen researched the \"Aerodynamics of the Discus\", reporting the discus will stall at an angle of 29°.\n\nThe discus throw has been the subject of a number of well-known ancient Greek statues and Roman copies such as the Discobolus and Discophoros. The discus throw also appears repeatedly in ancient Greek mythology, featured as a means of manslaughter in the cases of Hyacinth, Crocus, Phocus, and Acrisius, and as a named event in the funeral games of Patroclus.\n\nDiscus throwers have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins. One of the recent samples is the €10 Greek Discus commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics. On the obverse of the coin a modern athlete is seen in the foreground in a half-turned position, while in the background an ancient discus thrower has been captured in a lively bending motion, with the discus high above his head, creating a vivid representation of the sport.\n\nIn U.S. high school track and field, boys typically throw a discus weighing 1.6 kg (3 lb 9 oz) and the girls throw the 1 kg (2.2 lb) women's discus. Under USATF Youth rules, boys throw the 1 kg discus between the ages of 11–14, and transition to the 1.6 kg discus as 15- to 18-year-olds. Girls throw the 1 kg discus as 11- to 18-year-olds.\n\nUnder US high school rules, if a discus hits the surrounding safety cage and is deflected into the sector, it is ruled a foul. In contrast, under IAAF, WMA, NCAA and USATF rules, it is ruled a legal throw. Additionally, under US high school rules, distances thrown are rounded down to the nearest whole inch, rather than the nearest centimetre.\n\nUS high school rules allow the use of a solid rubber discus; it is cheaper and easier to learn to throw (due to its more equal distribution of weight, as opposed to the heavy rim weight of the metal rim/core discus), but less durable. However, there are a vast variety of metal discuses to choose from. The weight is not always distributed into the rim of metal discuses as there are four categories that the discs are sold in; center weighted, low spin, high spin, and very high spin. Center weighted discs carry 50-60% of their weight in the rims and are intended for beginner throwers just as rubber discs are. \n\nBULLET::::- Correct as of June 2019.\n\n!Rank\n!Mark\n!Athlete\n!Date\n!Place\n!Ref\n!1\n!2\n!3\n!rowspan=24\nrowspan=2\n29 May 1983\nMoscow\n\n29 June 2019\nBottnaryd\n\n!6\n!7\n!8\n!9\n!rowspan=310\n!13\n!14\n!15\n!16\n!17\n!18\n!19\n\n16 June 2019\nRabat\n\n!20\n!21\n!22\n!23\n!24\n!25\n\nBULLET::::- Gerd Kanter also threw 72.02 m (2007), 71.88 m (2008), 71.64 m (2009), 71.45 m (2010).\nBULLET::::- Virgilijus Alekna also threw 71.56 m (2007), 71.25 m (2008, 71.12 m (2000), 71.08 m (2006).\nBULLET::::- Daniel Ståhl also threw 71.29 m (2017).\nBULLET::::- Róbert Fazekas also threw 71.25 m (2002).\nBULLET::::- Ben Plucknett also threw 71.14 m (1983).\nBULLET::::- Lars Riedel also threw 71.06 m (1996).\nBULLET::::- Ricky Bruch also threw 71.00 m (1984).\n\nAt the 2019 Diamond League Meeting in Doha, Qatar, Daniel Ståhl became the first man to produce six throws beyond 69.50 m in a single competition.\n\nBULLET::::- Ben Plucknett also threw a world record of 72.34 on 7 July 1981 in Stockholm, but this performance was annulled due to doping offense.\nBULLET::::- Rickard Bruch also threw 72.18 on 23 July 1974 at an exhibition meeting in Piteå.\nBULLET::::- John Powell also threw 72.08 on 11 September 1987 in Klagshamn, but the throw was made onto a sloping/downhill sector.\nBULLET::::- Kamy Keshmiri threw 70.84 on 27 May 1992 in Salinas, but this performance was annulled due to doping offense.\n\nBULLET::::- Correct as of June 2019.\n{ class=\"wikitable sortable\"\n\nBULLET::::- Gabriele Reinsch also threw 74.44 m (1988), 73.42 m (1988).\nBULLET::::- Ilke Wyludda also threw 74.40 m (1988), 73.04 m (1989).\nBULLET::::- Diana Sachse also threw 73.90 m (1987), 73.32 m (1987), 73.26 m (1986), 73.24 m (1987), 73.04 m (1987), 72.94 m (1988).\nBULLET::::- Daniela Costian also threw 73.78 m (1988).\nBULLET::::- Galina Savinkova also threw 73.26 m (1983), 72.96 m (1985).\n\nBULLET::::- Martina Hellmann also threw 78.14 at an unofficial meeting in Berlin on 6 September 1988\nBULLET::::- Ilke Wyludda also threw 75.36 at an unofficial meeting in Berlin on 6 September 1988\nBULLET::::- Darya Pishchalnikova of Russia threw a best of 70.69 in Cheboksary on 5 July 2012, but this performance was annulled due to doping offense.\n\n!Year\n!Distance\n!Athlete\n!Location\n1968\nalign=left\nReno\n1969\nalign=left\nMalmo\n1970\nalign=left\nMalmo\n1971\nalign=left\nLancaster\n1972\nalign=left\nStockholm\n1973\nalign=left\nSkellefteå\n1974\nalign=left\nHelsingborg\n1975\nalign=left\nLong Beach\n1976\nalign=left\nSan Jose\n1977\nalign=left\n1978\nalign=left\nBerlin\n1979\nalign=left\nWalnut\n1980\nalign=left\nErfurt\n1981\nalign=left\nModesto\n1982\nalign=left\nSalinas\n1983\nalign=left\nMoskva\n1984\nalign=left\nSan Jose\n1985\nalign=left\nSan Jose\n1986\nalign=left\nNeubrandenburg\n1987\nalign=left\nNeubrandenburg\n1988\nalign=left\nBerlin\n1989\nalign=left\nNorden\n1990\nalign=left\nSmalininkai\n1991\nalign=left\nFresno\n1992\nalign=left\nHalle\n1993\nalign=left\nJena\n1994\nalign=left\nBudapest\n1995\nalign=left\nBellinzona; Monaco\n1996\nalign=left\nSalinas\n1997\nalign=left\nWiesbaden\n1998\nalign=left\nSalinas\n1999\nalign=left\nJena\n2000\nalign=left\nKaunas\n2001\nalign=left\nStellenbosch\n2002\nalign=left\nSzombathely\n2003\nalign=left\nBudapest\n2004\nalign=left\nRethimno\n2005\nalign=left\nMadrid\n2006\nalign=left\nHelsingborg\n2007\nalign=left\nSalinas\n2008\nalign=left\nSalinas\n2009\nalign=left\nKohila\n2010\nalign=left\nChula Vista\n2011\nalign=left\nBudapest\n2012\nalign=left\nTurnov\n2013\nalign=left\nHengelo\n2014\nalign=left\nHalle\n2015\nalign=left\nCetniewo\n2016\nalign=left\nSollentuna\n2017\nalign=left\nSollentuna \n2018\nalign=left\nEskilstuna\n2019\nalign=left\nBottnaryd\n\n!Year\n!Distance\n!Athlete\n!Location\n1968\nalign=left\nWerdohl\n1969\nalign=left\nHamburg\n1970\nalign=left\nLeipzig\n1971\nalign=left\nMunich\n1972\nalign=left\nConstanta\n1973\nalign=left\nEdinburgh\n1974\nalign=left\nPrague\n1975\nalign=left\nZürich\n1976\nalign=left\nSochi\n1977\nalign=left\nKarl-Marx-Stadt\n1978\nalign=left\nDresden\n1979\nalign=left\nLeipzig\n1980\nalign=left\nSofia\n1981\nalign=left\nBerlin\n1982\nalign=left\nKarl-Marx-Stadt\n1983\nalign=left\nLeselidze\n1984\nalign=left\nNitra\n1985\nalign=left\nErfurt\n1986\nalign=left\nNeubrandenburg\n1987\nalign=left\nKarl-Marx-Stadt\n1988\nalign=left\nNeubrandenburg\n1989\nalign=left\nNeubrandenburg\n1990\nalign=left\nTel Aviv\n1991\nalign=left\nTokyo\n1992\nalign=left\nBeijing\n1993\nalign=left\nVenissieux\n1994\nalign=left\nAuckland\n1995\nalign=left\nFlorø\n1996\nalign=left\nAtlanta\n1997\nalign=left\nShanghai\n1998\nalign=left\nStendal\n1999\nalign=left\nThessaloníki\n2000\nalign=left\nBucharest\n2001\nalign=left\nEdmonton\n2002\nalign=left\nTula\n2003\nalign=left\nHalle\n2004\nalign=left\nMinsk\n2005\nalign=left\nMadrid\n2006\nalign=left\nSchönebeck\n2007\nalign=left\nHalle\n2008\nalign=left\nIstanbul\n2009\nalign=left\nJinan\n2010\nalign=left\nWiesbaden\n2011\nalign=left\nSchönebeck\n2012\nalign=left\nLondon\n2013\nalign=left\nLausanne\n2014\nalign=left\nZürich\n2015\nalign=left\nBilbao\n2016\nalign=left\nShanghai\n2017\nalign=left\nBarcelona\n2018\nalign=left\nDoha\n2019\nalign=left\nSotteville\n\nBULLET::::- List of discus throw national champions (men)\n\nBULLET::::- World Record\nBULLET::::- Discus History\nBULLET::::- IAAF list of discus-throw records in XML\n"}
{"id": "8492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8492", "title": "Discrete mathematics", "text": "Discrete mathematics\n\nDiscrete mathematics is the study of mathematical structures that are fundamentally discrete rather than continuous. In contrast to real numbers that have the property of varying \"smoothly\", the objects studied in discrete mathematics – such as integers, graphs, and statements in logic – do not vary smoothly in this way, but have distinct, separated values. Discrete mathematics therefore excludes topics in \"continuous mathematics\" such as calculus or Euclidean geometry. Discrete objects can often be enumerated by integers. More formally, discrete mathematics has been characterized as the branch of mathematics dealing with countable sets (finite sets or sets with the same cardinality as the natural numbers). However, there is no exact definition of the term \"discrete mathematics.\" Indeed, discrete mathematics is described less by what is included than by what is excluded: continuously varying quantities and related notions.\n\nThe set of objects studied in discrete mathematics can be finite or infinite. The term finite mathematics is sometimes applied to parts of the field of discrete mathematics that deals with finite sets, particularly those areas relevant to business.\n\nResearch in discrete mathematics increased in the latter half of the twentieth century partly due to the development of digital computers which operate in discrete steps and store data in discrete bits. Concepts and notations from discrete mathematics are useful in studying and describing objects and problems in branches of computer science, such as computer algorithms, programming languages, cryptography, automated theorem proving, and software development. Conversely, computer implementations are significant in applying ideas from discrete mathematics to real-world problems, such as in operations research.\n\nAlthough the main objects of study in discrete mathematics are discrete objects, analytic methods from continuous mathematics are often employed as well.\n\nIn university curricula, \"Discrete Mathematics\" appeared in the 1980s, initially as a computer science support course; its contents were somewhat haphazard at the time. The curriculum has thereafter developed in conjunction with efforts by ACM and MAA into a course that is basically intended to develop mathematical maturity in first-year students; therefore it is nowadays a prerequisite for mathematics majors in some universities as well. Some high-school-level discrete mathematics textbooks have appeared as well. At this level, discrete mathematics is sometimes seen as a preparatory course, not unlike precalculus in this respect.\n\nThe Fulkerson Prize is awarded for outstanding papers in discrete mathematics.\n\nThe history of discrete mathematics has involved a number of challenging problems which have focused attention within areas of the field. In graph theory, much research was motivated by attempts to prove the four color theorem, first stated in 1852, but not proved until 1976 (by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken, using substantial computer assistance).\n\nIn logic, the second problem on David Hilbert's list of open problems presented in 1900 was to prove that the axioms of arithmetic are consistent. Gödel's second incompleteness theorem, proved in 1931, showed that this was not possible – at least not within arithmetic itself. Hilbert's tenth problem was to determine whether a given polynomial Diophantine equation with integer coefficients has an integer solution. In 1970, Yuri Matiyasevich proved that this could not be done.\n\nThe need to break German codes in World War II led to advances in cryptography and theoretical computer science, with the first programmable digital electronic computer being developed at England's Bletchley Park with the guidance of Alan Turing and his seminal work, On Computable Numbers. At the same time, military requirements motivated advances in operations research. The Cold War meant that cryptography remained important, with fundamental advances such as public-key cryptography being developed in the following decades. Operations research remained important as a tool in business and project management, with the critical path method being developed in the 1950s. The telecommunication industry has also motivated advances in discrete mathematics, particularly in graph theory and information theory. Formal verification of statements in logic has been necessary for software development of safety-critical systems, and advances in automated theorem proving have been driven by this need.\n\nComputational geometry has been an important part of the computer graphics incorporated into modern video games and computer-aided design tools.\n\nSeveral fields of discrete mathematics, particularly theoretical computer science, graph theory, and combinatorics, are important in addressing the challenging bioinformatics problems associated with understanding the tree of life.\n\nCurrently, one of the most famous open problems in theoretical computer science is the P = NP problem, which involves the relationship between the complexity classes P and NP. The Clay Mathematics Institute has offered a $1 million USD prize for the first correct proof, along with prizes for six other mathematical problems.\n\nTheoretical computer science includes areas of discrete mathematics relevant to computing. It draws heavily on graph theory and mathematical logic. Included within theoretical computer science is the study of algorithms and data structures. Computability studies what can be computed in principle, and has close ties to logic, while complexity studies the time, space, and other resources taken by computations. Automata theory and formal language theory are closely related to computability. Petri nets and process algebras are used to model computer systems, and methods from discrete mathematics are used in analyzing VLSI electronic circuits. Computational geometry applies algorithms to geometrical problems, while computer image analysis applies them to representations of images. Theoretical computer science also includes the study of various continuous computational topics.\n\nInformation theory involves the quantification of information. Closely related is coding theory which is used to design efficient and reliable data transmission and storage methods. Information theory also includes continuous topics such as: analog signals, analog coding, analog encryption.\n\nLogic is the study of the principles of valid reasoning and inference, as well as of consistency, soundness, and completeness. For example, in most systems of logic (but not in intuitionistic logic) Peirce's law (((\"P\"→\"Q\")→\"P\")→\"P\") is a theorem. For classical logic, it can be easily verified with a truth table. The study of mathematical proof is particularly important in logic, and has applications to automated theorem proving and formal verification of software.\n\nLogical formulas are discrete structures, as are proofs, which form finite trees or, more generally, directed acyclic graph structures (with each inference step combining one or more premise branches to give a single conclusion). The truth values of logical formulas usually form a finite set, generally restricted to two values: \"true\" and \"false\", but logic can also be continuous-valued, e.g., fuzzy logic. Concepts such as infinite proof trees or infinite derivation trees have also been studied, e.g. infinitary logic.\n\nSet theory is the branch of mathematics that studies sets, which are collections of objects, such as {blue, white, red} or the (infinite) set of all prime numbers. Partially ordered sets and sets with other relations have applications in several areas.\n\nIn discrete mathematics, countable sets (including finite sets) are the main focus. The beginning of set theory as a branch of mathematics is usually marked by Georg Cantor's work distinguishing between different kinds of infinite set, motivated by the study of trigonometric series, and further development of the theory of infinite sets is outside the scope of discrete mathematics. Indeed, contemporary work in descriptive set theory makes extensive use of traditional continuous mathematics.\n\nCombinatorics studies the way in which discrete structures can be combined or arranged.\nEnumerative combinatorics concentrates on counting the number of certain combinatorial objects - e.g. the twelvefold way provides a unified framework for counting permutations, combinations and partitions.\nAnalytic combinatorics concerns the enumeration (i.e., determining the number) of combinatorial structures using tools from complex analysis and probability theory. In contrast with enumerative combinatorics which uses explicit combinatorial formulae and generating functions to describe the results, analytic combinatorics aims at obtaining asymptotic formulae.\nDesign theory is a study of combinatorial designs, which are collections of subsets with certain intersection properties.\nPartition theory studies various enumeration and asymptotic problems related to integer partitions, and is closely related to q-series, special functions and orthogonal polynomials. Originally a part of number theory and analysis, partition theory is now considered a part of combinatorics or an independent field.\nOrder theory is the study of partially ordered sets, both finite and infinite.\n\nGraph theory, the study of graphs and networks, is often considered part of combinatorics, but has grown large enough and distinct enough, with its own kind of problems, to be regarded as a subject in its own right. Graphs are one of the prime objects of study in discrete mathematics. They are among the most ubiquitous models of both natural and human-made structures. They can model many types of relations and process dynamics in physical, biological and social systems. In computer science, they can represent networks of communication, data organization, computational devices, the flow of computation, etc. In mathematics, they are useful in geometry and certain parts of topology, e.g. knot theory. Algebraic graph theory has close links with group theory. There are also continuous graphs; however, for the most part, research in graph theory falls within the domain of discrete mathematics.\n\nDiscrete probability theory deals with events that occur in countable sample spaces. For example, count observations such as the numbers of birds in flocks comprise only natural number values {0, 1, 2, ...}. On the other hand, continuous observations such as the weights of birds comprise real number values and would typically be modeled by a continuous probability distribution such as the normal. Discrete probability distributions can be used to approximate continuous ones and vice versa. For highly constrained situations such as throwing dice or experiments with decks of cards, calculating the probability of events is basically enumerative combinatorics.\n\nNumber theory is concerned with the properties of numbers in general, particularly integers. It has applications to cryptography and cryptanalysis, particularly with regard to modular arithmetic, diophantine equations, linear and quadratic congruences, prime numbers and primality testing. Other discrete aspects of number theory include geometry of numbers. In analytic number theory, techniques from continuous mathematics are also used. Topics that go beyond discrete objects include transcendental numbers, diophantine approximation, p-adic analysis and function fields.\n\nAlgebraic structures occur as both discrete examples and continuous examples. Discrete algebras include: boolean algebra used in logic gates and programming; relational algebra used in databases; discrete and finite versions of groups, rings and fields are important in algebraic coding theory; discrete semigroups and monoids appear in the theory of formal languages.\n\nA function defined on an interval of the integers is usually called a sequence. A sequence could be a finite sequence from a data source or an infinite sequence from a discrete dynamical system. Such a discrete function could be defined explicitly by a list (if its domain is finite), or by a formula for its general term, or it could be given implicitly by a recurrence relation or difference equation. Difference equations are similar to a differential equations, but replace differentiation by taking the difference between adjacent terms; they can be used to approximate differential equations or (more often) studied in their own right. Many questions and methods concerning differential equations have counterparts for difference equations. For instance, where there are integral transforms in harmonic analysis for studying continuous functions or analogue signals, there are discrete transforms for discrete functions or digital signals. As well as the discrete metric there are more general discrete or finite metric spaces and finite topological spaces.\n\nDiscrete geometry and combinatorial geometry are about combinatorial properties of \"discrete collections\" of geometrical objects. A long-standing topic in discrete geometry is tiling of the plane. Computational geometry applies algorithms to geometrical problems.\n\nAlthough topology is the field of mathematics that formalizes and generalizes the intuitive notion of \"continuous deformation\" of objects, it gives rise to many discrete topics; this can be attributed in part to the focus on topological invariants, which themselves usually take discrete values.\nSee combinatorial topology, topological graph theory, topological combinatorics, computational topology, discrete topological space, finite topological space, topology (chemistry).\n\nOperations research provides techniques for solving practical problems in engineering, business, and other fields — problems such as allocating resources to maximize profit, and scheduling project activities to minimize risk. Operations research techniques include linear programming and other areas of optimization, queuing theory, scheduling theory, and network theory. Operations research also includes continuous topics such as continuous-time Markov process, continuous-time martingales, process optimization, and continuous and hybrid control theory.\n\nDecision theory is concerned with identifying the values, uncertainties and other issues relevant in a given decision, its rationality, and the resulting optimal decision.\n\nUtility theory is about measures of the relative economic satisfaction from, or desirability of, consumption of various goods and services.\n\nSocial choice theory is about voting. A more puzzle-based approach to voting is ballot theory.\n\nGame theory deals with situations where success depends on the choices of others, which makes choosing the best course of action more complex. There are even continuous games, see differential game. Topics include auction theory and fair division.\n\nDiscretization concerns the process of transferring continuous models and equations into discrete counterparts, often for the purposes of making calculations easier by using approximations. Numerical analysis provides an important example.\n\nThere are many concepts in continuous mathematics which have discrete versions, such as discrete calculus, discrete probability distributions, discrete Fourier transforms, discrete geometry, discrete logarithms, discrete differential geometry, discrete exterior calculus, discrete Morse theory, difference equations, discrete dynamical systems, and discrete vector measures.\n\nIn applied mathematics, discrete modelling is the discrete analogue of continuous modelling. In discrete modelling, discrete formulae are fit to data. A common method in this form of modelling is to use recurrence relation.\n\nIn algebraic geometry, the concept of a curve can be extended to discrete geometries by taking the spectra of polynomial rings over finite fields to be models of the affine spaces over that field, and letting subvarieties or spectra of other rings provide the curves that lie in that space. Although the space in which the curves appear has a finite number of points, the curves are not so much sets of points as analogues of curves in continuous settings. For example, every point of the form formula_1 for formula_2 a field can be studied either as formula_3, a point, or as the spectrum formula_4 of the local ring at (x-c), a point together with a neighborhood around it. Algebraic varieties also have a well-defined notion of tangent space called the Zariski tangent space, making many features of calculus applicable even in finite settings.\n\nThe time scale calculus is a unification of the theory of difference equations with that of differential equations, which has applications to fields requiring simultaneous modelling of discrete and continuous data. Another way of modeling such a situation is the notion of hybrid dynamical systems.\n\nBULLET::::- Outline of discrete mathematics\nBULLET::::- Cyberchase, a show that teaches Discrete Mathematics to children\n\nBULLET::::- Ronald Graham, Donald E. Knuth, Oren Patashnik, \"Concrete Mathematics\".\nBULLET::::- Veerarajan, T.(2007), Discrete mathematics with graph theory and combinatorics, Tata Mcgraw Hill\n\nBULLET::::- Discrete mathematics at the utk.edu Mathematics Archives, providing links to syllabi, tutorials, programs, etc.\nBULLET::::- Iowa Central: Electrical Technologies Program Discrete mathematics for Electrical engineering.\n"}
{"id": "8494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8494", "title": "DDT", "text": "DDT\n\nDichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, commonly known as DDT, is a colorless, tasteless, and almost odorless crystalline chemical compound, an organochlorine. It was originally developed as an insecticide, then it became infamous for its environmental impacts. DDT was first synthesized in 1874 by the Austrian chemist Othmar Zeidler. DDT's insecticidal action was discovered by the Swiss chemist Paul Hermann Müller in 1939. DDT was used in the second half of World War II to control malaria and typhus among civilians and troops. Müller was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1948 \"for his discovery of the high efficiency of DDT as a contact poison against several arthropods\".\n\nBy October 1945, DDT was available for public sale in the United States. Although it was promoted by government and industry for use as an agricultural and household pesticide, there were also concerns about its use from the beginning. Opposition to DDT was focused by the 1962 publication of Rachel Carson's book \"Silent Spring\". It cataloged environmental impacts that coincided with widespread use of DDT in agriculture in the United States, and it questioned the logic of broadcasting potentially dangerous chemicals into the environment with little prior investigation of their environmental and health effects. The book claimed that DDT and other pesticides had been shown to cause cancer and that their agricultural use was a threat to wildlife, particularly birds. Its publication was a seminal event for the environmental movement and resulted in a large public outcry that eventually led, in 1972, to a ban on DDT's agricultural use in the United States. A worldwide ban on agricultural use was formalized under the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, but its limited and still-controversial use in disease vector control continues, because of its effectiveness in reducing malarial infections, balanced by environmental and other health concerns.\n\nAlong with the passage of the Endangered Species Act, the United States ban on DDT is a major factor in the comeback of the bald eagle (the national bird of the United States) and the peregrine falcon from near-extinction in the contiguous United States.\n\nDDT is similar in structure to the insecticide methoxychlor and the acaricide dicofol. It is highly hydrophobic and nearly insoluble in water but has good solubility in most organic solvents, fats and oils. DDT does not occur naturally and is synthesised by consecutive Friedel–Crafts reactions between chloral () and two equivalents of chlorobenzene (), in the presence of an acidic catalyst. DDT has been marketed under trade names including Anofex, Cezarex, Chlorophenothane, Dicophane, Dinocide, Gesarol, Guesapon, Guesarol, Gyron, Ixodex, Neocid, Neocidol and Zerdane; INN is clofenotane.\n\nCommercial DDT is a mixture of several closely–related compounds. Due to the nature of the chemical reaction used to synthesize DDT, several combinations of \"ortho\" and \"para\" arene substitution patterns are formed. The major component (77%) is the desired \"p\",\"p\" isomer. The \"o\",\"p\" isomeric impurity is also present in significant amounts (15%). Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE) and dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane (DDD) make up the balance of impurities in commercial samples. DDE and DDD are also the major metabolites and environmental breakdown products. DDT, DDE and DDD are sometimes referred to collectively as DDX.\n\nDDT has been formulated in multiple forms, including solutions in xylene or petroleum distillates, emulsifiable concentrates, water-wettable powders, granules, aerosols, smoke candles and charges for vaporizers and lotions.\n\nFrom 1950 to 1980, DDT was extensively used in agriculture – more than 40,000 tonnes each year worldwide – and it has been estimated that a total of 1.8 million tonnes have been produced globally since the 1940s. In the United States, it was manufactured by some 15 companies, including Monsanto, Ciba, Montrose Chemical Company, Pennwalt, and Velsicol Chemical Corporation. Production peaked in 1963 at 82,000 tonnes per year. More than 600,000 tonnes (1.35 billion pounds) were applied in the US before the 1972 ban. Usage peaked in 1959 at about 36,000 tonnes.\n\nIn 2009, 3,314 tonnes were produced for malaria control and visceral leishmaniasis. India is the only country still manufacturing DDT, and is the largest consumer.<ref name=\"DDTBP.1/2\"></ref> China ceased production in 2007.\n\nIn insects, DDT opens sodium ion channels in neurons, causing them to fire spontaneously, which leads to spasms and eventual death. Insects with certain mutations in their sodium channel gene are resistant to DDT and similar insecticides. DDT resistance is also conferred by up-regulation of genes expressing cytochrome P450 in some insect species, as greater quantities of some enzymes of this group accelerate the toxin's metabolism into inactive metabolites. (The same enzyme family is up-regulated in mammals too, e.g., in response to ethanol consumption.) Genomic studies in the model genetic organism \"Drosophila melanogaster\" revealed that high level DDT resistance is polygenic, involving multiple resistance mechanisms.\n\nDDT was first synthesized in 1874 by Othmar Zeidler under the supervision of Adolf von Baeyer. It was further described in 1929 in a dissertation by W. Bausch and in two subsequent publications in 1930. The insecticide properties of \"multiple chlorinated aliphatic or fat-aromatic alcohols with at least one trichloromethane group\" were described in a patent in 1934 by Wolfgang von Leuthold. DDT's insecticidal properties were not, however, discovered until 1939 by the Swiss scientist Paul Hermann Müller, who was awarded the 1948 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for his efforts.\n\nDDT is the best-known of several chlorine-containing pesticides used in the 1940s and 1950s. With pyrethrum in short supply, DDT was used extensively during World War II by the Allies to control the insect vectors of typhus – nearly eliminating the disease in many parts of Europe. In the South Pacific, it was sprayed aerially for malaria and dengue fever control with spectacular effects. While DDT's chemical and insecticidal properties were important factors in these victories, advances in application equipment coupled with competent organization and sufficient manpower were also crucial to the success of these programs.\n\nIn 1945, DDT was made available to farmers as an agricultural insecticide and played a role in the final (for a time) elimination of malaria in Europe and North America.\n\nIn 1955, the World Health Organization commenced a program to eradicate malaria in countries with low to moderate transmission rates worldwide, relying largely on DDT for mosquito control and rapid diagnosis and treatment to reduce transmission. The program eliminated the disease in \"North America, Europe, the former Soviet Union\", and in \"Taiwan, much of the Caribbean, the Balkans, parts of northern Africa, the northern region of Australia, and a large swath of the South Pacific\" and dramatically reduced mortality in Sri Lanka and India.\n\nHowever, failure to sustain the program, increasing mosquito tolerance to DDT, and increasing parasite tolerance led to a resurgence. In many areas early successes partially or completely reversed, and in some cases rates of transmission increased. The program succeeded in eliminating malaria only in areas with \"high socio-economic status, well-organized healthcare systems, and relatively less intensive or seasonal malaria transmission\".\n\nDDT was less effective in tropical regions due to the continuous life cycle of mosquitoes and poor infrastructure. It was not applied at all in sub-Saharan Africa due to these perceived difficulties. Mortality rates in that area never declined to the same dramatic extent, and now constitute the bulk of malarial deaths worldwide, especially following the disease's resurgence as a result of resistance to drug treatments and the spread of the deadly malarial variant caused by \"Plasmodium falciparum\". Eradication was abandoned in 1969 and attention instead focused on controlling and treating the disease. Spraying programs (especially using DDT) were curtailed due to concerns over safety and environmental effects, as well as problems in administrative, managerial and financial implementation. Efforts shifted from spraying to the use of bednets impregnated with insecticides and other interventions.\n\nBy October 1945, DDT was available for public sale in the United States, used both as an agricultural pesticide and as a household insecticide. Although its use was promoted by government and the agricultural industry, US scientists such as FDA pharmacologist Herbert O. Calvery expressed concern over possible hazards associated with DDT as early as 1944. In 1947, Dr. Bradbury Robinson, a physician and nutritionist practicing in St. Louis, Michigan, warned of the dangers of using the pesticide DDT in agriculture. DDT had been researched and manufactured in St. Louis by the Michigan Chemical Corporation, later purchased by Velsicol Chemical Corporation, and had become an important part of the local economy. Citing research performed by Michigan State University in 1946, Robinson, a past president of the local Conservation Club, opined that: ... perhaps the greatest danger from D.D.T. is that its extensive use in farm areas is most likely to upset the natural balances, not only killing beneficial insects in great number but by bringing about the death of fish, birds, and other forms of wild life either by their feeding on insects killed by D.D.T. or directly by ingesting the poison.\n\nAs its production and use increased, public response was mixed. At the same time that DDT was hailed as part of the \"world of tomorrow,\" concerns were expressed about its potential to kill harmless and beneficial insects (particularly pollinators), birds, fish, and eventually humans. The issue of toxicity was complicated, partly because DDT's effects varied from species to species, and partly because consecutive exposures could accumulate, causing damage comparable to large doses. A number of states attempted to regulate DDT. In the 1950s the federal government began tightening regulations governing its use. These events received little attention. Women like Dorothy Colson and Mamie Ella Plyler of Claxton, Georgia gathered evidence about DDT's effects and wrote to the Georgia Department of Public Health, the National Health Council in New York City, and other organizations.\n\nIn 1957 \"The New York Times\" reported an unsuccessful struggle to restrict DDT use in Nassau County, New York, and the issue came to the attention of the popular naturalist-author Rachel Carson. William Shawn, editor of \"The New Yorker\", urged her to write a piece on the subject, which developed into her 1962 book \"Silent Spring\". The book argued that pesticides, including DDT, were poisoning both wildlife and the environment and were endangering human health. \"Silent Spring\" was a best seller, and public reaction to it launched the modern environmental movement in the United States. The year after it appeared, President John F. Kennedy ordered his Science Advisory Committee to investigate Carson's claims. The committee's report \"add[ed] up to a fairly thorough-going vindication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring thesis,\" in the words of the journal \"Science\", and recommended a phaseout of \"persistent toxic pesticides\". In 1965, the U.S. military removed DDT from the military supply system due in part to the development of resistance by body lice to DDT; it was replaced by lindane.\n\nDDT became a prime target of the growing anti-chemical and anti-pesticide movements, and in 1967 a group of scientists and lawyers founded the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) with the specific goal of enacting a ban on DDT. Victor Yannacone, Charles Wurster, Art Cooley and others in the group had all witnessed bird kills or declines in bird populations and suspected that DDT was the cause. In their campaign against the chemical, the EDF petitioned the government for a ban and filed lawsuits. Around this time, toxicologist David Peakall was measuring DDE levels in the eggs of peregrine falcons and California condors and finding that increased levels corresponded with thinner shells.\n\nIn response to an EDF suit, the U.S. District Court of Appeals in 1971 ordered the EPA to begin the de-registration procedure for DDT. After an initial six-month review process, William Ruckelshaus, the Agency's first Administrator rejected an immediate suspension of DDT's registration, citing studies from the EPA's internal staff stating that DDT was not an imminent danger. However, these findings were criticized, as they were performed mostly by economic entomologists inherited from the United States Department of Agriculture, who many environmentalists felt were biased towards agribusiness and understated concerns about human health and wildlife. The decision thus created controversy.\n\nThe EPA held seven months of hearings in 1971–1972, with scientists giving evidence for and against DDT. In the summer of 1972, Ruckelshaus announced the cancellation of most uses of DDT – exempting public health uses under some conditions. Again, this caused controversy. Immediately after the announcement, both the EDF and the DDT manufacturers filed suit against EPA. Many in the agricultural community were concerned that food production would be severely impacted, while proponents of pesticides warned of increased breakouts of insect-borne diseases and questioned the accuracy of giving animals high amounts of pesticides for cancer potential. Industry sought to overturn the ban, while the EDF wanted a comprehensive ban. The cases were consolidated, and in 1973 the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that the EPA had acted properly in banning DDT. During the late 1970s, the EPA also began banning organochlorines, pesticides that were chemically similar to DDT. These included aldrin, dieldrin, chlordane, heptachlor, texaphene, and mirex.\n\nSome uses of DDT continued under the public health exemption. For example, in June 1979, the California Department of Health Services was permitted to use DDT to suppress flea vectors of bubonic plague. DDT continued to be produced in the United States for foreign markets until 1985, when over 300 tons were exported.\n\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, agricultural use was banned in most developed countries, beginning with Hungary in 1968, followed by Norway and Sweden in 1970, West Germany and the United States in 1972, but not in the United Kingdom until 1984. By 1991, total bans, including for disease control, were in place in at least 26 countries; for example, Cuba in 1970, the US in the 1980s, Singapore in 1984, Chile in 1985, and the Republic of Korea in 1986.\n\nThe Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, which took effect in 2004, put a global ban on several persistent organic pollutants, and restricted DDT use to vector control. The Convention was ratified by more than 170 countries. Recognizing that total elimination in many malaria-prone countries is currently unfeasible absent affordable/effective alternatives, the convention exempts public health use within World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines from the ban. Resolution 60.18 of the World Health Assembly commits WHO to the Stockholm Convention's aim of reducing and ultimately eliminating DDT. Malaria Foundation International states, \"The outcome of the treaty is arguably better than the status quo going into the negotiations. For the first time, there is now an insecticide which is restricted to vector control only, meaning that the selection of resistant mosquitoes will be slower than before.\"\n\nDespite the worldwide ban, agricultural use continued in India, North Korea, and possibly elsewhere.<ref name=\"DDTBP.1/2\"></ref> As of 2013, an estimated 3,000 to 4,000 tons of DDT were produced for disease vector control, including 2786 tons in India. DDT is applied to the inside walls of homes to kill or repel mosquitoes. This intervention, called indoor residual spraying (IRS), greatly reduces environmental damage. It also reduces the incidence of DDT resistance. For comparison, treating of cotton during a typical U.S. growing season requires the same amount of chemical to treat roughly 1,700 homes.\n\nDDT is a persistent organic pollutant that is readily adsorbed to soils and sediments, which can act both as sinks and as long-term sources of exposure affecting organisms. Depending on conditions, its soil half-life can range from 22 days to 30 years. Routes of loss and degradation include runoff, volatilization, photolysis and aerobic and anaerobic biodegradation. Due to hydrophobic properties, in aquatic ecosystems DDT and its metabolites are absorbed by aquatic organisms and adsorbed on suspended particles, leaving little DDT dissolved in the water (however, its half-life in aquatic environments is listed by the National Pesticide Information Center as 150 years). Its breakdown products and metabolites, DDE and DDD, are also persistent and have similar chemical and physical properties. DDT and its breakdown products are transported from warmer areas to the Arctic by the phenomenon of global distillation, where they then accumulate in the region's food web.\n\nMedical researchers in 1974 found a measurable and significant difference in the presence of DDT in human milk between mothers who lived in New Brunswick and mothers who lived in Nova Scotia, \"possibly because of the wider use of insecticide sprays in the past\".\n\nBecause of its lipophilic properties, DDT can bioaccumulate, especially in predatory birds. DDT is toxic to a wide range of living organisms, including marine animals such as crayfish, daphnids, sea shrimp and many species of fish. DDT, DDE and DDD magnify through the food chain, with apex predators such as raptor birds concentrating more chemicals than other animals in the same environment. They are stored mainly in body fat. DDT and DDE are resistant to metabolism; in humans, their half-lives are 6 and up to 10 years, respectively. In the United States, these chemicals were detected in almost all human blood samples tested by the Centers for Disease Control in 2005, though their levels have sharply declined since most uses were banned. Estimated dietary intake has declined, although FDA food tests commonly detect it.\n\nDespite being banned for many years, in 2018 research showed that DDT residues are still present in European soils and Spanish rivers.\n\nThe chemical and its breakdown products DDE and DDD caused eggshell thinning and population declines in multiple North American and European bird of prey species. DDE-related eggshell thinning is considered a major reason for the decline of the bald eagle, brown pelican, peregrine falcon and osprey. However, birds vary in their sensitivity to these chemicals, with birds of prey, waterfowl and song birds being more susceptible than chickens and related species. Even in 2010, California condors that feed on sea lions at Big Sur that in turn feed in the Palos Verdes Shelf area of the Montrose Chemical Superfund site exhibited continued thin-shell problems, though DDT's role in the decline of the California condor is disputed.\n\nThe biological thinning mechanism is not entirely understood, but DDE appears to be more potent than DDT, and strong evidence indicates that \"p\",\"p\"-DDE inhibits calcium ATPase in the membrane of the shell gland and reduces the transport of calcium carbonate from blood into the eggshell gland. This results in a dose-dependent thickness reduction. Other evidence indicates that o,p'-DDT disrupts female reproductive tract development, later impairing eggshell quality. Multiple mechanisms may be at work, or different mechanisms may operate in different species.\n\nDDT is an endocrine disruptor. It is considered likely to be a human carcinogen although the majority of studies suggest it is not directly genotoxic. DDE acts as a weak androgen receptor antagonist, but not as an estrogen. \"p\",\"p\"-DDT, DDT's main component, has little or no androgenic or estrogenic activity. The minor component \"o\",\"p\"-DDT has weak estrogenic activity.\n\nDDT is classified as \"moderately toxic\" by the US National Toxicology Program (NTP) and \"moderately hazardous\" by WHO, based on the rat oral of 113 mg/kg. Indirect exposure is considered relatively non-toxic for humans.\n\nPrimarily through the tendency for DDT to buildup in areas of the body with high lipid content, chronic exposure can affect reproductive capabilities and the embryo or fetus.\nBULLET::::- A review article in \"The Lancet\" states, \"research has shown that exposure to DDT at amounts that would be needed in malaria control might cause preterm birth and early weaning ... toxicological evidence shows endocrine-disrupting properties; human data also indicate possible disruption in semen quality, menstruation, gestational length, and duration of lactation.\"\nBULLET::::- Other studies document decreases in semen quality among men with high exposures (generally from IRS).\nBULLET::::- Studies are inconsistent on whether high blood DDT or DDE levels increase time to pregnancy. In mothers with high DDE blood serum levels, daughters may have up to a 32% increase in the probability of conceiving, but increased DDT levels have been associated with a 16% decrease in one study.\nBULLET::::- Indirect exposure of mothers through workers directly in contact with DDT is associated with an increase in spontaneous abortions\nBULLET::::- Other studies found that DDT or DDE interfere with proper thyroid function in pregnancy and childhood.\nBULLET::::- Mothers with high levels of DDT circulating in their blood during pregnancy were found to be more likely to give birth to children who would go on to develop autism.\n\nIn 2015, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classified DDT as Group 2A \"probably carcinogenic to humans\". Previous assessments by the U.S. National Toxicology Program classified it as \"reasonably anticipated to be a carcinogen\" and by the EPA classified DDT, DDE and DDD as class B2 \"probable\" carcinogens; these evaluations were based mainly on animal studies. \n\nA 2005 Lancet review stated that occupational DDT exposure was associated with increased pancreatic cancer risk in 2 case control studies, but another study showed no DDE dose-effect association. Results regarding a possible association with liver cancer and biliary tract cancer are conflicting: workers who did not have direct occupational DDT contact showed increased risk. White men had an increased risk, but not white women or black men. Results about an association with multiple myeloma, prostate and testicular cancer, endometrial cancer and colorectal cancer have been inconclusive or generally do not support an association. A 2017 review of liver cancer studies concluded that \"organochlorine pesticides, including DDT, may increase hepatocellular carcinoma risk\".\n\nA 2009 review, whose co-authors included persons engaged in DDT-related litigation, reached broadly similar conclusions, with an equivocal association with testicular cancer. Case–control studies did not support an association with leukemia or lymphoma.\n\nThe question of whether DDT or DDE are risk factors in breast cancer has not been conclusively answered. Several meta analyses of observational studies have concluded that there is no overall relationship between DDT exposure and breast cancer risk. The United States Institute of Medicine reviewed data on the association of breast cancer with DDT exposure in 2012 and concluded that a causative relationship could neither be proven nor disproven.\n\nA 2007 case–control study using archived blood samples found that breast cancer risk was increased 5-fold among women who were born prior to 1931 and who had high serum DDT levels in 1963. Reasoning that DDT use became widespread in 1945 and peaked around 1950, they concluded that the ages of 14–20 were a critical period in which DDT exposure leads to increased risk. This study, which suggests a connection between DDT exposure and breast cancer that would not be picked up by most studies, has received variable commentary in third party reviews. One review suggested that \"previous studies that measured exposure in older women may have missed the critical period\". The National Toxicology Program notes that while the majority of studies have not found a relationship between DDT exposure and breast cancer that positive associations have been seen in a \"few studies among women with higher levels of exposure and among certain subgroups of women\".\n\nA 2015 case control study identified a link (odds ratio 3.4) between \"in-utero\" exposure (as estimated from archived maternal blood samples) and breast cancer diagnosis in daughters. The findings \"support classification of DDT as an endocrine disruptor, a predictor of breast cancer, and a marker of high risk\".\n\nMalaria remains the primary public health challenge in many countries. In 2015, there were 214 million cases of malaria worldwide resulting in an estimated 438,000 deaths, 90% of which occurred in Africa. DDT is one of many tools to fight the disease. Its use in this context has been called everything from a \"miracle weapon [that is] like Kryptonite to the mosquitoes\", to \"toxic colonialism\".\n\nBefore DDT, eliminating mosquito breeding grounds by drainage or poisoning with Paris green or pyrethrum was sometimes successful. In parts of the world with rising living standards, the elimination of malaria was often a collateral benefit of the introduction of window screens and improved sanitation. A variety of usually simultaneous interventions represents best practice. These include antimalarial drugs to prevent or treat infection; improvements in public health infrastructure to diagnose, sequester and treat infected individuals; bednets and other methods intended to keep mosquitoes from biting humans; and vector control strategies such as larvaciding with insecticides, ecological controls such as draining mosquito breeding grounds or introducing fish to eat larvae and indoor residual spraying (IRS) with insecticides, possibly including DDT. IRS involves the treatment of interior walls and ceilings with insecticides. It is particularly effective against mosquitoes, since many species rest on an indoor wall before or after feeding. DDT is one of 12 WHO–approved IRS insecticides.\n\nThe WHO's anti-malaria campaign of the 1950s and 1960s relied heavily on DDT and the results were promising, though temporary in developing countries. Experts tie malarial resurgence to multiple factors, including poor leadership, management and funding of malaria control programs; poverty; civil unrest; and increased irrigation. The evolution of resistance to first-generation drugs (e.g. chloroquine) and to insecticides exacerbated the situation. Resistance was largely fueled by unrestricted agricultural use. Resistance and the harm both to humans and the environment led many governments to curtail DDT use in vector control and agriculture. In 2006 WHO reversed a longstanding policy against DDT by recommending that it be used as an indoor pesticide in regions where malaria is a major problem.\n\nOnce the mainstay of anti-malaria campaigns, as of 2008 only 12 countries used DDT, including India and some southern African states, though the number was expected to rise.\n\nWhen it was introduced in World War II, DDT was effective in reducing malaria morbidity and mortality. WHO's anti-malaria campaign, which consisted mostly of spraying DDT and rapid treatment and diagnosis to break the transmission cycle, was initially successful as well. For example, in Sri Lanka, the program reduced cases from about one million per year before spraying to just 18 in 1963 and 29 in 1964. Thereafter the program was halted to save money and malaria rebounded to 600,000 cases in 1968 and the first quarter of 1969. The country resumed DDT vector control but the mosquitoes had evolved resistance in the interim, presumably because of continued agricultural use. The program switched to malathion, but despite initial successes, malaria continued its resurgence into the 1980s.\n\nDDT remains on WHO's list of insecticides recommended for IRS. After the appointment of Arata Kochi as head of its anti-malaria division, WHO's policy shifted from recommending IRS only in areas of seasonal or episodic transmission of malaria, to advocating it in areas of continuous, intense transmission. WHO reaffirmed its commitment to phasing out DDT, aiming \"to achieve a 30% cut in the application of DDT world-wide by 2014 and its total phase-out by the early 2020s if not sooner\" while simultaneously combating malaria. WHO plans to implement alternatives to DDT to achieve this goal.\n\nSouth Africa continues to use DDT under WHO guidelines. In 1996, the country switched to alternative insecticides and malaria incidence increased dramatically. Returning to DDT and introducing new drugs brought malaria back under control. Malaria cases increased in South America after countries in that continent stopped using DDT. Research data showed a strong negative relationship between DDT residual house sprayings and malaria. In a research from 1993 to 1995, Ecuador increased its use of DDT and achieved a 61% reduction in malaria rates, while each of the other countries that gradually decreased its DDT use had large increases.\n\nIn some areas resistance reduced DDT's effectiveness. WHO guidelines require that absence of resistance must be confirmed before using the chemical. Resistance is largely due to agricultural use, in much greater quantities than required for disease prevention.\n\nResistance was noted early in spray campaigns. Paul Russell, former head of the Allied Anti-Malaria campaign, observed in 1956 that \"resistance has appeared after six or seven years\". Resistance has been detected in Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Turkey and Central America and it has largely been replaced by organophosphate or carbamate insecticides, e.g. malathion or bendiocarb.\n\nIn many parts of India, DDT is ineffective. Agricultural uses were banned in 1989 and its anti-malarial use has been declining. Urban use ended. One study concluded that \"DDT is still a viable insecticide in indoor residual spraying owing to its effectivity in well supervised spray operation and high excito-repellency factor.\"\n\nStudies of malaria-vector mosquitoes in KwaZulu-Natal Province, South Africa found susceptibility to 4% DDT (WHO's susceptibility standard), in 63% of the samples, compared to the average of 87% in the same species caught in the open. The authors concluded that \"Finding DDT resistance in the vector \"An. arabiensis\", close to the area where we previously reported pyrethroid-resistance in the vector \"An. funestus\" Giles, indicates an urgent need to develop a strategy of insecticide resistance management for the malaria control programmes of southern Africa.\"\n\nDDT can still be effective against resistant mosquitoes and the avoidance of DDT-sprayed walls by mosquitoes is an additional benefit of the chemical. For example, a 2007 study reported that resistant mosquitoes avoided treated huts. The researchers argued that DDT was the best pesticide for use in IRS (even though it did not afford the most protection from mosquitoes out of the three test chemicals) because the other pesticides worked primarily by killing or irritating mosquitoes – encouraging the development of resistance. Others argue that the avoidance behavior slows eradication. Unlike other insecticides such as pyrethroids, DDT requires long exposure to accumulate a lethal dose; however its irritant property shortens contact periods. \"For these reasons, when comparisons have been made, better malaria control has generally been achieved with pyrethroids than with DDT.\" In India outdoor sleeping and night duties are common, implying that \"the excito-repellent effect of DDT, often reported useful in other countries, actually promotes outdoor transmission\".\n\nIRS is effective if at least 80% of homes and barns in a residential area are sprayed. Lower coverage rates can jeopardize program effectiveness. Many residents resist DDT spraying, objecting to the lingering smell, stains on walls, and the potential exacerbation of problems with other insect pests. Pyrethroid insecticides (e.g. deltamethrin and lambda-cyhalothrin) can overcome some of these issues, increasing participation.\n\nA 1994 study found that South Africans living in sprayed homes have levels that are several orders of magnitude greater than others. Breast milk from South African mothers contains high levels of DDT and DDE. It is unclear to what extent these levels arise from home spraying vs food residues. Evidence indicates that these levels are associated with infant neurological abnormalities.\n\nMost studies of DDT's human health effects have been conducted in developed countries where DDT is not used and exposure is relatively low.\n\nIllegal diversion to agriculture is also a concern as it is difficult to prevent and its subsequent use on crops is uncontrolled. For example, DDT use is widespread in Indian agriculture, particularly mango production and is reportedly used by librarians to protect books. Other examples include Ethiopia, where DDT intended for malaria control is reportedly used in coffee production, and Ghana where it is used for fishing. The residues in crops at levels unacceptable for export have been an important factor in bans in several tropical countries. Adding to this problem is a lack of skilled personnel and management.\n\nA few people and groups have argued that limitations on DDT use for public health purposes have caused unnecessary morbidity and mortality from vector-borne diseases, with some claims of malaria deaths ranging as high as the hundreds of thousands and millions. Robert Gwadz of the US National Institutes of Health said in 2007, \"The ban on DDT may have killed 20 million children.\" These arguments were rejected as \"outrageous\" by former WHO scientist Socrates Litsios. May Berenbaum, University of Illinois entomologist, says, \"to blame environmentalists who oppose DDT for more deaths than Hitler is worse than irresponsible\". More recently, Michael Palmer, a professor of chemistry at the University of Waterloo, has pointed out that DDT is still used to prevent malaria, that its declining use is primarily due to increases in manufacturing costs, and that in Africa, efforts to control malaria have been regional or local, not comprehensive.\nCriticisms of a DDT \"ban\" often specifically reference the 1972 United States ban (with the erroneous implication that this constituted a worldwide ban and prohibited use of DDT in vector control). Reference is often made to \"Silent Spring\", even though Carson never pushed for a DDT ban. John Quiggin and Tim Lambert wrote, \"the most striking feature of the claim against Carson is the ease with which it can be refuted\".\n\nInvestigative journalist Adam Sarvana and others characterize these notions as \"myths\" promoted principally by Roger Bate of the pro-DDT advocacy group Africa Fighting Malaria (AFM).\n\nOrganophosphate and carbamate insecticides, e.g. malathion and bendiocarb, respectively, are more expensive than DDT per kilogram and are applied at roughly the same dosage. Pyrethroids such as deltamethrin are also more expensive than DDT, but are applied more sparingly (0.02–0.3 g/m vs 1–2 g/m), so the net cost per house per treatment is about the same. It must be noted that DDT has one of the longest resiudal efficacy periods of any IRS insecticide, lasting 6 to 12 months. Pyrethroids will remain active for only 4 to 6 months, and organophosphates and carbamates remain active for 2 to 6 months. In many malaria-endemic countries, malaria transmission occurs year-round, meaning that the high expense conducting a spray campaign (including hiring spray operators, procuring insecticides, and conducting pre-spray outreach campaigns to encourage people to be home and to accept the intervention) will need to occur multiple times per year for these shorter lasting insecticides.\n\nIn 2019, the related compound difluorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DFDT) was described as a potentially more effective and therefore potentially safer alternative to DDT.\n\nBefore DDT, malaria was successfully eliminated or curtailed in several tropical areas by removing or poisoning mosquito breeding grounds and larva habitats, for example by eliminating standing water. These methods have seen little application in Africa for more than half a century. According to CDC, such methods are not practical in Africa because \"\"Anopheles gambiae\", one of the primary vectors of malaria in Africa, breeds in numerous small pools of water that form due to rainfall ... It is difficult, if not impossible, to predict when and where the breeding sites will form, and to find and treat them before the adults emerge.\"\n\nThe relative effectiveness of IRS versus other malaria control techniques (e.g. bednets or prompt access to anti-malarial drugs) varies and is dependent on local conditions.\n\nA WHO study released in January 2008 found that mass distribution of insecticide-treated mosquito nets and artemisinin–based drugs cut malaria deaths in half in malaria-burdened Rwanda and Ethiopia. IRS with DDT did not play an important role in mortality reduction in these countries.\n\nVietnam has enjoyed declining malaria cases and a 97% mortality reduction after switching in 1991 from a poorly funded DDT-based campaign to a program based on prompt treatment, bednets and pyrethroid group insecticides.\n\nIn Mexico, effective and affordable chemical and non-chemical strategies were so successful that the Mexican DDT manufacturing plant ceased production due to lack of demand.\n\nA review of fourteen studies in sub-Saharan Africa, covering insecticide-treated nets, residual spraying, chemoprophylaxis for children, chemoprophylaxis or intermittent treatment for pregnant women, a hypothetical vaccine and changing front–line drug treatment, found decision making limited by the lack of information on the costs and effects of many interventions, the small number of cost-effectiveness analyses, the lack of evidence on the costs and effects of packages of measures and the problems in generalizing or comparing studies that relate to specific settings and use different methodologies and outcome measures. The two cost-effectiveness estimates of DDT residual spraying examined were not found to provide an accurate estimate of the cost-effectiveness of DDT spraying; the resulting estimates may not be good predictors of cost-effectiveness in current programs.\n\nHowever, a study in Thailand found the cost per malaria case prevented of DDT spraying (US$1.87) to be 21% greater than the cost per case prevented of lambda-cyhalothrin–treated nets (US$1.54), casting some doubt on the assumption that DDT was the most cost-effective measure. The director of Mexico's malaria control program found similar results, declaring that it was 25% cheaper for Mexico to spray a house with synthetic pyrethroids than with DDT. However, another study in South Africa found generally lower costs for DDT spraying than for impregnated nets.\n\nA more comprehensive approach to measuring cost-effectiveness or efficacy of malarial control would not only measure the cost in dollars, as well as the number of people saved, but would also consider ecological damage and negative human health impacts. One preliminary study found that it is likely that the detriment to human health approaches or exceeds the beneficial reductions in malarial cases, except perhaps in epidemics. It is similar to the earlier study regarding estimated theoretical infant mortality caused by DDT and subject to the criticism also mentioned earlier.\n\nA study in the Solomon Islands found that \"although impregnated bed nets cannot entirely replace DDT spraying without substantial increase in incidence, their use permits reduced DDT spraying\".\n\nA comparison of four successful programs against malaria in Brazil, India, Eritrea and Vietnam does not endorse any single strategy but instead states, \"Common success factors included conducive country conditions, a targeted technical approach using a package of effective tools, data-driven decision-making, active leadership at all levels of government, involvement of communities, decentralized implementation and control of finances, skilled technical and managerial capacity at national and sub-national levels, hands-on technical and programmatic support from partner agencies, and sufficient and flexible financing.\"\n\nDDT resistant mosquitoes may be susceptible to pyrethroids in some countries. However, pyrethroid resistance in \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes is on the rise with resistant mosquitoes found in multiple countries.\n\nBULLET::::- DDT in New Zealand\nBULLET::::- Mickey Slim, an alleged cocktail that combined gin with a pinch of DDT.\nBULLET::::- Operation Cat Drop\nBULLET::::- Biomagnification\n\nBULLET::::- David Kinkela. \"DDT and the American Century: Global Health, Environmental Politics, and the Pesticide That Changed the World\" (University of North Carolina Press, 2011).\n\nArtifacts\n\nBULLET::::- Phil Allegretti Pesticide Collection consisting of ephemera and 3-D objects, including cans, sprayers, and diffusers, related to DDT pesticide and insecticide in the United States in the mid-20th century (all images freely available for download in variety of formats from Science History Institute Digital Collections at digital.sciencehistory.org).\n\nBULLET::::- Chemistry\nBULLET::::- DDT at \"The Periodic Table of Videos\" (University of Nottingham)\n\nBULLET::::- Toxicity\nBULLET::::- Scorecard: The Pollution Information Site – DDT\nBULLET::::- Interview with Barbara Cohn, PhD about DDT and breast cancer\nBULLET::::- Pesticide residues in food 2000 : DDT\n\nBULLET::::- Politics and DDT\n\nBULLET::::- Malaria and DDT\nBULLET::::- 'Andrew Spielman, Harvard School of Public Health, discusses environmentally friendly control of Malaria and uses of DDT Freeview video provided by the Vega Science Trust\n\nBULLET::::- DDT in popular culture\nBULLET::::- Examples of DDT advertising in the United States.\n"}
{"id": "8495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8495", "title": "Data set", "text": "Data set\n\nA data set (or dataset) is a collection of data. In the case of tabular data, a data set corresponds to one or more database tables, where every column of a table represents a particular variable, and each row corresponds to a given record of the data set in question. The data set lists values for each of the variables, such as height and weight of an object, for each member of the data set. Each value is known as a datum. Data sets can also consist of a collection of documents or files.\n\nIn the open data discipline, data set is the unit to measure the information released in a public open data repository. The European Open Data portal aggregates more than half a million data sets. In this field other definitions have been proposed but currently there is not an official one. Some other issues (real-time data sources, non-relational data sets, etc.) increases the difficulty to reach a consensus about it.\n\nSeveral characteristics define a data set's structure and properties. These include the number and types of the attributes or variables, and various statistical measures applicable to them, such as standard deviation and kurtosis.\n\nThe values may be numbers, such as real numbers or integers, for example representing a person's height in centimeters, but may also be nominal data (i.e., not consisting of numerical values), for example representing a person's ethnicity. More generally, values may be of any of the kinds described as a level of measurement. For each variable, the values are normally all of the same kind. However, there may also be \"missing values\", which must be indicated in some way.\n\nIn statistics, data sets usually come from actual observations obtained by sampling a statistical population, and each row corresponds to the observations on one element of that population. Data sets may further be generated by algorithms for the purpose of testing certain kinds of software. Some modern statistical analysis software such as SPSS still present their data in the classical data set fashion. If data is missing or suspicious an imputation method may be used to complete a data set.\n\nSeveral classic data sets have been used extensively in the statistical literature:\n\nBULLET::::- Iris flower data set – Multivariate data set introduced by Ronald Fisher (1936).\nBULLET::::- MNIST database – Images of handwritten digits commonly used to test classification, clustering, and image processing algorithms\nBULLET::::- \"Categorical data analysis\" – Data sets used in the book, \"An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis\".\nBULLET::::- \"Robust statistics\" – Data sets used in \"Robust Regression and Outlier Detection\" (Rousseeuw and Leroy, 1986). Provided on-line at the University of Cologne.\nBULLET::::- \"Time series\" – Data used in Chatfield's book, \"The Analysis of Time Series\", are provided on-line by StatLib.\nBULLET::::- \"Extreme values\" – Data used in the book, \"An Introduction to the Statistical Modeling of Extreme Values\" are a snapshot of the data as it was provided on-line by Stuart Coles, the book's author.\nBULLET::::- \"Bayesian Data Analysis\" – Data used in the book are provided on-line by Andrew Gelman, one of the book's authors.\nBULLET::::- The Bupa liver data – Used in several papers in the machine learning (data mining) literature.\nBULLET::::- Anscombe's quartet – Small data set illustrating the importance of graphing the data to avoid statistical fallacies\n\nBULLET::::- Data\nBULLET::::- Data blending\nBULLET::::- Data (computing)\nBULLET::::- Data sample\nBULLET::::- Data store\nBULLET::::- Interoperability\nBULLET::::- Data collection system\nBULLET::::- Datahub – a community-managed home for open data sets\nBULLET::::- Data.gov – the U.S. Government’s open data\nBULLET::::- data.world\nBULLET::::- GCMD – the Global Change Master Directory containing over 20,000 descriptions of Earth science and environmental science data sets and services\nBULLET::::- Humanitarian Data Exchange(HDX) – The Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) is an open humanitarian data sharing platform managed by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.\nBULLET::::- NYC Open Data – free public data published by New York City agencies and other partners.\nBULLET::::- Relational data set repository\nBULLET::::- Research Pipeline – a wiki/website with links to data sets on many different topics\nBULLET::::- StatLib–JASA Data Archive\nBULLET::::- UCI – a machine learning repository\nBULLET::::- UK Government Public Data\nBULLET::::- World Bank Open Data – Free and open access to global development data by World Bank\n"}
{"id": "8496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8496", "title": "DMA", "text": "DMA\n\nDMA may refer to:\n\nBULLET::::- \"DMA\" (magazine), a defunct dance music magazine\nBULLET::::- Dallas Museum of Art, an art museum in Texas, US\nBULLET::::- Danish Music Awards, an award show held in Denmark\nBULLET::::- BT Digital Music Awards, an annual event in the UK\nBULLET::::- Doctor of Musical Arts, a degree\nBULLET::::- Detroit Music Awards, an award show held in Michigan, US\nBULLET::::- DMA's, an Australian alternative rock band\n\nBULLET::::- DMA Design, now Rockstar North, a video game developer in Edinburgh, Scotland\nBULLET::::- Danish Medical Association\nBULLET::::- Derbyshire Miners' Association, England\nBULLET::::- Data & Marketing Association\nBULLET::::- Durham Miners' Association, a trade union\n\nBULLET::::- DMA eV, (\"\") an academic association for German and Moroccan graduates in Hanover, Germany\nBULLET::::- Delaware Military Academy, US\nBULLET::::- Digital Media Academy, US\n\nBULLET::::- Davis–Monthan Air Force Base (IATA airport code), near Tucson, Arizona, US\nBULLET::::- Defense Mapping Agency, a former agency of the US Department of Defense\nBULLET::::- Defense Media Activity, an organization of the US Department of Defense\n\nBULLET::::- Dominica (IOC code)\nBULLET::::- Dublin Metropolitan Area, an Irish jurisdiction\n\nBULLET::::- Dynamic mechanical analysis of polymers viscoelasticity\n\nBULLET::::- Delmadinone acetate, a progestin and antigonadotropin used as an antiandrogen\nBULLET::::- Dimethandrolone, an anabolic–androgenic steroid\nBULLET::::- Dimethoxyamphetamine, a psychedelic phenethylamine\nBULLET::::- Dimethylacetamide, an organic solvent\nBULLET::::- Dimethylamine\nBULLET::::- Dimethylaniline\nBULLET::::- Distributed multipole analysis, a method describing the charge distribution of a molecule\n\nBULLET::::- Direct memory access\nBULLET::::- Disney Movies Anywhere\nBULLET::::- Dynamic Microprocessor Associates, developer of pcAnywhere\n\nBULLET::::- Designated market area, a region where the population can receive the same media offerings\nBULLET::::- Direct market access, used in financial markets\n"}
{"id": "8498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8498", "title": "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders", "text": "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\n\nThe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) (latest edition, the DSM-5, published in 2013) is a publication for the classification of mental disorders using a common language and standard criteria. It is used by clinicians, researchers, psychiatric drug regulation agencies, health insurance companies, pharmaceutical companies, the legal system, and policy makers. It is published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA).\n\nThe DSM evolved from systems for collecting census and psychiatric hospital statistics, and from a United States Army manual. Revisions since its first publication in 1952 have incrementally added to the total number of mental disorders, and removed those no longer considered to be mental disorders.\n\nTwo alternate classification publications are also widely used. The is produced by the WHO. The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is the other common manual for mental disorders. It has broader scope than the DSM, covering overall health. While the DSM is the most popular diagnostic system for mental disorders in the U.S., the ICD is used more widely in Europe and other parts of the world, giving it a far larger reach than the DSM. The DSM-IV-TR (4th. ed.) contains specific codes allowing comparisons between the DSM and the ICD manuals, which may not systematically match because revisions are not simultaneously coordinated. Though recent editions of the DSM and ICD have become more similar due to collaborative agreements, each one contains information absent from the other.\n\nThe DSM has received praise for standardizing psychiatric diagnosis grounded in empirical evidence, as opposed to the theory-bound nosology used in DSM-III; but it also generated controversy and criticism. Criticisms include ongoing questions concerning the reliability and validity of many diagnoses; the use of arbitrary dividing lines between mental illness and \"normality\"; possible cultural bias; and the medicalization of human distress.\n\nMental health professionals use the manual to determine and help communicate a patient's diagnosis after an evaluation. Hospitals, clinics, and insurance companies in the United States may require a DSM diagnosis for all patients treated. The DSM can be used clinically, or to categorize patients using diagnostic criteria for research purposes. but they are correlated with the pharmaceutical corps to for profit purposes. Some studies done on specific disorders often recruit patients whose symptoms match the criteria listed in the DSM for that disorder. An international survey of psychiatrists in sixty-six countries compared the use of the ICD-10 and DSM-IV. It found the former was more often used for clinical diagnosis while the latter was more valued for research.\n\nDSM-5, and the abbreviations for all previous editions, are registered trademarks owned by the APA.\n\nThe initial impetus for developing a classification of mental disorders in the United States was the need to collect statistical information. The first official attempt was the 1840 census, which used a single category: \"idiocy/insanity\". Three years later, the American Statistical Association made an official protest to the U.S. House of Representatives, stating that \"the most glaring and remarkable errors are found in the statements respecting nosology, prevalence of insanity, blindness, deafness, and dumbness, among the people of this nation\", pointing out that in many towns African-Americans were all marked as insane, and calling the statistics essentially useless.\n\nThe Association of Medical Superintendents of American Institutions for the Insane was formed in 1844; it has since changed its name twice before the new millennium: in 1892 to the American Medico-Psychological Association, and in 1921 to the present American Psychiatric Association (APA).\n\nEdward Jarvis and later Francis Amasa Walker helped expand the census, from two volumes in 1870 to twenty-five volumes in 1880. Frederick H. Wines was appointed to write a 582-page volume called \"Report on the Defective, Dependent, and Delinquent Classes of the Population of the United States, As Returned at the Tenth Census (June 1, 1880)\" (published 1888). Wines used seven categories of mental illness: dementia, dipsomania (uncontrollable craving for alcohol), epilepsy, mania, melancholia, monomania and paresis. These categories were also adopted by the Association.\n\nIn 1917, together with the National Commission on Mental Hygiene (now Mental Health America), the APA developed a new guide for mental hospitals called the \"Statistical Manual for the Use of Institutions for the Insane\". This included twenty-two diagnoses and would be revised several times by the APA over the years. Along with the New York Academy of Medicine, the APA also provided the psychiatric nomenclature subsection of the U.S. general medical guide, the \"Standard Classified Nomenclature of Disease\", referred to as the \"Standard\".\n\nWorld War II saw the large-scale involvement of U.S. psychiatrists in the selection, processing, assessment, and treatment of soldiers. This moved the focus away from mental institutions and traditional clinical perspectives. Under the direction of James Forrestal a committee headed by psychiatrist Brigadier General William C. Menninger, with the assistance of the Mental Hospital Service developed a new classification scheme called Medical 203, that was issued in 1943 as a War Department Technical Bulletin under the auspices of the Office of the Surgeon General. The foreword to the DSM-I states the United States Navy had itself made some minor revisions but \"the Army established a much more sweeping revision, abandoning the basic outline of the Standard and attempting to express present day concepts of mental disturbance. This nomenclature eventually was adopted by all Armed Forces\", and \"assorted modifications of the Armed Forces nomenclature [were] introduced into many clinics and hospitals by psychiatrists returning from military duty.\" The Veterans Administration also adopted a slightly modified version of Medical 203.\n\nIn 1949, the World Health Organization published the sixth revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases (ICD), which included a section on mental disorders for the first time. The foreword to DSM-1 states this \"categorized mental disorders in rubrics similar to those of the Armed Forces nomenclature.\"\n\nAn APA Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics was empowered to develop a version of Medical 203 specifically for use in the United States, to standardize the diverse and confused usage of different documents. In 1950, the APA committee undertook a review and consultation. It circulated an adaptation of Medical 203, the VA system, and the Standard's Nomenclature to approximately 10% of APA members. 46% replied, of which 93% approved, and after some further revisions (resulting in its being called DSM-I), the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders was approved in 1951 and published in 1952. The structure and conceptual framework were the same as in Medical 203, and many passages of text were identical. The manual was 130 pages long and listed 106 mental disorders. These included several categories of \"personality disturbance\", generally distinguished from \"neurosis\" (nervousness, egodystonic).\n\nIn 1952, the APA listed homosexuality in the DSM as a sociopathic personality disturbance. \"\", a large-scale 1962 study of homosexuality by Irving Bieber and other authors, was used to justify inclusion of the disorder as a supposed pathological hidden fear of the opposite sex caused by traumatic parent–child relationships. This view was very influential in the medical profession. In 1956, however, the psychologist Evelyn Hooker performed a study comparing the happiness and well-adjusted nature of self-identified homosexual men with heterosexual men and found no difference. Her study stunned the medical community and made her a heroine to many gay men and lesbians, but homosexuality remained in the DSM until May 1974.\n\nIn the 1960s, there were many challenges to the concept of mental illness itself. These challenges came from psychiatrists like Thomas Szasz, who argued mental illness was a myth used to disguise moral conflicts; from sociologists such as Erving Goffman, who said mental illness was another example of how society labels and controls non-conformists; from behavioural psychologists who challenged psychiatry's fundamental reliance on unobservable phenomena; and from gay rights activists who criticised the APA's listing of homosexuality as a mental disorder. A study published in \"Science\" by Rosenhan received much publicity and was viewed as an attack on the efficacy of psychiatric diagnosis.\n\nAlthough the APA was closely involved in the next significant revision of the mental disorder section of the ICD (version 8 in 1968), it decided to go ahead with a revision of the DSM. It was published in 1968, listed 182 disorders, and was 134 pages long. It was quite similar to the DSM-I. The term \"reaction\" was dropped, but the term \"neurosis\" was retained. Both the DSM-I and the DSM-II reflected the predominant psychodynamic psychiatry, although they also included biological perspectives and concepts from Kraepelin's system of classification. Symptoms were not specified in detail for specific disorders. Many were seen as reflections of broad underlying conflicts or maladaptive reactions to life problems, rooted in a distinction between neurosis and psychosis (roughly, anxiety/depression broadly in touch with reality, or hallucinations/delusions appearing disconnected from reality). Sociological and biological knowledge was incorporated, in a model that did not emphasize a clear boundary between normality and abnormality. The idea that personality disorders did not involve emotional distress was discarded.\n\nAn influential 1974 paper by Robert Spitzer and Joseph L. Fleiss demonstrated the second edition of the DSM (DSM-II) was an unreliable diagnostic tool. They found different practitioners using the DSM-II rarely agreed when diagnosing patients with similar problems. In reviewing previous studies of eighteen major diagnostic categories, Fleiss and Spitzer concluded \"there are no diagnostic categories for which reliability is uniformly high. Reliability appears to be only satisfactory for three categories: mental deficiency, organic brain syndrome (but not its subtypes), and alcoholism. The level of reliability is no better than fair for psychosis and schizophrenia and is poor for the remaining categories\".\n\nAs described by Ronald Bayer, a psychiatrist and gay rights activist, specific protests by gay rights activists against the APA began in 1970, when the organization held its convention in San Francisco. The activists disrupted the conference by interrupting speakers and shouting down and ridiculing psychiatrists who viewed homosexuality as a mental disorder. In 1971, gay rights activist Frank Kameny worked with the Gay Liberation Front collective to demonstrate against the APA's convention. At the 1971 conference, Kameny grabbed the microphone and yelled: \"Psychiatry is the enemy incarnate. Psychiatry has waged a relentless war of extermination against us. You may take this as a declaration of war against you.\"\n\nThis activism occurred in the context of a broader anti-psychiatry movement that had come to the fore in the 1960s and was challenging the legitimacy of psychiatric diagnosis. Anti-psychiatry activists protested at the same APA conventions, with some shared slogans and intellectual foundations.\n\nPresented with data from researchers such as Alfred Kinsey and Evelyn Hooker, the sixth printing of the DSM-II, in 1974, no longer listed homosexuality as a category of disorder. After a vote by the APA trustees in 1973, and confirmed by the wider APA membership in 1974, the diagnosis was replaced with the category of \"sexual orientation disturbance\".\n\nIn 1974, the decision to create a new revision of the DSM was made, and Robert Spitzer was selected as chairman of the task force. The initial impetus was to make the DSM nomenclature consistent with the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), published by the World Health Organization. The revision took on a far wider mandate under the influence and control of Spitzer and his chosen committee members. One goal was to improve the uniformity and validity of psychiatric diagnosis in the wake of a number of critiques, including the famous Rosenhan experiment. There was also a need to standardize diagnostic practices within the U.S. and with other countries after research showed psychiatric diagnoses differed between Europe and the United States. The establishment of these criteria was an attempt to facilitate the pharmaceutical regulatory process.\n\nThe criteria adopted for many of the mental disorders were taken from the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) and Feighner Criteria, which had just been developed by a group of research-orientated psychiatrists based primarily at Washington University in St. Louis and the New York State Psychiatric Institute. Other criteria, and potential new categories of disorder, were established by consensus during meetings of the committee, as chaired by Spitzer. A key aim was to base categorization on colloquial English descriptive language (which would be easier to use by federal administrative offices), rather than assumptions of cause, although its categorical approach assumed each particular pattern of symptoms in a category reflected a particular underlying pathology (an approach described as \"neo-Kraepelinian\"). The psychodynamic or physiologic view was abandoned, in favor of a regulatory or legislative model. A new \"multiaxial\" system attempted to yield a picture more amenable to a statistical population census, rather than a simple diagnosis. Spitzer argued \"mental disorders are a subset of medical disorders\" but the task force decided on the DSM statement: \"Each of the mental disorders is conceptualized as a clinically significant behavioral or psychological syndrome.\" The personality disorders were placed on axis II along with mental retardation.\n\nThe first draft of the DSM-III was prepared within a year. It introduced many new categories of disorder, while deleting or changing others. A number of the unpublished documents discussing and justifying the changes have recently come to light. Field trials sponsored by the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) were conducted between 1977 and 1979 to test the reliability of the new diagnoses. A controversy emerged regarding deletion of the concept of neurosis, a mainstream of psychoanalytic theory and therapy but seen as vague and unscientific by the DSM task force. Faced with enormous political opposition, the DSM-III was in serious danger of not being approved by the APA Board of Trustees unless \"neurosis\" was included in some capacity; a political compromise reinserted the term in parentheses after the word \"disorder\" in some cases. Additionally, the diagnosis of ego-dystonic homosexuality replaced the DSM-II category of \"sexual orientation disturbance\".\n\nFinally published in 1980, the DSM-III was 494 pages and listed 265 diagnostic categories. It rapidly came into widespread international use and has been termed a revolution or transformation in psychiatry.\n\nWhen DSM-III was published, the developers made extensive claims about the reliability of the radically new diagnostic system they had devised, which relied on data from special field trials. However, according to a 1994 article by Stuart A. Kirk:\n\nTwenty years after the reliability problem became the central focus of DSM-III, there is still not a single multi-site study showing that DSM (any version) is routinely used with high reliably by regular mental health clinicians. Nor is there any credible evidence that any version of the manual has greatly increased its reliability beyond the previous version. There are important methodological problems that limit the generalisability of most reliability studies. Each reliability study is constrained by the training and supervision of the interviewers, their motivation and commitment to diagnostic accuracy, their prior skill, the homogeneity of the clinical setting in regard to patient mix and base rates, and the methodological rigor achieved by the investigator ...\n\nIn 1987, the DSM-III-R was published as a revision of the DSM-III, under the direction of Spitzer. Categories were renamed and reorganized, and significant changes in criteria were made. Six categories were deleted while others were added. Controversial diagnoses, such as pre-menstrual dysphoric disorder and masochistic personality disorder, were considered and discarded. \"Ego-dystonic homosexuality\" was also removed and was largely subsumed under \"sexual disorder not otherwise specified\", which can include \"persistent and marked distress about one's sexual orientation.\" Altogether, the DSM-III-R contained 292 diagnoses and was 567 pages long. Further efforts were made for the diagnoses to be purely descriptive, although the introductory text stated for at least some disorders, \"particularly the Personality Disorders, the criteria require much more inference on the part of the observer\" (p. xxiii).\n\nIn 1994, DSM-IV was published, listing 410 disorders in 886 pages. The task force was chaired by Allen Frances. A steering committee of twenty-seven people was introduced, including four psychologists. The steering committee created thirteen work groups of five to sixteen members. Each work group had about twenty advisers. The work groups conducted a three-step process: first, each group conducted an extensive literature review of their diagnoses; then, they requested data from researchers, conducting analyses to determine which criteria required change, with instructions to be conservative; finally, they conducted multicenter field trials relating diagnoses to clinical practice. A major change from previous versions was the inclusion of a clinical significance criterion to almost half of all the categories, which required symptoms cause \"clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning\". Some personality disorder diagnoses were deleted or moved to the appendix.\n\nA \"text revision\" of the DSM-IV, known as the DSM-IV-TR, was published in 2000. The diagnostic categories and the vast majority of the specific criteria for diagnosis were unchanged. The text sections giving extra information on each diagnosis were updated, as were some of the diagnostic codes to maintain consistency with the ICD. The DSM-IV-TR was organized into a five-part axial system. The first axis incorporated clinical disorders. The second axis covered personality disorders and intellectual disabilities. The remaining axes covered medical, psychosocial, environmental, and childhood factors functionally necessary to provide diagnostic criteria for health care assessments.\n\nThe DSM-IV-TR characterizes a mental disorder as \"a clinically significant behavioral or psychological syndrome or pattern that occurs in an individual [which] is associated with present distress ... or disability ... or with a significant increased risk of suffering.\" It also notes \"no definition adequately specifies precise boundaries for the concept of 'mental disorder' ... different situations call for different definitions\". It states \"there is no assumption that each category of mental disorder is a completely discrete entity with absolute boundaries dividing it from other mental disorders or from no mental disorder\" (APA, 1994 and 2000).\n\nThe DSM-IV is a categorical classification system. The categories are prototypes, and a patient with a close approximation to the prototype is said to have that disorder. DSM-IV states, \"there is no assumption each category of mental disorder is a completely discrete entity with absolute boundaries\" but isolated, low-grade and non-criterion (unlisted for a given disorder) symptoms are not given importance. Qualifiers are sometimes used, for example mild, moderate or severe forms of a disorder. For nearly half the disorders, symptoms must be sufficient to cause \"clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning\", although DSM-IV-TR removed the distress criterion from tic disorders and several of the paraphilias due to their egosyntonic nature. Each category of disorder has a numeric code taken from the ICD coding system, used for health service (including insurance) administrative purposes.\n\nWith the advent of the DSM-5 in 2013, the APA eliminated the longstanding multiaxial system for mental disorders.\n\nPreviously, the DSM-IV organized each psychiatric diagnosis into five dimensions (axes) relating to different aspects of disorder or disability:\nBULLET::::- \"Axis I:\" All psychological diagnostic categories except mental retardation and personality disorder\nBULLET::::- \"Axis II:\" Personality disorders and mental retardation (more appropriately termed \"intellectual disability\")\nBULLET::::- \"Axis III:\" General medical condition; acute medical conditions and physical disorders\nBULLET::::- \"Axis IV:\" Psychosocial and environmental factors contributing to the disorder\nBULLET::::- \"Axis V:\" Global Assessment of Functioning or Child Global Assessment of Functioning [cGAF]\nMental/Psychiatric/Behavioral/Learning conditions include, but are not limited to: depression, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder, ADHD, autism spectrum disorders, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and schizophrenia.\n\nPersonality Disorders include, but are not limited to: paranoid personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder, schizotypal personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, antisocial personality disorder, narcissistic personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder, avoidant personality disorder, dependent personality disorder, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder; and organic intellectual disabilities.\n\nCommon medical/physical conditions or diseases that may result in and/or exacerbate some of the aforementioned mental/psychiatric conditions OR that may be aggravated by the aforementioned mental/psychiatric conditions include, but are not limited to: brain injuries, terminal diseases, pregnancy, cancer, epilepsy, idiopathic physiological conditions and virtually any other conditions, ailments and/or injuries which may affect the patient's mental health.. Many Biopsychosocial Assessments incorporate multiple factors that adversely affect the patient's, client's and/or subject's overall well-being and homeostasis.\n\nTypical psychosocial influences that are usually listed as having negative impact on life, mentality and health include, but are not limited to: Environmental factors of dysfunction such as those experienced within home, school and work; Social factors such as issues with drug use (not diagnosed), enabling friends and conflicts with coworkers; Family complications such as divorce, social service involvement and court ordered placements; Various stressors such as recent accident, natural disaster and other traumatic occurrences (i.e. assault, death, abuse); Financial problems such as bankruptcy, job loss and debts; and service needs such as lack of medical insurance, inability to find adequate treatment and inaccessibility to necessary state and federal programs.\n\nThe DSM-IV does not specifically cite its sources, but there are four volumes of \"sourcebooks\" intended to be APA's documentation of the guideline development process and supporting evidence, including literature reviews, data analyses and field trials. The Sourcebooks have been said to provide important insights into the character and quality of the decisions that led to the production of DSM-IV, and hence the scientific credibility of contemporary psychiatric classification.\n\nThe fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), the DSM-5, was approved by the Board of Trustees of the APA on December 1, 2012. Published on May 18, 2013, the DSM-5 contains extensively revised diagnoses and, in some cases, broadens diagnostic definitions while narrowing definitions in other cases. The DSM-5 is the first major edition of the manual in twenty years.\n\nA significant change in the fifth edition is the deletion of the subtypes of schizophrenia (paranoid, disorganized, catatonic, undifferentiated and residual).\n\nThe deletion of the subsets of autistic spectrum disorder (namely, Asperger's syndrome, classic autism, Rett syndrome, childhood disintegrative disorder and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified) was also implemented, with specifiers with regard to intensity (mild, moderate and severe). Severity is based on social communication impairments and restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviour, with three levels: 1 (requiring support), 2 (requiring substantial support) and 3 (requiring very substantial support).\n\nDuring the revision process, the APA website periodically listed several sections of the DSM-5 for review and discussion.\n\nBeginning with the fifth edition, it is intended that diagnostic guidelines revisions will be added more often to keep up with research in the field. It is notable the DSM-5 is identified with Arabic rather than Roman numerals. Beginning with DSM-5, the American Psychiatric Association will use decimals to identify incremental updates (e.g., DSM-5.1, DSM-5.2) and whole numbers for new editions (e.g., DSM-5, DSM-6), similar to the scheme used for software versioning.\n\nAllsopp et al (2019) describe as scientifically meaningless the entire construct of psychiatric diagnoses because of its unsupportable premise of mental distresses' being \"caused\" by whatever (putative) disorder(s) being set in contrast to hypothesized-yet-subjective notions about what should be thought normal.\n\nThe revisions of the DSM from the 3rd Edition forward have been mainly concerned with diagnostic reliability—the degree to which different diagnosticians agree on a diagnosis. {Henrik Walter} argued that a science of psychiatry can only advance if diagnosis is reliable. If clinicians and researchers frequently disagree about the diagnosis of a patient, then research into the causes and effective treatments of those disorders cannot advance. Hence, diagnostic reliability was a major concern of DSM-III. When the diagnostic reliability problem was thought to be solved, subsequent editions of the DSM were concerned mainly with \"tweaking\" the diagnostic criteria. Unfortunately, neither the issue of reliability or validity was settled.\n\nIn 2013, shortly before the publication of DSM-5, the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Thomas R. Insel, declared that the agency would no longer fund research projects that rely exclusively on DSM diagnostic criteria due to its lack of validity. Insel questioned the validity of the DSM classification scheme because \"... diagnoses are based on a consensus about clusters of clinical symptoms ...\" as opposed to \"... collecting the genetic, imaging, physiologic, and cognitive data to see how all the data – not just the symptoms – cluster and how these clusters relate to treatment response.\"\n\nField trials of DSM-5 brought the debate of reliability back into the limelight as some disorders showed poor reliability. For example, major depressive disorder, a common mental illness, had a poor reliability kappa statistic of 0.28, indicating that clinicians frequently disagreed on this diagnosis in the same patients. The most reliable diagnosis was major neurocognitive disorder with a kappa of 0.78.\n\nBy design, the DSM is primarily concerned with the signs and symptoms of mental disorders, rather than the underlying causes. It claims to collect them together based on statistical or clinical patterns. As such, it has been compared to a naturalist's field guide to birds, with similar advantages and disadvantages. The lack of a causative or explanatory basis, however, is not specific to the DSM, but rather reflects a general lack of pathophysiological understanding of psychiatric disorders. As DSM-III chief architect Robert Spitzer and DSM-IV editor Michael First outlined in 2005, \"little progress has been made toward understanding the pathophysiological processes and cause of mental disorders. If anything, the research has shown the situation is even more complex than initially imagined, and we believe not enough is known to structure the classification of psychiatric disorders according to etiology.\"\n\n\"The DSM's focus on superficial symptoms is claimed to be largely a result of necessity (assuming such a manual is nevertheless produced), since there is no agreement on a more explanatory classification system. Reviewers note, however, that this approach is undermining research, including in genetics, because it results in the grouping of individuals who have very little in common except superficial criteria as per DSM or ICD diagnosis (Fadul, 2014, p.143).\"\n\nDespite the lack of consensus on underlying causation, advocates for specific psychopathological paradigms have nonetheless faulted the current diagnostic scheme for not incorporating evidence-based models or findings from other areas of science. A recent example is evolutionary psychologists' criticism that the DSM does not differentiate between genuine cognitive malfunctions and those induced by psychological adaptations, a key distinction within evolutionary psychology but one that is widely challenged within general psychology. Another example is the strong operationalist viewpoint, which contends that reliance on operational definitions, as purported by the DSM, necessitates that intuitive concepts like depression be replaced by specific measurable concepts before they are scientifically meaningful. One critic states of psychologists that \"Instead of replacing 'metaphysical' terms such as 'desire' and 'purpose', they used it to legitimize them by giving them operational definitions ... the initial, quite radical operationalist ideas eventually came to serve as little more than a 'reassurance fetish' (Koch 1992) for mainstream methodological practice.\"\n\nA 2013 review published in the \"European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience\" states \"that psychiatry targets the phenomena of consciousness, which, unlike somatic symptoms and signs, cannot be grasped on the analogy with material thing-like objects.\" As an example of the problem of the superficial characterization of psychiatric signs and symptoms, the authors gave the example of a patient saying they \"feel depressed, sad, or down\", showing that such a statement could indicate various underlying experiences: \"not only depressed mood but also, for instance, irritation, anger, loss of meaning, varieties of fatigue, ambivalence, ruminations of different kinds, hyper-reflectivity, thought pressure, psychological anxiety, varieties of depersonalization, and even voices with negative content, and so forth.\" The structured interview comes with \"danger of over confidence in the face value of the answers, as if a simple 'yes' or 'no' truly confirmed or denied the diagnostic criterion at issue.\" The authors gave an example: A patient who was being administered the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV Axis I Disorders denied thought insertion, but during a \"conversational, phenomenological interview\", a semi-structured interview tailored to the patient, the same patient admitted to experiencing thought insertion, along with a delusional elaboration. The authors suggested 2 reasons for this discrepancy: either the patient did not \"recognize his own experience in the rather blunt, implicitly either/or formulation of the structured-interview question\", or the experience did not \"fully articulate itself\" until the patient started talking about his experiences.\n\nDr. Allen Frances being an outspoken critic of the DSM-5 states that \"normality is an endangered species,\" for the reason of \"fad diagnoses\" and an \"epidemic\" of over-diagnosing, and suggests that the \"DSM-5 threatens to provoke several more [epidemics].\" Some researchers state that changes in diagnostic criteria reduce thresholds for a diagnosis, which results in increases in prevalence rates following each published version of the DSM for ADHD and autism spectrum disorder. Bruchmüller suggests that as a factor that may lead to overdiagnosis can be also situations when the diagnostician's clinical judgment regarding a diagnose (ADHD) is affected by heuristics.\n\nDespite caveats in the introduction to the DSM, it has long been argued that its system of classification makes unjustified categorical distinctions between disorders and uses arbitrary cut-offs between normal and abnormal. A 2009 psychiatric review noted that attempts to demonstrate natural boundaries between related DSM syndromes, or between a common DSM syndrome and normality, have failed. Some argue that rather than a categorical approach, a fully dimensional, spectrum or complaint-oriented approach would better reflect the evidence.\n\nIn addition, it is argued that the current approach based on exceeding a threshold of symptoms does not adequately take into account the context in which a person is living, and to what extent there is internal disorder of an individual versus a psychological response to adverse situations. The DSM does include a step (\"Axis IV\") for outlining \"Psychosocial and environmental factors contributing to the disorder\" once someone is diagnosed with that particular disorder.\n\nBecause an individual's degree of impairment is often not correlated with symptom counts and can stem from various individual and social factors, the DSM's standard of distress or disability can often produce false positives. On the other hand, individuals who do not meet symptom counts may nevertheless experience comparable distress or disability in their life.\n\nPsychiatrists have argued that published diagnostic standards relied on an exaggerated interpretation of neurophysiological findings and so understate the scientific importance of social-psychological variables. Advocating a more culturally sensitive approach to psychology, critics such as Carl Bell and Marcello Maviglia contend that researchers and service-providers often discount the cultural and ethnic diversity of individuals. In addition, current diagnostic guidelines have been criticized as having a fundamentally Euro-American outlook. Although these guidelines have been widely implemented, opponents argue that even when a diagnostic criterion-set is accepted across different cultures, it does not necessarily indicate that the underlying constructs have any validity within those cultures; even reliable application can only demonstrate consistency, not legitimacy. Cross-cultural psychiatrist Arthur Kleinman contends that the Western bias is ironically illustrated in the introduction of cultural factors to the DSM-IV: the fact that disorders or concepts from non-Western or non-mainstream cultures are described as \"culture-bound\", whereas standard psychiatric diagnoses are given no cultural qualification whatsoever, is to Kleinman revelatory of an underlying assumption that Western cultural phenomena are universal. Other cross-cultural critics largely share Kleinman's negative view toward the culture-bound syndrome, common responses included both disappointment over the large number of documented non-Western mental disorders still left out, and frustration that even those included were often misinterpreted or misrepresented.\n\nMainstream psychiatrists have also been dissatisfied with these new culture-bound diagnoses, although not for the same reasons. Robert Spitzer, a lead architect of the DSM-III, has held the opinion that the addition of cultural formulations was an attempt to placate cultural critics, and that they lack any scientific motivation or support. Spitzer also posits that the new culture-bound diagnoses are rarely used in practice, maintaining that the standard diagnoses apply regardless of the culture involved. In general, the mainstream psychiatric opinion remains that if a diagnostic category is valid, cross-cultural factors are either irrelevant or are only significant to specific symptom presentations. One of the results was the development of the Azibo Nosology by Daudi Ajani Ya Azibo as an alternative to the DSM to treat African diaspora patients.\n\nHistorically, the DSM tended to avoid issues involving religion; the DSM-5 relaxed this attitude somewhat.\n\nThere was extensive analysis and comment on DSM-IV (published in 1994) in the years leading up to the 2013 publication of DSM-5. It was alleged that the way the categories of DSM-IV were structured, as well as the substantial expansion of the number of categories within it, represented increasing medicalization of human nature, very possibly attributable to disease mongering by psychiatrists and pharmaceutical companies, the power and influence of the latter having grown dramatically in recent decades. In 2005, then APA President Steven Sharfstein released a statement in which he conceded that psychiatrists had \"allowed the biopsychosocial model to become the bio-bio-bio model\". reported that of the authors who selected and defined the DSM-IV psychiatric disorders, roughly half had financial relationships with the pharmaceutical industry during the period 1989-2004, raising the prospect of a direct conflict of interest. The same article concluded that the connections between panel members and the drug companies were particularly strong in those diagnoses where drugs are the first line of treatment, such as schizophrenia and mood disorders, where 100% of the panel members had financial ties with the pharmaceutical industry.\n\nWilliam Glasser referred to DSM-IV as \"phony diagnostic categories\", arguing that \"it was developed to help psychiatrists – to help them make money\". A 2012 article in The New York Times commented sharply that DSM-IV (then in its 18th year), through copyrights held closely by the APA, had earned the Association over $100 million.\n\nHowever, although the number of identified diagnoses had increased by more than 300% (from 106 in DSM-I to 365 in DSM-IV-TR), psychiatrists such as Zimmerman and Spitzer argued that this almost entirely represented greater specification of the forms of pathology, thereby allowing better grouping of more similar patients.\n\nA client is a person who accesses psychiatric services and may have been given a diagnosis from the DSM, while a survivor self-identifies as a person who has endured a psychiatric intervention and the mental health system (which may have involved involuntary commitment and involuntary treatment). A term adopted by many users of psychiatric services is \"consumer.\" This term was chosen to eliminate the \"patient\" label and restore the person to an active role as a user or consumer of services. Some individuals are relieved to find that they have a recognized condition that they can apply a name to and this has led to many people self-diagnosing. Others, however, question the accuracy of the diagnosis, or feel they have been given a \"label\" that invites social stigma and discrimination (the terms \"mentalism\" and \"sanism\" have been used to describe such discriminatory treatment).\n\nDiagnoses can become internalized and affect an individual's self-identity, and some psychotherapists have found that the healing process can be inhibited and symptoms can worsen as a result. Some members of the psychiatric survivors movement (more broadly the consumer/survivor/ex-patient movement) actively campaign against their diagnoses, or the assumed implications, and/or against the DSM system in general. Additionally, it has been noted that the DSM often uses definitions and terminology that are inconsistent with a recovery model, and such content can erroneously imply excess psychopathology (e.g. multiple \"comorbid\" diagnoses) or chronicity.\n\nPsychiatrist Allen Frances has been critical of proposed revisions to the DSM-5. In a 2012 \"New York Times\" editorial, Frances warned that if this DSM version is issued unamended by the APA, \"it will medicalize normality and result in a glut of unnecessary and harmful drug prescription.\" In a December 2, 2012 blog post in \"Psychology Today\", Frances provides his \"...list of DSM 5's ten most potentially harmful changes\":\nBULLET::::- Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder, for temper tantrums\nBULLET::::- Major Depressive Disorder, includes normal grief\nBULLET::::- Minor Neurocognitive Disorder, for normal forgetting in old age\nBULLET::::- Adult Attention Deficit Disorder, encouraging psychiatric prescriptions of stimulants\nBULLET::::- Binge Eating Disorder, for excessive eating\nBULLET::::- Autism, defining the disorder more specifically, possibly leading to decreased rates of diagnosis and the disruption of school services\nBULLET::::- First time drug users will be lumped in with addicts\nBULLET::::- Behavioral Addictions, making a \"...mental disorder of everything we like to do a lot.\"\nBULLET::::- Generalized Anxiety Disorder, includes everyday worries\nBULLET::::- Post-traumatic stress disorder, changes \"...opened the gate even further to the already existing problem of misdiagnosis of PTSD in forensic settings.\"\n\nA group of 25 psychiatrists and researchers, among which Frances and Thomas Szasz, have published debates on what they see as the six most essential questions in psychiatric diagnosis:\nBULLET::::- Are they more like theoretical constructs or more like diseases?\nBULLET::::- How to reach an agreed definition?\nBULLET::::- Should the DSM-5 take a cautious or conservative approach?\nBULLET::::- What is the role of practical rather than scientific considerations?\nBULLET::::- How should it be used by clinicians or researchers?\nBULLET::::- Is an entirely different diagnostic system required?\n\nIn 2011, psychologist Brent Robbins co-authored a national letter for the Society for Humanistic Psychology that has brought thousands into the public debate about the DSM. Over 15,000 individuals and mental health professionals have signed a petition in support of the letter. Thirteen other American Psychological Association divisions have endorsed the petition. Robbins has noted that under the new guidelines, certain responses to grief could be labeled as pathological disorders, instead of being recognized as being normal human experiences.\n\nBULLET::::- Chinese Classification and Diagnostic Criteria of Mental Disorders\nBULLET::::- Classification of mental disorders\nBULLET::::- Diagnostic classification and rating scales used in psychiatry\nBULLET::::- DSM-IV Codes\nBULLET::::- Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) Scale\nBULLET::::- International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD)\nBULLET::::- Kraepelinian dichotomy\nBULLET::::- Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual\nBULLET::::- Relational disorder (proposed DSM-5 new diagnosis)\nBULLET::::- Research Domain Criteria (RDoC), a framework being developed by the National Institute of Mental Health\nBULLET::::- Rosenhan experiment\nBULLET::::- Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV \"(SCID)\"\nBULLET::::- Homosexuality in DSM\n\nBULLET::::- Official DSM-5 development website\nBULLET::::- Diagnostic Criteria from DSM-IV-TR\nBULLET::::- Cooper, Rachel (2017): Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). ISKO Encyclopedia of Knowledge Organization\nBULLET::::- The Multiaxial System of Diagnosis in DSM-IV Criteria\n"}
{"id": "8500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8500", "title": "Dar es Salaam", "text": "Dar es Salaam\n\nDar es Salaam (; from ) is the largest city and former capital of Tanzania. It is the largest city in East Africa and the seventh-largest in Africa, with a population of 4,364,541. Located on the Swahili coast, Dar es Salaam is an important economic centre and one of the fastest growing cities in the world.\n\nUntil 1974, Dar es Salaam served as Tanzania's capital city, at which point the capital city commenced transferring to Dodoma, which was officially completed in 1996. However, as of 2018, it remains a focus of central government bureaucracy, although this is in the process of fully moving to Dodoma. It is Tanzania's most prominent city in arts, fashion, media, music, film and television, and is a leading financial centre. The city is the leading arrival and departure point for most tourists who visit Tanzania, including the national parks for safaris and the islands of Unguja and Pemba.\n\nIt is the capital of the co-extensive Dar es Salaam Region, which is one of Tanzania's 31 administrative regions and consists of five districts: Kinondoni in the north, Ilala in the centre, Ubungo and Temeke in the south and Kigamboni in the east across the Kurasini creek.\n\nIn the 19th century, Mzizima (Swahili for \"healthy town\") was a coastal fishing village on the periphery of Indian Ocean trade routes. In 1865 or 1866, Sultan Majid bin Said of Zanzibar began building a new city very close to Mzizima and named it Dar es Salaam. The name is commonly translated as \"abode/home of peace\", based on the Arabic \"dar\" (\"house\"), and the Arabic \"es salaam\" (\"of peace\"). Dar es Salaam fell into decline after Majid's death in 1870, but was revived in 1887 when the German East Africa Company established a station there. The town's growth was facilitated by its role as the administrative and commercial centre of German East Africa and industrial expansion resulting from the construction of the Central Railway Line in the early 1900s.\n\nGerman East Africa was captured by the British during World War I and became Tanganyika with Dar es Salaam remaining the administrative and commercial centre. Under British indirect rule, separate European (e.g., Oyster Bay) and African (e.g., Kariakoo and Ilala) areas developed at a distance from the city centre. The city's population also included a large number of workers from British India, many of whom came to take advantage of the trade and commercial opportunities presented to them. After World War II, Dar es Salaam experienced a period of rapid growth.\n\nPolitical developments, including the formation and growth of the Tanganyika African National Union, led to Tanganyika attaining independence from colonial rule in December 1961. Dar es Salaam continued to serve as its capital, even when in 1964 Tanganyika and People's Republic of Zanzibar merged to form Tanzania. In 1973, however, provisions were made to relocate the capital to Dodoma, a more centrally located city in the interior. The relocation process has not yet been completed, and Dar es Salaam remains Tanzania's primary city.\n\nIn 1967, the Tanzanian government declared the \"Ujamaa policy\", which set Tanzania into a socialist path. The move slowed down the potential growth of the city as the government encouraged people not to move in cities but stay in Ujamaa socialist villages. However, by the 1980s the Ujamaa policy proved to be a failure in combating increasing poverty and hunger that Tanzania faced, and delayed the development that it needed. This led to the 1980s liberalization policy that virtually ended socialism and its proponents within Tanzania's government.\n\nUntil the late 1990s, Dar es Salaam was not put into the same category as Africa's leading cities like Nairobi, Johannesburg, Lagos, or Addis Ababa. The 2000s became the turning point as the city experienced one of Africa's fastest urbanization rates as businesses were opened and prospered, growth in the construction sector with multi-storey building, bridges and roads, Tanzanian banks headquartered in the city started to run more proper, the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange expanded, and the Dar es Salaam harbour proved to be the most important in Tanzania and prominent for entrepot trade with landlocked countries like eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, and Zambia. The CBD skyline hosts tall buildings, among them the 35-floor PSPF Tower, finished in 2015, and the Tanzania Ports Authority (TPA) Tower, currently under construction.\n\nDar es Salaam is located at 6°48' South, 39°17' East (−6.8000, 39.2833), on a natural harbour on the eastern coast of East Africa, with sandy beaches in some areas.\n\nThe region of Dar es Salaam is divided into five districts.\n\nDar es Salaam Region is divided into five administrative districts. All five are governed as municipal councils, and so all of the city's suburbs or wards are affiliated with them. The regional commissioner is Paul Makonda.\n\n! colspan=\"4\"  Districts of Dar es Salaam Region\n! style=\"width: 7em\"  District\n! style=\"width: 10em\"  Population (2012)\n! style=\"width: 5em\"  Area km²\n! Dar es SalaamDar es Salaam Region\n!! style=\"text-align:right;\"  4,364,541\n!! style=\"text-align:right;\"  1,393\n\nKinondoni is the most populated amongst the districts, with half of the city's population residing within it. It is also home to high-income suburbs. These include:\n\nBULLET::::- Masaki, Oysterbay and Ada Estate are the high-income suburbs located along the central beach. During the Colonial Era, they were the major European suburbs of the city. Now diplomats and expatriates reside in these areas. Oysterbay Beach, also known as Coco Beach, is the only white sandy beach east of Kinondoni.\nBULLET::::- Mikocheni and Regent Estate are also suburbs within the district. According to the 2012 census, the Mikocheni ward had a population of 32,947.\nBULLET::::- Msasani is a peninsula to the northeast of the city center. It is home to expatriates from the United Kingdom and other western countries. Msasani contains a mixture of traditional shops and western-oriented resorts and stores.\nBULLET::::- Mbezi Beach is the beachfront suburb located along the northern Dar es Salaam Beach. It contains several tourist hotels, residences and further more a kite surfing area by Upepo Avenue.\nBULLET::::- Sinza, Kijitonyama, Magomeni, Kinondoni and Mwenge are more ethnically mixed than the areas above. These are located west of Dar es Salaam's central business district.\nBULLET::::- Tandale, Mwananyamala-Kisiwani and Kigogo are considered low-income neighborhoods characterized by poor settlement planning, low quality housing and social services.\n\nIlala is the administrative district of Dar es Salaam where almost all government offices and ministries are housed. The Central Business District (locally called \"Posta\") is located in this district. It is the transportation hub of the city, as the Julius Nyerere International Airport, Central Railway Station and Tazara Railway Station are all within the district boundaries. The residential areas are mainly middle to high-income, and some of these are:\nBULLET::::- Upanga and Kisutu had the highest concentration of Asian communities within Dar es Salaam, with residents of Indian and Arabian descent. These areas contain colonial houses and mansions built in Indian, Arabic and European styles. Upanga contains Upanga East and Upanga West.\nBULLET::::- Kariakoo is the shopping district of the city. Shops, bazaars and merchants dot the streets, selling products from foodstuffs to hardware materials. The Kariakoo Market, which is the largest, contains the only underground section of the city. It is the major supply point of the food consumed by all the residents of Dar es Salaam.\nBULLET::::- Tabata, Segerea and Ukonga are located a bit farther west from the city center. They are becoming busier in terms of business and entertainment, which has caused serious traffic congestion.\nBULLET::::- Ilala is among the middle-income suburbs very near to the city center, and is marked by the Askari Monument. It suffers from gang activity.\n\nTemeke is the industrial district of the city, where the manufacturing centers (heavy and light industry) are located. The Port of Dar es Salaam, which is the largest in the country, is found east of Temeke.\n\nTemeke is believed to have the largest concentration of low-income residents due to industry. Port officials, military and police officers live there.\nBULLET::::- Kurasini located on the Dar es Salaam Harbour, is the home of the Dar es Salaam Port, The Police College, Mgulani Police Barracks and the Dar es Salaam International Trade Fair Grounds. Thus, the main residents are police officers and port officials.\nBULLET::::- Chang'ombe is one of the only higher income areas in Temeke. It has maintained this status due to occupation by African high colonial officers and some industry owners from the colonial era. Chang'ombe is the home of the Dar es Salaam University College of Education, the National Stadium and Uhuru Stadium.\nBULLET::::- Temeke, Mtoni and Tandika are middle to low-income suburbs.\nBULLET::::- Mbagala and Kijichi are middle to low-income suburbs. Mbagala is the largest suburb in the whole district.\n\nThe Ubungo terminal serves as a transportation link to most large Dar es Salaam urban nodes. The narrow-gauge commuter rail runs from there to the city centre, with ten level crossings along the route.\n\nBULLET::::- Kigamboni (South Beach), a beachfront suburb on a peninsula, is home to an economically diverse population. Access to the suburb is mainly by ferry, although the Kigamboni Bridge provides an alternative.\n\nDue to close proximity to the equator and the warm Indian Ocean, the city experiences tropical climatic conditions, typified by hot and humid weather throughout much of the year. It has a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen: Aw). Annual rainfall is approximately , and in a normal year there are two rainy seasons: \"the long rains\" in April and May and \"the short rains\" in November and December.\n\n\"In 1949 the town became a municipality...[with] four honourable nominated Town Councillors who elected a Mayor.\" \"Until June 1996, Dar es Salaam was managed by the Dar es Salaam City Council...the highest policy-making body in the city.\" As of 2017 Paul Makonda serves as the commissioner of Dar es Salaam Region.\n\nAs any growing city Dar es Salaam is the city in Tanzania to which villagers flock for better opportunities. Westerners and Asians are also settling in Dar es Salaam, and the movement of foreigners has put a good workload on the relevant government body for developing better policies to accommodate the growing and the diverse population of the Dar es Salaam together with its suburbs.\n\nDar es Salaam is the most populous city in Tanzania. With a population increase of 5.6 percent per year from 2002 to 2012, it is the third-fastest-growing city in Africa, after Bamako and Lagos, and the ninth-fastest-growing in the world. The metro population is expected to reach 5.12 million by 2020 and predicted to be as high as 76 million by the year 2100, making it the third largest city on earth (after Lagos and Kinshasa), by 2100.\n\nAccording to the 2012 national census, the region had a population of 4,364,541, which was much higher than the pre-census projection of 3,270,255. For 2002–2012, the region's 5.6 percent average annual population growth rate was the highest in the country. It was also the most densely populated region with 3,133 people per square kilometer.\n\nThe sprawling suburbs furthest from the city centre are generally populated by Tanzanians of African descent, with the exception of Oyster Bay, where there is a large population of foreign expatriates. The edges of Dar es Salaam are spreading rapidly, severely taxing the transportation network (which aside from ferries, lacks any kind of mass transit facilities) and raising the prospect of future urban overcrowding.\n\n! Year !! Population\n1925  30,000\n1948  69,000\n1957  129,000\n1972  396,000\n2005  2,456,100\n2012  4,364,541\n2025  5,690,000 (projection)\n\nDar es Salaam is Tanzania's most important city for both business and government. The city contains high concentrations of trade and other services and manufacturing compared to other parts of Tanzania, which has about 80 percent of its population in rural areas. Downtown includes small businesses, many of which are run by traders and proprietors whose families originated from the Middle East and the Indian sub-continent—areas of the world with which the settlements of the Tanzanian coast have had long-standing trading relations.\n\nThe Dar es Salaam Central Business District is the largest in Tanzania and comprises the Kisutu, Kivukoni, Upanga and Kariakoo areas. The downtown area is located in the Ilala district. Kivukoni is home to the Tanzania central bank, The Bank of Tanzania, the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange and the city's important Magogoni fish market. Kisutu has businesses and offices and is the location of Dar es Salaam central railway station, the PSPF Towers and the TPA tower.\n\nDar es Salaam has had a major construction boom. The PSPF Twin Towers with more than 35 stories is the tallest building in the city and the country. Dar es Salaam has major infrastructural challenges, including an outdated transport system and occasional power rationing.\n\nThe Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange (DSE) is the country's first and most important stock exchange market.\n\nDar es Salaam hosts the Mlimani City shopping mall also there is City Mall around Kisutu area, Quality Center Mall, GSM Pugu Shopping Mall, GSM Msasani Mall as well Dar Free Market Mall.\n\nDar es Salaam, on a natural harbour on the Indian Ocean, is one of the hubs of the Tanzanian transportation system as the main railways and several highways originate in or near the city to provide convenient transportation for commuters.\n\nThe most common form of transport in Dar es Salaam are the public buses, called \"dala dala\", which are often found at the major bus terminals of Makumbusho and Ubungo. Since the introduction of motorcycle transit business known as \"Bodaboda\", most of the people prefer this type of transportation, which allows them to get into the city faster compared to the minibuses which face a lot of traffic. Other types of transport include motorcycles and bajaj.\nThe government has been introducing a bus rapid transport or metro bus system under the Dar es Salaam bus rapid transit meaning 'mwendo kasi' in Kiswahili. The metro buses are managed by UDART a partnership company between UDA (Usafiri Dar es Salaam) and the government.\n\nThe bus rapid transit system Phase 1 is completed and already in operation by the Dar es Salaam Rapid Transit Agency, a government-private sector entity, and began operation on 10 May 2016. It is branded as UDA-RT (Usafiri Dar es Salaam Rapid Transit). The first section runs between Kimara in the northwest to Kivukoni on the northern headland of the harbour. Phase 1 was funded by the World Bank, African Development Bank and the Tanzanian government.\n\nThe city has the country's busiest port: The port is located on the west of the Indian Ocean, Kurasini creek south east of Dar es Salaam's central business District. The Port of Dar es Salaam handles 90% of the country's cargo.\nDue to huge influx of cargo and the slow pace of expansion a new cargo port northwest of Dar es Salaam is proposed at Bagamoyo.\n\nMV Kigamboni ferries run between south east of Kivukoni and north west of Kigamboni in Dar es Salaam.\n\nTravel to urban and sub-urban parts of Dar es Salaam is provided by the Dar es Salaam commuter rail.\n\nTanzania Railways operates the Central Line from Dar es Salaam to Kigoma.\n\nThe city also hosts the head office of Tanzania Zambia Railways Authority (TAZARA) built in the late 1960s to early 1970s. The main terminal is located west of Dar es Salaam's central business district in north Yombo Vituka along Nelson Mandela road. The TAZARA Railway connects Dar es Salaam to Zambia.\n\nThe Julius Nyerere International Airport is the principal airport serving the country with two operating terminals and one under construction; Terminal Three at Kipawa in Ilala Municipality. The airport is located west of Dar es Salaam's central business district.\n\nDar es Salaam (and specifically the area of Oyster Bay) is home to the brightly coloured and tourist-oriented Tingatinga painting style. The Nyumba ya sanaa (\"House of Art\") is a cultural centre, workshop and shop dedicated to Tanzanian art, showcasing and promoting Tanzanian craftmanship. Prominent Tanzanian sculptor George Lilanga has donated some of his works to the centre, including decorations of the building's main entrance.\n\nThe music scene in Dar es Salaam is divided between several styles. The longest standing style is live dance music (muziki wa dansi), played by bands such as DDC Mlimani Park Orchestra and Malaika Musical Band. Taarab which was traditionally strong in Zanzibar has also found a niche. However, it remains small compared both to dance music and \"Bongo Flava\", a broad category that represents the Tanzanian take on hip hop and R&B, which has quickly become the most popular locally produced music. Traditional music, which locally is used to refer to tribal music is still performed but typically only on family oriented occasions such as weddings.\n\nThis rap scene is also present.\n\nIn the 1970s, the Ministry of National Youth Culture aimed to create a national culture, which stressed the importance of music. Dar es Salaam became the music center in Tanzania, with the local radio showcasing new bands and dominating the music and cultural scene. With this ujamaa, or family, mentality governing culture and music a unified people's culture was created, leading to the rise of hip hop music. Throughout the years, the radio in Dar es Salaam has played a major role in the dissemination of music because many people don't have television and cassettes are used over CDs.\n\nDar es Salaam has two of the five museums comprising the National Museum of Tanzania consortium, namely the National Museum proper and the Makumbusho Cultural Centre & Village Museum. The National Museum is dedicated to the history of Tanzania; most notably, it exhibits some of the bones of \"Paranthropus boisei\" that were among the findings of Louis Leakey at Olduvai. The Makumbusho Cultural Centre & Village Museum, located in the outskirts of the city on the road to Bagamoyo, showcases traditional huts from 16 different Tanzanian ethnic groups. There are also examples of traditional cultivations, and traditional music and dance shows are held daily. In 2016, there was a breakthrough discovery in Northern Tanzania by a scientist, from the University of Dar es Salaam, of footprints thought to be of a hominid that predates Homo sapiens.\n\nClose to the National Museum are also the botanical gardens, with tropical plants and trees.\n\nThere are beaches on the Msasani peninsula north of Dar es Salaam and in Kigamboni to the south. Trips to the nearby islands of the Dar es Salaam Marine Reserve are a popular daytrip from the city and a spot for snorkeling, swimming and sunbathing. Bongoyo Island can be reached by boat from the Msasani Slipway.\n\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Dar es Salaam (Catholic Church), Anglican Church of Tanzania (Anglican Communion), Evangelical Lutheran Church in Tanzania (Lutheran World Federation), Baptist Convention of Tanzania (Baptist World Alliance), Assemblies of God. There are also Muslim mosques.\n\nDar es Salaam is the sports center of Tanzania. Dar es Salaam hosts the second largest stadium in East and Central Africa (National Stadium), which can accommodate up to 60,000 people.\nThe National Stadium hosts Dar es Salaam's Young Africans Sports Club, Simba Sports Club, Azam F.C. and other Tanzanian football clubs, and international matches. There is a proposal to build a new stadium in Dodoma, much bigger in capacity than the present one in Dar es Salaam by the government as a donation from the Moroccan Kingdom.\n\nApart from the National Stadium, Dar es Salaam is home to the Uhuru Stadium (used mainly for local tournaments and political gatherings), Karume Memorial Stadium (the home of the Tanzania Football Federation). The stadium is situated west of Kurasini.\n\nThe Gymkhana Golf Courses located north west of the Kivukoni area (between the city centre looking on to the shores of the Indian Ocean in the east and Barack Obama Drive), also has tennis courts, squash courts, and a fitness club. Outside of the metropolitan districts, there is the Lugalo Military Golf Course (located in the Lugalo Military Barracks).\n\nDar es Salaam's Mama Africa school, founded in 2003, is known for training some of Africa's finest acrobats.\n\nDar es Salaam's Union Sports Club hosts a single indoor squash court with a referees' viewing gallery within the club grounds. The club has a yearly squash tournament during the Muslim month of Ramadhan.\n\nDar es Salaam's Union Sports Club hosts a single darts room. The club has a yearly darts tournament during the Muslim month of ramadhan.\n\nDar es Salaam's Union Sports Club hosts a single room for table tennis. The club has a yearly table tennis tournament during the Muslim month of Ramadhan.\n\nDar es Salaam's Union Sports Club hosts an under-the-sky outdoor scrabble tournament within the club grounds once a year during the Muslim month of Ramadhan.\n\nDar es Salaam hosts numerous outdoor swimming clubs; people also swim in the Indian Ocean.\n\nNewspapers in Dar es Salaam are often sold by people prowling through stationary traffic at road intersections. English-language ones, with online presences, include \"The Citizen\" and \"The Guardian\" and the Kiswahili dailies, \"Tanzania Daima\" and \"Mwananchi\". \"Business Times\" is the only financial and economic newspaper in the city. It was established in 1988 and became the first private newspaper in Tanzania. \"Business Times\" owns \"Majira\", another Kiswahili newspaper.\n\nDar es Salaam is home to ITV, Sibuka, Channel Ten Television Station formerly known as Dar es Salaam Television (DTV) and Azam TV, a subscription-based service from the Azam group of companies.\n\nAyo TV, a television station, is also based in Ubungo, Dar es Salaam, as is the Tanzania Broadcasting Corporation.\n\nInstallation of a trans-Indian Ocean backbone cable in 2009 has, in theory, made Internet access much more readily available in Dar in particular and in East Africa in general. However, roll-out to end-users is slow, partly because of spotty telephone line coverage at the moment provided by the Tanzania Telecommunications Company Limited, partly due to the substantial prices and long contracts demanded for purchase of bandwidth for small ISPs. Mobile-telephone access to the Internet via 3G and 3.75G is still relatively expensive. 4G is making its way through major cities and towns with plans to go countrywide in the advanced planning stages.\n\nInternet cafés are found in the city centre and free wifi hotspots in various government and non government institutions as well as public transport.\n\nThe expressed aim of the SEACOM cable is to enable East Africa to develop economically through increased online trading.\n\nDar es Salaam is the educational centre of Tanzania. The city is home to several institutions of higher learning.\nBULLET::::- The University of Dar es Salaam is the oldest and second largest public university in Tanzania after the University of Dodoma. It is located in the western part of the city in north-east Ubungo, occupying on the observation hill, from the city centre. The university has 16,400 undergraduate and 2,700 postgraduate students.\nBULLET::::- The Ardhi University (ARU) was established on 1 July 1996 after transforming the former University College of Lands and Architectural Studies (UCLAS) which was then a Constituent College of the University of Dar es Salaam. Historically, Ardhi University, dates back to 1956 when it started as Surveying Training School offering land surveying technician certificate courses at the present location of Mgulani Salvation Army Camp in Dar es Salaam. In 1958, the School was moved to the present location (i.e. the Observation Hill). In 1972, the school was transformed to Ardhi Institute. Then the Institute offered two-year diploma programmes in the fields of Land Surveying and Land Management and Valuation. In the same year, a three-year diploma program in Urban and Rural Planning was introduced. In 1975, all the three-year diploma programmes were upgraded to Advanced Diplomas. The Building Design and Building Economics courses started in 1976 and 1978 respectively. In 1996 Ardhi Institute was affiliated with the University of Dar es Salaam as a constituent college of the university; subsequently its name changed to the University College of Lands and Architectural Studies (UCLAS). Within ten years, UCLAS increased the number of academic programmes from six to 39. The programmes ranging from diplomas to PhDs were offered by two faculties, the Faculty of Architecture and Planning (FAP) and the Faculty of Lands and Environmental Engineering (FLEE). As a result of these changes, student enrollment increased from only 400 in 1996 to about 1,400 in 2007. At the same time, the number of academic staff with PhD increased from 3 in 1996 to over 60 in 2012. At present there are over 80 PhD holders who have graduated from over 25 universities worldwide. In 2007 Ardhi University came into being following the signing of the Ardhi University Charter by His Excellency the President of The United Republic of Tanzania. Concurrently, the structure and number of programmes and academic units has increased significantly. At present, the university comprises four schools, one institute and several centres. Schools include the School of Architecture, Construction Economics and Management (SACEM); the School of Earth Sciences, Real Estates, Business and Informatics (SERBI); the School of Environmental Science and Technology (SEST); and the School of Spatial Planning and Social Science (SSPSS), alongside the Institute of Human Settlements Studies (IHSS). The university offers undergraduate and postgraduate studies with postgraduate, bachelor's, master's and PhD degrees in various disciplines.\nBULLET::::- The Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences has two campuses: Muhimbili Campus and Mloganzila Campus. Muhimbili Campus is situated in Ilala Municipality, in Upanga along United Nations Road. Mloganzila Campus occupies and is located off Dar es Salaam-Morogoro highway, from Dar es Salaam.\nBULLET::::- The Open University of Tanzania is a fully fledged and accredited public institution of higher learning, running programmes leading to certificates, diplomas, undergraduate and postgraduate qualifications. Since it was founded, the university has enrolled students from Malawi, Uganda, Kenya, Namibia, Hungary, Burundi, Libya, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Lesotho, Botswana and most of Tanzania. , the total enrollment at the university was 44,099, the majority of whom were Tanzanian.\nBULLET::::- The Hubert Kairuki Memorial University is a private institution located on plot No. 322 Regent Estate in the Mikocheni area, some 7-km from the Dar es Salaam City centre, off Ali Hassan Mwinyi and Old Bagamoyo roads.\nBULLET::::- The International Medical and Technological University is a privately owned institute of higher education institution operating in Dar es Salaam.\nBULLET::::- The Kampala International University began operations in 2009. The University Centre is situated on of land in the Gongo la Mboto area, Ilala District, from Mwalimu Julius Nyerere International Airport along Pugu Road.\nBULLET::::- The National institute of Transport\n\nThe city has some of the best schools in Tanzania such as Shaaban Robert Secondary School, Al Muntazir School, Aga Khan Primary School, Aga Khan Mzizima Secondary School, Loyola School, Indian School Dar Es Salaam, International School of Tanganyika, and St. Constantine's International School.\n\nBelow is a list of notable people who lived in Dar es Salaam:\n\nBULLET::::- David Adjaye, London-based architect, born in Dar es Salaam in 1966\nBULLET::::- C.A. \"Peter\" Bransgrove (1914–1966), architect in Dar es Salaam 1947–1966\nBULLET::::- Joaquim Chissano, former president of Mozambique, headed the FRELIMO headquarters in Dar es Salaam where he lived before returning to Mozambique after the country won independence. He was the first head of state to address the African Union (AU) in Swahili before Swahili became one of the official languages of the AU. He learned the language during the years he spent in Tanzania as a member of FRELIMO and became fluent in it.\nBULLET::::- Kanyama Chiume, one of the main leaders in the independence struggle in Nyasaland (renamed Malawi after the country won independence) where he served as minister of education and then as minister of foreign affairs before going into exile in Tanzania, lived in Dar es Salaam for decades. He grew up in Tanganyika. He spent his childhood in Morogoro and in Dar es Salaam and attended primary school and secondary school in Tanganyika (later renamed Tanzania). When he was in boarding school in Dar es Salaam, he lived in the same dormitory with Rashidi Kawawa who later became vice president of Tanganyika, later Tanzania, after the country won independence. He also attended Tabora Secondary School (then known as Upper School) with Oscar Kambona who became Tanganyika's first minister of defence and foreign affairs after the country became independent. Chiume graduated from Makerere University College in Uganda and went to teach at Alliance Secondary School in Dodoma, Tanganyika. After he left Malawi in 1964 to go into exile in Tanzania (1964 - 1994), he went to live in Dar es Salaam again. He also worked in Dar es Salaam for many years as a journalist at \"The Nationalist\", a newspaper of the ruling party TANU, together with Benjamin Mkapa who was then the editor and who later became president of Tanzania.\nBULLET::::- Roald Dahl, writer, lived in Dar es Salaam 1934–1939\nBULLET::::- Jane Goodall, scientist, primatologist\nBULLET::::- Marin Hinkle, actress, \"Two and a Half Men\" TV show\nBULLET::::- Rachel Luttrell, actress, Stargate Atlantis, born in Dar es Salaam in 1971\nBULLET::::- Nairn McEwan, rugby union player and second national coach, born in Dar es Salaam\nBULLET::::- Bibi Titi Mohammed, politician, chair of the Umoja wa Wanawake wa Tanzania (the women's branch of TANU)\nBULLET::::- Ally Sykes, politician and leading figure in Tanzania's independence movement.\nBULLET::::- Yoweri Museveni, president of Uganda, lived in Dar es Salaam for many years, first as a student and later as a political refugee. He attended the University of Dar es Salaam where he studied economics and political science. One of his professors was Walter Rodney (see below).\nBULLET::::- Godfrey Mwakikagile, prominent Tanzanian author and Africanist. He attended school in Dar es Salaam and worked in the same city as an information officer at the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and as a news reporter at the \"Daily News\" before going to the United States for further studies. He later became an author of non-fiction books about Africa and the African diaspora and an Africanist scholar.\nBULLET::::- Juma Mwapachu, Tanzanian diplomat, lawyer, author of books about African politics and economics; served as secretary-general of the East African Community (EAC)\nBULLET::::- Herieth Paul, fashion model\nBULLET::::- Walter Rodney, Guyanese historian, political activist and scholar. He was the author of \"How Europe Underdeveloped Africa\". He taught at the University of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania from 1966 to 1967 and later at his alma mater, the University of the West Indies, Mona campus, Kingston, Jamaica. In 1969, Rodney returned to the University of Dar es Salaam where he served as a professor of history until 1974 before going back to Guyana where he was assassinated in June 1980.\nBULLET::::- Justinian Rweyemamu, Tanzanian economist, author and professor of economics at the University of Dar es Salaam; worked at the United Nations; economic adviser to Tanzania's first president, Julius Nyerere\nBULLET::::- Mbwana Samatta, African footballer of the year 2015 for the domestic players\nBULLET::::- Issa G. Shivji, Tanzanian academic and author and one of Africa's experts on constitutional law and development issues. He served as professor of law at the University of Dar es Salaam for many years and was the first to hold the Mwalimu Julius Nyerere Research Chair in Pan-African Studies at the university. He also taught at a number of universities around the world.\nBULLET::::- Hasheem Thabeet, Oklahoma City Thunder basketball centre\nBULLET::::- Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, commander of the German East Africa Army, composed of European German officers and senior non-commissioned officers and native black African askaris, undefeated by the British and South Africans between the Great War's outbreak in August, 1914 and the Armistice in November, 1918\n\nDar es Salaam is twinned with:\nBULLET::::- Hamburg, Germany\nBULLET::::- Samsun, Turkey\nBULLET::::- Changzhou, Jiangsu, China\nBULLET::::- Mazandaran, Iran\n\n"}
{"id": "8501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8501", "title": "Distributed computing", "text": "Distributed computing\n\nDistributed computing is a field of computer science that studies distributed systems. A \"distributed system\" is a system whose components are located on different networked computers, which communicate and coordinate their actions by passing messages to one another. The components interact with one another in order to achieve a common goal. Three significant characteristics of distributed systems are: concurrency of components, lack of a global clock, and independent failure of components. Examples of distributed systems vary from SOA-based systems to massively multiplayer online games to peer-to-peer applications.\n\nA computer program that runs within a distributed system is called a distributed program (and distributed programming is the process of writing such programs). There are many different types of implementations for the message passing mechanism, including pure HTTP, RPC-like connectors and message queues.\n\n\"Distributed computing\" also refers to the use of distributed systems to solve computational problems. In \"distributed computing\", a problem is divided into many tasks, each of which is solved by one or more computers, which communicate with each other via message passing.\n\nThe word \"distributed\" in terms such as \"distributed system\", \"distributed programming\", and \"distributed algorithm\" originally referred to computer networks where individual computers were physically distributed within some geographical area. The terms are nowadays used in a much wider sense, even referring to autonomous processes that run on the same physical computer and interact with each other by message passing.\n\nWhile there is no single definition of a distributed system, the following defining properties are commonly used as:\nBULLET::::- There are several autonomous computational entities (\"computers\" or \"nodes\"), each of which has its own local memory.\nBULLET::::- The entities communicate with each other by message passing.\n\nA distributed system may have a common goal, such as solving a large computational problem; the user then perceives the collection of autonomous processors as a unit. Alternatively, each computer may have its own user with individual needs, and the purpose of the distributed system is to coordinate the use of shared resources or provide communication services to the users.\n\nOther typical properties of distributed systems include the following:\nBULLET::::- The system has to tolerate failures in individual computers.\nBULLET::::- The structure of the system (network topology, network latency, number of computers) is not known in advance, the system may consist of different kinds of computers and network links, and the system may change during the execution of a distributed program.\nBULLET::::- Each computer has only a limited, incomplete view of the system. Each computer may know only one part of the input.\n\nDistributed systems are groups of networked computers which share a common goal for their work.\nThe terms \"concurrent computing\", \"parallel computing\", and \"distributed computing\" have a lot of overlap, and no clear distinction exists between them. The same system may be characterized both as \"parallel\" and \"distributed\"; the processors in a typical distributed system run concurrently in parallel. Parallel computing may be seen as a particular tightly coupled form of distributed computing, and distributed computing may be seen as a loosely coupled form of parallel computing. Nevertheless, it is possible to roughly classify concurrent systems as \"parallel\" or \"distributed\" using the following criteria:\nBULLET::::- In parallel computing, all processors may have access to a shared memory to exchange information between processors.\nBULLET::::- In distributed computing, each processor has its own private memory (distributed memory). Information is exchanged by passing messages between the processors.\nThe figure on the right illustrates the difference between distributed and parallel systems. Figure (a) is a schematic view of a typical distributed system; the system is represented as a network topology in which each node is a computer and each line connecting the nodes is a communication link. Figure (b) shows the same distributed system in more detail: each computer has its own local memory, and information can be exchanged only by passing messages from one node to another by using the available communication links. Figure (c) shows a parallel system in which each processor has a direct access to a shared memory.\n\nThe situation is further complicated by the traditional uses of the terms parallel and distributed \"algorithm\" that do not quite match the above definitions of parallel and distributed \"systems\" (see below for more detailed discussion). Nevertheless, as a rule of thumb, high-performance parallel computation in a shared-memory multiprocessor uses parallel algorithms while the coordination of a large-scale distributed system uses distributed algorithms.\n\nThe use of concurrent processes which communicate through message-passing has its roots in operating system architectures studied in the 1960s. The first widespread distributed systems were local-area networks such as Ethernet, which was invented in the 1970s.\n\nARPANET, the predecessor of the Internet, was introduced in the late 1960s, and ARPANET e-mail was invented in the early 1970s. E-mail became the most successful application of ARPANET, and it is probably the earliest example of a large-scale distributed application. In addition to ARPANET (and its successor, the Internet), other early worldwide computer networks included Usenet and FidoNet from the 1980s, both of which were used to support distributed discussion systems.\n\nThe study of distributed computing became its own branch of computer science in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The first conference in the field, Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), dates back to 1982, and its counterpart International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC) was first held in Ottawa in 1985 as the International Workshop on Distributed Algorithms on Graphs.\n\nVarious hardware and software architectures are used for distributed computing. At a lower level, it is necessary to interconnect multiple CPUs with some sort of network, regardless of whether that network is printed onto a circuit board or made up of loosely coupled devices and cables. At a higher level, it is necessary to interconnect processes running on those CPUs with some sort of communication system.\n\nDistributed programming typically falls into one of several basic architectures: client–server, three-tier, \"n\"-tier, or peer-to-peer; or categories: loose coupling, or tight coupling.\n\nBULLET::::- Client–server: architectures where smart clients contact the server for data then format and display it to the users. Input at the client is committed back to the server when it represents a permanent change.\nBULLET::::- Three-tier: architectures that move the client intelligence to a middle tier so that stateless clients can be used. This simplifies application deployment. Most web applications are three-tier.\nBULLET::::- \"n\"-tier: architectures that refer typically to web applications which further forward their requests to other enterprise services. This type of application is the one most responsible for the success of application servers.\nBULLET::::- Peer-to-peer: architectures where there are no special machines that provide a service or manage the network resources. Instead all responsibilities are uniformly divided among all machines, known as peers. Peers can serve both as clients and as servers. Examples of this architecture include BitTorrent and the bitcoin network.\n\nAnother basic aspect of distributed computing architecture is the method of communicating and coordinating work among concurrent processes. Through various message passing protocols, processes may communicate directly with one another, typically in a master/slave relationship. Alternatively, a \"database-centric\" architecture can enable distributed computing to be done without any form of direct inter-process communication, by utilizing a shared database. Database-centric architecture in particular provides relational processing analytics in a schematic architecture allowing for live environment relay. This enables distributed computing functions both within and beyond the parameters of a networked database.\n\nReasons for using distributed systems and distributed computing may include:\nBULLET::::1. The very nature of an application may \"require\" the use of a communication network that connects several computers: for example, data produced in one physical location and required in another location.\nBULLET::::2. There are many cases in which the use of a single computer would be possible in principle, but the use of a distributed system is \"beneficial\" for practical reasons. For example, it may be more cost-efficient to obtain the desired level of performance by using a cluster of several low-end computers, in comparison with a single high-end computer. A distributed system can provide more reliability than a non-distributed system, as there is no single point of failure. Moreover, a distributed system may be easier to expand and manage than a monolithic uniprocessor system.\n\nExamples of distributed systems and applications of distributed computing include the following:\nBULLET::::- telecommunication networks:\nBULLET::::- telephone networks and cellular networks,\nBULLET::::- computer networks such as the Internet,\nBULLET::::- wireless sensor networks,\nBULLET::::- routing algorithms;\nBULLET::::- network applications:\nBULLET::::- World Wide Web and peer-to-peer networks,\nBULLET::::- massively multiplayer online games and virtual reality communities,\nBULLET::::- distributed databases and distributed database management systems,\nBULLET::::- network file systems,\nBULLET::::- Distributed cache such as burst buffer,\nBULLET::::- distributed information processing systems such as banking systems and airline reservation systems;\nBULLET::::- real-time process control:\nBULLET::::- aircraft control systems,\nBULLET::::- industrial control systems;\nBULLET::::- parallel computation:\nBULLET::::- scientific computing, including cluster computing, grid computing, cloud computing, and various volunteer computing projects (see the list of distributed computing projects),\nBULLET::::- distributed rendering in computer graphics\n\nMany tasks that we would like to automate by using a computer are of question–answer type: we would like to ask a question and the computer should produce an answer. In theoretical computer science, such tasks are called computational problems. Formally, a computational problem consists of \"instances\" together with a \"solution\" for each instance. Instances are questions that we can ask, and solutions are desired answers to these questions.\n\nTheoretical computer science seeks to understand which computational problems can be solved by using a computer (computability theory) and how efficiently (computational complexity theory). Traditionally, it is said that a problem can be solved by using a computer if we can design an algorithm that produces a correct solution for any given instance. Such an algorithm can be implemented as a computer program that runs on a general-purpose computer: the program reads a problem instance from input, performs some computation, and produces the solution as output. Formalisms such as random access machines or universal Turing machines can be used as abstract models of a sequential general-purpose computer executing such an algorithm.\n\nThe field of concurrent and distributed computing studies similar questions in the case of either multiple computers, or a computer that executes a network of interacting processes: which computational problems can be solved in such a network and how efficiently? However, it is not at all obvious what is meant by \"solving a problem\" in the case of a concurrent or distributed system: for example, what is the task of the algorithm designer, and what is the concurrent or distributed equivalent of a sequential general-purpose computer?\n\nThe discussion below focuses on the case of multiple computers, although many of the issues are the same for concurrent processes running on a single computer.\n\nThree viewpoints are commonly used:\nBULLET::::- Parallel algorithms in shared-memory model\nBULLET::::- All processors have access to a shared memory. The algorithm designer chooses the program executed by each processor.\nBULLET::::- One theoretical model is the parallel random access machines (PRAM) that are used. However, the classical PRAM model assumes synchronous access to the shared memory.\nBULLET::::- Shared-memory programs can be extended to distributed systems if the underlying operating system encapsulates the communication between nodes and virtually unifies the memory across all individual systems.\nBULLET::::- A model that is closer to the behavior of real-world multiprocessor machines and takes into account the use of machine instructions, such as Compare-and-swap (CAS), is that of \"asynchronous shared memory\". There is a wide body of work on this model, a summary of which can be found in the literature.\n\nBULLET::::- Parallel algorithms in message-passing model\nBULLET::::- The algorithm designer chooses the structure of the network, as well as the program executed by each computer.\nBULLET::::- Models such as Boolean circuits and sorting networks are used. A Boolean circuit can be seen as a computer network: each gate is a computer that runs an extremely simple computer program. Similarly, a sorting network can be seen as a computer network: each comparator is a computer.\nBULLET::::- Distributed algorithms in message-passing model\nBULLET::::- The algorithm designer only chooses the computer program. All computers run the same program. The system must work correctly regardless of the structure of the network.\nBULLET::::- A commonly used model is a graph with one finite-state machine per node.\n\nIn the case of distributed algorithms, computational problems are typically related to graphs. Often the graph that describes the structure of the computer network \"is\" the problem instance. This is illustrated in the following example.\n\nConsider the computational problem of finding a coloring of a given graph \"G\". Different fields might take the following approaches:\nBULLET::::- Centralized algorithms\nBULLET::::- The graph \"G\" is encoded as a string, and the string is given as input to a computer. The computer program finds a coloring of the graph, encodes the coloring as a string, and outputs the result.\nBULLET::::- Parallel algorithms\nBULLET::::- Again, the graph \"G\" is encoded as a string. However, multiple computers can access the same string in parallel. Each computer might focus on one part of the graph and produce a coloring for that part.\nBULLET::::- The main focus is on high-performance computation that exploits the processing power of multiple computers in parallel.\nBULLET::::- Distributed algorithms\nBULLET::::- The graph \"G\" is the structure of the computer network. There is one computer for each node of \"G\" and one communication link for each edge of \"G\". Initially, each computer only knows about its immediate neighbors in the graph \"G\"; the computers must exchange messages with each other to discover more about the structure of \"G\". Each computer must produce its own color as output.\nBULLET::::- The main focus is on coordinating the operation of an arbitrary distributed system.\n\nWhile the field of parallel algorithms has a different focus than the field of distributed algorithms, there is a lot of interaction between the two fields. For example, the Cole–Vishkin algorithm for graph coloring was originally presented as a parallel algorithm, but the same technique can also be used directly as a distributed algorithm.\n\nMoreover, a parallel algorithm can be implemented either in a parallel system (using shared memory) or in a distributed system (using message passing). The traditional boundary between parallel and distributed algorithms (choose a suitable network vs. run in any given network) does not lie in the same place as the boundary between parallel and distributed systems (shared memory vs. message passing).\n\nIn parallel algorithms, yet another resource in addition to time and space is the number of computers. Indeed, often there is a trade-off between the running time and the number of computers: the problem can be solved faster if there are more computers running in parallel (see speedup). If a decision problem can be solved in polylogarithmic time by using a polynomial number of processors, then the problem is said to be in the class NC. The class NC can be defined equally well by using the PRAM formalism or Boolean circuits—PRAM machines can simulate Boolean circuits efficiently and vice versa.\n\nIn the analysis of distributed algorithms, more attention is usually paid on communication operations than computational steps. Perhaps the simplest model of distributed computing is a synchronous system where all nodes operate in a lockstep fashion. This model is commonly known as the LOCAL model. During each \"communication round\", all nodes in parallel (1) receive the latest messages from their neighbours, (2) perform arbitrary local computation, and (3) send new messages to their neighbors. In such systems, a central complexity measure is the number of synchronous communication rounds required to complete the task.\n\nThis complexity measure is closely related to the diameter of the network. Let \"D\" be the diameter of the network. On the one hand, any computable problem can be solved trivially in a synchronous distributed system in approximately 2\"D\" communication rounds: simply gather all information in one location (\"D\" rounds), solve the problem, and inform each node about the solution (\"D\" rounds).\n\nOn the other hand, if the running time of the algorithm is much smaller than \"D\" communication rounds, then the nodes in the network must produce their output without having the possibility to obtain information about distant parts of the network. In other words, the nodes must make globally consistent decisions based on information that is available in their \"local D-neighbourhood\". Many distributed algorithms are known with the running time much smaller than \"D\" rounds, and understanding which problems can be solved by such algorithms is one of the central research questions of the field. Typically an algorithm which solves a problem in polylogarithmic time in the network size is considered efficient in this model.\n\nAnother commonly used measure is the total number of bits transmitted in the network (cf. communication complexity). The features of this concept are typically captured with the CONGEST(B) model, which similarly defined as the LOCAL model but where single messages can only contain B bits.\n\nTraditional computational problems take the perspective that we ask a question, a computer (or a distributed system) processes the question for a while, and then produces an answer and stops. However, there are also problems where we do not want the system to ever stop. Examples of such problems include the dining philosophers problem and other similar mutual exclusion problems. In these problems, the distributed system is supposed to continuously coordinate the use of shared resources so that no conflicts or deadlocks occur.\n\nThere are also fundamental challenges that are unique to distributed computing. The first example is challenges that are related to \"fault-tolerance\". Examples of related problems include consensus problems, Byzantine fault tolerance, and self-stabilisation.\n\nA lot of research is also focused on understanding the \"asynchronous\" nature of distributed systems:\nBULLET::::- Synchronizers can be used to run synchronous algorithms in asynchronous systems.\nBULLET::::- Logical clocks provide a causal happened-before ordering of events.\nBULLET::::- Clock synchronization algorithms provide globally consistent physical time stamps.\n\"Coordinator election\" (or \"leader election\") is the process of designating a single process as the organizer of some task distributed among several computers (nodes). Before the task is begun, all network nodes are either unaware which node will serve as the \"coordinator\" (or leader) of the task, or unable to communicate with the current coordinator. After a coordinator election algorithm has been run, however, each node throughout the network recognizes a particular, unique node as the task coordinator.\n\nThe network nodes communicate among themselves in order to decide which of them will get into the \"coordinator\" state. For that, they need some method in order to break the symmetry among them. For example, if each node has unique and comparable identities, then the nodes can compare their identities, and decide that the node with the highest identity is the coordinator.\n\nThe definition of this problem is often attributed to LeLann, who formalized it as a method to create a new token in a token ring network in which the token has been lost.\n\nCoordinator election algorithms are designed to be economical in terms of total bytes transmitted, and time. The algorithm suggested by Gallager, Humblet, and Spira for general undirected graphs has had a strong impact on the design of distributed algorithms in general, and won the Dijkstra Prize for an influential paper in distributed computing.\n\nMany other algorithms were suggested for different kind of network graphs, such as undirected rings, unidirectional rings, complete graphs, grids, directed Euler graphs, and others. A general method that decouples the issue of the graph family from the design of the coordinator election algorithm was suggested by Korach, Kutten, and Moran.\n\nIn order to perform coordination, distributed systems employ the concept of coordinators. The coordinator election problem is to choose a process from among a group of processes on different processors in a distributed system to act as the central coordinator. Several central coordinator election algorithms exist.\n\nSo far the focus has been on \"designing\" a distributed system that solves a given problem. A complementary research problem is \"studying\" the properties of a given distributed system.\n\nThe halting problem is an analogous example from the field of centralised computation: we are given a computer program and the task is to decide whether it halts or runs forever. The halting problem is undecidable in the general case, and naturally understanding the behaviour of a computer network is at least as hard as understanding the behaviour of one computer.\n\nHowever, there are many interesting special cases that are decidable. In particular, it is possible to reason about the behaviour of a network of finite-state machines. One example is telling whether a given network of interacting (asynchronous and non-deterministic) finite-state machines can reach a deadlock. This problem is PSPACE-complete, i.e., it is decidable, but it is not likely that there is an efficient (centralised, parallel or distributed) algorithm that solves the problem in the case of large networks.\n\nBULLET::::- AppScale\nBULLET::::- BOINC\nBULLET::::- Code mobility\nBULLET::::- Decentralized computing\nBULLET::::- Distributed algorithm\nBULLET::::- Distributed algorithmic mechanism design\nBULLET::::- Distributed cache\nBULLET::::- Distributed operating system\nBULLET::::- Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing\nBULLET::::- Fog computing\nBULLET::::- Folding@home\nBULLET::::- Grid computing\nBULLET::::- Inferno\nBULLET::::- Jungle computing\nBULLET::::- Layered queueing network\nBULLET::::- Library Oriented Architecture (LOA)\nBULLET::::- List of distributed computing conferences\nBULLET::::- List of distributed computing projects\nBULLET::::- List of important publications in concurrent, parallel, and distributed computing\nBULLET::::- Model checking\nBULLET::::- Parallel distributed processing\nBULLET::::- Parallel programming model\nBULLET::::- Plan 9 from Bell Labs\nBULLET::::- Shared nothing architecture\nBULLET::::- Books\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Articles\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Web sites\n\nBULLET::::- Books\nBULLET::::- : Java Distributed Computing by Jim Faber, 1998\n\nBULLET::::- Articles\n\nBULLET::::- Conference Papers\nBULLET::::- C. Rodríguez, M. Villagra and B. Barán, , Bionetics2007, pp. 66–69, 2007.\n\n"}
{"id": "8504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8504", "title": "Dublin", "text": "Dublin\n\nDublin (, ; ) is the capital and largest city of Ireland. Situated on a bay on the east coast, at the mouth of the River Liffey, it lies within the province of Leinster. It is bordered on the south by the Dublin Mountains, a part of the Wicklow Mountains range. It has an urban area population of 1,173,179, while the population of the Dublin Region (formerly County Dublin) was 1,347,359. The population of the Greater Dublin Area was 1,904,806 per the 2016 census.\n\nThere is archaeological debate regarding precisely where Dublin was established by the Gaels in or before the 7th century AD. Later expanded as a Viking settlement, the Kingdom of Dublin, the city became Ireland's principal settlement following the Norman invasion. The city expanded rapidly from the 17th century and was briefly the second largest city in the British Empire before the Acts of Union in 1800. Following the partition of Ireland in 1922, Dublin became the capital of the Irish Free State, later renamed Ireland.\n\nDublin is a historical and contemporary centre for education, the arts, administration and industry. the city was listed by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC) as a global city, with a ranking of \"Alpha −\", which places it amongst the top thirty cities in the world.\n\nThe name \"Dublin\" derives from the Irish word \"Dubhlinn\", early Classical Irish /, from (, , ) meaning \"black, dark\", and () \"pool\", referring to a dark tidal pool. This tidal pool was located where the River Poddle entered the Liffey, on the site of the castle gardens at the rear of Dublin Castle. In Modern Irish the name is \"Duibhlinn\", and Irish rhymes from County Dublin show that in Dublin Leinster Irish it was pronounced \"Duílinn\" . The original pronunciation is preserved in the names for the city in other languages such as Old English , Old Norse , modern Icelandic and modern Manx as well as Welsh . Other localities in Ireland also bear the name \"Duibhlinn\", variously anglicised as Devlin, Divlin and Difflin. Historically, scribes using the Gaelic script wrote \"bh\" with a dot over the \"b\", rendering Duḃlinn or Duiḃlinn. Those without knowledge of Irish omitted the dot, spelling the name as \"Dublin\". Variations on the name are also found in traditionally Gaelic-speaking areas of Scotland (Gàidhealtachd, cognate with Irish Gaeltacht), such as \"An Linne Dhubh\" (\"the black pool\"), which is part of Loch Linnhe.\n\nIt is now thought that the Viking settlement was preceded by a Christian ecclesiastical settlement known as \"Duibhlinn\", from which \"Dyflin\" took its name. Beginning in the 9th and 10th century, there were two settlements where the modern city stands. The Viking settlement of about 841, \"Dyflin\", and a Gaelic settlement, Áth Cliath (\"ford of hurdles\") further up river, at the present day Father Mathew Bridge (also known as Dublin Bridge), at the bottom of Church Street. ', meaning \"town of the hurdled ford\", is the common name for the city in modern Irish. ' is a place name referring to a fording point of the River Liffey near Father Mathew Bridge. \"\" was an early Christian monastery, believed to have been in the area of Aungier Street, currently occupied by Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church. There are other towns of the same name, such as \"Àth Cliath\" in East Ayrshire, Scotland, which is anglicised as Hurlford.\n\nThe area of Dublin Bay has been inhabited by humans since prehistoric times, but the writings of Ptolemy (the Greco-Roman astronomer and cartographer) in about AD 140 provide possibly the earliest reference to a settlement there. He called it \"Eblana polis\" ().\n\nDublin celebrated its 'official' millennium in 1988, meaning the Irish government recognised 988 as the year in which the city was settled and that this first settlement would later become the city of Dublin.\nIt is now thought the Viking settlement of about 841 was preceded by a Christian ecclesiastical settlement known as \"Duibhlinn\", from which \"Dyflin\" took its name. Beginning in the 9th and 10th century, there were two settlements which later became the modern Dublin. The subsequent Scandinavian settlement centred on the River Poddle, a tributary of the Liffey in an area now known as Wood Quay. The Dubhlinn was a pool on the lowest stretch of the Poddle, used to moor ships. This pool was finally fully infilled during the early 18th century, as the city grew. The Dubhlinn lay where the Castle Garden is now located, opposite the Chester Beatty Library within Dublin Castle. \"Táin Bó Cuailgne\" (\"The Cattle Raid of Cooley\") refers to \"Dublind rissa ratter Áth Cliath\", meaning \"Dublin, which is called Ath Cliath\".\n\nDublin was established as a Viking settlement in the 10th century and, despite a number of attacks by the native Irish, it remained largely under Viking control until the Norman invasion of Ireland was launched from Wales in 1169. It was upon the death of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn in early 1166 that Ruaidrí Ua Conchobair, King of Connacht, proceeded to Dublin and was inaugurated \"King of Ireland\" without opposition.\n\nAccording to some historians, part of the city's early economic growth is attributed to a trade in slaves. Slavery in Ireland and Dublin reached its pinnacle in the 9th and 10th centuries. Prisoners from slave raids and kidnappings, which captured men, women and children, brought revenue to the Gaelic Irish Sea raiders, as well as to the Vikings who had initiated the practice. The victims came from Wales, England, Normandy and beyond.\n\nThe King of Leinster, Diarmait Mac Murchada, after his exile by Ruaidhrí, enlisted the help of Strongbow, the Earl of Pembroke, to conquer Dublin. Following Mac Murrough's death, Strongbow declared himself King of Leinster after gaining control of the city. In response to Strongbow's successful invasion, King Henry II of England affirmed his ultimate sovereignty by mounting a larger invasion in 1171 and pronounced himself Lord of Ireland. Around this time, the \"county of the City of Dublin\" was established along with certain liberties adjacent to the city proper. This continued down to 1840 when the barony of Dublin City was separated from the barony of Dublin. Since 2001, both baronies have been redesignated as the \"City of Dublin\".\nDublin Castle, which became the centre of Norman power in Ireland, was founded in 1204 as a major defensive work on the orders of King John of England. Following the appointment of the first Lord Mayor of Dublin in 1229, the city expanded and had a population of 8,000 by the end of the 13th century. Dublin prospered as a trade centre, despite an attempt by King Robert I of Scotland to capture the city in 1317. It remained a relatively small walled medieval town during the 14th century and was under constant threat from the surrounding native clans. In 1348, the Black Death, a lethal plague which had ravaged Europe, took hold in Dublin and killed thousands over the following decade.\n\nDublin was incorporated into the English Crown as the Pale, which was a narrow strip of English settlement along the eastern seaboard. The Tudor conquest of Ireland in the 16th century spelt a new era for Dublin, with the city enjoying a renewed prominence as the centre of administrative rule in Ireland. Determined to make Dublin a Protestant city, Queen Elizabeth I of England established Trinity College in 1592 as a solely Protestant university and ordered that the Catholic St. Patrick's and Christ Church cathedrals be converted to Protestant.\n\nThe city had a population of 21,000 in 1640 before a plague in 1649–51 wiped out almost half of the city's inhabitants. However, the city prospered again soon after as a result of the wool and linen trade with England, reaching a population of over 50,000 in 1700.\n\nAs the city continued to prosper during the 18th century, Georgian Dublin became, for a short period, the second largest city of the British Empire and the fifth largest city in Europe, with the population exceeding 130,000. The vast majority of Dublin's most notable architecture dates from this period – the Four Courts, the Custom House, Temple Bar and Grafton Street are some of the few remaining areas that were not affected by the wave of Georgian reconstruction and maintained their medieval character.\n\nDublin grew even more dramatically during the 18th century, with the construction of many new districts and buildings, such as Merrion Square, Parliament House and the Royal Exchange. The Wide Streets Commission was established in 1757 at the request of Dublin Corporation to govern architectural standards on the layout of streets, bridges and buildings. In 1759, the Guinness brewery was founded; and would eventually grow to become the largest brewery in the world and the largest employer in Dublin.\n\nDublin suffered a period of political and economic decline during the 19th century following the Acts of Union 1800, under which the seat of government was transferred to the Westminster Parliament in London. The city played no major role in the Industrial Revolution, but remained the centre of administration and a transport hub for most of the island. Ireland had no significant sources of coal, the fuel of the time, and Dublin was not a centre of ship manufacturing, the other main driver of industrial development in Britain and Ireland. Belfast developed faster than Dublin during this period on a mixture of international trade, factory-based linen cloth production and shipbuilding.\nThe Easter Rising of 1916, the Irish War of Independence, and the subsequent Irish Civil War resulted in a significant amount of physical destruction in central Dublin. The Government of the Irish Free State rebuilt the city centre and located the new parliament, the Oireachtas, in Leinster House. Since the beginning of Norman rule in the 12th century, the city has functioned as the capital in varying geopolitical entities: Lordship of Ireland (1171–1541), Kingdom of Ireland (1541–1800), as part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (1801–1922), and the Irish Republic (1919–1922). Following the partition of Ireland in 1922, it became the capital of the Irish Free State (1922–1937) and now is the capital of Ireland. One of the memorials to commemorate that time is the Garden of Remembrance.\n\nDublin was also a victim of the Northern Irish Troubles, although during this 30-year conflict, violence mainly occurred within Northern Ireland. However, the Provisional IRA drew some support from within the Republic, including from Dublin. A Loyalist paramilitary group, the Ulster Volunteer Force, bombed the city during this time – notably in an atrocity known as the Dublin and Monaghan bombings in which 34 people died, mainly in central Dublin.\n\nSince 1997, the landscape of Dublin has changed. The city was at the forefront of Ireland's economic expansion during the Celtic Tiger period, with private sector and state development of housing, transport and business. Following an economic decline during the Great Recession, Dublin has rebounded and has close to full employment, but a significant problem with housing supply in both city and surrounds.\n\nFrom 1842, the boundaries of the city were comprehended by the baronies of Dublin City and the Barony of Dublin. In 1930, the boundaries were extended by the Local Government (Dublin) Act. Later, in 1953, the boundaries were again extended by the Local Government Provisional Order Confirmation Act.\n\nDublin City Council is a unicameral assembly of 63 members elected every five years from Local Election Areas. It is presided over by the Lord Mayor, who is elected for a yearly term and resides in Dublin's Mansion House. Council meetings occur at Dublin City Hall, while most of its administrative activities are based in the Civic Offices on Wood Quay. The party or coalition of parties with the majority of seats assigns committee members, introduces policies, and proposes the Lord Mayor. The Council passes an annual budget for spending on areas such as housing, traffic management, refuse, drainage, and planning. The Dublin City Manager is responsible for implementing City Council decisions but also has considerable executive power.\n\nAs the capital city, Dublin is the seat of the national parliament of Ireland, the Oireachtas. It is composed of the President of Ireland, Seanad Éireann as the upper house, and Dáil Éireann as the lower house. The President resides in Áras an Uachtaráin in Phoenix Park, while both houses of the Oireachtas meet in Leinster House, a former ducal palace on Kildare Street. It has been the home of the Irish parliament since the creation of the Irish Free State in 1922. The old Irish Houses of Parliament of the Kingdom of Ireland are located in College Green.\n\nGovernment Buildings house the Department of the Taoiseach, the Council Chamber, the Department of Finance and the Office of the Attorney General. It consists of a main building (completed 1911) with two wings (completed 1921). It was designed by Thomas Manley Dean and Sir Aston Webb as the Royal College of Science. The First Dáil originally met in the Mansion House in 1919. The Irish Free State government took over the two wings of the building to serve as a temporary home for some ministries, while the central building became the College of Technology until 1989. Although both it and Leinster House were intended to be temporary locations, they became the permanent homes of parliament from then on.\n\nFor elections to Dáil Éireann, the city is divided into five constituencies: Dublin Central (3 seats), Dublin Bay North (5 seats), Dublin North-West (3 seats), Dublin South-Central (4 seats) and Dublin Bay South (4 seats). Nineteen TD's are elected in total.\n\nIn the 2016 general election the Dublin city area elected 6 Fine Gael, 4 Sinn Féin, 2 Fianna Fáil, 2 Independents 4 Change, 2 Independents, 1 People Before Profit, 1 Green Party and 1 Social Democrats TDs.\n\nDublin is situated at the mouth of the River Liffey and encompasses a land area of approximately in east-central Ireland. It is bordered by the Dublin Mountains, a low mountain range and sub range of the Wicklow Mountains, to the south and surrounded by flat farmland to the north and west.\n\nThe River Liffey divides the city in two, between the Northside and the Southside. The Liffey bends at Leixlip from a northeasterly route to a predominantly eastward direction, and this point also marks the transition to urban development from more agricultural land usage.\n\nTwo secondary rivers further divide the city  – the River Tolka, running southeast into Dublin Bay, and the River Dodder running northeast to near the mouth of the Liffey, and these and the Liffey have multiple tributaries. A number of lesser rivers and streams also flow to the sea.\n\nTwo canals – the Grand Canal on the southside and the Royal Canal on the northside – ring the inner city on their way from the west and the River Shannon.\n\nA north-south division once, to some extent, traditionally existed, with the River Liffey as the divider. The Northside was generally seen as working class to middle class, while the Southside was seen as middle class to upper-middle class, although containing \"pockets\" of working class life. There have also been some social divisions evident between the coastal suburbs in the east of the city, and the newer developments further to the west.\n\nIn some tourism and real-estate marketing contexts, inner Dublin is sometimes divided into a number of \"quarters\" or districts. These include, the 'Medieval Quarter' (in the area of Dublin Castle, Christ Church and St Patrick's Cathedral and the old city walls), the 'Georgian Quarter' (including the area around St Stephen's Green, Trinity College, and Merrion Square), the 'Docklands Quarter' (around the Dublin Docklands and Silicon Docks), the 'Cultural Quarter' (around Temple Bar), and 'Creative Quarter' (between South William Street and George's Street).\n\nSimilar to much of the rest of northwestern Europe, Dublin experiences a maritime climate (\"Cfb\") with cool summers, mild winters, and a lack of temperature extremes. The average maximum January temperature is , while the average maximum July temperature is . On average, the sunniest months are May and June, while the wettest month is October with of rain, and the driest month is February with . Rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year.\n\nDublin's sheltered location on the east coast makes it the driest place in Ireland, receiving only about half the rainfall of the west coast. Ringsend in the south of the city records the lowest rainfall in the country, with an average annual precipitation of , with the average annual precipitation in the city centre being . The main precipitation in winter is rain; however snow showers do occur between November and March. Hail is more common than snow. The city experiences long summer days and short winter days. Strong Atlantic winds are most common in autumn. These winds can affect Dublin, but due to its easterly location, it is least affected compared to other parts of the country. However, in winter, easterly winds render the city colder and more prone to snow showers.\n\nIn the 20th century, smog and air-pollution were an issue in the city, precipitating a ban on bituminous fuels across Dublin. The ban was implemented in 1990 to address black smoke concentrations, that had been linked to cardiovascular and respiratory deaths in residents. Since the ban, non-trauma death rates, respiratory death rates and cardiovascular death rates have declined – by an estimated 350 deaths annually.\n\n!Colspan=14Climate data for Dublin\n!Month\n!Jan\n!Feb\n!Mar\n!Apr\n!May\n!Jun\n!Jul\n!Aug\n!Sep\n!Oct\n!Nov\n!Dec\n!style=\"border-left-width:medium\"Year\n!Average sea temperature °C (°F)\nstyle=\"background:#9090FF;color:#000000;\"9.6(49.3)\nstyle=\"background:#8484FF;color:#000000;\"8.8(47.8)\nstyle=\"background:#7E7EFF;color:#000000;\"8.4(47.1)\nstyle=\"background:#8888FF;color:#000000;\"9.1(48.4)\nstyle=\"background:#9C9CFF;color:#000000;\"10.4(50.7)\nstyle=\"background:#B8B8FF;color:#000000;\"12.3(54.1)\nstyle=\"background:#D3D3FF;color:#000000;\"14.1(57.4)\nstyle=\"background:#DFDFFF;color:#000000;\"14.9(58.8)\nstyle=\"background:#DEDEFF;color:#000000;\"14.8(58.6)\nstyle=\"background:#D3D3FF;color:#000000;\"14.1(57.4)\nstyle=\"background:#C4C4FF;color:#000000;\"13.1(55.6)\nstyle=\"background:#A9A9FF;color:#000000;\"11.3(52.3)\nstyle=\"background:#B0B0FF;color:#000000;border-left-width:medium\"11.7(53.1)\n!Mean daily daylight hours\nstyle=\"background:#E2E200;color:#000000;\"8.0\nstyle=\"background:#F0F011;color:#000000;\"10.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF33;color:#000000;\"12.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF55;color:#000000;\"14.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF77;color:#000000;\"16.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF88;color:#000000;\"17.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF77;color:#000000;\"16.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF66;color:#000000;\"15.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF44;color:#000000;\"13.0\nstyle=\"background:#F7F722;color:#000000;\"11.0\nstyle=\"background:#E9E900;color:#000000;\"9.0\nstyle=\"background:#E2E200;color:#000000;\"8.0\nstyle=\"background:#FFFF3A;color:#000000;border-left-width:medium\"12.4\n!Average Ultraviolet index\nstyle=\"background:#289500;color:#000000;\"0\nstyle=\"background:#289500;color:#000000;\"1\nstyle=\"background:#289500;color:#000000;\"2\nstyle=\"background:#f7e400;color:#000000;\"4\nstyle=\"background:#f7e400;color:#000000;\"5\nstyle=\"background:#f85900;color:#000000;\"6\nstyle=\"background:#f85900;color:#000000;\"6\nstyle=\"background:#f7e400;color:#000000;\"5\nstyle=\"background:#f7e400;color:#000000;\"4\nstyle=\"background:#289500;color:#000000;\"2\nstyle=\"background:#289500;color:#000000;\"1\nstyle=\"background:#289500;color:#000000;\"0\nstyle=\"background:#f7e400;color:#000000;border-left-width:medium\"3\n!Colspan=14 style=\"background:#f8f9fa;font-weight:normal;font-size:95%;\"Source: Weather Atlas\n\nDublin has many landmarks and monuments dating back hundreds of years. One of the oldest is Dublin Castle, which was first founded as a major defensive work on the orders of England's King John in 1204, shortly after the Norman invasion of Ireland in 1169, when it was commanded that a castle be built with strong walls and good ditches for the defence of the city, the administration of justice, and the protection of the King's treasure. Largely complete by 1230, the castle was of typical Norman courtyard design, with a central square without a keep, bounded on all sides by tall defensive walls and protected at each corner by a circular tower. Sited to the south-east of Norman Dublin, the castle formed one corner of the outer perimeter of the city, using the River Poddle as a natural means of defence.\nOne of Dublin's newest monuments is the Spire of Dublin, officially entitled the \"Monument of Light.\" It is a conical spire made of stainless steel, located on O'Connell Street where it meets Henry Street and North Earl Street. It replaces Nelson's Pillar and is intended to mark Dublin's place in the 21st century. The spire was designed by Ian Ritchie Architects, who sought an \"Elegant and dynamic simplicity bridging art and technology\". The base of the monument is lit and the top is illuminated to provide a beacon in the night sky across the city.\n\nThe Old Library of Trinity College, Dublin, holding the Book of Kells, is one of the city's most visited sites. The Book of Kells is an illustrated manuscript created by Irish monks circa 800 AD. The Ha'penny Bridge, an iron footbridge over the River Liffey, is one of the most photographed sights in Dublin and is considered to be one of Dublin's most iconic landmarks.\n\nOther landmarks and monuments include Christ Church Cathedral and St Patrick's Cathedral, the Mansion House, the Molly Malone statue, the complex of buildings around Leinster House, including part of the National Museum of Ireland and the National Library of Ireland, The Custom House and Áras an Uachtaráin. Other sights include the Anna Livia monument. The Poolbeg Towers are also landmark features of Dublin, and visible from various spots around the city.\n\nThere are many green-spaces around the city, and Dublin City Council manages over of parks. Public parks include the Phoenix Park, Herbert Park, St Stephen's Green, Saint Anne's Park and Bull Island. The Phoenix Park is about west of the city centre, north of the River Liffey. Its perimeter wall encloses , making it one of the largest walled city parks in Europe. It includes large areas of grassland and tree-lined avenues, and since the 17th century has been home to a herd of wild fallow deer. The residence of the President of Ireland (Áras an Uachtaráin), which was built in 1751, is located in the park. The park is also home to Dublin Zoo, Ashtown Castle, and the official residence of the United States Ambassador. Music concerts are also sometimes held in the park.\n\nSt Stephen's Green is adjacent to one of Dublin's main shopping streets, Grafton Street, and to a shopping centre named for it, while on its surrounding streets are the offices of a number of public bodies.\n\nSaint Anne's Park is a public park and recreational facility, shared between Raheny and Clontarf, both suburbs on the Northside. The park, the second largest municipal park in Dublin, is part of a former estate assembled by members of the Guinness family, beginning with Benjamin Lee Guinness in 1835 (the largest municipal park is nearby (North) Bull Island, also shared between Clontarf and Raheny), featuring a 5 km beach.\n\n The Dublin region is the economic centre of Ireland, and was at the forefront of the country's economic expansion during the Celtic Tiger period. In 2009, Dublin was listed as the fourth richest city in the world by purchasing power and 10th richest by personal income. According to \"Mercer's 2011 Worldwide Cost of Living Survey\", Dublin is the 13th most expensive city in the European Union (down from 10th in 2010) and the 58th most expensive place to live in the world (down from 42nd in 2010). , approximately 874,400 people were employed in the Greater Dublin Area. Around 60% of people who are employed in Ireland's financial, ICT, and professional sectors are located in this area.\n\nA number of Dublin's traditional industries, such as food processing, textile manufacturing, brewing, and distilling have gradually declined, although Guinness has been brewed at the St. James's Gate Brewery since 1759. Economic improvements in the 1990s attracted a number of global pharmaceutical, information and communications technology companies to the city and Greater Dublin Area. Companies such as Microsoft, Google, Amazon, eBay, PayPal, Yahoo!, Facebook, Twitter, Accenture and Pfizer now have European headquarters and/or operational bases in the city, with several located in enterprise clusters like the Digital Hub and Silicon Docks. The presence of these companies has driven economic expansion in the city and led to Dublin sometimes being referred to as the \"Tech Capital of Europe\".\n\nFinancial services have also become important to the city since the establishment of Dublin's International Financial Services Centre in 1987. More than 500 operations are approved to trade under the IFSC programme. The centre is host to half of the world's top 50 banks and to half of the top 20 insurance companies. Many international firms have established major headquarters in the city, such as Citibank. The Irish Stock Exchange (ISEQ), Internet Neutral Exchange (INEX) and Irish Enterprise Exchange (IEX) are also located in Dublin. Dublin has been positioned as one of the main cities vying to host Financial Services companies hoping to retain access to the Eurozone after Brexit. The Celtic Tiger also led to a temporary boom in construction, with large redevelopment projects in the Dublin Docklands and Spencer Dock. Completed projects include the Convention Centre, the 3Arena, and the Bord Gáis Energy Theatre.\n\nIn the second quarter of 2018, Dublin touched its lowest unemployment rate in a decade, when it fell down to 5.7% as reported by the Dublin Economic Monitor.\n\nThe road network in Ireland is primarily focused on Dublin. The M50 motorway, a semi-ring road which runs around the south, west and north of the city, connects important national primary routes to the rest of the country. In 2008, the West-Link toll bridge was replaced by the eFlow barrier-free tolling system, with a three-tiered charge system based on electronic tags and car pre-registration.\n\nThe first phase of a proposed eastern bypass for the city is the Dublin Port Tunnel, which officially opened in 2006 to mainly cater for heavy vehicles. The tunnel connects Dublin Port and the M1 motorway close to Dublin Airport. The city is also surrounded by an inner and outer orbital route. The inner orbital route runs approximately around the heart of the Georgian city and the outer orbital route runs primarily along the natural circle formed by Dublin's two canals, the Grand Canal and the Royal Canal, as well as the North and South Circular Roads.\n\nThe 2016 TomTom Traffic Index ranked Dublin the 15th most congested city in the world and the 7th most congested in Europe.\n\nDublin is served by a network of nearly 200 bus routes which cover the city and suburbs. The majority of these are provided by Dublin Bus, with a modest number having been transferred to Go Ahead Ireland in 2018, but a number of smaller companies also operate. Fares are generally calculated on a stage system based on distance travelled. There are several different levels of fares, which apply on most services. A \"Real Time Passenger Information\" system was introduced at Dublin Bus bus stops in 2012. Electronically displayed signs relay information about the time of the next bus' arrival based on its GPS determined position. The National Transport Authority is responsible for integration of bus and rail services in Dublin and has been involved in introducing a pre-paid smart card, called a Leap card, which can be used on all of Dublin's public transport services.\n\nThe 2011 Census showed that 5.9 percent of commuters in Dublin cycled. A 2013 report by Dublin City Council on traffic flows crossing the canals in and out of the city found that just under 10% of all traffic was made up of cyclists, representing an increase of 14.1% over 2012 and an 87.2% increase over 2006 levels and is attributed to measures, such as, the Dublinbikes bike rental scheme, the provision of cycle lanes, public awareness campaigns to promote cycling and the introduction of the 30 km/h city centre speed limit.\n\nDublin City Council began installing cycle lanes and tracks throughout the city in the 1990s, and the city had over of specific on- and off-road tracks for cyclists. In 2011, the city was ranked 9th of major world cities on the \"Copenhagenize Index of Bicycle-Friendly Cities\". The same index showed a fall to 15th in 2015, and Dublin was outside the top 20 in 2017.\nDublinbikes is a self-service bicycle rental scheme which has been in operation in Dublin since 2009. Sponsored by JCDecaux and Just Eat, the scheme consists of hundreds of unisex bicycles stationed at 44 terminals throughout the city centre. Users must make a subscription for either an annual Long Term Hire Card or purchase a three-day ticket. , Dublinbikes had over 66,000 long-term subscribers making over 2 million journeys per year.\n\nHeuston and Connolly stations are the two main railway termini in Dublin. Operated by Iarnród Éireann, the Dublin Suburban Rail network consists of five railway lines serving the Greater Dublin Area and commuter towns such as Drogheda and Dundalk in County Louth, Gorey in County Wexford, and extending as far as Portlaoise and once a day, Newry. One of the five lines is the electrified Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) line, which runs primarily along the coast of Dublin, comprising 31 stations, from Malahide and Howth southwards as far as Greystones in County Wicklow. Commuter rail operates on the other four lines using Irish Rail diesel multiple units. In 2013, passengers for DART and Dublin Suburban lines were 16 million and 11.7 million, respectively (around 75% of all Irish Rail passengers).\n\nDublin once had an extensive system of trams but this was largely phased out by 1949. A new light rail system, often described as a tram system, the Luas, was launched in 2004, and is run by Transdev Ireland (under contract from Transport Infrastructure Ireland), carrying over 34 million passengers annually. The network consists of two interconnecting lines; the Red Line links the Docklands and city centre with the south-western suburbs of Tallaght and Saggart, while the Green Line connects northern inner city suburbs and the main city centre with suburbs to the south of the city including Sandyford and Brides Glen. Together these lines comprise a total 67 stations and of track. Construction of a 6 km extension to the Green Line, bringing it into the north of the city, commenced in June 2013 and was opened for passenger travel on 9 December 2017.\n\nA metro service is proposed under the name of Metrolink, and planned to run from Dublin's northside to Sandyford via Dublin Airport and St. Stephen's Green, with construction projected to start after 2021.\n\nDublin Connolly is connected by bus to Dublin Port and ferries run by Irish Ferries and Stena Line to Holyhead for connecting trains on the North Wales Coast Line to Chester, Crewe and London Euston. Dublin Connolly to Dublin Port can be reached via Amiens Street, Dublin into Store Street or by Luas via Busáras where Dublin Bus operates services to the Ferry Terminal.\n\nDublin Airport (owned and operated by DAA) is located north of Dublin city, near Swords in the administrative county of Fingal. The headquarters of Ireland's flag carrier Aer Lingus and regional airlines Stobart Air and CityJet are located there, and those of low-cost carrier Ryanair nearby. The airport offers a short and medium haul network, domestic services to regional airports in Ireland, and long-haul services to the United States, Canada, the Middle East and Hong Kong. Dublin Airport is the 11th busiest in the European Union, and by far the busiest airport on the island of Ireland.\n\nIn 2014, Dublin Airport was the 18th busiest airport in Europe, serving over 21 million passengers. By 2016 this increased to 27.9 million passengers passing through the airport, establishing an all-time record supported by growth in both short- and long-haul networks. In 2015 and 2016, transatlantic traffic grew, with 158 summer flights a week to North America, making it the sixth largest European hub for that route over the year. Transatlantic traffic was also the fastest-growing segment of the market for the airport in 2016, in which a 16% increase from 2015 brought the yearly number of passengers travelling between Dublin and North America to 2.9 million.\n\nFrom 2010 to 2016, Dublin Airport saw an increase of nearly 9.5 million passengers in its annual traffic, as the number of commercial aircraft movements has similarly followed a growth trend from 163,703 in 2013 to 191,233 in 2015.\n\nDublin is also served by Weston Airport and other small facilities, by a range of helicopter operators, and the military and some State services use Casement Aerodrome nearby.\n\nDublin is the largest centre of education in Ireland, and is home to four universities and a number of other higher education institutions. It was the European Capital of Science in 2012.\n\nThe University of Dublin is the oldest university in Ireland, dating from the 16th century, and is located in the city centre. Its sole constituent college, Trinity College (TCD), was established by Royal Charter in 1592 under Elizabeth I. It was closed to Roman Catholics until 1793, and the Catholic hierarchy then banned Roman Catholics from attending until 1970. It is situated in the city centre, on College Green, and has over 18,000 students.\n\nThe National University of Ireland (NUI) has its seat in Dublin, which is also the location of the associated \"constituent university\" of University College Dublin (UCD), which has over 30,000 students. Founded in 1854, it is now the largest university in Ireland. UCD's main campus is at Belfield, about from the city centre, in the southeastern suburbs.\n\nAs of 2019, Dublin's principal, and Ireland's largest, institution for technological education and research, Dublin Institute of Technology (DIT), with origins in 1887, has merged with two major suburban third level institutions, Institute of Technology, Tallaght and Institute of Technology, Blanchardstown, to form Technological University Dublin, Ireland's second largest university by student population. The new university offers a wide range of courses in areas include engineering, architecture, the sciences, health, journalism, digital media, hospitality, business, art and design, music and the humanities programmes, and has three long-term campuses, at Grangegorman, Tallaght and Blanchardstown.\n\nDublin City University (DCU), formerly the National Institute for Higher Education (NIHE) Dublin, offers courses in business, engineering, science, communication courses, languages and primary education. It has around 16,000 students, and its main campus is located about from the city centre, in the northern suburbs. Aside from the main Glasnevin Campus, the Drumcondra campus includes the former St Patrick's College of Education, now also hosting students from the nearby Mater Dei Institute and students from the Church of Ireland College of Education.\n\nThe Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI) conducts a medical school which is a recognised college of the NUI, and is situated at St. Stephen's Green in the city centre; there are also large medical schools within UCD and Trinity College. The National College of Art and Design (NCAD) provides education and research in art, design and media. The National College of Ireland (NCI) is also based in Dublin, as well as the Economic and Social Research Institute, a social science research institute, on Sir John Rogerson's Quay, and the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies.\n\nDublin is also home to the Royal Irish Academy, membership of which is considered Ireland's highest academic honour.\n\nThe Institute of International and European Affairs is also in Dublin. Dublin Business School (DBS) is Ireland's largest private third level institution with over 9,000 students located on Aungier Street, and Griffith College Dublin has its main facility in Portobello. There are also smaller specialised colleges, including The Gaiety School of Acting and the New Media Technology College.\n\nThe Irish public administration and management training centre has its base in Dublin, the Institute of Public Administration provides a range of undergraduate and post graduate awards via the National University of Ireland and in some instances, Queen's University Belfast.\n\nThe suburban town of Dún Laoghaire is home to the Dún Laoghaire Institute of Art, Design and Technology (IADT), which supports training and research in art, design, business, psychology and media technology.\n\ncolspan=\"2\"Main immigrant groups in Dublin City and suburbs, 2016\n! Nationality  Population\nPoland  33,751\nUnited Kingdom  19,196\nRomania  16,808\nLithuania 9,869\nBrazil  8,903\nItaly  6,834\nIndia  6,546\nSpain  6,341\nLatvia  5,771\nChina  5,748\nFrance  5,576\nUnited States  4,042\nNigeria  2,563\nPakistan  2,515\nPhilippines  2,204\nThe City of Dublin is the area administered by Dublin City Council, but the term \"Dublin\" is also used to refer to the contiguous urban area which includes parts of the adjacent local authority areas of Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin. Together, the four areas form the traditional County Dublin. This area is sometimes known as the Dublin Region. The population of the administrative area controlled by the City Council was 554,554 in the 2016 census, while the population of the urban area was 1,173,179. The County Dublin population was 1,273,069 and that of the Greater Dublin Area 1,904,806. The area's population is expanding rapidly, and it is estimated by the Central Statistics Office that it will reach 2.1 million by 2020.\n\nAfter World War Two, Italians were by far the largest immigrant group in both Dublin and Ireland and became synonymous with the catering and restaurant landscape. Since the late 1990s, Dublin has experienced a significant level of net immigration, with the greatest numbers coming from the European Union, especially the United Kingdom, Poland and Lithuania. There is also immigration from outside Europe, including from Brazil, India, the Philippines, China and Nigeria. Dublin is home to a greater proportion of newer arrivals than any other part of the country. Sixty percent of Ireland's Asian population lives in Dublin. Over 15% of Dublin's population was foreign-born in 2006.\n\nThe capital attracts the largest proportion of non-Catholic migrants from other countries. Increased secularisation in Ireland has prompted a drop in regular Catholic church attendance in Dublin from over 90 percent in the mid-1970s down to 14 percent according to a 2011 survey.\n\nAccording to the 2016 census, the population of Dublin was 86.2% white (including 862,381 white Irish [86.2%], 132,846 other white [13.2%] and 5,092 [.5%] white Irish traveller), 2% black (23,892), and 4.6% Asian (46,626). Additionally, 2.7% (27,412) are from other ethnic or cultural background, while 4.9% (49,092) did not state their ethnicity. In terms of religion, 68.2% identified as Catholic, 12.7% as other stated religions, with 19.1% having no religion or no religion stated.\n\n, there were 1,367 families within the Dublin region living in homeless accommodation or other emergency housing.\n\nDublin has a significant literary history, and produced many literary figures, including Nobel laureates William Butler Yeats, George Bernard Shaw and Samuel Beckett. Other influential writers and playwrights include Oscar Wilde, Jonathan Swift and the creator of Dracula, Bram Stoker. It is also the location of key and notable works of James Joyce, including \"Ulysses\", which is set in Dublin and includes much topical detail. \"Dubliners\" is a collection of short stories by Joyce about incidents and typical characters of the city during the early 20th century. Other renowned writers include J. M. Synge, Seán O'Casey, Brendan Behan, Maeve Binchy, John Banville and Roddy Doyle. Ireland's biggest libraries and literary museums are found in Dublin, including the National Print Museum of Ireland and National Library of Ireland. In July 2010, Dublin was named as a UNESCO City of Literature, joining Edinburgh, Melbourne and Iowa City with the permanent title.\n\nThere are several theatres within the city centre, and various well-known actors have emerged from the Dublin theatrical scene, including Noel Purcell, Michael Gambon, Brendan Gleeson, Stephen Rea, Colin Farrell, Colm Meaney and Gabriel Byrne. The best known theatres include the Gaiety, Abbey, Olympia, Gate, and Grand Canal. The Gaiety specialises in musical and operatic productions, and also opens its doors after the evening theatre production to host a variety of live music, dancing, and films. The Abbey was founded in 1904 by a group that included Yeats with the aim of promoting indigenous literary talent. It went on to provide a breakthrough for some of the city's most famous writers, such as Synge, Yeats himself and George Bernard Shaw. The Gate was founded in 1928 to promote European and American Avant Garde works. The Grand Canal Theatre is a newer 2,111 capacity theatre which opened in 2010 in the Grand Canal Dock area.\n\nApart from being the focus of the country's literature and theatre, Dublin is also the focal point for much of Irish art and the Irish artistic scene. The Book of Kells, a world-famous manuscript produced by Celtic monks in AD 800 and an example of Insular art, is on display in Trinity College. The Chester Beatty Library houses a collection of manuscripts, miniature paintings, prints, drawings, rare books and decorative arts assembled by American mining millionaire (and honorary Irish citizen) Sir Alfred Chester Beatty (1875–1968). The collections date from 2700 BC onwards and are drawn from Asia, the Middle East, North Africa and Europe.\nIn addition public art galleries are found across the city, including the Irish Museum of Modern Art, the National Gallery, the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery, the Douglas Hyde Gallery, the Project Arts Centre and the exhibition space of the Royal Hibernian Academy. Private galleries in Dublin include Green on Red Gallery, Kerlin Gallery, Kevin Kavanagh Gallery and Mother's Tankstation.\n\nThree branches of the National Museum of Ireland are located in Dublin: Archaeology in Kildare Street, Decorative Arts and History in Collins Barracks and Natural History in Merrion Street. The same area is also home to a number of smaller museums such as Number 29 on Fitzwilliam Street and the Little Museum of Dublin on St. Stephen's Green. Dublin is home to the National College of Art and Design, which dates from 1746, and Dublin Institute of Design, founded in 1991. Dublinia is a living history attraction showcasing the Viking and Medieval history of the city.\n\nDublin has long had an 'underground' arts scene, with Temple Bar hosting artists in the 1980s, and spaces such as the Project Arts Centre acting as a hub for collectives and new exhibitions. \"The Guardian\" noted that Dublin's independent and underground arts flourished during the economic recession of c.2010. Dublin also has many dramatic, musical and operatic companies, including Festival Productions, Lyric Opera Productions, the Pioneers' Musical & Dramatic Society, the Glasnevin Musical Society, Third Day Chorale, Second Age Theatre Company, Opera Theatre Company and Opera Ireland.\n\nDublin was shortlisted to be World Design Capital 2014. Taoiseach Enda Kenny was quoted to say that Dublin \"would be an ideal candidate to host the World Design Capital in 2014\".\n\nDublin has a vibrant nightlife and is reputedly one of Europe's most youthful cities, with an estimate of 50% of citizens being younger than 25. There are many pubs across the city centre, with the area around St. Stephen's Green and Grafton Street, especially Harcourt Street, Camden Street, Wexford Street and Leeson Street, the location of many nightclubs and pubs.\n\nThe best known area for nightlife is Temple Bar, south of the River Liffey. The area has become popular among tourists, including stag and hen parties from Britain. It was developed as Dublin's cultural quarter and does retain this spirit as a centre for small arts productions, photographic and artists' studios, and in the form of street performers and small music venues; however, it has been criticised as overpriced, false and dirty by Lonely Planet. The areas around Leeson Street, Harcourt Street, South William Street and Camden/George's Street are popular nightlife spots for locals.\n\nLive music is played on streets and at venues throughout Dublin, and the city has produced several musicians and groups of international success, including The Dubliners, Thin Lizzy, The Boomtown Rats, U2, The Script, Sinéad O'Connor, Boyzone, Kodaline and Westlife. Dublin has several mid-range venues that host live music throughout the week, including Whelans and Vicar Street. The 3Arena venue in the Dublin Docklands plays host to visiting global performers.\n\nDublin city centre is a popular shopping destination for both locals and tourists. The city has numerous shopping districts, particularly around Grafton Street and Henry Street. The city centre is also the location of large department stores, including Arnotts, Brown Thomas and (prior to its 2015 closure) Clerys.\n\nWhile the city has seen the loss of some traditional market sites, Moore Street remains one of the city's oldest trading districts. There has also been some growth in local farmers' markets and other markets. In 2007, Dublin Food Co-op relocated to a warehouse in The Liberties area, where it is home to market and community events. Suburban Dublin has several modern retail centres, including Dundrum Town Centre, Blanchardstown Centre, the Square in Tallaght, Liffey Valley Shopping Centre in Clondalkin, Omni Shopping Centre in Santry, Nutgrove Shopping Centre in Rathfarnham, and Swords Pavilions in Swords.\n\nDublin is the centre of both media and communications in Ireland, with many newspapers, radio stations, television stations and telephone companies based there. RTÉ is Ireland's national state broadcaster, and is based in Donnybrook. Fair City is RTÉ's soap opera, located in the fictional Dublin suburb of \"Carraigstown\".\n\nVirgin Media Television, eir Sport, MTV Ireland and Sky News are also based in the city. The headquarters of An Post and telecommunications companies such as Eir, as well as mobile operators Vodafone and 3 are all located there. Dublin is also the headquarters of national newspapers such as \"The Irish Times\" and \"Irish Independent\", as well as local newspapers such as \"The Evening Herald\".\n\nAs well as being home to RTÉ Radio, Dublin also hosts the national radio networks Today FM and Newstalk, and local stations. Commercial radio stations based in the city include 4fm (94.9 MHz), Dublin's 98FM (98.1 MHz), Radio Nova 100FM (100.3 MHz), Q102 (102.2 MHz), SPIN 1038 (103.8 MHz), FM104 (104.4 MHz), Sunshine 106.8 (106.8 MHz). There are also numerous community and special interest stations, including Dublin City FM (103.2 MHz), Dublin South FM (93.9 MHz), Liffey Sound FM (96.4 MHz), Near FM (90.3 MHz), and Raidió Na Life (106.4 MHz).\n\nCroke Park is the largest sport stadium in Ireland. The headquarters of the Gaelic Athletic Association, it has a capacity of 82,300. It is the third-largest stadium in Europe after Nou Camp in Barcelona and Wembley Stadium in London. It hosts the premier Gaelic football and hurling games, international rules football and irregularly other sporting and non-sporting events including concerts. Muhammad Ali fought there in 1972 and it played host to the opening and closing ceremonies of the 2003 Special Olympics. It also has conference and banqueting facilities. There is a GAA Museum there and tours of the stadium are offered, including a rooftop walk of the stadium. During the redevelopment of Lansdowne Road, Croke Park played host to the Irish Rugby Union Team and Republic of Ireland national football team as well as hosting the Heineken Cup rugby 2008–09 semi-final between Munster and Leinster which set a world record attendance for a club rugby match. The Dublin GAA team plays most of their home league hurling games at Parnell Park.\n\nI.R.F.U. Stadium Lansdowne Road was laid out in 1874. This was the venue for home games of both the Irish Rugby Union Team and the Republic of Ireland national football team. A joint venture between the Irish Rugby Football Union, the FAI and the Government, saw it redeveloped into a new state-of-the-art 50,000 seat Aviva Stadium, which opened in May 2010. Aviva Stadium hosted the 2011 UEFA Europa League Final. Rugby union team Leinster Rugby play their competitive home games in the RDS Arena & the Aviva Stadium while Donnybrook Stadium hosts their friendlies and A games, Ireland A and Women, Leinster Schools and Youths and the home club games of All Ireland League clubs Old Wesley and Bective Rangers. County Dublin is home for 13 of the senior rugby union clubs in Ireland including 5 of the 10 sides in the top division 1A.\n\nCounty Dublin is home to six League of Ireland association clubs; Bohemians F.C., Shamrock Rovers, St Patrick's Athletic, University College Dublin, Shelbourne and Cabinteely. The first Irish side to reach the group stages of a European competition (2011–12 UEFA Europa League group stage) are Shamrock Rovers, who play at Tallaght Stadium in South Dublin. Bohemian F.C play at Dalymount Park, the oldest football stadium in the country, and home ground for the Ireland football team from 1904 to 1990. St Patrick's Athletic play at Richmond Park; University College Dublin at the UCD Bowl in Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown; and Shelbourne at Tolka Park. Tolka Park, Dalymount Park, UCD Bowl and Tallaght Stadium, along with the Carlisle Grounds in Bray, hosted all Group 3 games in the intermediary round of the 2011 UEFA Regions' Cup.\n\nDublin has two ODI cricket grounds in Castle Avenue and Malahide Cricket Club Ground. The Castle Avenue hosted its first One Day International match on 21 May 1999 as part of the 1999 Cricket World Cup when Bangladesh played against the West Indies. College Park has Test status and played host to Ireland's first Test cricket match, a women's match against Pakistan in 2000. The men's Irish cricket team also played their first Test match against Pakistan at Malahide Cricket Club Ground during 2018. Leinster Lightning play their home inter-provincial matches in Dublin at College Park.\n\nThe Dublin Marathon has been run since 1980 at the end of October. The Women's Mini Marathon has been run since 1983 on the first Monday in June, which is also a bank holiday in Ireland. It is said to be the largest all female event of its kind in the world. The Great Ireland Run takes place in Dublin's Phoenix Park in mid-April.\n\nThe Dublin area hosts greyhound racing at Shelbourne Park and horse racing at Leopardstown. The Dublin Horse Show takes place at the RDS, which hosted the Show Jumping World Championships in 1982. The national boxing arena is located in The National Stadium on the South Circular Road. The National Basketball Arena is located in Tallaght, is the home of the Irish basketball team, the venue for the basketball league finals, and has also hosted boxing and wrestling events. The National Aquatic Centre in Blanchardstown is Ireland's largest indoor water leisure facility. There are also Gaelic Handball, hockey and athletics stadia, most notably Morton Stadium in Santry, which held the athletics events of the 2003 Special Olympics.\n\nAs of the 2018 Michelin Guide, five Dublin restaurants shared six Michelin stars – including Restaurant Patrick Guilbaud with two. Irish-born Kevin Thornton was awarded two Michelin stars in 2001 – though his restaurant, Thornton's, closed in 2016. The Dublin Institute of Technology commenced a bachelor's degree in culinary skills in 1999.\n\nHistorically, Irish coffee houses and cafes were associated with those working in media. Since the beginning of the 21st century, with the growth of apartment living in the city, Dublin's cafés attracted younger patrons looking for an informal gathering place and an ad hoc office. Cafés became more popular in the city, and Irish-owned coffee chains like Java Republic, Insomnia, and O'Brien's Sandwich Bars now compete internationally. In 2008, Irish barista Stephen Morrissey won the title of World Barista Champion.\n\nThere are 12,950 students in the Dublin region attending 34 gaelscoileanna (Irish-language primary schools) and 10 gaelcholáistí (Irish-language secondary schools). Two Irish language radio stations Raidió Na Life and RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta have studios in the city, and the online and DAB station Raidió Rí-Rá broadcasts from studios in the city. A number of Irish language agencies are also located in the capital. Conradh na Gaeilge offers language classes, has a book shop and is a meeting place for different groups. The closest Gaeltacht to Dublin is the County Meath Gaeltacht of Ráth Cairn and Baile Ghib which is away.\n\nDublin is twinned with four places:\n! ! style=\"background:#659ec7; width:10%;\" City\n! ! style=\"background:#659ec7; width:15%;\" Nation\n! ! style=\"background:#659ec7; width: 5%;\" Since\n! ! style=\"background:lemonchiffon;\" San Jose\n! ! style=\"text-align:center;\" United States\n! ! 1986\n! ! style=\"background:lemonchiffon;\" Liverpool\n! ! style=\"text-align:center;\" United Kingdom\n! ! 1986\n! ! style=\"background:lemonchiffon;\" Barcelona\n! ! style=\"text-align:center;\" Spain\n! ! 1998\n! ! style=\"background:lemonchiffon;\" Beijing\n! ! style=\"text-align:center;\" China\n! ! 2011\n\nThe city also has \"co-operation agreements\" with a number of other cities, and has previously proposed agreements with Rio de Janeiro and the Mexican city of Guadalajara.\n\nBULLET::::- Dublin English\nBULLET::::- List of people from Dublin\nBULLET::::- List of subdivisions of County Dublin\n\nBULLET::::- John Flynn and Jerry Kelleher, \"Dublin Journeys in America\" (High Table Publishing, 2003)\nBULLET::::- Hanne Hem, \"Dubliners, An Anthropologist's Account\", Oslo, 1994\nBULLET::::- Pat Liddy, \"Dublin A Celebration – From the 1st to the 21st century\" (Dublin City Council, 2000)\nBULLET::::- Maurice Craig, \"The Architecture of Ireland from the Earliest Times to 1880\" (Batsford, Paperback edition 1989)\nBULLET::::- Frank McDonald, \"Saving the City: How to Halt the Destruction of Dublin\" (Tomar Publishing, 1989)\nBULLET::::- Edward McParland, \"Public Architecture in Ireland 1680–1760\" (Yale University Press, 2001)\n\nBULLET::::- Dublin City Council – Official website of the local authority for Dublin\nBULLET::::- Dublin Tourist Board – Official tourism site\nBULLET::::- Alternative Dublin Guide Hidden-Dublin Guide\nBULLET::::- Dublin UNESCO City of Literature official site\n"}
{"id": "8506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8506", "title": "DirectX", "text": "DirectX\n\nMicrosoft DirectX is a collection of application programming interfaces (APIs) for handling tasks related to multimedia, especially game programming and video, on Microsoft platforms. Originally, the names of these APIs all began with Direct, such as Direct3D, DirectDraw, DirectMusic, DirectPlay, DirectSound, and so forth. The name \"DirectX\" was coined as a shorthand term for all of these APIs (the \"X\" standing in for the particular API names) and soon became the name of the collection. When Microsoft later set out to develop a gaming console, the \"X\" was used as the basis of the name Xbox to indicate that the console was based on DirectX technology. The \"X\" initial has been carried forward in the naming of APIs designed for the Xbox such as XInput and the Cross-platform Audio Creation Tool (XACT), while the DirectX pattern has been continued for Windows APIs such as Direct2D and DirectWrite.\n\nDirect3D (the 3D graphics API within DirectX) is widely used in the development of video games for Microsoft Windows and the Xbox line of consoles. Direct3D is also used by other software applications for visualization and graphics tasks such as CAD/CAM engineering. As Direct3D is the most widely publicized component of DirectX, it is common to see the names \"DirectX\" and \"Direct3D\" used interchangeably.\n\nThe DirectX software development kit (SDK) consists of runtime libraries in redistributable binary form, along with accompanying documentation and headers for use in coding. Originally, the runtimes were only installed by games or explicitly by the user. Windows 95 did not launch with DirectX, but DirectX was included with Windows 95 OEM Service Release 2. Windows 98 and Windows NT 4.0 both shipped with DirectX, as has every version of Windows released since. The SDK is available as a free download. While the runtimes are proprietary, closed-source software, source code is provided for most of the SDK samples. Starting with the release of Windows 8 Developer Preview, DirectX SDK has been integrated into Windows SDK.\n\nIn late 1994, Microsoft was ready to release Windows 95, its next operating system. An important factor in the value consumers would place on it was the programs that would be able to run on it. Three Microsoft employees—Craig Eisler, Alex St. John, and Eric Engstrom—were concerned because programmers tended to see Microsoft's previous operating system, MS-DOS, as a better platform for game programming, meaning few games would be developed for Windows 95 and the operating system would not be as much of a success. This was compounded by negative reception surrounding the Windows port of the video game \"The Lion King\". The game used WinG, which crashed on Compaq Presarios that came shipped with it following a partnership between Compaq and Disney, as the Cirrus Logic display drivers used by the Presarios were not thoroughly tested with the API.\n\nDOS allowed direct access to video cards, keyboards, mice, sound devices, and all other parts of the system, while Windows 95—with its protected memory model—restricted access to all of these, working on a much more standardized model. Microsoft needed a quick solution for programmers; the operating system was only months away from being released. Eisler (development lead), St. John, and Engstrom (program manager) worked together to fix this problem, with a solution that they eventually named DirectX.\n\nThe first version of DirectX was released in September 1995 as the Windows Games SDK. It was the Win32 replacement for the DCI and WinG APIs for Windows 3.1. DirectX allowed all versions of Microsoft Windows, starting with Windows 95, to incorporate high-performance multimedia. Eisler wrote about the frenzy to build DirectX 1 through 5 in his blog.\n\nDirectX 2.0 became a component of Windows itself with the releases of Windows 95 OSR2 and Windows NT 4.0 in mid-1996. Since Windows 95 was itself still new and few games had been released for it, Microsoft engaged in heavy promotion of DirectX to developers who were generally distrustful of Microsoft's ability to build a gaming platform in Windows. Alex St. John, the evangelist for DirectX, staged an elaborate event at the 1996 Computer Game Developers Conference which game developer Jay Barnson described as a Roman theme, including real lions, togas, and something resembling an indoor carnival. It was at this event that Microsoft first introduced Direct3D and DirectPlay, and demonstrated multiplayer \"MechWarrior 2\" being played over the Internet.\n\nThe DirectX team faced the challenging task of testing each DirectX release against an array of computer hardware and software. A variety of different graphics cards, audio cards, motherboards, CPUs, input devices, games, and other multimedia applications were tested with each beta and final release. The DirectX team also built and distributed tests that allowed the hardware industry to confirm that new hardware designs and driver releases would be compatible with DirectX.\n\nPrior to DirectX, Microsoft had included OpenGL on their Windows NT platform. At the time, OpenGL required \"high-end\" hardware and was focused on engineering and CAD uses. Direct3D was intended to be a Microsoft controlled alternative to OpenGL, focused initially on game use. As 3D gaming grew, OpenGL developed to include better support for programming techniques for interactive multimedia applications like games, giving developers choice between using OpenGL or Direct3D as the 3D graphics API for their applications. At that point a \"battle\" began between supporters of the cross-platform OpenGL and the Windows-only Direct3D. Incidentally, OpenGL was supported at Microsoft by the DirectX team. If a developer chose to use OpenGL 3D graphics API, the other APIs of DirectX are often combined with OpenGL in computer games because OpenGL does not include all of DirectX's functionality (such as sound or joystick support).\n\nIn a console-specific version, DirectX was used as a basis for Microsoft's Xbox, Xbox 360 and Xbox One console API. The API was developed jointly between Microsoft and Nvidia, which developed the custom graphics hardware used by the original Xbox. The Xbox API was similar to DirectX version 8.1, but is non-updateable like other console technologies. The Xbox was code named DirectXbox, but this was shortened to Xbox for its commercial name.\n\nIn 2002, Microsoft released DirectX 9 with support for the use of much longer shader programs than before with pixel and vertex shader version 2.0. Microsoft has continued to update the DirectX suite since then, introducing Shader Model 3.0 in DirectX 9.0c, released in August 2004.\n\nAs of April 2005, DirectShow was removed from DirectX and moved to the Microsoft Platform SDK instead.\n\nDirectX has been confirmed to be present in Microsoft's Windows Phone 8.\n\nReal-time raytracing was announced as DXR in 2018.\n\nThe original logo resembled a deformed radiation warning symbol. Controversially, the original name for the DirectX project was the \"Manhattan Project\", a reference to the US nuclear weapons initiative. Alex St. John, head of Microsoft DirectX evangelism at the time, claims that the connotation of the ultimate outcome of the Manhattan Project (the nuclear bombing of Japan) is intentional, and that DirectX and its sister project, the Xbox (which shares a similar logo), were meant to displace Japanese videogame-makers from their dominance of the video game industry. However, Microsoft publicly denies this account, instead claiming that the logo is merely an artistic design.\n\nDirectX is composed of multiple APIs:\n\nBULLET::::- Direct3D (D3D): Real-time 3D rendering API\nBULLET::::- DXGI: Enumerates adapters and monitors and manages swap chains for Direct3D 10 and later.\nBULLET::::- Direct2D: 2D graphics API\nBULLET::::- DirectWrite: Text rendering API\nBULLET::::- DirectCompute: API for general-purpose computing on graphics processing units\nBULLET::::- DirectX Diagnostics (DxDiag): A tool for diagnosing and generating reports on components related to DirectX, such as audio, video, and input drivers\nBULLET::::- DirectX Media Objects: Support for streaming objects such as encoders, decoders, and effects\nBULLET::::- XACT3: High-level audio API\nBULLET::::- XAudio2: Low-level audio API\nBULLET::::- DirectX Raytracing (DXR): Real-time raytracing API\n\nMicrosoft has deprecated the following components:\nBULLET::::- DirectX Media: Consists of:\nBULLET::::- DirectAnimation for 2D/3D web animation, DirectShow for multimedia playback and streaming media\nBULLET::::- DirectX Transform for web interactivity, and Direct3D Retained Mode for higher level 3D graphics\nBULLET::::- DirectX plugins for audio signal processing\nBULLET::::- DirectX Video Acceleration for accelerated video playback (Deprecated in favor of Media Foundation)\nBULLET::::- DirectDraw: 2D graphics API (Deprecated in favor of Direct2D)\nBULLET::::- DirectInput: Input API for interfacing with keyboards, mice, joysticks, and game controllers (Deprecated after version 8 in favor of XInput for Xbox 360 controllers or standard WM_INPUT window message processing for keyboard and mouse input)\nBULLET::::- DirectPlay: Network API for communication over a local-area or wide-area network (Deprecated after version 8 in favor of Games for Windows Live and Xbox Live)\nBULLET::::- DirectSound: Audio API (Deprecated since DirectX 8 in favor of XAudio2 and XACT3)\nBULLET::::- DirectSound3D (DS3D): 3D sounds API (Deprecated since DirectX 8 in favor of XAudio2 and XACT3)\nBULLET::::- DirectMusic: Components for playing soundtracks authored in DirectMusic Producer (Deprecated since DirectX 8 in favor of XAudio2 and XACT3)\n\nDirectX functionality is provided in the form of COM-style objects and interfaces. Additionally, while not DirectX components themselves, managed objects have been built on top of some parts of DirectX, such as Managed Direct3D and the XNA graphics library on top of Direct3D 9.\n\nDirectX 9 was released in 2002 for Windows 98 and XP, and currently is supported by all subsequent versions. Microsoft continues to make changes in DirectX 9c, causing support to be dropped for some of the aforementioned operating systems. As of January 2007, Windows 2000 or XP is required. This also introduced Shader Model 2.0 containing Pixel Shader 2.0 and Vertex Shader 2.0.\n\nA major update to DirectX API, DirectX 10 ships with and is only available with Windows Vista and later; previous versions of Windows such as Windows XP are not able to run DirectX 10-exclusive applications. Rather, programs that are run on a Windows XP system with DirectX 10 hardware simply resort to the DirectX 9.0c code path, the latest available for Windows XP computers.\n\nChanges for DirectX 10 were extensive. Many former parts of DirectX API were deprecated in the latest DirectX SDK and are preserved for compatibility only: DirectInput was deprecated in favor of XInput, DirectSound was deprecated in favor of the Cross-platform Audio Creation Tool system (XACT) and additionally lost support for hardware accelerated audio, since the Vista audio stack renders sound in software on the CPU. The DirectPlay DPLAY.DLL was also removed and was replaced with dplayx.dll; games that rely on this DLL must duplicate it and rename it to dplay.dll.\n\nIn order to achieve backwards compatibility, DirectX in Windows Vista contains several versions of Direct3D:\nBULLET::::- Direct3D 9: emulates Direct3D 9 behavior as it was on Windows XP. Details and advantages of Vista's Windows Display Driver Model are hidden from the application if WDDM drivers are installed. This is the only API available if there are only XP graphic drivers (XDDM) installed, after an upgrade to Vista for example.\nBULLET::::- Direct3D 9Ex (known internally during Windows Vista development as 9.0L or 9.L): allows full access to the new capabilities of WDDM (if WDDM drivers are installed) while maintaining compatibility for existing Direct3D applications. The Windows Aero user interface relies on D3D 9Ex.\nBULLET::::- Direct3D 10: Designed around the new driver model in Windows Vista and featuring a number of improvements to rendering capabilities and flexibility, including Shader Model 4.\nDirect3D 10.1 is an incremental update of Direct3D 10.0 which shipped with, and required, Windows Vista Service Pack 1. This release mainly sets a few more image quality standards for graphics vendors, while giving developers more control over image quality. It also adds support for cube map arrays, separate blend modes per-MRT, coverage mask export from a pixel shader, ability to run pixel shader per sample, access to multi-sampled depth buffers and requires that the video card supports Shader Model 4.1 or higher and 32-bit floating-point operations. Direct3D 10.1 still fully supports Direct3D 10 hardware, but in order to utilize all of the new features, updated hardware is required.\n\nMicrosoft unveiled DirectX 11 at the Gamefest 08 event in Seattle, with the major scheduled features including GPGPU support (DirectCompute), and Direct3D 11 with tessellation support and improved multi-threading support to assist video game developers in developing games that better utilize multi-core processors. Direct3D 11 runs on Windows Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8 and Windows 10. Parts of the new API such as multi-threaded resource handling can be supported on Direct3D 9/10/10.1-class hardware. Hardware tessellation and Shader Model 5.0 require Direct3D 11 supporting hardware. Microsoft has since released the Direct3D 11 Technical Preview. Direct3D 11 is a strict superset of Direct3D 10.1 — all hardware and API features of version 10.1 are retained, and new features are added only when necessary for exposing new functionality. This helps to keep backwards compatibility with previous versions of DirectX.\n\nMicrosoft released the Final Platform Update for Windows Vista on October 27, 2009, which was 5 days after the initial release of Windows 7 (launched with Direct3D 11 as a base standard).\n\nSince then, four updates for DirectX 11 were released:\nBULLET::::- DirectX 11.1 is included in Windows 8. It supports WDDM 1.2 for increased performance, features improved integration of Direct2D (now at version 1.1), Direct3D, and DirectCompute, and includes DirectXMath, XAudio2, and XInput libraries from the XNA framework. It also features stereoscopic 3D support for gaming and video. DirectX 11.1 was also partially backported to Windows 7, via the Windows 7 platform update.\nBULLET::::- DirectX 11.2 is included in Windows 8.1 (including the RT version) and Windows Server 2012 R2. It added some new features to Direct2D like geometry realizations. It also added swap chain composition, which allows some elements of the scene to be rendered at lower resolutions and then composited via hardware overlay with other parts rendered at higher resolution.\nBULLET::::- DirectX 11.X is a superset of DirectX 11.2 running on the Xbox One. It actually includes some features, such as draw bundles, that were later announced as part of DirectX 12.\nBULLET::::- DirectX 11.3 was announced along with DirectX 12 at GDC and released in 2015. It is meant to complement DirectX 12 as a higher-level alternative. It is included with Windows 10.\n\nDirectX 12 was announced by Microsoft at GDC on March 20, 2014, and was officially launched alongside Windows 10 on July 29, 2015.\n\nThe primary feature highlight for the new release of DirectX was the introduction of advanced low-level programming APIs for Direct3D 12 which can reduce driver overhead. Developers are now able to implement their own command lists and buffers to the GPU, allowing for more efficient resource utilization through parallel computation. Lead developer Max McMullen stated that the main goal of Direct3D 12 is to achieve \"console-level efficiency on phone, tablet and PC\". The release of Direct3D 12 comes alongside other initiatives for low-overhead graphics APIs including AMD's Mantle for AMD graphics cards, Apple's Metal for iOS and macOS and Khronos Group's cross-platform Vulkan.\n\nMultiadapter support will feature in DirectX 12 allowing developers to utilize multiple GPUs on a system simultaneously; multi-GPU support was previously dependent on vendor implementations such as AMD CrossFireX or NVIDIA SLI.\n\nDirectX 12 is supported on all Fermi and later Nvidia GPUs, on AMD's GCN-based chips and on Intel's Haswell and later processors' graphics units.\n\nAt SIGGRAPH 2014, Intel released a demo showing a computer generated asteroid field, in which DirectX 12 was claimed to be 50–70% more efficient than DirectX 11 in rendering speed and CPU power consumption.\n\n\"Ashes of the Singularity\" was the first publicly available game to utilize DirectX 12. Testing by \"Ars Technica\" in August 2015 revealed slight performance regressions in DirectX 12 over DirectX 11 mode for the Nvidia GeForce 980 Ti, whereas the AMD Radeon R9 290x achieved consistent performance improvements of up to 70% under DirectX 12, and in some scenarios the AMD outperformed the more powerful Nvidia under DirectX 12. The performance discrepancies may be due to poor Nvidia driver optimizations for DirectX 12, or even hardware limitations of the card which was optimized for DirectX 11 serial execution, however the exact cause remains unclear.\n\nDirectX 12 APIs are also featured on the Xbox, however the DirectX 12 code is not directly portable between PC and Xbox One due to inherent differences between the two platforms. The performance improvements of DirectX 12 on the Xbox are not as substantial as on the PC.\n\nIn March 2018, DirectX Raytracing (DXR) was announced, capable of real-time ray-tracing on supported hardware, and the DXR API was added in the Windows 10 October 2018 update.\n\nIn 2019 Microsoft announced the arrival of DirectX 12 to Windows 7\n\n+DirectX versions\n! colspan=\"3\" Version\n! rowspan=\"2\" Release date\n! rowspan=\"2\" Notes\n!Major\n! Minor\n! Number\n!1\n! rowspan=\"2\" 2\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 2.0a  4.03.00.1096  June 5, 1996  Windows 95 OSR2 and Windows NT 4.0\n! rowspan=\"4\" 3\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\"  3.0  4.04.00.0068  September 15, 1996   \n4.04.00.0069  1996  Later package of DirectX 3.0 included Direct3D 4.04.00.0069\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 3.0a  4.04.00.0070  December 1996  Windows NT 4.0 SP3 (and above)Last supported version of DirectX for Windows NT 4.0\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 3.0b  4.04.00.0070  December 1996  This was a very minor update to 3.0a that fixed a cosmetic problem with the Japanese version of Windows 95\n!4\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 4.0  colspan=2  Never launched  DirectX 4 was never released. Raymond Chen of Microsoft explained in his book, \"The Old New Thing\", that after DirectX 3 was released, Microsoft began developing versions 4 and 5 at the same time. Version 4 was to be a shorter-term release with small features, whereas version 5 would be a more substantial release. The lack of interest from game developers in the features stated for DirectX 4 resulted in it being shelved, and the large amount of documents that already distinguished the two new versions resulted in Microsoft choosing to not re-use version 4 to describe features intended for version 5.\n! rowspan=\"3\" 5\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 5.0  4.05.00.0155 (RC55)  August 4, 1997  Available as a beta for Windows 2000 that would install on Windows NT 4.0\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" 5.2  4.05.01.1600 (RC00)  May 5, 1998  DirectX 5.2 release for Windows 95\n4.05.01.1998 (RC0)  June 25, 1998  Windows 98 exclusive\n! rowspan=\"3\" 6\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 6.0  4.06.00.0318 (RC3)  August 7, 1998  Windows CE as implemented on Dreamcast and other devices\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 6.1  4.06.02.0436 (RC0)  February 3, 1999  \nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 6.1a  4.06.03.0518 (RC0)  May 5, 1999  Windows 98 Second Edition exclusive\n! rowspan=\"6\" 7\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" 7.0  4.07.00.0700 (RC1)  September 22, 1999  \n4.07.00.0700  February 17, 2000  Windows 2000\nrowspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;\" 7.0a   December 17, 1999  Released only for Windows 95 and 98\n4.07.00.0716 (RC0)  March 8, 2000  \n4.07.00.0716 (RC1)  2000  \nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 7.1  4.07.01.3000 (RC1)  September 14, 2000  Windows ME exclusive. Last version to have built-in RGB software rendering support\n! rowspan=\"7\" 8\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 8.0  4.08.00.0400 (RC10)  November 10, 2000  \nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 8.0a  4.08.00.0400 (RC14)  January 24, 2001  Last supported version for Windows 95 and last version to have software rendering support in dxdiag.exe\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" 8.1  4.08.01.0810  October 25, 2001  Windows XP, Windows XP SP1, Windows Server 2003 and Xbox exclusive\n4.08.01.0881 (RC7)  November 8, 2001  This version is for the down level operating systems (Windows 98, Windows ME and Windows 2000)\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 8.1a  4.08.01.0901 (RC?)  2002  This release includes an update to Direct3D (D3d8.dll)\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 8.1b  4.08.01.0901 (RC7)  June 25, 2002  This update includes a fix to DirectShow on Windows 2000 (Quartz.dll)\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 8.2  4.08.02.0134 (RC0)  2002  Same as the DirectX 8.1b but includes DirectPlay 8.2\n! rowspan=\"9\" 9\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 9.0  4.09.00.0900 (RC4)  December 19, 2002  Periodic hybrid 32-bit/64-bit updates were released for DirectX 9, starting from 4.09.00.0904 (RC0 for DX 9.0c) in October 2004, released bimonthly until August 2007, and quarterly thereafter. The last periodic update was released in June 2010\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 9.0a  4.09.00.0901 (RC6)  March 26, 2003  \nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 9.0b  4.09.00.0902 (RC2)  August 13, 2003  \nJuly 22, 2004\nFirst 9.0c version and last supported version for Windows 98\n4.09.00.0904 (RC0)  August 4, 2004  \n\nDecember 8, 2006\nLast supported version for Windows 98 Second Edition\n4.09.00.0904  August 6, 2004 / April 21, 2008*  Xbox 360, Windows XP SP2, SP3*, Windows Server 2003 SP1 and Windows Server 2003 R2\n\nOctober 27, 2008\nLast supported version for Windows ME\n! rowspan=\"3\" 10\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 10  6.00.6000.16386  November 30, 2006  Windows Vista exclusive\nrowspan=\"2\" style=\"text-align:center;\" 10.1  6.00.6001.18000  February 4, 2008  Windows Vista SP1, Windows Server 2008Includes Direct3D 10.1\n6.00.6002.18005  April 28, 2009  Windows Vista SP2, Windows Server 2008 SP2Includes Direct3D 10.1\n! rowspan=\"5\" 11\nrowspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;\" 11  6.01.7600.16385  October 22, 2009  Windows 7, Windows Server 2008 R2\n6.01.7601.17514  February 16, 2011  Windows 7 SP1, Windows Server 2008 R2 SP1\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 11.1  6.02.9200.16384  August 1, 2012  Windows 7 SP1, Windows 8, Windows RT, Windows Server 2012\nstyle=\"text-align:center;\" 11.2  6.03.9600.16384  October 18, 2013  Windows 8.1, Windows RT, Windows Server 2012 R2, Xbox One\n! rowspan=\"4\" 12\n10.00.15063.0000  March 20, 2017  Windows 10, Depth Bounds Testing and Programmable MSAA added\n10.00.17763.0001  October 2, 2018  Windows 10, DirectX Raytracing support added\n10.00.18362.0116  May 19, 2019  Windows 10, Variable Rate Shading (VRS) support added\n\nThe version number as reported by Microsoft's DxDiag tool (version 4.09.0000.0900 and higher) use the x.xx.xxxx.xxxx format for version numbers. However, the DirectX and Windows XP MSDN page claims that the registry always has been in the x.xx.xx.xxxx format. Therefore, when the above table lists a version as '4.09.00.0904' Microsoft's DxDiag tool may have it as '4.09.0000.0904'.\n\nVarious releases of Windows have included and supported various versions of DirectX, allowing newer versions of the operating system to continue running applications designed for earlier versions of DirectX until those versions can be gradually phased out in favor of newer APIs, drivers, and hardware.\n\nAPIs such as Direct3D and DirectSound need to interact with hardware, and they do this through a device driver. Hardware manufacturers have to write these drivers for a particular DirectX version's device driver interface (or DDI), and test each individual piece of hardware to make them DirectX compatible. Some hardware devices have only DirectX compatible drivers (in other words, one must install DirectX in order to use that hardware). Early versions of DirectX included an up-to-date library of all of the DirectX compatible drivers currently available. This practice was stopped however, in favor of the web-based Windows Update driver-update system, which allowed users to download only the drivers relevant to their hardware, rather than the entire library.\n\nPrior to DirectX 10, DirectX runtime was designed to be \"backward compatible\" with older drivers, meaning that newer versions of the APIs were designed to interoperate with older drivers written against a previous version's DDI. The application programmer had to query the available hardware capabilities using a complex system of \"cap bits\" each tied to a particular hardware feature. Direct3D 7 and earlier would work on any version of the DDI, Direct3D 8 requires a minimum DDI level of 6 and Direct3D 9 requires a minimum DDI level of 7.\nHowever, the Direct3D 10 runtime in Windows Vista cannot run on older hardware drivers due to the significantly updated DDI, which requires a unified feature set and abandons the use of \"cap bits\".\n\nDirect3D 10.1 introduces \"feature levels\" 10_0 and 10_1, which allow use of only the hardware features defined in the specified version of Direct3D API. Direct3D 11 adds level 11_0 and \"10 Level 9\" - a subset of the Direct3D 10 API designed to run on Direct3D 9 hardware, which has three feature levels (9_1, 9_2 and 9_3) grouped by common capabilities of \"low\", \"med\" and \"high-end\" video cards; the runtime directly uses Direct3D 9 DDI provided in all WDDM drivers. Feature level 11_1 has been introduced with Direct3D 11.1.\n\nIn 2002, Microsoft released a version of DirectX compatible with the Microsoft .NET Framework, thus allowing programmers to take advantage of DirectX functionality from within .NET applications using compatible languages such as managed C++ or the use of the C# programming language. This API was known as \"Managed DirectX\" (or MDX for short), and claimed to operate at 98% of performance of the underlying native DirectX APIs. In December 2005, February 2006, April 2006, and August 2006, Microsoft released successive updates to this library, culminating in a beta version called Managed DirectX 2.0. While Managed DirectX 2.0 consolidated functionality that had previously been scattered over multiple assemblies into a single assembly, thus simplifying dependencies on it for software developers, development on this version has subsequently been discontinued, and it is no longer supported. The Managed DirectX 2.0 library expired on October 5, 2006.\n\nDuring the GDC 2006, Microsoft presented the XNA Framework, a new managed version of DirectX (similar but not identical to Managed DirectX) that is intended to assist development of games by making it easier to integrate DirectX, HLSL and other tools in one package. It also supports the execution of managed code on the Xbox 360. The XNA Game Studio Express RTM was made available on December 11, 2006, as a free download for Windows XP. Unlike the DirectX runtime, Managed DirectX, XNA Framework or the Xbox 360 APIs (XInput, XACT etc.) have not shipped as part of Windows. Developers are expected to redistribute the runtime components along with their games or applications.\n\nNo Microsoft product including the latest XNA releases provides DirectX 10 support for the .NET Framework.\n\nThe other approach for DirectX in managed languages is to use third-party libraries like:\n\nBULLET::::- SlimDX, an open source library for DirectX programming on the .NET Framework\nBULLET::::- SharpDX, which is an open source project delivering the full DirectX API for .NET on all Windows platforms, allowing the development of high performance game, 2D and 3D graphics rendering as well as real-time sound applications\nBULLET::::- DirectShow.NET for the DirectShow subset\nBULLET::::- Windows API CodePack for .NET Framework, which is an open source library from Microsoft.\n\nThere are alternatives to the DirectX family of APIs, with OpenGL, its successor Vulkan, Metal and Mantle having the most features comparable to Direct3D. Examples of other APIs include SDL, Allegro, OpenMAX, OpenML, OpenAL, OpenCL, FMOD, SFML etc. Many of these libraries are cross-platform or have open codebases. There are also alternative implementations that aim to provide the same API, such as the one in Wine. Furthermore, the developers of ReactOS are trying to reimplement DirectX under the name \"ReactX\".\n\nBULLET::::- DxDiag\nBULLET::::- Direct3D\nBULLET::::- Vulkan (API)\nBULLET::::- Simple DirectMedia Layer\nBULLET::::- Comparison of OpenGL and Direct3D\nBULLET::::- Graphics Device Interface (GDI)\nBULLET::::- Graphics pipeline\nBULLET::::- DirectX plugin\nBULLET::::- ActiveX\n\nBULLET::::- Microsoft's DirectX developer site\nBULLET::::- The State of DirectX 10 - Image Quality & Performance\n"}
{"id": "8508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8508", "title": "Slalom skiing", "text": "Slalom skiing\n\nSlalom is an alpine skiing and alpine snowboarding discipline, involving skiing between poles or gates. These are spaced more closely than those in giant slalom, super giant slalom and downhill, necessitating quicker and shorter turns. Internationally, the sport is contested at the FIS Alpine World Ski Championships, and at the Olympic Winter Games.\n\nThe term may also refer to waterskiing on one ski. \n\nThe term slalom comes from the Morgedal/Seljord (a Norwegian dialect) word \"slalåm\": \"sla\", meaning slightly inclining hillside, and \"låm\", meaning track after skis. The inventors of modern skiing classified their trails according to their difficulty. \"Slalåm\" was a trail used in Telemark by boys and girls not yet able to try themselves on the more challenging runs. \"Ufsilåm\" was a trail with one obstacle (\"ufse\") like a jump, a fence, a difficult turn, a gorge, a cliff (often more than high) and more. \"Uvyrdslåm\" was a trail with several obstacles. A Norwegian military downhill competition in 1767 included racing downhill among trees \"without falling or breaking skis\". Sondre Norheim and other skiers from Telemark practiced \"uvyrdslåm\" or \"disrespectful/reckless downhill\" where they raced downhill in difficult and untested terrain (i.e., off piste). The 1866 \"ski race\" in Oslo was a combined cross-country, jumping and slalom competition. In the slalom participants were allowed use poles for braking and steering, and they were given points for style (appropriate skier posture). During the late 1800s Norwegian skiers participated in all branches (jumping, slalom, and cross-country) often with the same pair of skis. Slalom and variants of slalom were often referred to as hill races. Around 1900 hill races are abandoned in the Oslo championships at Huseby and Holmenkollen. Mathias Zdarsky's development of the Lilienfeld binding helped change hill races into a specialty of the Alps region.\n\nThe rules for the modern slalom were developed by Arnold Lunn in 1922 for the British National Ski Championships, and adopted for alpine skiing at the 1936 Winter Olympics. Under these rules gates were marked by pairs of flags rather than single ones, were arranged so that the racers had to use a variety of turn lengths to negotiate them, and scoring was on the basis of time alone, rather than on both time and style.\n\nA course is constructed by laying out a series of gates, formed by alternating pairs of red and blue poles. The skier must pass between the two poles forming the gate, with the tips of both skis and the skier's feet passing between the poles. A course has 55 to 75 gates for men and 40 to 60 for women. The vertical drop for a men's course is and slightly less for women. The gates are arranged in a variety of configurations to challenge the competitor.\n\nBecause the offsets are relatively small in slalom, ski racers take a fairly direct line and often knock the poles out of the way as they pass, which is known as blocking. (The main blocking technique in modern slalom is cross-blocking, in which the skier takes such a tight line and angulates so strongly that he or she is able to block the gate with the outside hand.) Racers employ a variety of protective equipment, including shin pads, hand guards, helmets and face guards.\n\nTraditionally, bamboo poles were used for gates, the rigidity of which forced skiers to maneuver their entire body around each gate. In the early 1980s, rigid poles were replaced by hard plastic poles, hinged at the base. The hinged gates require, according to FIS rules, only that the skis and boots of the skier go around each gate.\n\nThe new gates allow a more direct path down a slalom course through the process of cross-blocking or shinning the gates. Cross-blocking is a technique in which the legs go around the gate with the upper body inclined toward, or even across, the gate; in this case the racer's outside pole and shinguards hit the gate, knocking it down and out of the way. Cross-blocking is done by pushing the gate down with the arms, hands, or shins. By 1989, most of the top technical skiers in the world had adopted the cross-block technique.\n\nWith the innovation of shaped skis around the turn of the 21st century, equipment used for slalom in international competition changed drastically. World Cup skiers commonly skied on slalom skis at a length of in the 1980s and 1990s but by the 2002 Olympic Winter Games in Salt Lake City, the majority of competitors were using skis measuring or less.\n\nThe downside of the shorter skis was that athletes found that recoveries were more difficult with a smaller platform underfoot. Out of concern for the safety of athletes, the FIS began to set minimum ski lengths for international slalom competition. The minimum was initially set at for men and for women, but was increased to for men and for women for the 2003–2004 season.\nThe equipment minimums and maximums imposed by the International Ski Federation (FIS) have created a backlash from skiers, suppliers, and fans. The main objection is that the federation is regressing the equipment, and hence the sport, by two decades. \nAmerican Bode Miller hastened the shift to the shorter, more radical sidecut skis when he achieved unexpected success after becoming the first Junior Olympic athlete to adopt the equipment in giant slalom and super-G in 1996. A few years later, the technology was adapted to slalom skis as well.\n\nIn the following table men's slalom World Cup podiums in the World Cup since first season in 1967.\n! style=width:10%Season\n! style=\"background:gold; width:30%\"1st\n! style=\"background:silver; width:30%\"2nd\n! style=\"background:#cc9966; width:30%\"3rd\nalign=center1967  Jean-Claude Killy  Guy Perillat  Heinrich Messner\nalign=center1968  Dumeng Giovanoli  Jean-Claude Killy  Patrick Russel\nalign=center1969  Alain Penz<br> Alfred Matt<br> Jean-Noel Augert<br> Patrick Russel bgcolor=lightgrey colspan=2\nalign=center1970  Alain Penz  Jean-Noel Augert<br> Patrick Russel bgcolor=lightgrey\nalign=center1971  Jean-Noel Augert  Gustav Thöni  Tyler Palmer\nalign=center1972  Jean-Noel Augert  Andrzej Bachleda  Roland Thöni\nalign=center1973  Gustav Thöni  Christian Neureuther  Jean-Noel Augert\nalign=center1974  Gustav Thöni  Christian Neureuther  Johann Kniewasser\nalign=center1975  Ingemar Stenmark  Gustav Thöni  Piero Gros\nalign=center1976  Ingemar Stenmark  Piero Gros  Gustav Thöni<br> Hans Hinterseer\nalign=center1977  Ingemar Stenmark  Klaus Heidegger  Paul Frommelt\nalign=center1978  Ingemar Stenmark  Klaus Heidegger  Phil Mahre\nalign=center1979  Ingemar Stenmark  Phil Mahre  Christian Neureuther\nalign=center1980  Ingemar Stenmark  Bojan Križaj  Christian Neureuther\nalign=center1981  Ingemar Stenmark  Phil Mahre  Bojan Križaj<br> Steve Mahre\nalign=center1982  Phil Mahre  Ingemar Stenmark  Steve Mahre\nalign=center1983  Ingemar Stenmark  Stig Strand  Andreas Wenzel\nalign=center1984  Marc Girardelli  Ingemar Stenmark  Franz Gruber\nalign=center1985  Marc Girardelli  Paul Frommelt  Ingemar Stenmark\nalign=center1986  Rok Petrovič  Bojan Križaj<br> Ingemar Stenmark<br> Paul Frommelt bgcolor=lightgrey\nalign=center1987  Bojan Križaj  Ingemar Stenmark  Armin Bittner\nalign=center1988  Alberto Tomba  Günther Mader  Felix McGrath\nalign=center1989  Armin Bittner  Alberto Tomba  Marc Girardelli<br> Ole-Christian Furuseth\nalign=center1990  Armin Bittner  Alberto Tomba<br> Ole-Christian Furuseth bgcolor=lightgrey \nalign=center1991  Marc Girardelli  Ole-Christian Furuseth  Rudolf Nierlich\nalign=center1992  Alberto Tomba  Paul Accola  Finn-Christian Jagge\nalign=center1993  Thomas Fogdö  Alberto Tomba  Thomas Stangassinger\nalign=center1994  Alberto Tomba  Thomas Stangassinger  Jure Kosir\nalign=center1995  Alberto Tomba  Michael Tritscher  Jure Kosir\nalign=center1996  Sebastien Amiez  Alberto Tomba  Thomas Sykora\nalign=center1997  Thomas Sykora  Thomas Stangassinger  Finn-Christian Jagge\nalign=center1998  Thomas Sykora  Thomas Stangassinger  Hans-Petter Buraas\nalign=center1999  Thomas Stangassinger  Jure Kosir  Finn-Christian Jagge\nalign=center2000  Kjetil-Andre Aamodt  Ole-Christian Furuseth  Matjaz Vrhovnik\nalign=center2001  Benjamin Raich  Heinz Schilchegger  Mario Matt\nalign=center2002  Ivica Kostelić  Bode Miller  Jean-Pierre Vidal\nalign=center2003  Kalle Palander  Ivica Kostelić  Rainer Schönfelder\nalign=center2004  Rainer Schönfelder  Kalle Palander  Benjamin Raich\nalign=center2005  Benjamin Raich  Rainer Schönfelder  Manfred Pranger\nalign=center2006  Giorgio Rocca  Kalle Palander  Benjamin Raich\nalign=center2007  Benjamin Raich  Mario Matt  Jens Byggmark\nalign=center2008  Manfred Mölgg  Jean-Baptiste Grange  Reinfried Herbst\nalign=center2009  Jean-Baptiste Grange  Ivica Kostelić  Julien Lizeroux\nalign=center2010  Reinfried Herbst  Julien Lizeroux  Silvan Zurbriggen\nalign=center2011  Ivica Kostelić  Jean-Baptiste Grange  Andre Myhrer\nalign=center2012  André Myhrer  Ivica Kostelić  Marcel Hirscher\nalign=center2013  Marcel Hirscher  Felix Neureuther  Ivica Kostelić\nalign=center2014  Marcel Hirscher  Felix Neureuther  Henrik Kristoffersen\nalign=center2015  Marcel Hirscher  Felix Neureuther  Alexander Khoroshilov\nalign=center2016  Henrik Kristoffersen  Marcel Hirscher  Felix Neureuther\nalign=center2017  Marcel Hirscher  Henrik Kristoffersen  Manfred Mölgg\nalign=center2018  Marcel Hirscher  Henrik Kristoffersen  André Myhrer\nalign=center2019  Marcel Hirscher  Clément Noël  Daniel Yule\n"}
{"id": "8518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8518", "title": "Dachshund", "text": "Dachshund\n\nThe dachshund ( or )(German: \"badger dog\"), also known as the wiener dog or sausage dog is a short-legged, long-bodied, hound-type dog breed. They may be smooth-haired, wire-haired, or long-haired.\n\nThe standard-size dachshund was developed to scent, chase, and flush out badgers and other burrow-dwelling animals, while the miniature dachshund was bred to hunt smaller prey such as rabbits. In the Western United States, they have also been used to track wounded deer and hunt prairie dogs.\n\nDachshunds also participate in conformation shows, field trials and many other events organized through pure-bred dog organizations such as the American Kennel Club (AKC). According to the AKC, the dachshund is ranked in 13th place in popularity amongst dog breeds in the United States.\n\nThe name \"dachshund\" is of German origin and literally means \"badger dog,\" from \"Dachs\" (\"European badger\") and \"Hund\" (\"hound, dog\"). The pronunciation varies in English: variations of the first and second syllables include , , and , , . It may be mispronounced as \"dash-hound\" by some English speakers. Although \"dachshund\" is a German word, in modern German they are more commonly known by the short name \"Dackel\" or \"Teckel\". The German word is pronounced .\n\nBecause of their long, narrow build, they are often nicknamed wiener dog or sausage dog. \n\nWhile classified in the hound group or scent hound group in the United States and Great Britain, the breed has its own group in the countries which belong to the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (World Canine Federation). Many dachshunds, especially the wire-haired subtype, may exhibit behavior and appearance that are similar to that of the terrier group of dogs. An argument can be made for the scent (or hound) group classification because the breed was developed to use scent to trail and hunt animals, and probably descended from the Saint Hubert Hound like many modern scent hound breeds such as bloodhounds and Basset Hounds; but with the persistent personality and love for digging that probably developed from the terrier, it can also be argued that they could belong in the terrier, or \"earth dog\", group.\n\nA typical dachshund is long-bodied and muscular with short stubby legs. Its front paws are disproportionately large, being paddle-shaped and particularly suitable for digging. Its skin is loose enough not to tear while tunneling in tight burrows to chase prey. The dachshund has a deep chest which provides appropriate lung capacity for stamina when hunting. Its snout is long. According to the AKC standards for the breed, \"scars from honorable wounds shall not be considered a fault\" because the dachshund is a hunting dog.\n\nThere are three dachshund coat varieties: smooth coat (short hair), longhaired, and wirehaired. Longhaired dachshunds have a silky coat and short featherings on legs and ears. Wirehaired dachshunds are the least common coat variety in the United States (although it is the most common in Germany) and the most recent coat to appear in breeding standards.\nDachshunds have a wide variety of colors and patterns, the most common one being red. Their base coloration can be single-colored (either red or cream), tan pointed (black and tan, chocolate and tan, blue and tan, or isabella and tan), and in wirehaired dogs, a color referred to as wildboar. Patterns such as dapple (merle), sable, brindle and piebald also can occur on any of the base colors. Dachshunds in the same litter may be born in different coat colors depending on the genetic makeup of the parents. \n\nThe dominant color in the breed is red, followed by black and tan. Tan pointed dogs have tan (or cream) markings over the eyes, ears, paws, and tail. The reds range from coppers to deep rusts, with or without somewhat common black hairs peppered along the back, face and ear edges, lending much character and an almost burnished appearance; this is referred to among breeders and enthusiasts as an \"overlay\" or \"sabling\". Sabling should not be confused with a more unusual coat color referred to as sable. At a distance, a sable dachshund looks somewhat like a black and tan dog. Upon closer examination, however, one can observe that along the top of the dog's body, each hair is actually banded with red at the base near the skin transitioning to mostly black along the length of the strand. An additional striking coat marking is the brindle pattern. \"Brindle\" refers to dark stripes over a solid background—usually red. If a dachshund is brindled on a dark coat and has tan points, it will have brindling on the tan points only. Even one single, lone stripe of brindle is a brindle. If a dachshund has one single spot of dapple, it is a dapple.\n\nThe Dachshund Club of America (DCA) and the American Kennel Club (AKC) consider both the piebald pattern and the double dapple (double merle) pattern to be nonstandard. However, both types continue to be shown and sometimes even win in the conformation ring.\n\nDogs that are double-dappled have the merle pattern of a dapple, but with distinct white patches that occur when the dapple gene expresses itself twice in the same area of the coat. The DCA excluded the wording \"double-dapple\" from the standard in 2007 and now strictly uses the wording \"dapple\" as the double dapple gene is commonly responsible for blindness and deafness.\n\nDachshunds come in three sizes: standard, miniature, and \"kaninchen\" (German for \"rabbit\"). Although the standard and miniature sizes are recognized almost universally, the rabbit size is not recognized by clubs in the United States and the United Kingdom. The rabbit size is recognized by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (World Canine Federation) (FCI), which contain kennel clubs from 83 countries all over the world. An increasingly common size for family pets falls between the miniature and the standard size, frequently referred to as \"tweenies,\" not an official classification.\n\nA full-grown standard dachshund averages to , while the miniature variety normally weighs less than . The kaninchen weighs to . According to kennel club standards, the miniature (and kaninchen, where recognized) differs from the full-size only by size and weight, thus offspring from miniature parents must never weigh more than the miniature standard to be considered a miniature as well. While many kennel club size divisions use weight for classification, such as the American Kennel Club, other kennel club standards determine the difference between the miniature and standard by chest circumference; some kennel clubs, such as in Germany, even measure chest circumference in addition to height and weight.\n\nH. L. Mencken said that \"A dachshund is a half-dog high and a dog-and-a-half long,\" although they have been referred to as \"two dogs long\". This characteristic has led them to be quite a recognizable breed, and they are featured in many jokes and cartoons, particularly \"The Far Side\" by Gary Larson.\n\nLight-colored dachshunds can sport amber, light brown, or green eyes; however, kennel club standards state that the darker the eye color, the better. Dapple and double dapple dachshunds can have multi coloured “wall” eyes with fully blue, partially blue or patched irises due to the effect of the dapple gene on eye pigmentation expression. “Wall” eye is permissible according to DCA standards but undesirable by AKC standards. Piebald-patterned dachshunds will never have blue in their eyes, unless the dapple pattern is present.\n\nDachshunds are playful, but as hunting dogs can be quite stubborn, and are known for their propensity for chasing small animals, birds, and tennis balls with great determination and ferocity. Many dachshunds are stubborn, making them a challenge to train.\n\nDachshunds can be aggressive to strangers and other dogs. Despite this, they are rated in the intelligence of dogs as an average working dog with a persistent ability to follow trained commands 50% of the time or more. They rank 49th in Stanley Coren's \"Intelligence of Dogs\", being of average working and obedience intelligence.\nThey can have a loud bark. Some bark quite a lot and may need training to stop, while others will not bark much at all. Dachshunds are known for their devotion and loyalty to their owners, though they can be standoffish towards strangers. If left alone too frequently, some dachshunds are prone to separation anxiety and may chew objects in the house to relieve stress.\n\nDachshunds are burrowers by nature and are likely to burrow in blankets and other items around the house, when bored or tired.\n\nDachshunds can be difficult to housebreak, and patience and consistency are often needed in this endeavor.\n\nAccording to the American Kennel Club's breed standards, \"the dachshund is clever, lively and courageous to the point of rashness, persevering in above and below ground work, with all the senses well-developed. Any display of shyness is a serious fault.\" Their temperament and body language give the impression that they do not know or care about their relatively small size. Like many small hunting dogs, they will challenge a larger dog. Indulged dachshunds may become snappy or extremely obstinate.\n\nMany dachshunds do not like unfamiliar people, and many will growl or bark at them. Although the dachshund is generally an energetic dog, some are sedate. This dog's behavior is such that it is not the dog for everyone. A bored, untrained dachshund will become destructive. If raised improperly and not socialized at a young age, dachshunds can become aggressive or fearful. They require a caring, loving owner who understands their need for entertainment and exercise.\n\nDachshunds may not be the best pets for small children. Like any dog, dachshunds need a proper introduction at a young age. Well-trained dachshunds and well-behaved children usually get along fine. Otherwise, they may be aggressive and bite an unfamiliar child, especially one that moves quickly around them or teases them. However, many dachshunds are very tolerant and loyal to children within their family, but these children should be mindful of the vulnerability of the breed's back.\n\nA 2008 University of Pennsylvania study of 6,000 dog owners who were interviewed indicated that dogs of smaller breeds were more likely to be \"genetically predisposed towards aggressive behaviour\". Dachshunds were rated the most aggressive, with 20% having bitten strangers, as well as high rates of attacks on other dogs and their owners. The study noted that attacks by small dogs were unlikely to cause serious injuries and because of this were probably under-reported.\n\nThe breed is prone to spinal problems, especially intervertebral disk disease (IVDD), due in part to an extremely long spinal column and short rib cage. The risk of injury may be worsened by obesity, jumping, rough handling, or intense exercise, which place greater strain on the vertebrae. About 20–25% of dachshunds will develop IVDD.\n\nTreatment consists of combinations of crate confinement and courses of anti-inflammatory medications (steroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like carprofen and meloxicam), or chronic pain medications, like tramadol. Serious cases may require surgery to remove the troublesome disk contents. A dog may need the aid of a cart to get around if paralysis occurs.\n\nA minimally invasive procedure called \"percutaneous laser disk ablation\" has been developed at the Oklahoma State University Veterinary Hospital. Originally, the procedure was used in clinical trials only on dachshunds that had suffered previous back incidents. Since dachshunds are prone to back issues, the goal is to expand this treatment to dogs in a normal population.\n\nIn addition to back problems, the breed is prone to patellar luxation where the kneecap can become dislodged. Dachshunds may also be affected by osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease). The condition seems to be mainly limited to wire-haired Dachshunds, with 17% being carriers. A genetic test is available to allow breeders to avoid breeding carriers to carriers. In such pairings, each puppy will have a 25% chance of being affected.\n\nIn some double dapples, there are varying degrees of vision and hearing loss, including reduced or absent eyes. Not all double dapples have problems with their eyes and/or ears, which may include degrees of hearing loss, full deafness, malformed ears, congenital eye defects, reduced or absent eyes, partial or full blindness, or varying degrees of both vision and hearing problems; but heightened problems can occur due to the genetic process in which two dapple genes cross, particularly in certain breeding lines. Dapple genes, which are dominant genes, are considered \"dilution\" genes, meaning whatever color the dog would have originally carried is lightened, or diluted, randomly; two dominant \"dilution\" genes can cancel each other out, or \"cross\", removing all color and producing a white recessive gene, essentially a white mutation. When occurring genetically within the eyes or ears, this white mutation can be detrimental to development, causing hearing or vision problems.\n\nOther dachshund health problems include hereditary epilepsy, granulomatous meningoencephalitis, dental issues, Cushing's syndrome, thyroid and autoimmune problems, various allergies and atopies, and various eye conditions including cataracts, glaucoma, progressive retinal atrophy, corneal ulcers, nonucerative corneal disease, sudden acquired retinal degeneration, and cherry eye. Dachshunds are also 2.5 times more likely than other breeds of dogs to develop patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital heart defect. Dilute color dogs (Blue, Isabella, and Cream) are very susceptible to color dilution alopecia, a skin disorder that can result in hair loss and extreme sensitivity to sun. Since the occurrence and severity of these health problems is largely hereditary, breeders are working to eliminate these.\n\nFactors influencing the litter size of puppies and the proportion of stillborn puppies per litter were analyzed in normally sized German dachshunds. The records analyzed contained data on 42,855 litters. It was found that as the inbreeding coefficient increased, litter size decreased and the percentage of stillborn puppies increased, thus indicating inbreeding depression. It was also found that young and older dams had smaller litter sizes and more stillborn puppies than middle-aged dams.\n\nThe dachshund is a creation of German breeders and includes elements of German, French, and English hounds and terriers. Dachshunds have been kept by royal courts all over Europe, including that of Queen Victoria, who was particularly enamored by the breed.\n\nThe first verifiable references to the dachshund, originally named the \"Dachs Kriecher\" (\"badger crawler\") or \"Dachs Krieger\" (\"badger warrior\"), came from books written in the early 18th century. Prior to that, there exist references to \"badger dogs\" and \"hole dogs\", but these likely refer to purposes rather than to specific breeds. The original German dachshunds were larger than the modern full-size variety, weighing between , and originally came in straight-legged and crook-legged varieties (the modern dachshund is descended from the latter). Though the breed is famous for its use in exterminating badgers and badger-baiting, dachshunds were also commonly used for rabbit and fox hunting, for locating wounded deer, and in packs were known to hunt game as large as wild boar and as fierce as the wolverine.\n\nThere are huge differences of opinion as to when dachshunds were specifically bred for their purpose of badger hunting, as the American Kennel Club states the dachshund was bred in the 15th century, while the Dachshund Club of America states that foresters bred the dogs in the 18th or 19th century.\n\nDouble-dapple dachshunds, which are prone to eye disease, blindness, or hearing problems, are generally believed to have been introduced to the United States between 1879 and 1885.\n\nThe flap-down ears and famous curved tail of the dachshund have deliberately been bred into the dog. In the case of the ears, this is to keep grass seeds, dirt, and other matter from entering the ear canal. The curved tail is dual-purposed: to be seen more easily in long grass and, in the case of burrowing dachshunds, to help haul the dog out if it becomes stuck in a burrow.\nThe smooth-haired dachshund, the oldest style, may be a cross between the German Shorthaired Pointer, a Pinscher, and a Bracke (a type of bloodhound), or to have been produced by crossing a short Bruno Jura Hound with a pinscher. Others believe it was a cross from a miniature French pointer and a pinscher; others claim that it was developed from the St. Hubert Hound, also a bloodhound, in the 18th century, and still others believe that they were descended from Basset Hounds, based upon their scent abilities and general appearance. Dachshunds can track a scent that is more than a week old.\n\nThe exact origins of the dachshund are therefore unknown. According to William Loeffler, from \" The American Book of the Dog (1891)\", in the chapter on dachshunds: \"The origin of the Dachshund is in doubt, our best authorities disagreeing as to the beginning of the breed.\" What can be agreed on, however, is that the short-haired dachshund gave rise to both the long-haired and the wire-haired varieties.\n\nThere are two theories about how the standard longhaired dachshund came about. One theory is that smooth Dachshunds would occasionally produce puppies which had slightly longer hair than their parents. By selectively breeding these animals, breeders eventually produced a dog which consistently produced longhaired offspring, and the longhaired dachshund was born. Another theory is that the standard longhaired dachshund was developed by breeding smooth dachshunds with various land and water spaniels. The long-haired dachshund may be a cross among any of the small dog breeds in the spaniel group, including the German Stoeberhund, and the smooth-haired dachshund.\n\nThe wire-haired dachshund, the last to develop, was bred in the late 19th century. There is a possibility the wire-haired dachshund was a cross between the smooth dachshund and various hard-coated terriers and wire-haired pinschers, such as the Schnauzer, the Dandie Dinmont Terrier, the German Wirehaired Pointer, or perhaps the Scottish Terrier.\n\nDachshunds have traditionally been viewed as a symbol of Germany. Political cartoonists commonly used the image of the dachshund to ridicule Germany. During World War I the dachshunds' popularity in the United States plummeted because of this association. As a result, they were often called \"liberty hounds\" by their owners similar to \"liberty cabbage\" becoming a term for sauerkraut mostly in North America. The stigma of the association was revived to a lesser extent during World War II, though it was comparatively short-lived. Kaiser Wilhelm II and German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel were known for keeping dachshunds.\n\nDue to the association of the breed with Germany, as well as its particular popularity among dog keepers in Munich back then, the dachshund was chosen to be the first official mascot for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, with the name Waldi.\n\nSome people train and enter their dachshund to compete in dachshund races, such as the Wiener Nationals. Several races across the United States routinely draw several thousand attendees, including races in Germantown, Tennessee; Bossier City, Louisiana; Buda, Texas; Davis, California; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Alamitos, California; Findlay, Ohio; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Kansas City, Kansas; Palo Alto, California; and Shakopee, Minnesota. There is also an annual dachshund run in Kennywood, located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, called the Wiener 100, in Huntington, West Virginia called the Dachshund Dash and in Lovettsville, Virginia as part of the town's annual Oktoberfest celebration.\n\nDespite the popularity of these events, the Dachshund Club of America opposes \"wiener racing\", as many greyhound tracks use the events to draw large crowds to their facilities. The DCA is also worried about potential injuries to dogs, due to their predisposition to back injuries. Another favorite sport is earthdog trials, in which dachshunds enter tunnels with dead ends and obstacles attempting to locate an artificial bait or live but caged and protected rats.\n\nIn Germany, dachshunds are widely called \"Dackel\" (both singular and plural). Among hunters, they are mainly referred to as \"Teckel\". There are kennels which specialize in breeding hunting dachshunds, the so-called \"jagdliche Leistungszucht\" (\"hunting-related performance breed\") or \"Gebrauchshundezucht\" (\"working dog breed\"), as opposed to breeding family dogs. Therefore, it is sometimes incorrectly believed that \"Teckel\" is either a name for the hunting breed or a mark for passing the test for a trained hunting dog (called \"VGP\", \"Verband-Gebrauchsprüfung\") in Germany.\n\nDachshunds are one of the most popular dogs in the United States, ranking 13th in the 2016 AKC registration statistics. They are popular with urban and apartment dwellers, ranking among the top ten most popular breeds in 76 of 190 major US cities surveyed by the AKC.\nOne will find varying degrees of organized local dachshund clubs in most major American cities, including New York, New Orleans, Portland, Los Angeles, and Chicago.\n\nBULLET::::- John F. Kennedy bought a dachshund puppy while touring Europe in 1937 for his then-girlfriend Olivia. The puppy, named Dunker, never left Germany after Kennedy started to get allergic reactions.\nBULLET::::- Grover Cleveland, the 22nd and 24th President, had a dachshund in the White House.\nBULLET::::- William Randolph Hearst was an avid lover of dachshunds. When his own dachshund Helena died, he eulogized her in his \"In The News\" column.\nBULLET::::- Fred, E.B. White's dachshund, appeared in many of his famous essays.\nBULLET::::- Lump, the pet of Pablo Picasso, who was thought to have inspired some of his artwork. (Pronounced: loomp; German for \"Rascal\") \"\" tells the story of Picasso and Lump.\nBULLET::::- Jack Ruby, the killer of Lee Harvey Oswald, had a dachshund named Sheba, which he often referred to as his wife. At the time he murdered Oswald, he had four of them—although he once had as many as 10.\nBULLET::::- Andy Warhol had a pair of dachshunds, Archie and Amos, whom he depicted in his paintings and mentioned frequently in his diaries.\nBULLET::::- Stanley and Boodgie, immortalized on canvas by owner David Hockney, and published in the book \"David Hockney's Dog Days\".\nBULLET::::- Wadl and Hexl, Kaiser Wilhelm II's famous ferocious pair. Upon arriving at Archduke Franz Ferdinand's country seat, château Konopiště, on a semi-official visit, they promptly proceeded to do away with one of the Austro-Hungarian heir presumptive's priceless golden pheasants, thereby almost causing an international incident. Another one of his beloved dachshunds, Senta, is currently buried at Huis Doorn, Wilhelm's manor in the Netherlands.\nBULLET::::- Donald Rumsfeld was asked, in 2003, whether he had duct tape, plastic sheeting, and a three-day supply of bottled water at home. He replied, \"I would like to say I did. I don't believe we do. But I do have a miniature dachshund named Reggie who looks out for us.\"\nBULLET::::- In Zelenogorsk, Russia, a parade of Dachshunds pass by a Dachshund monument every July 25 to commemorate the day the city was founded.\nBULLET::::- Joe was the dachshund of General Claire Lee Chennault, commander of the Flying Tigers and then the China Air Task Force of the US Army Air Forces, and became the mascot of those organizations.\nBULLET::::- Maxie, a dachshund owned by actress Marie Prevost, tried to awaken his dead mistress, who was found with small bites on her legs. Maxie's barking eventually summoned neighbours to the scene. The incident inspired the 1977 Nick Lowe song \"Marie Prevost\".\nBULLET::::- Liliane Kaufmann, wife of Edgar J. Kaufmann who commissioned the home Fallingwater from Frank Lloyd Wright in 1935, was a well known breeder and owner of long-haired dachshunds. At the Fallingwater bookstore, visitors are able to purchase a book titled \"Moxie\" which is about one of the dachshunds who lived at Fallingwater. Liliane raised long haired dachshunds and they travelled from Pittsburgh to Bear Run with her.\nBULLET::::- Obie is a dachshund who became infamous for his obesity, weighing as much as , more than twice a normal-weight standard dachshund. He reached his target weight of in July 2013.\nBULLET::::- Carole Lombard and Clark Gable had a dachshund named Commissioner.\nBULLET::::- Crusoe the Celebrity Dachshund gained fame on social media. In 2015, Crusoe came out with his \"The New York Times\" best-selling book titled \"Crusoe: Adventures of the Wiener Dog Extraordinaire!\". In 2018, Crusoe came out with another book titled Crusoe: The Worldly Weiner Dog. At the 9th annual Shorty Awards, Crusoe won the best animal category. In 2018, Crusoe won the People's Choice Awards Animal Star of 2018.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Nintendogs: Dachshund and Friends\"\nBULLET::::- Dachshund Breed Standard Russian Kennel Club 13 March 2001\nBULLET::::- Dachshund Breed Standard Poland Kennel Club 9 May 2001\n\nBULLET::::- Dachshund pronunciation\n"}
{"id": "8519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8519", "title": "Data structure", "text": "Data structure\n\nIn computer science, a data structure is a data organization, management, and storage format that enables efficient access and modification. More precisely, a data structure is a collection of data values, the relationships among them, and the functions or operations that can be applied to the data.\n\nData structures serve as the basis for abstract data types (ADT). The ADT defines the logical form of the data type. The data structure implements the physical form of the data type.\n\nDifferent types of data structures are suited to different kinds of applications, and some are highly specialized to specific tasks. For example, relational databases commonly use B-tree indexes for data retrieval, while compiler implementations usually use hash tables to look up identifiers.\n\nData structures provide a means to manage large amounts of data efficiently for uses such as large databases and internet indexing services. Usually, efficient data structures are key to designing efficient algorithms. Some formal design methods and programming languages emphasize data structures, rather than algorithms, as the key organizing factor in software design. Data structures can be used to organize the storage and retrieval of information stored in both main memory and secondary memory.\n\nData structures are generally based on the ability of a computer to fetch and store data at any place in its memory, specified by a pointer—a bit string, representing a memory address, that can be itself stored in memory and manipulated by the program. Thus, the array and record data structures are based on computing the addresses of data items with arithmetic operations, while the linked data structures are based on storing addresses of data items within the structure itself. \n\nThe implementation of a data structure usually requires writing a set of procedures that create and manipulate instances of that structure. The efficiency of a data structure cannot be analyzed separately from those operations. This observation motivates the theoretical concept of an abstract data type, a data structure that is defined indirectly by the operations that may be performed on it, and the mathematical properties of those operations (including their space and time cost).\n\nThere are numerous types of data structures, generally built upon simpler primitive data types:\nBULLET::::- An \"array\" is a number of elements in a specific order, typically all of the same type (depending on the language, individual elements may either all be forced to be the same type, or may be of almost any type). Elements are accessed using an integer index to specify which element is required. Typical implementations allocate contiguous memory words for the elements of arrays (but this is not always a necessity). Arrays may be fixed-length or resizable.\nBULLET::::- A \"linked list\" (also just called \"list\") is a linear collection of data elements of any type, called nodes, where each node has itself a value, and points to the next node in the linked list. The principal advantage of a linked list over an array, is that values can always be efficiently inserted and removed without relocating the rest of the list. Certain other operations, such as random access to a certain element, are however slower on lists than on arrays.\nBULLET::::- A \"record\" (also called \"tuple\" or \"struct\") is an aggregate data structure. A record is a value that contains other values, typically in fixed number and sequence and typically indexed by names. The elements of records are usually called \"fields\" or \"members\".\nBULLET::::- A \"union\" is a data structure that specifies which of a number of permitted primitive types may be stored in its instances, e.g. \"float\" or \"long integer\". Contrast with a record, which could be defined to contain a float \"and\" an integer; whereas in a union, there is only one value at a time. Enough space is allocated to contain the widest member datatype.\nBULLET::::- A \"tagged union\" (also called \"variant\", \"variant record\", \"discriminated union\", or \"disjoint union\") contains an additional field indicating its current type, for enhanced type safety.\nBULLET::::- An \"object\" is a data structure that contains data fields, like a record does, as well as various methods which operate on the data contents. An object is an in-memory instance of a class from a taxonomy. In the context of object-oriented programming, records are known as plain old data structures to distinguish them from objects.\n\nIn addition, \"graphs\" and \"binary trees\" are other commonly used data structures.\n\nMost assembly languages and some low-level languages, such as BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language), lack built-in support for data structures. On the other hand, many high-level programming languages and some higher-level assembly languages, such as MASM, have special syntax or other built-in support for certain data structures, such as records and arrays. For example, the C (a direct descendant of BCPL) and Pascal languages support structs and records, respectively, in addition to vectors (one-dimensional arrays) and multi-dimensional arrays.\n\nMost programming languages feature some sort of library mechanism that allows data structure implementations to be reused by different programs. Modern languages usually come with standard libraries that implement the most common data structures. Examples are the C++ Standard Template Library, the Java Collections Framework, and the Microsoft .NET Framework.\n\nModern languages also generally support modular programming, the separation between the interface of a library module and its implementation. Some provide opaque data types that allow clients to hide implementation details. Object-oriented programming languages, such as C++, Java, and Smalltalk, typically use classes for this purpose.\n\nMany known data structures have concurrent versions which allow multiple computing threads to access a single concrete instance of a data structure simultaneously.\n\nBULLET::::- Abstract data type\nBULLET::::- Concurrent data structure\nBULLET::::- Data model\nBULLET::::- Dynamization\nBULLET::::- Linked data structure\nBULLET::::- List of data structures\nBULLET::::- Persistent data structure\nBULLET::::- Plain old data structure\nBULLET::::- Succinct data structure\nBULLET::::- Peter Brass, \"Advanced Data Structures\", Cambridge University Press, 2008,\nBULLET::::- Donald Knuth, \"The Art of Computer Programming\", vol. 1. Addison-Wesley, 3rd edition, 1997,\nBULLET::::- Dinesh Mehta and Sartaj Sahni, \"Handbook of Data Structures and Applications\", Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, 2004,\nBULLET::::- Niklaus Wirth, \"Algorithms and Data Structures\", Prentice Hall, 1985,\n\nBULLET::::- Alfred Aho, John Hopcroft, and Jeffrey Ullman, \"Data Structures and Algorithms\", Addison-Wesley, 1983,\nBULLET::::- G. H. Gonnet and R. Baeza-Yates, \"Handbook of Algorithms and Data Structures - in Pascal and C\", second edition, Addison-Wesley, 1991,\nBULLET::::- Ellis Horowitz and Sartaj Sahni, \"Fundamentals of Data Structures in Pascal\", Computer Science Press, 1984,\n\nBULLET::::- Descriptions from the Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures\nBULLET::::- Data structures course\nBULLET::::- An Examination of Data Structures from .NET perspective\nBULLET::::- Schaffer, C. \"Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis\"\n"}
{"id": "8520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8520", "title": "Dmitri Shostakovich", "text": "Dmitri Shostakovich\n\nDmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich (, ; 9 August 1975) was a Russian composer and pianist. He is regarded as one of the major composers of the 20th century, with a unique harmonic language and a historic importance due to his years of work under Stalin.\nShostakovich achieved fame in the Soviet Union under the patronage of Soviet chief of staff Mikhail Tukhachevsky, but later had a complex and difficult relationship with the government. Nevertheless, he received accolades and state awards and served in the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR (1947) and the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union (from 1962 until his death).\nA polystylist, Shostakovich developed a hybrid voice, combining a variety of different musical techniques into his works. His music is characterized by sharp contrasts, elements of the grotesque, and ambivalent tonality; the composer was also heavily influenced by the neo-classical style pioneered by Igor Stravinsky, and (especially in his symphonies) by the late Romanticism of Gustav Mahler.\nShostakovich's orchestral works include 15 symphonies and six concerti. His chamber output includes 15 string quartets, a piano quintet, two piano trios, and two pieces for string octet. His solo piano works include two sonatas, an early set of preludes, and a later set of 24 preludes and fugues. Other works include three operas, several song cycles, ballets, and a substantial quantity of film music; especially well known is \"The Second Waltz\", Op. 99, music to the film \"The First Echelon\" (1955–1956), as well as the suites of music composed for \"The Gadfly\".\n\nBorn at Podolskaya Street in Saint Petersburg, Russia, Shostakovich was the second of three children of Dmitri Boleslavovich Shostakovich and Sofiya Vasilievna Kokoulina. Shostakovich's paternal grandfather, originally surnamed Szostakowicz, was of Polish Roman Catholic descent (his family roots trace to the region of the town of Vileyka in today's Belarus), but his immediate forebears came from Siberia. A Polish revolutionary in the January Uprising of 1863–4, Bolesław Szostakowicz would be exiled to Narym (near Tomsk) in 1866 in the crackdown that followed Dmitri Karakozov's assassination attempt on Tsar Alexander II. When his term of exile ended, Szostakowicz decided to remain in Siberia. He eventually became a successful banker in Irkutsk and raised a large family. His son Dmitri Boleslavovich Shostakovich, the composer's father, was born in exile in Narim in 1875 and studied physics and mathematics in Saint Petersburg University, graduating in 1899. He then went to work as an engineer under Dmitri Mendeleev at the Bureau of Weights and Measures in Saint Petersburg. In 1903 he married another Siberian transplant to the capital, Sofiya Vasilievna Kokoulina, one of six children born to a Russian Siberian native.\n\nTheir son, Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich, displayed significant musical talent after he began piano lessons with his mother at the age of nine. On several occasions he displayed a remarkable ability to remember what his mother had played at the previous lesson, and would get \"caught in the act\" of playing the previous lesson's music while pretending to read different music placed in front of him. In 1918 he wrote a funeral march in memory of two leaders of the Kadet party, murdered by Bolshevik sailors.\n\nIn 1919, at the age of 13, he was admitted to the Petrograd Conservatory, then headed by Alexander Glazunov, who monitored Shostakovich's progress closely and promoted him. Shostakovich studied piano with Leonid Nikolayev after a year in the class of Elena Rozanova, composition with Maximilian Steinberg, and counterpoint and fugue with Nikolay Sokolov, with whom he became friends. Shostakovich also attended Alexander Ossovsky's music history classes. Steinberg tried to guide Shostakovich on the path of the great Russian composers, but was disappointed to see him 'wasting' his talent and imitating Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev. Shostakovich also suffered for his perceived lack of political zeal, and initially failed his exam in Marxist methodology in 1926. His first major musical achievement was the First Symphony (premiered 1926), written as his graduation piece at the age of 19. This work brought him to the attention of Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who helped Shostakovich find accommodation and work in Moscow, and sent a driver around in \"a very stylish automobile\" to take him to a concert.\n\nAfter graduation, Shostakovich initially embarked on a dual career as concert pianist and composer, but his dry style of playing was often unappreciated (his American biographer, Laurel Fay, comments on his \"emotional restraint\" and \"riveting rhythmic drive\"). He nevertheless won an \"honorable mention\" at the First International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw in 1927. He attributed the disappointment at the competition to suffering from appendicitis and the jury being all-Polish. He had his appendix removed in April 1927. After the competition Shostakovich met the conductor Bruno Walter, who was so impressed by the composer's First Symphony that he conducted it at its Berlin premiere later that year. Leopold Stokowski was equally impressed and gave the work its U.S. premiere the following year in Philadelphia and also made the work's first recording.\n\nShostakovich concentrated on composition thereafter and soon limited his performances primarily to those of his own works. In 1927 he wrote his Second Symphony (subtitled \"To October\"), a patriotic piece with a great pro-Soviet choral finale. Owing to its experimental nature, as with the subsequent Third Symphony, it was not critically acclaimed with the enthusiasm given to the First.\n\n1927 also marked the beginning of Shostakovich's relationship with Ivan Sollertinsky, who remained his closest friend until the latter's death in 1944. Sollertinsky introduced the composer to the music of Mahler, which had a strong influence on his music from the Fourth Symphony onwards.\n\nWhile writing the Second Symphony, Shostakovich also began work on his satirical opera \"The Nose\", based on the story by Nikolai Gogol. In June 1929, against the composer's own wishes, the opera was given a concert performance; it was ferociously attacked by the Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians (RAPM). Its stage premiere on 18 January 1930 opened to generally poor reviews and widespread incomprehension among musicians.\n\nIn the late 1920s and early 1930s, Shostakovich worked at TRAM, a proletarian youth theatre. Although he did little work in this post, it shielded him from ideological attack. Much of this period was spent writing his opera, \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\", which was first performed in 1934. It was immediately successful, on both popular and official levels. It was described as \"the result of the general success of Socialist construction, of the correct policy of the Party\", and as an opera that \"could have been written only by a Soviet composer brought up in the best tradition of Soviet culture\".\n\nShostakovich married his first wife, Nina Varzar, in 1932. Initial difficulties led to a divorce in 1935, but the couple soon remarried when Nina became pregnant with their first child, Galina.\n\nOn 17 January 1936, Joseph Stalin paid a rare visit to the opera for a performance of a new work, \"Quiet Flows the Don\", based on the novel by Mikhail Sholokhov, by the little-known composer Ivan Dzerzhinsky, who was called to Stalin's box at the end of the performance and told that his work had \"considerable ideological-political value\". On 26 January, Stalin revisited the opera, accompanied by Vyacheslav Molotov, Andrei Zhdanov and Anastas Mikoyan, to hear \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District.\" He and his entourage left without speaking to anyone. Shostakovich had been forewarned by a friend that he should postpone a planned concert tour in Arkhangelsk, in order to be present at that particular performance. Eyewitness accounts testify that Shostakovich was \"white as a sheet\" when he went to take his bow after the third act. In letters written to Sollertinsky, Shostakovich recounted the horror with which he watched as Stalin shuddered every time the brass and percussion played too loudly. Equally horrifying was the way Stalin and his companions laughed at the love-making scene between Sergei and Katerina. The next day, Shostakovich left for Arkhangelsk, and was there when he heard on 28 January that \"Pravda\" had published a tirade titled \"Muddle Instead of Music\", complaining that the opera was a \"deliberately dissonant, muddled stream of sounds...(that) quacks, hoots, pants and gasps.\" This was the signal for a nationwide campaign, during which even Soviet music critics who had praised the opera were forced to recant in print, saying they \"failed to detect the shortcomings of \"Lady Macbeth\" as pointed out by \"Pravda\"\". There was resistance from those who admired Shostakovich, including Sollertinsky, who turned up at a composers' meeting in Leningrad called to denounce the opera and praised it instead. Two other speakers supported him. When Shostakovich returned to Leningrad, he had a telephone call from the commander of the Leningrad Military District, who had been asked by Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky to make sure that he was all right. When the writer Isaac Babel was under arrest four years later, he told his interrogators that \"it was common ground for us to proclaim the genius of the slighted Shostakovich.\"\n\nOn 6 February, Shostakovich was again attacked in \"Pravda\", this time for his light comic ballet \"The Limpid Stream\", which was denounced because \"it jangles and expresses nothing\" and did not give an accurate picture of peasant life on a collective farm. Fearful that he was about to be arrested, Shostakovich secured an appointment with the Chairman of the USSR State Committee on Culture, Platon Kerzhentsev, who reported to Stalin and Molotov that he had instructed the composer to \"reject formalist errors and in his art attain something that could be understood by the broad masses\", and that Shostakovich had admitted being in the wrong and had asked for a meeting with Stalin, which was not granted.\n\nAs a result of this campaign, commissions began to fall off, and Shostakovich's income fell by about three-quarters. His Fourth Symphony was due to receive its premiere on 11 December 1936, but he withdrew it from the public, possibly because it was banned, and the symphony was not performed for 25 years, until 30 December 1961. \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\" was also suppressed. A bowdlerised version was eventually performed under a new title, \"Katerina Izmailova\", on 8 January 1963. The anti-Shostakovich campaign also served as a signal to artists working in other fields, including art, architecture, the theatre and cinema, with the writer Mikhail Bulgakov, the director Sergei Eisenstein, and the theatre director Vsevolod Meyerhold among the prominent targets. More widely, 1936 marked the beginning of the Great Terror, in which many of the composer's friends and relatives were imprisoned or killed. These included his friend Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky (shot months after his arrest); his brother-in-law Vsevolod Frederiks (a distinguished physicist, who was eventually released but died before he got home); his close friend Nikolai Zhilyayev (a musicologist who had taught Tukhachevsky; shot shortly after his arrest); his mother-in-law, the astronomer Sofiya Mikhaylovna Varzar (sent to a camp in Karaganda); his friend the Marxist writer Galina Serebryakova (20 years in camps); his uncle Maxim Kostrykin (died); and his colleagues Boris Kornilov and Adrian Piotrovsky (executed). His only consolation in this period was the birth of his daughter Galina in 1936; his son Maxim was born two years later.\n\nThe publication of the \"Pravda\" editorials coincided with the composition of Shostakovich's Fourth Symphony. The work marked a great shift in style, owing to the substantial influence of Mahler and a number of Western-style elements. The symphony gave Shostakovich compositional trouble, as he attempted to reform his style into a new idiom. The composer was well into the work when the \"Pravda\" article appeared. He continued to compose the symphony and planned a premiere at the end of 1936. Rehearsals began that December, but after a number of rehearsals Shostakovich, for reasons still debated today, decided to withdraw the symphony from the public. A number of his friends and colleagues, such as Isaak Glikman, have suggested that it was, in fact, an official ban that Shostakovich was persuaded to present as a voluntary withdrawal. Whatever the case, it seems possible that this action saved the composer's life: during this time Shostakovich feared for himself and his family. Yet he did not repudiate the work; it retained its designation as his Fourth Symphony. A piano reduction was published in 1946, and the work was finally premiered in 1961, well after Stalin's death.\n\nDuring 1936 and 1937, in order to maintain as low a profile as possible between the Fourth and Fifth symphonies, Shostakovich mainly composed film music, a genre favored by Stalin and lacking in dangerous personal expression.\n\nThe composer's response to his denunciation was the Fifth Symphony of 1937, which was musically more conservative than his earlier works. Premiered on 21 November 1937 in Leningrad, it was a phenomenal success. The Fifth brought many to tears and welling emotions. Later, Shostakovich's purported memoir, \"Testimony\", stated: \"I'll never believe that a man who understood nothing could feel the Fifth Symphony. Of course they understood, they understood what was happening around them and they understood what the Fifth was about.\"\n\nThe success put Shostakovich in good standing once again. Music critics and the authorities alike, including those who had earlier accused Shostakovich of formalism, claimed that he had learned from his mistakes and become a true Soviet artist. In a newspaper article published under Shostakovich's name, the Fifth Symphony was characterized as \"A Soviet artist's creative response to just criticism.\" The composer Dmitry Kabalevsky, who had been among those who disassociated themselves from Shostakovich when the \"Pravda\" article was published, praised the Fifth Symphony and congratulated Shostakovich for \"not having given in to the seductive temptations of his previous 'erroneous' ways.\"\n\nIt was also at this time that Shostakovich composed the first of his string quartets. His chamber works allowed him to experiment and express ideas that would have been unacceptable in his more public symphonies. In September 1937 he began to teach composition at the Leningrad Conservatory, which provided some financial security.\n\nIn 1939, before Soviet forces attempted to invade Finland, the Party Secretary of Leningrad Andrei Zhdanov commissioned a celebratory piece from Shostakovich, the \"Suite on Finnish Themes\", to be performed as the marching bands of the Red Army paraded through Helsinki. The Winter War was a bitter experience for the Red Army, the parade never happened, and Shostakovich never laid claim to the authorship of this work. It was not performed until 2001.\nAfter the outbreak of war between the Soviet Union and Germany in 1941, Shostakovich initially remained in Leningrad. He tried to enlist for the military but was turned away because of his poor eyesight. To compensate, he became a volunteer for the Leningrad Conservatory's firefighter brigade and delivered a radio broadcast to the Soviet people \"\". The photograph for which he posed was published in newspapers throughout the country.\n\nHis greatest and most famous wartime contribution was the Seventh Symphony. The composer wrote the first three movements in Leningrad and completed the work in Kuibyshev (now Samara), where he and his family had been evacuated. It remains unclear whether Shostakovich really conceived the idea of the symphony with the siege of Leningrad in mind. It was officially claimed as a representation of the people of Leningrad's brave resistance to the German invaders and an authentic piece of patriotic art at a time when morale needed boosting. The symphony was first premiered by the Bolshoi Theatre orchestra in Kuibyshev and was soon performed abroad in London and the United States. The most compelling performance was the Leningrad premiere by the Radio Orchestra in the besieged city. The orchestra had only 14 musicians left, so the conductor Karl Eliasberg had to recruit anyone who could play an instrument to perform the symphony.\n\nThe family moved to Moscow in spring 1943. At the time of the Eighth Symphony's premiere, the tide had turned for the Red Army. As a consequence, the public, and most importantly the authorities, wanted another triumphant piece from the composer. Instead, they got the Eighth Symphony, perhaps the ultimate in sombre and violent expression in Shostakovich's output. In order to preserve Shostakovich's image (a vital bridge to the people of the Union and to the West), the government assigned the name \"Stalingrad\" to the symphony, giving it the appearance of mourning of the dead in the bloody Battle of Stalingrad. But the piece did not escape criticism. Its composer is reported to have said: \"When the Eighth was performed, it was openly declared counter-revolutionary and anti-Soviet. They said, 'Why did Shostakovich write an optimistic symphony at the beginning of the war and a tragic one now? At the beginning, we were retreating and now we're attacking, destroying the Fascists. And Shostakovich is acting tragic, that means he's on the side of the fascists.'\" The work was unofficially but effectively banned until 1956.\n\nThe Ninth Symphony (1945), in contrast, was much lighter in tone. Gavriil Popov wrote that it was \"splendid in its joie de vivre, gaiety, brilliance, and pungency!\" But by 1946 it too was the subject of criticism. Israel Nestyev asked whether it was the right time for \"a light and amusing interlude between Shostakovich's significant creations, a temporary rejection of great, serious problems for the sake of playful, filigree-trimmed trifles.\" The \"New York World-Telegram\" of 27 July 1946 was similarly dismissive: \"The Russian composer should not have expressed his feelings about the defeat of Nazism in such a childish manner\". Shostakovich continued to compose chamber music, notably his Second Piano Trio (Op. 67), dedicated to the memory of Sollertinsky, with a bittersweet, Jewish-themed \"totentanz\" finale. In 1947, the composer was made a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR.\n\nIn 1948, Shostakovich, along with many other composers, was again denounced for formalism in the Zhdanov decree. Andrei Zhdanov, Chairman of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, accused Shostakovich and other composers (such as Sergei Prokofiev and Aram Khachaturian) of writing inappropriate and formalist music. This was part of an ongoing anti-formalism campaign intended to root out all Western compositional influence as well as any perceived \"non-Russian\" output. The conference resulted in the publication of the Central Committee's Decree \"On V. Muradeli’s opera \"The Great Friendship\",\" which targeted all Soviet composers and demanded that they write only \"proletarian\" music, or music for the masses. The accused composers, including Shostakovich, were summoned to make public apologies in front of the committee. Most of Shostakovich's works were banned, and his family had privileges withdrawn. Yuri Lyubimov says that at this time \"he waited for his arrest at night out on the landing by the lift, so that at least his family wouldn't be disturbed.\"\n\nThe decree's consequences for composers were harsh. Shostakovich was among those dismissed from the Conservatory altogether. For him, the loss of money was perhaps the largest blow. Others still in the Conservatory experienced an atmosphere thick with suspicion. No one wanted his work to be understood as formalist, so many resorted to accusing their colleagues of writing or performing anti-proletarian music.\n\nIn the next few years, Shostakovich composed three categories of work: film music to pay the rent, official works aimed at securing official rehabilitation, and serious works \"for the desk drawer\". The latter included the Violin Concerto No. 1 and the song cycle \"From Jewish Folk Poetry\". The cycle was written at a time when the postwar anti-Semitic campaign was already under way, with widespread arrests, including that of I. Dobrushin and Yiditsky, the compilers of the book from which Shostakovich took his texts.\n\nThe restrictions on Shostakovich's music and living arrangements were eased in 1949, when Stalin decided that the Soviets needed to send artistic representatives to the Cultural and Scientific Congress for World Peace in New York City, and that Shostakovich should be among them. For Shostakovich, it was a humiliating experience culminating in a New York press conference where he was expected to read a prepared speech. Nicolas Nabokov, who was present in the audience, witnessed Shostakovich starting to read \"in a nervous and shaky voice\" before he had to break off \"and the speech was continued in English by a suave radio baritone\". Fully aware that Shostakovich was not free to speak his mind, Nabokov publicly asked him whether he supported the then recent denunciation of Stravinsky's music in the Soviet Union. Shostakovich, who was a great admirer of Stravinsky and had been influenced by his music, had no alternative but to answer in the affirmative. Nabokov did not hesitate to write that this demonstrated that Shostakovich was \"not a free man, but an obedient tool of his government.\" Shostakovich never forgave Nabokov for this public humiliation. That same year Shostakovich was obliged to compose the cantata \"Song of the Forests\", which praised Stalin as the \"great gardener\".\n\nStalin's death in 1953 was the biggest step toward Shostakovich's rehabilitation as a creative artist, which was marked by his Tenth Symphony. It features a number of musical quotations and codes (notably the DSCH and Elmira motifs, Elmira Nazirova being a pianist and composer who had studied under Shostakovich in the year before his dismissal from the Moscow Conservatory), the meaning of which is still debated, while the savage second movement, according to \"Testimony\", is intended as a musical portrait of Stalin. The Tenth ranks alongside the Fifth and Seventh as one of Shostakovich's most popular works. 1953 also saw a stream of premieres of the \"desk drawer\" works.\n\nDuring the forties and fifties, Shostakovich had close relationships with two of his pupils, Galina Ustvolskaya and Elmira Nazirova. In the background to all this remained Shostakovich's first, open marriage to Nina Varzar until her death in 1954. He taught Ustvolskaya from 1937 to 1947. The nature of their relationship is far from clear: Mstislav Rostropovich described it as \"tender\". Ustvolskaya rejected a proposal of marriage from him after Nina's death. Shostakovich's daughter, Galina, recalled her father consulting her and Maxim about the possibility of Ustvolskaya becoming their stepmother. Ustvolskaya's friend Viktor Suslin said that she had been \"deeply disappointed\" in Shostakovich by the time of her graduation in 1947. The relationship with Nazirova seems to have been one-sided, expressed largely through his letters to her, and can be dated to around 1953 to 1956. He married his second wife, Komsomol activist Margarita Kainova, in 1956; the couple proved ill-matched, and divorced five years later.\n\nIn 1954, Shostakovich wrote the Festive Overture, opus 96; it was used as the theme music for the 1980 Summer Olympics. (His '\"Theme from the film \"Pirogov\", Opus 76a: Finale\" was played as the cauldron was lit at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece.)\n\nIn 1959, Shostakovich appeared on stage in Moscow at the end of a concert performance of his Fifth Symphony, congratulating Leonard Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for their performance (part of a concert tour of the Soviet Union). Later that year, Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic recorded the symphony in Boston for Columbia Records.\n\nThe year 1960 marked another turning point in Shostakovich's life: he joined the Communist Party. The government wanted to appoint him General Secretary of the Composers' Union, but in order to hold that position he was required to attain Party membership. It was understood that Nikita Khrushchev, the First Secretary of the Communist Party from 1953 to 1964, was looking for support from the leading ranks of the intelligentsia in an effort to create a better relationship with the Soviet Union's artists. This event has been interpreted variously as a show of commitment, a mark of cowardice, the result of political pressure, or his free decision. On the one hand, the apparat was undoubtedly less repressive than it had been before Stalin's death. On the other, his son recalled that the event reduced Shostakovich to tears, and he later told his wife Irina that he had been blackmailed. Lev Lebedinsky has said that the composer was suicidal. From 1962, he served as a delegate in the Supreme Soviet of the USSR. Once he joined the Party, several articles he did not write denouncing individualism in music were published in \"Pravda\" under his name. In joining the party, Shostakovich was also committing himself to finally writing the homage to Lenin that he had promised before. His Twelfth Symphony, which portrays the Bolshevik Revolution and was completed in 1961, was dedicated to Vladimir Lenin and called \"The Year 1917.\" Around this time, his health began to deteriorate.\n\nShostakovich's musical response to these personal crises was the Eighth String Quartet, composed in only three days. He subtitled the piece \"To the victims of fascism and war\", ostensibly in memory of the Dresden fire bombing that took place in 1945. Yet, like the Tenth Symphony, this quartet incorporates quotations from several of his past works and his musical monogram. Shostakovich confessed to his friend Isaak Glikman, \"I started thinking that if some day I die, nobody is likely to write a work in memory of me, so I had better write one myself.\" Several of Shostakovich's colleagues, including Natalya Vovsi-Mikhoels and the cellist Valentin Berlinsky, were also aware of the Eighth Quartet's biographical intent. Peter J. Rabinowitz has also pointed to covert references to Richard Strauss's Metamorphosen in the Eighth Quartet.\n\nIn 1962 Shostakovich got married for the third time, to Irina Supinskaya. In a letter to Glikman, he wrote \"her only defect is that she is 27 years old. In all other respects she is splendid: clever, cheerful, straightforward and very likeable.\" According to Galina Vishnevskaya, who knew the Shostakoviches well, this marriage was a very happy one: \"It was with her that Dmitri Dmitriyevich finally came to know domestic peace... Surely, she prolonged his life by several years.\" In November he made his only venture into conducting, conducting a couple of his own works in Gorky; otherwise he declined to conduct, citing nerves and ill health.\n\nThat year saw Shostakovich again turn to the subject of anti-Semitism in his Thirteenth Symphony (subtitled \"Babi Yar\"). The symphony sets a number of poems by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the first of which commemorates a massacre of Ukrainian Jews during the Second World War. Opinions are divided how great a risk this was: the poem had been published in Soviet media, and was not banned, but remained controversial. After the symphony's premiere, Yevtushenko was forced to add a stanza to his poem which said that Russians and Ukrainians had died alongside the Jews at Babi Yar.\n\nIn 1965 Shostakovich raised his voice in defence of poet Joseph Brodsky, who was sentenced to five years of exile and hard labor. Shostakovich co-signed protests together with Yevtushenko and fellow Soviet artists Kornei Chukovsky, Anna Akhmatova, Samuil Marshak, and the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre. After the protests the sentence was commuted, and Brodsky returned to Leningrad.\n\nIn 1964 Shostakovich composed the music for the Russian film \"Hamlet\", which was favourably reviewed by \"The New York Times\": \"But the lack of this aural stimulation – of Shakespeare's eloquent words – is recompensed in some measure by a splendid and stirring musical score by Dmitri Shostakovich. This has great dignity and depth, and at times an appropriate wildness or becoming levity\".\n\nIn later life, Shostakovich suffered from chronic ill health, but he resisted giving up cigarettes and vodka. Beginning in 1958 he suffered from a debilitating condition that particularly affected his right hand, eventually forcing him to give up piano playing; in 1965 it was diagnosed as poliomyelitis. He also suffered heart attacks the following year and again in 1971, and several falls in which he broke both his legs; in 1967 he wrote in a letter: \"Target achieved so far: 75% (right leg broken, left leg broken, right hand defective). All I need to do now is wreck the left hand and then 100% of my extremities will be out of order.\"\n\nA preoccupation with his own mortality permeates Shostakovich's later works, among them the later quartets and the Fourteenth Symphony of 1969 (a song cycle based on a number of poems on the theme of death). This piece also finds Shostakovich at his most extreme with musical language, with twelve-tone themes and dense polyphony throughout. He dedicated the piece to his close friend Benjamin Britten, who conducted its Western premiere at the 1970 Aldeburgh Festival. The Fifteenth Symphony of 1971 is, by contrast, melodic and retrospective in nature, quoting Wagner, Rossini and the composer's own Fourth Symphony.\n\nShostakovich died of lung cancer on 9 August 1975. A civic funeral was held; he was interred in Novodevichy Cemetery, Moscow. Even before his death he had been commemorated with the naming of the Shostakovich Peninsula on Alexander Island, Antarctica., Despite suffering from Motor Neurone Disease (or ALS) from as early as the 1960s, Shostakovich insisted upon writing all his own correspondence and music himself, even when his right hand was virtually unusable. This is a last hallmark of his extraordinarily determined and tenacious character.\nHe was survived by his third wife, Irina; his daughter, Galina; and his son, Maxim, a pianist and conductor who was the dedicatee and first performer of some of his father's works. Shostakovich himself left behind several recordings of his own piano works; other noted interpreters of his music include Emil Gilels, Mstislav Rostropovich, Tatiana Nikolayeva, Maria Yudina, David Oistrakh, and members of the Beethoven Quartet.\n\nHis last work was his Viola Sonata, which was first performed officially on 1 October 1975.\n\nShostakovich's musical influence on later composers outside the former Soviet Union has been relatively slight, although Alfred Schnittke took up his eclecticism and his contrasts between the dynamic and the static, and some of André Previn's music shows clear links to Shostakovich's style of orchestration. His influence can also be seen in some Nordic composers, such as Lars-Erik Larsson. Many of his Russian contemporaries, and his pupils at the Leningrad Conservatory were strongly influenced by his style (including German Okunev, Boris Tishchenko, whose 5th Symphony of 1978 is dedicated to Shostakovich's memory, Sergei Slonimsky, and others). Shostakovich's conservative idiom has grown increasingly popular with audiences both within and beyond Russia, as the avant-garde has declined in influence and debate about his political views has developed.\n\nShostakovich's works are broadly tonal and in the Romantic tradition, but with elements of atonality and chromaticism. In some of his later works (e.g., the Twelfth Quartet), he made use of tone rows. His output is dominated by his cycles of symphonies and string quartets, each totaling fifteen works. The symphonies are distributed fairly evenly throughout his career, while the quartets are concentrated towards the latter part. Among the most popular are the Fifth and Seventh Symphonies and the Eighth and Fifteenth Quartets. Other works include the operas \"Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk\", \"The Nose\" and the unfinished \"The Gamblers\" based on the comedy of Nikolai Gogol; six concertos (two each for piano, violin and cello); two piano trios; and a large quantity of film music.\n\nShostakovich's music shows the influence of many of the composers he most admired: Bach in his fugues and passacaglias; Beethoven in the late quartets; Mahler in the symphonies and Berg in his use of musical codes and quotations. Among Russian composers, he particularly admired Modest Mussorgsky, whose operas \"Boris Godunov\" and \"Khovanshchina\" he re-orchestrated; Mussorgsky's influence is most prominent in the wintry scenes of \"Lady Macbeth\" and the Eleventh Symphony, as well as in his satirical works such as \"Rayok\". Prokofiev's influence is most apparent in the earlier piano works, such as the first sonata and first concerto. The influence of Russian church and folk music is very evident in his works for unaccompanied choir of the 1950s.\n\nShostakovich's relationship with Stravinsky was profoundly ambivalent; as he wrote to Glikman, \"Stravinsky the composer I worship. Stravinsky the thinker I despise.\" He was particularly enamoured of the Symphony of Psalms, presenting a copy of his own piano version of it to Stravinsky when the latter visited the USSR in 1962. (The meeting of the two composers was not very successful, however; observers commented on Shostakovich's extreme nervousness and Stravinsky's \"cruelty\" to him.)\n\nMany commentators have noted the disjunction between the experimental works before the 1936 denunciation and the more conservative ones that followed; the composer told Flora Litvinova, \"without 'Party guidance' ... I would have displayed more brilliance, used more sarcasm, I could have revealed my ideas openly instead of having to resort to camouflage.\" Articles published by Shostakovich in 1934 and 1935 cited Berg, Schoenberg, Krenek, Hindemith, \"and especially Stravinsky\" among his influences. Key works of the earlier period are the First Symphony, which combined the academicism of the conservatory with his progressive inclinations; \"The Nose\" (\"The most uncompromisingly modernist of all his stage-works\"); \"Lady Macbeth\", which precipitated the denunciation; and the Fourth Symphony, described in Grove's Dictionary as \"a colossal synthesis of Shostakovich's musical development to date\". The Fourth Symphony was also the first in which the influence of Mahler came to the fore, prefiguring the route Shostakovich took to secure his rehabilitation, while he himself admitted that the preceding two were his least successful.\n\nIn the years after 1936, Shostakovich's symphonic works were outwardly musically conservative, regardless of any subversive political content. During this time he turned increasingly to chamber works, a field that permitted the composer to explore different and often darker ideas without inviting external scrutiny. While his chamber works were largely tonal, they gave Shostakovich an outlet for sombre reflection not welcomed in his more public works. This is most apparent in the late chamber works, which portray what is described in Grove's Dictionary as a \"world of purgatorial numbness\"; in some of these he included the use of tone rows, although he treated these as melodic themes rather than serially. Vocal works are also a prominent feature of his late output, setting texts often concerned with love, death and art.\n\nEven before the Stalinist anti-Semitic campaigns in the late 1940s and early 1950s, Shostakovich showed an interest in Jewish themes. He was intrigued by Jewish music's \"ability to build a jolly melody on sad intonations\". Examples of works that included Jewish themes are the Fourth String Quartet (1949), the First Violin Concerto (1948), and the \"Four Monologues on Pushkin Poems\" (1952), as well as the Piano Trio in E minor (1944). He was further inspired to write with Jewish themes when he examined Moisei Beregovski's 1944 thesis on Jewish folk music.\n\nIn 1948, Shostakovich acquired a book of Jewish folk songs, and from this he composed the song cycle \"From Jewish Folk Poetry\". He initially wrote eight songs that were meant to represent the hardships of being Jewish in the Soviet Union. To disguise this, Shostakovich added three more songs meant to demonstrate the great life Jews had under the Soviet regime. Despite his efforts to hide the real meaning in the work, the Union of Composers refused to approve his music in 1949 under the pressure of the anti-Semitism that gripped the country. \"From Jewish Folk Poetry\" could not be performed until after Stalin's death in March 1953, along with all the other works that were forbidden.\n\nThroughout his compositions, Shostakovich demonstrated a controlled use of musical quotation. This stylistic choice had been common in previous composers, but Shostakovich developed it into a defining characteristic of his music. Rather than quoting other composers, Shostakovich preferred to quote himself. His compositions have been connected by musicologists through their quotations.\n\nOne example is the main theme of Katerina's aria, \"Seryozha, khoroshiy moy\" from the fourth act of \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\". It accompanies Katerina as she reunites with her lover Sergei. The aria's beauty comes as a breath of fresh air in the intense, overbearing tone of the scene. This goes well with the dialogue, as Katerina visits her lover in prison. The theme is made tragic when Sergei betrays her and finds a new lover upon blaming Katerina for his incarceration.\n\nMore than 25 years later, Shostakovich quotes this theme in his eighth string quartet. In the midst of this quartet's oppressive and somber themes, the only time the listener receives a light and cheerful moment is when the cello introduces the Seryozha theme about three minutes into the fourth movement. The quotation uses Katerina's hope amid misery as a means to demonstrate the hope of those oppressed by fascists.\n\nThis theme emerges once again in his 14th string quartet. As in the eighth, the cello introduces the theme, but for an entirely different purpose. The last in Shostakovich's \"quartet of quartets\", the fourteenth serves to honor the cellist of the Beethoven String Quartet, Sergei Shirinsky. Rather than reflecting the original theme's intentions, the quotation serves as a dedication to Shirinsky.\n\nIn 2004, the musicologist Olga Digonskaya discovered a trove of Shostakovich manuscripts at the Glinka State Central Museum of Musical Culture, Moscow. In a cardboard file were some \"300 pages of musical sketches, pieces and scores\" in Shostakovich's hand. \"A composer friend bribed Shostakovich's housemaid to regularly deliver the contents of Shostakovich's office waste bin to him, instead of taking it to the garbage. Some of those cast-offs eventually found their way into the Glinka. ... The Glinka archive 'contained a huge number of pieces and compositions which were completely unknown or could be traced quite indirectly,' Digonskaya said.\"\n\nAmong these were Shostakovich's piano and vocal sketches for a prologue to an opera, \"Orango\" (1932). They were orchestrated by the British composer Gerard McBurney and premiered in December 2011 by the Los Angeles Philharmonic.\n\nAccording to McBurney, opinion is divided on whether Shostakovich's music is \"of visionary power and originality, as some maintain, or, as others think, derivative, trashy, empty and second-hand\". William Walton, his British contemporary, described him as \"the greatest composer of the 20th century\". Musicologist David Fanning concludes in Grove's Dictionary that, \"Amid the conflicting pressures of official requirements, the mass suffering of his fellow countrymen, and his personal ideals of humanitarian and public service, he succeeded in forging a musical language of colossal emotional power.\"\n\nSome modern composers have been critical. Pierre Boulez dismissed Shostakovich's music as \"the second, or even third of Mahler\". The Romanian composer and Webern disciple Philip Gershkovich called Shostakovich \"a hack in a trance\". A related complaint is that Shostakovich's style is vulgar and strident: Stravinsky wrote of \"Lady Macbeth\": \"brutally hammering ... and monotonous\". English composer and musicologist Robin Holloway described his music as \"battleship-grey in melody and harmony, factory-functional in structure; in content all rhetoric and coercion.\"\n\nIn the 1980s, the Finnish conductor and composer Esa-Pekka Salonen was critical of Shostakovich and refused to conduct his music. For instance, he said in 1987:\nShostakovich is in many ways a polar counter-force for Stravinsky. [...] When I have said that the 7th symphony of Shostakovich is a dull and unpleasant composition, people have responded: \"Yes, yes, but think of the background of that symphony.\" Such an attitude does no good to anyone.\n\nSalonen has since performed and recorded several of Shostakovich's works, including the Piano Concertos Nos. 1 and 2 (1999), the Violin Concerto No. 1 (2010), the Prologue to \"Orango\" and the Symphony No. 4 (2012).\n\nIt is certainly true that Shostakovich borrows extensively from the material and styles both of earlier composers and of popular music; the vulgarity of \"low\" music is a notable influence on this \"greatest of eclectics\". McBurney traces this to the avant-garde artistic circles of the early Soviet period in which Shostakovich moved early in his career, and argues that these borrowings were a deliberate technique to allow him to create \"patterns of contrast, repetition, exaggeration\" that gave his music large-scale structure.\n\nShostakovich was in many ways an obsessive man: according to his daughter he was \"obsessed with cleanliness\". He synchronised the clocks in his apartment and regularly sent cards to himself to test how well the postal service was working. Elizabeth Wilson's \"Shostakovich: A Life Remembered\" (1994 edition) indexes 26 references to his nervousness. Mikhail Druskin remembers that even as a young man the composer was \"fragile and nervously agile\". Yuri Lyubimov comments, \"The fact that he was more vulnerable and receptive than other people was no doubt an important feature of his genius.\" In later life, Krzysztof Meyer recalled, \"his face was a bag of tics and grimaces.\"\n\nIn his lighter moods, sport was one of his main recreations, although he preferred spectating or umpiring to participating (he was a qualified football referee). His favourite football club was Zenit Leningrad (now Zenit Saint Petersburg), which he would watch regularly. He also enjoyed playing card games, particularly patience.\n\nHe was fond of satirical writers such as Gogol, Chekhov and Mikhail Zoshchenko. The influence of the latter in particular is evident in his letters, which include wry parodies of Soviet officialese. Zoshchenko himself noted the contradictions in the composer's character: \"he is ... frail, fragile, withdrawn, an infinitely direct, pure child ... [but he is also] hard, acid, extremely intelligent, strong perhaps, despotic and not altogether good-natured (although cerebrally good-natured).\"\n\nHe was diffident by nature: Flora Litvinova has said he was \"completely incapable of saying 'No' to anybody.\" This meant he was easily persuaded to sign official statements, including a denunciation of Andrei Sakharov in 1973. His widow later told Helsingin Sanomat that his name was included without his permission. On the other hand, he was willing to try to help constituents in his capacities as chairman of the Composers' Union and Deputy to the Supreme Soviet. Oleg Prokofiev commented that \"he tried to help so many people that ... less and less attention was paid to his pleas.\" When asked if he believed in God, Shostakovich said \"No, and I am very sorry about it.\"\n\nShostakovich's response to official criticism and whether he used music as a kind of covert dissidence is a matter of dispute. He outwardly conformed to government policies and positions, reading speeches and putting his name to articles expressing the government line. But it is evident he disliked many aspects of the regime, as confirmed by his family, his letters to Isaak Glikman, and the satirical cantata \"Rayok\", which ridiculed the \"anti-formalist\" campaign and was kept hidden until after his death. He was a close friend of Marshal of the Soviet Union Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who was executed in 1937 during the Great Purge.\n\nIt is also uncertain to what extent Shostakovich expressed his opposition to the state in his music. The revisionist view was put forth by Solomon Volkov in the 1979 book \"Testimony\", which claimed to be Shostakovich's memoirs dictated to Volkov. The book alleged that many of the composer's works contained coded anti-government messages, placing Shostakovich in a tradition of Russian artists outwitting censorship that goes back at least to Alexander Pushkin. He incorporated many quotations and motifs in his work, most notably his musical signature DSCH. His longtime musical collaborator Yevgeny Mravinsky said, \"Shostakovich very often explained his intentions with very specific images and connotations.\"\n\nThe revisionist perspective has subsequently been supported by his children, Maxim and Galina, although Maxim said in 1981 that Volkov's book was not his father's work. Volkov has further argued, both in \"Testimony\" and in \"Shostakovich and Stalin\", that Shostakovich adopted the role of the \"yurodivy\" or holy fool in his relations with the government. Other prominent revisionists are Ian MacDonald, whose book \"The New Shostakovich\" put forward further revisionist interpretations of his music, and Elizabeth Wilson, whose \"Shostakovich: A Life Remembered\" provides testimony from many of the composer's acquaintances.\n\nMusicians and scholars including Laurel Fay and Richard Taruskin contest the authenticity and debate the significance of \"Testimony\", alleging that Volkov compiled it from a combination of recycled articles, gossip, and possibly some information directly from the composer. Fay documents these allegations in her 2002 article 'Volkov's \"Testimony\" reconsidered', showing that the only pages of the original \"Testimony\" manuscript that Shostakovich had signed and verified are word-for-word reproductions of earlier interviews he gave, none of which are controversial. Against this, Allan B. Ho and Dmitry Feofanov have pointed out that at least two of the signed pages contain controversial material: for instance, \"on the first page of chapter 3, where [Shostakovich] notes that the plaque that reads 'In this house lived [Vsevolod] Meyerhold' should also say 'And in this house his wife was brutally murdered'.\"\n\nIn May 1958, during a visit to Paris, Shostakovich recorded his two piano concertos with André Cluytens, as well as some short piano works. These were issued by EMI on an LP, reissued by Seraphim Records on LP, and eventually digitally remastered and released on CD. Shostakovich recorded the two concertos in stereo in Moscow for Melodiya. Shostakovich also played the piano solos in recordings of the Cello Sonata, Op. 40 with cellist Daniil Shafran and also with Mstislav Rostropovich; the Violin Sonata, Op. 134, with violinist David Oistrakh; and the Piano Trio, Op. 67 with violinist David Oistrakh and cellist Miloš Sádlo. There is also a short sound film of Shostakovich as soloist in a 1930s concert performance of the closing moments of his first piano concerto. A colour film of Shostakovich supervising one of his operas, from his last year, was also made. A major achievement was EMI's recording of the original, unexpurgated opera \"Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk\". There was at least one recording of the cleaned-up version, \"Katerina Ismailova\", that Shostakovich had made to satisfy Soviet censorship. But when conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and his wife, soprano Galina Vishnevskaya were finally allowed to emigrate to the West, the composer begged them to record the full original score, which they did in April 1978. It features Vishnevskaya as Katerina, Nicolai Gedda as Sergei, Dimiter Petkov as Boris Ismailov and a brilliant supporting cast under Rostropovich's direction.\n\nBelgium: Member of the Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium (1960)\n\nDenmark: Léonie Sonning Music Prize (1973)\n\nFinland: Wihuri Sibelius Prize (1958)\n\nSoviet Union:\n\nUnited Kingdom: Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society (1966)\n\nBULLET::::- Music written in all major and/or minor keys\nBULLET::::- Sinyavsky–Daniel trial\nBULLET::::- \"The Noise of Time\" – a novel concerning Shostakovich by English author Julian Barnes.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Complete catalogue of works, with many additional comments by Sikorski\nBULLET::::- The Shostakovich Debate: Interpreting the composer's life and music\nBULLET::::- One Resurrected Drunkard: A Dialogue on Tony Palmer's \"Testimony\" Article on Palmer's Shostakovich film in \"Bright Lights Film Journal\"\nBULLET::::- Dmitry Shostakovich about Iosif Andriasov\nBULLET::::- Journey of Dmitri Shostakovich – an interview with filmmaker Helga Landauer\nBULLET::::- Epitonic.com: Dimitri Shostakovich featuring tracks from \"Written with the Heart's Blood\"\nBULLET::::- , at a rehearsal of his opera \"The Nose\" in 1975\nBULLET::::- BBC Presenter Stephen Johnson on Shostakovich and Depression\nBULLET::::- \"Altovaya sonata. Dmitriy Shostakovich (1981)\" (\"Sonata for Viola\"), documentary film on Shostakovich's life, and difficulties with Khrennikov and Stalin\nBULLET::::- Complete opus list, comprehensive discography, bibliography, filmography, list of first performances and links by Yosuke Kudo\nBULLET::::- Archive of BBC's \"Discovering Music\" radio show, featuring Shostakovich's Symphony No. 5, Symphony No. 10, String Quartet No. 8, and Cello Concerto No. 1.\nBULLET::::- Various pieces by Shostakovich in streaming media by Classical Music Archives\nBULLET::::- Shostakovich: the 24 preludes Op. 34\nBULLET::::- University of Houston Moderated Discussion List: Dmitri Shostakovich and other Russian Composers\nBULLET::::- Shostakovich: the string quartets\nBULLET::::- Shostakovich: the quartets in context\nBULLET::::- Interview with the composer's son, conductor Maxim Shostakovich by Bruce Duffie, 10 July 1992\nBULLET::::- \"Shostakovich's Tenth Symphony: The Azerbaijani Link – Elmira Nazirova\" by Aida Huseinova, in Azerbaijan International, Vol. 11:1 (Spring 2003), pp. 54–59.\n"}
