{"id": "10128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10128", "title": "Elizabeth I of England", "text": "Elizabeth I of England\n\nElizabeth I (7 September 1533 – 24 March 1603) was Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death on 24 March 1603. Sometimes called the Virgin Queen, Gloriana or Good Queen Bess, Elizabeth was the last of the five monarchs of the House of Tudor.\n\nElizabeth was the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, his second wife, who was executed two-and-a-half years after Elizabeth's birth. Anne's marriage to Henry VIII was annulled, and Elizabeth was declared illegitimate. Her half-brother, Edward VI, ruled until his death in 1553, bequeathing the crown to Lady Jane Grey and ignoring the claims of his two half-sisters, Elizabeth and the Roman Catholic Mary, in spite of statute law to the contrary. Edward's will was set aside and Mary became queen, deposing Lady Jane Grey. During Mary's reign, Elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting Protestant rebels.\n\nIn 1558 upon Mary's death, Elizabeth succeeded her half-sister to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel. She depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers, led by William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley. One of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an English Protestant church, of which she became the Supreme Governor. This Elizabethan Religious Settlement was to evolve into the Church of England. It was expected that Elizabeth would marry and produce an heir; however, despite numerous courtships, she never did. She was eventually succeeded by her first cousin twice removed, James VI of Scotland. She had earlier been responsible for the imprisonment and execution of James's mother, Mary, Queen of Scots.\n\nIn government, Elizabeth was more moderate than her father and half-siblings had been. One of her mottoes was \"\"video et taceo\"\" (\"I see but say nothing\"). In religion, she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution. After the pope declared her illegitimate in 1570 and released her subjects from obedience to her, several conspiracies threatened her life, all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers' secret service. Elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs, manoeuvring between the major powers of France and Spain. She only half-heartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly resourced military campaigns in the Netherlands, France, and Ireland. By the mid-1580s, England could no longer avoid war with Spain. England's defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 associated Elizabeth with one of the greatest military victories in English history.\n\nAs she grew older, Elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity. A cult grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits, pageants, and literature of the day. Elizabeth's reign became known as the Elizabethan era. The period is famous for the flourishing of English drama, led by playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe, and for the seafaring prowess of English adventurers such as Francis Drake. Some historians depict Elizabeth as a short-tempered, sometimes indecisive ruler, who enjoyed more than her share of luck. Towards the end of her reign, a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity. Elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer and a dogged survivor in an era when government was ramshackle and limited, and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones. After the short reigns of her half-siblings, her 44 years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped forge a sense of national identity.\n\nElizabeth was born at Greenwich Palace and was named after her grandmothers, Elizabeth of York and Elizabeth Howard. She was the second child of Henry VIII of England born in wedlock to survive infancy. Her mother was Henry's second wife, Anne Boleyn. At birth, Elizabeth was the heir presumptive to the throne of England. Her older half-sister, Mary, had lost her position as a legitimate heir when Henry annulled his marriage to Mary's mother, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Anne, with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the Tudor succession. She was baptised on 10 September 1533; Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, the Marquess of Exeter, the Duchess of Norfolk and the Dowager Marchioness of Dorset stood as her godparents. A canopy was carried at the ceremony over the three-day old child by her uncle Viscount Rochford, Lord Hussey, Lord Thomas Howard, and Lord Howard of Effingham.\n\nElizabeth was two years and eight months old when her mother was beheaded on 19 May 1536, four months after Catherine of Aragon's death from natural causes. Elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession. Eleven days after Anne Boleyn's execution, Henry married Jane Seymour, who died shortly after the birth of their son, Edward, in 1537. From his birth, Edward was undisputed heir apparent to the throne. Elizabeth was placed in his household and carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.\n\nElizabeth's first governess, Margaret Bryan, wrote that she was \"as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever I knew any in my life\". Catherine Champernowne, better known by her later, married name of Catherine \"Kat\" Ashley, was appointed as Elizabeth's governess in 1537, and she remained Elizabeth's friend until her death in 1565. Champernowne taught Elizabeth four languages: French, Flemish, Italian and Spanish. By the time William Grindal became her tutor in 1544, Elizabeth could write English, Latin, and Italian. Under Grindal, a talented and skilful tutor, she also progressed in French and Greek. After Grindal died in 1548, Elizabeth received her education under Roger Ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging.\n\nBy the time her formal education ended in 1550, Elizabeth was one of the best educated women of her generation. At the end of her life, Elizabeth was also believed to speak Welsh, Cornish, Scottish and Irish in addition to the languages mentioned above. The Venetian ambassador stated in 1603 that she \"possessed [these] languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue\". Historian Mark Stoyle suggests that she was probably taught Cornish by William Killigrew, Groom of the Privy Chamber and later Chamberlain of the Exchequer.\n\nHenry VIII died in 1547 and Elizabeth's half-brother, Edward VI, became king at age nine. Catherine Parr, Henry's widow, soon married Thomas Seymour, 1st Baron Seymour of Sudeley, Edward VI's uncle and the brother of the Lord Protector, Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset. The couple took Elizabeth into their household at Chelsea. There Elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis that some historians believe affected her for the rest of her life. Thomas Seymour, approaching age 40 but having charm and \"a powerful sex appeal\", engaged in romps and horseplay with the 14-year-old Elizabeth. These included entering her bedroom in his nightgown, tickling her and slapping her on the buttocks. Parr, rather than confront her husband over his inappropriate activities, joined in. Twice she accompanied him in tickling Elizabeth, and once held her while he cut her black gown \"into a thousand pieces.\" However, after Parr discovered the pair in an embrace, she ended this state of affairs. In May 1548, Elizabeth was sent away.\n\nHowever, Thomas Seymour continued scheming to control the royal family and tried to have himself appointed the governor of the King's person. When Parr died after childbirth on 5 September 1548, he renewed his attentions towards Elizabeth, intent on marrying her. The details of his former behaviour towards Elizabeth emerged, and for his brother and the king's council, this was the last straw. In January 1549, Seymour was arrested on suspicion of plotting to marry Elizabeth and overthrow the Lord Protector. Elizabeth, living at Hatfield House, would admit nothing. Her stubbornness exasperated her interrogator, Sir Robert Tyrwhitt, who reported, \"I do see it in her face that she is guilty\". Seymour was beheaded on 20 March 1549.\n\nEdward VI died on 6 July 1553, aged 15. His will ignored the Succession to the Crown Act 1543, excluded both Mary and Elizabeth from the succession, and instead declared as his heir Lady Jane Grey, granddaughter of Henry VIII's younger sister, Mary. Jane was proclaimed queen by the Privy Council, but her support quickly crumbled, and she was deposed after nine days. On 3 August 1553, Mary rode triumphantly into London, with Elizabeth at her side.\nThe show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long. Mary, a devout Catholic, was determined to crush the Protestant faith in which Elizabeth had been educated, and she ordered that everyone attend Catholic Mass; Elizabeth had to outwardly conform. Mary's initial popularity ebbed away in 1554 when she announced plans to marry Philip of Spain, the son of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and an active Catholic. Discontent spread rapidly through the country, and many looked to Elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to Mary's religious policies.\n\nIn January and February 1554, Wyatt's rebellion broke out; it was soon suppressed. Elizabeth was brought to court, and interrogated regarding her role, and on 18 March, she was imprisoned in the Tower of London. Elizabeth fervently protested her innocence. Though it is unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels, some of them were known to have approached her. Mary's closest confidant, Charles V's ambassador Simon Renard, argued that her throne would never be safe while Elizabeth lived; and the Chancellor, Stephen Gardiner, worked to have Elizabeth put on trial. Elizabeth's supporters in the government, including Lord Paget, convinced Mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against her. Instead, on 22 May, Elizabeth was moved from the Tower to Woodstock, where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of Sir Henry Bedingfield. Crowds cheered her all along the way.\n\nOn 17 April 1555, Elizabeth was recalled to court to attend the final stages of Mary's apparent pregnancy. If Mary and her child died, Elizabeth would become queen. If, on the other hand, Mary gave birth to a healthy child, Elizabeth's chances of becoming queen would recede sharply. When it became clear that Mary was not pregnant, no one believed any longer that she could have a child. Elizabeth's succession seemed assured.\n\nKing Philip, who ascended the Spanish throne in 1556, acknowledged the new political reality and cultivated his sister-in-law. She was a better ally than the chief alternative, Mary, Queen of Scots, who had grown up in France and was betrothed to the Dauphin of France. When his wife fell ill in 1558, King Philip sent the Count of Feria to consult with Elizabeth. This interview was conducted at Hatfield House, where she had returned to live in October 1555. By October 1558, Elizabeth was already making plans for her government. On 6 November, Mary recognised Elizabeth as her heir. On 17 November 1558, Mary died and Elizabeth succeeded to the throne.\n\nElizabeth became queen at the age of 25, and declared her intentions to her Council and other peers who had come to Hatfield to swear allegiance. The speech contains the first record of her adoption of the mediaeval political theology of the sovereign's \"two bodies\": the body natural and the body politic:\n\nMy lords, the law of nature moves me to sorrow for my sister; the burden that is fallen upon me makes me amazed, and yet, considering I am God's creature, ordained to obey His appointment, I will thereto yield, desiring from the bottom of my heart that I may have assistance of His grace to be the minister of His heavenly will in this office now committed to me. And as I am but one body naturally considered, though by His permission a body politic to govern, so shall I desire you all ... to be assistant to me, that I with my ruling and you with your service may make a good account to Almighty God and leave some comfort to our posterity on earth. I mean to direct all my actions by good advice and counsel.\n\nAs her triumphal progress wound through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony, she was welcomed wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants, most with a strong Protestant flavour. Elizabeth's open and gracious responses endeared her to the spectators, who were \"wonderfully ravished\". The following day, 15 January 1559, a date chosen by her astrologer John Dee, Elizabeth was crowned and anointed by Owen Oglethorpe, the Catholic bishop of Carlisle, in Westminster Abbey. She was then presented for the people's acceptance, amidst a deafening noise of organs, fifes, trumpets, drums, and bells. Although Elizabeth was welcomed as queen in England, the country was still in a state of anxiety over the perceived Catholic threat at home and overseas, as well as the choice of whom she would marry.\n\nElizabeth's personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars. She was a Protestant, but kept Catholic symbols (such as the crucifix), and downplayed the role of sermons in defiance of a key Protestant belief.\n\nIn terms of public policy she favoured pragmatism in dealing with religious matters. The question of her legitimacy was a key concern: although she was technically illegitimate under both Protestant and Catholic law, her retroactively-declared illegitimacy under the English church was not a serious bar compared to having never been legitimate as the Catholics claimed she was. For this reason alone, it was never in serious doubt that Elizabeth would embrace Protestantism.\n\nElizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a Catholic crusade against heretical England. Elizabeth therefore sought a Protestant solution that would not offend Catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of English Protestants; she would not tolerate the more radical Puritans though, who were pushing for far-reaching reforms. As a result, the parliament of 1559 started to legislate for a church based on the Protestant settlement of Edward VI, with the monarch as its head, but with many Catholic elements, such as vestments.\n\nThe House of Commons backed the proposals strongly, but the bill of supremacy met opposition in the House of Lords, particularly from the bishops. Elizabeth was fortunate that many bishoprics were vacant at the time, including the Archbishopric of Canterbury. This enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative peers. Nevertheless, Elizabeth was forced to accept the title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England rather than the more contentious title of Supreme Head, which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear. The new Act of Supremacy became law on 8 May 1559. All public officials were to swear an oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk disqualification from office; the heresy laws were repealed, to avoid a repeat of the persecution of dissenters practised by Mary. At the same time, a new Act of Uniformity was passed, which made attendance at church and the use of an adapted version of the 1552 Book of Common Prayer compulsory, though the penalties for recusancy, or failure to attend and conform, were not extreme.\n\nFrom the start of Elizabeth's reign, it was expected that she would marry and the question arose to whom. Although she received many offers for her hand, she never married and was childless; the reasons for this are not clear. Historians have speculated that Thomas Seymour had put her off sexual relationships. She considered several suitors until she was about fifty. Her last courtship was with Francis, Duke of Anjou, 22 years her junior. While risking possible loss of power like her sister, who played into the hands of King Philip II of Spain, marriage offered the chance of an heir. However, the choice of a husband might also provoke political instability or even insurrection.\n\nIn the spring of 1559, it became evident that Elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend Robert Dudley. It was said that Amy Robsart, his wife, was suffering from a \"malady in one of her breasts\" and that the Queen would like to marry Dudley if his wife should die. By the autumn of 1559, several foreign suitors were vying for Elizabeth's hand; their impatient envoys engaged in ever more scandalous talk and reported that a marriage with her favourite was not welcome in England: \"There is not a man who does not cry out on him and her with indignation ... she will marry none but the favoured Robert.\" Amy Dudley died in September 1560, from a fall from a flight of stairs and, despite the coroner's inquest finding of accident, many people suspected Dudley of having arranged her death so that he could marry the queen. Elizabeth seriously considered marrying Dudley for some time. However, William Cecil, Nicholas Throckmorton, and some conservative peers made their disapproval unmistakably clear. There were even rumours that the nobility would rise if the marriage took place.\n\nAmong other marriage candidates being considered for the queen, Robert Dudley continued to be regarded as a possible candidate for nearly another decade. Elizabeth was extremely jealous of his affections, even when she no longer meant to marry him herself. In 1564, Elizabeth raised Dudley to the peerage as Earl of Leicester. He finally remarried in 1578, to which the queen reacted with repeated scenes of displeasure and lifelong hatred towards his wife, Lettice Knollys. Still, Dudley always \"remained at the centre of [Elizabeth's] emotional life\", as historian Susan Doran has described the situation. He died shortly after the defeat of the Armada. After Elizabeth's own death, a note from him was found among her most personal belongings, marked \"his last letter\" in her handwriting.\n\nMarriage negotiations constituted a key element in Elizabeth's foreign policy. She turned down Philip's own hand early in 1559 but for several years entertained the proposal of King Eric XIV of Sweden. For several years she also seriously negotiated to marry Philip's cousin Archduke Charles of Austria. By 1569, relations with the Habsburgs had deteriorated, and Elizabeth considered marriage to two French Valois princes in turn, first Henry, Duke of Anjou, and later, from 1572 to 1581, his brother Francis, Duke of Anjou, formerly Duke of Alençon. This last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against Spanish control of the Southern Netherlands. Elizabeth seems to have taken the courtship seriously for a time, and wore a frog-shaped earring that Anjou had sent her.\nIn 1563, Elizabeth told an imperial envoy: \"If I follow the inclination of my nature, it is this: beggar-woman and single, far rather than queen and married\". Later in the year, following Elizabeth's illness with smallpox, the succession question became a heated issue in Parliament. They urged the queen to marry or nominate an heir, to prevent a civil war upon her death. She refused to do either. In April she prorogued the Parliament, which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise taxes in 1566. Having promised to marry previously, she told an unruly House:\nI will never break the word of a prince spoken in public place, for my honour's sake. And therefore I say again, I will marry as soon as I can conveniently, if God take not him away with whom I mind to marry, or myself, or else some other great let happen.\nBy 1570, senior figures in the government privately accepted that Elizabeth would never marry or name a successor. William Cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem. For her failure to marry, Elizabeth was often accused of irresponsibility. Her silence, however, strengthened her own political security: she knew that if she named an heir, her throne would be vulnerable to a coup; she remembered that the way \"a second person, as I have been\" had been used as the focus of plots against her predecessor.\n\nElizabeth's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity. In poetry and portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin or a goddess or both, not as a normal woman. At first, only Elizabeth made a virtue of her virginity: in 1559, she told the Commons, \"And, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient, that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time, lived and died a virgin\". Later on, poets and writers took up the theme and turned it into an iconography that exalted Elizabeth. Public tributes to the Virgin by 1578 acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queen's marriage negotiations with the Duke of Alençon.\n\nUltimately, Elizabeth would insist she was married to her kingdom and subjects, under divine protection. In 1599, she spoke of \"all my husbands, my good people\".\n\nElizabeth's first policy toward Scotland was to oppose the French presence there. She feared that the French planned to invade England and put her Catholic cousin Mary, Queen of Scots, on the throne. Mary was considered by many to be the heir to the English crown, being the granddaughter of Henry VIII's elder sister, Margaret. Mary boasted being \"the nearest kinswoman she hath\". Elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into Scotland to aid the Protestant rebels, and though the campaign was inept, the resulting Treaty of Edinburgh of July 1560 removed the French threat in the north. When Mary returned to Scotland in 1561 to take up the reins of power, the country had an established Protestant church and was run by a council of Protestant nobles supported by Elizabeth. Mary refused to ratify the treaty.\n\nIn 1563 Elizabeth proposed her own suitor, Robert Dudley, as a husband for Mary, without asking either of the two people concerned. Both proved unenthusiastic, and in 1565 Mary married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, who carried his own claim to the English throne. The marriage was the first of a series of errors of judgement by Mary that handed the victory to the Scottish Protestants and to Elizabeth. Darnley quickly became unpopular and was murdered in February 1567 by conspirators almost certainly led by James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell. Shortly afterwards, on 15 May 1567, Mary married Bothwell, arousing suspicions that she had been party to the murder of her husband. Elizabeth confronted Mary about the marriage, writing to her:\n\nHow could a worse choice be made for your honour than in such haste to marry such a subject, who besides other and notorious lacks, public fame has charged with the murder of your late husband, besides the touching of yourself also in some part, though we trust in that behalf falsely.\n\nThese events led rapidly to Mary's defeat and imprisonment in Loch Leven Castle. The Scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her son James VI, who had been born in June 1566. James was taken to Stirling Castle to be raised as a Protestant. Mary escaped from Loch Leven in 1568 but after another defeat fled across the border into England, where she had once been assured of support from Elizabeth. Elizabeth's first instinct was to restore her fellow monarch; but she and her council instead chose to play safe. Rather than risk returning Mary to Scotland with an English army or sending her to France and the Catholic enemies of England, they detained her in England, where she was imprisoned for the next nineteen years.\n\nMary was soon the focus for rebellion. In 1569 there was a major Catholic rising in the North; the goal was to free Mary, marry her to Thomas Howard, 4th Duke of Norfolk, and put her on the English throne. After the rebels' defeat, over 750 of them were executed on Elizabeth's orders. In the belief that the revolt had been successful, Pope Pius V issued a bull in 1570, titled \"Regnans in Excelsis\", which declared \"Elizabeth, the pretended Queen of England and the servant of crime\" to be excommunicated and a heretic, releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her. Catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication. The papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against Catholics by Parliament, which were, however, mitigated by Elizabeth's intervention. In 1581, to convert English subjects to Catholicism with \"the intent\" to withdraw them from their allegiance to Elizabeth was made a treasonable offence, carrying the death penalty. From the 1570s missionary priests from continental seminaries went to England secretly in the cause of the \"reconversion of England\". Many suffered execution, engendering a cult of martyrdom.\n\n\"Regnans in Excelsis\" gave English Catholics a strong incentive to look to Mary Stuart as the legitimate sovereign of England. Mary may not have been told of every Catholic plot to put her on the English throne, but from the Ridolfi Plot of 1571 (which caused Mary's suitor, the Duke of Norfolk, to lose his head) to the Babington Plot of 1586, Elizabeth's spymaster Sir Francis Walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case against her. At first, Elizabeth resisted calls for Mary's death. By late 1586, she had been persuaded to sanction her trial and execution on the evidence of letters written during the Babington Plot. Elizabeth's proclamation of the sentence announced that \"the said Mary, pretending title to the same Crown, had compassed and imagined within the same realm divers things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of our royal person.\" On 8 February 1587, Mary was beheaded at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire. After Mary's execution, Elizabeth claimed that she had not intended for the signed execution warrant to be dispatched, and blamed her Secretary, William Davison, for implementing it without her knowledge. The sincerity of Elizabeth's remorse and whether or not she wanted to delay the warrant have been called into question both by her contemporaries and later historians.\n\nElizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive. The exception was the English occupation of Le Havre from October 1562 to June 1563, which ended in failure when Elizabeth's Huguenot allies joined with the Catholics to retake the port. Elizabeth's intention had been to exchange Le Havre for Calais, lost to France in January 1558. Only through the activities of her fleets did Elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy. This paid off in the war against Spain, 80% of which was fought at sea. She knighted Francis Drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from 1577 to 1580, and he won fame for his raids on Spanish ports and fleets. An element of piracy and self-enrichment drove Elizabethan seafarers, over whom the queen had little control.\n\nAfter the occupation and loss of Le Havre in 1562–1563, Elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585, when she sent an English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II. This followed the deaths in 1584 of the allies William the Silent, Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Anjou, and the surrender of a series of Dutch towns to Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, Philip's governor of the Spanish Netherlands. In December 1584, an alliance between Philip II and the French Catholic League at Joinville undermined the ability of Anjou's brother, Henry III of France, to counter Spanish domination of the Netherlands. It also extended Spanish influence along the channel coast of France, where the Catholic League was strong, and exposed England to invasion. The siege of Antwerp in the summer of 1585 by the Duke of Parma necessitated some reaction on the part of the English and the Dutch. The outcome was the Treaty of Nonsuch of August 1585, in which Elizabeth promised military support to the Dutch. The treaty marked the beginning of the Anglo-Spanish War, which lasted until the Treaty of London in 1604.\n\nThe expedition was led by her former suitor, the Earl of Leicester. Elizabeth from the start did not really back this course of action. Her strategy, to support the Dutch on the surface with an English army, while beginning secret peace talks with Spain within days of Leicester's arrival in Holland, had necessarily to be at odds with Leicester's, who wanted and was expected by the Dutch to fight an active campaign. Elizabeth, on the other hand, wanted him \"to avoid at all costs any decisive action with the enemy\". He enraged Elizabeth by accepting the post of Governor-General from the Dutch States General. Elizabeth saw this as a Dutch ploy to force her to accept sovereignty over the Netherlands, which so far she had always declined. She wrote to Leicester:\n\nWe could never have imagined (had we not seen it fall out in experience) that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us, above any other subject of this land, would have in so contemptible a sort broken our commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour ... And therefore our express pleasure and commandment is that, all delays and excuses laid apart, you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill whatsoever the bearer hereof shall direct you to do in our name. Whereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril.\n\nElizabeth's \"commandment\" was that her emissary read out her letters of disapproval publicly before the Dutch Council of State, Leicester having to stand nearby. This public humiliation of her \"Lieutenant-General\" combined with her continued talks for a separate peace with Spain, irreversibly undermined his standing among the Dutch. The military campaign was severely hampered by Elizabeth's repeated refusals to send promised funds for her starving soldiers. Her unwillingness to commit herself to the cause, Leicester's own shortcomings as a political and military leader, and the faction-ridden and chaotic situation of Dutch politics led to the failure of the campaign. Leicester finally resigned his command in December 1587.\n\nMeanwhile, Sir Francis Drake had undertaken a major voyage against Spanish ports and ships in the Caribbean in 1585 and 1586. In 1587 he made a successful raid on Cadiz, destroying the Spanish fleet of war ships intended for the \"Enterprise of England\", as Philip II had decided to take the war to England.\n\nOn 12 July 1588, the Spanish Armada, a great fleet of ships, set sail for the channel, planning to ferry a Spanish invasion force under the Duke of Parma to the coast of southeast England from the Netherlands. A combination of miscalculation, misfortune, and an attack of English fire ships on 29 July off Gravelines, which dispersed the Spanish ships to the northeast, defeated the Armada. The Armada straggled home to Spain in shattered remnants, after disastrous losses on the coast of Ireland (after some ships had tried to struggle back to Spain via the North Sea, and then back south past the west coast of Ireland). Unaware of the Armada's fate, English militias mustered to defend the country under the Earl of Leicester's command. He invited Elizabeth to inspect her troops at Tilbury in Essex on 8 August. Wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet dress, she addressed them in one of her most famous speeches:\nMy loving people, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we commit ourself to armed multitudes for fear of treachery; but I assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people ... I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman, but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a King of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any Prince of Europe should dare to invade the borders of my realm.\nWhen no invasion came, the nation rejoiced. Elizabeth's procession to a thanksgiving service at St Paul's Cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as a spectacle. The defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory, both for Elizabeth and for Protestant England. The English took their delivery as a symbol of God's favour and of the nation's inviolability under a virgin queen. However, the victory was not a turning point in the war, which continued and often favoured Spain. The Spanish still controlled the southern provinces of the Netherlands, and the threat of invasion remained. Sir Walter Raleigh claimed after her death that Elizabeth's caution had impeded the war against Spain:\n\nIf the late queen would have believed her men of war as she did her scribes, we had in her time beaten that great empire in pieces and made their kings of figs and oranges as in old times. But her Majesty did all by halves, and by petty invasions taught the Spaniard how to defend himself, and to see his own weakness.\n\nThough some historians have criticised Elizabeth on similar grounds, Raleigh's verdict has more often been judged unfair. Elizabeth had good reason not to place too much trust in her commanders, who once in action tended, as she put it herself, \"to be transported with an haviour of vainglory\".\n\nIn 1589, the year after the Spanish Armada, Elizabeth sent to Spain the \"English Armada\" or \"Counter Armada\" with 23,375 men and 150 ships, led by Sir Francis Drake as admiral and Sir John Norreys as general. The English fleet suffered a catastrophic defeat with 11,000–15,000 killed, wounded or died of disease and 40 ships sunk or captured. The advantage England had won upon the destruction of the Spanish Armada was lost, and the Spanish victory marked a revival of Philip II's naval power through the next decade.\n\nWhen the Protestant Henry IV inherited the French throne in 1589, Elizabeth sent him military support. It was her first venture into France since the retreat from Le Havre in 1563. Henry's succession was strongly contested by the Catholic League and by Philip II, and Elizabeth feared a Spanish takeover of the channel ports. The subsequent English campaigns in France, however, were disorganised and ineffective. Lord Willoughby, largely ignoring Elizabeth's orders, roamed northern France to little effect, with an army of 4,000 men. He withdrew in disarray in December 1589, having lost half his troops. In 1591, the campaign of John Norreys, who led 3,000 men to Brittany, was even more of a disaster. As for all such expeditions, Elizabeth was unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the commanders. Norreys left for London to plead in person for more support. In his absence, a Catholic League army almost destroyed the remains of his army at Craon, north-west France, in May 1591. In July, Elizabeth sent out another force under Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, to help Henry IV in besieging Rouen. The result was just as dismal. Essex accomplished nothing and returned home in January 1592. Henry abandoned the siege in April. As usual, Elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad. \"Where he is, or what he doth, or what he is to do,\" she wrote of Essex, \"we are ignorant\".\n\nAlthough Ireland was one of her two kingdoms, Elizabeth faced a hostile, and in places virtually autonomous, Irish population that adhered to Catholicism and was willing to defy her authority and plot with her enemies. Her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and prevent the rebels from giving Spain a base from which to attack England. In the course of a series of uprisings, Crown forces pursued scorched-earth tactics, burning the land and slaughtering man, woman and child. During a revolt in Munster led by Gerald FitzGerald, 15th Earl of Desmond, in 1582, an estimated 30,000 Irish people starved to death. The poet and colonist Edmund Spenser wrote that the victims \"were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart would have rued the same\". Elizabeth advised her commanders that the Irish, \"that rude and barbarous nation\", be well treated; but she showed no remorse when force and bloodshed were deemed necessary.\n\nBetween 1594 and 1603, Elizabeth faced her most severe test in Ireland during the Nine Years' War, a revolt that took place at the height of hostilities with Spain, who backed the rebel leader, Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone. In spring 1599, Elizabeth sent Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, to put the revolt down. To her frustration, he made little progress and returned to England in defiance of her orders. He was replaced by Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, who took three years to defeat the rebels. O'Neill finally surrendered in 1603, a few days after Elizabeth's death. Soon afterwards, a peace treaty was signed between England and Spain.\n\nElizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the Tsardom of Russia originally established by her half-brother. She often wrote to Ivan the Terrible on amicable terms, though the Tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance. The Tsar even proposed to her once, and during his later reign, asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in England should his rule be jeopardised. English merchant and explorer Anthony Jenkinson, who began his career as a representative of the Muscovy Company, became the queen's special ambassador to the court of Ivan the Terrible.\nUpon Ivan's death in 1584, he was succeeded by his less-ambitious son Feodor. Unlike his father, Feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with England. Feodor declared his kingdom open to all foreigners, and dismissed the English ambassador Sir Jerome Bowes, whose pomposity had been tolerated by Ivan. Elizabeth sent a new ambassador, Dr. Giles Fletcher, to demand from the regent Boris Godunov that he convince the Tsar to reconsider. The negotiations failed, due to Fletcher addressing Feodor with two of his many titles omitted. Elizabeth continued to appeal to Feodor in half appealing, half reproachful letters. She proposed an alliance, something which she had refused to do when offered one by Feodor's father, but was turned down.\n\nTrade and diplomatic relations developed between England and the Barbary states during the rule of Elizabeth. England established a trading relationship with Morocco in opposition to Spain, selling armour, ammunition, timber, and metal in exchange for Moroccan sugar, in spite of a Papal ban. In 1600, Abd el-Ouahed ben Messaoud, the principal secretary to the Moroccan ruler Mulai Ahmad al-Mansur, visited England as an ambassador to the court of Queen Elizabeth I, to negotiate an Anglo-Moroccan alliance against Spain. Elizabeth \"agreed to sell munitions supplies to Morocco, and she and Mulai Ahmad al-Mansur talked on and off about mounting a joint operation against the Spanish\". Discussions, however, remained inconclusive, and both rulers died within two years of the embassy.\n\nDiplomatic relations were also established with the Ottoman Empire with the chartering of the Levant Company and the dispatch of the first English ambassador to the Porte, William Harborne, in 1578. For the first time, a Treaty of Commerce was signed in 1580. Numerous envoys were dispatched in both directions and epistolar exchanges occurred between Elizabeth and Sultan Murad III. In one correspondence, Murad entertained the notion that Islam and Protestantism had \"much more in common than either did with Roman Catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols\", and argued for an alliance between England and the Ottoman Empire. To the dismay of Catholic Europe, England exported tin and lead (for cannon-casting) and ammunitions to the Ottoman Empire, and Elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with Murad III during the outbreak of war with Spain in 1585, as Francis Walsingham was lobbying for a direct Ottoman military involvement against the common Spanish enemy.\n\nThe period after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 brought new difficulties for Elizabeth that lasted until the end of her reign. The conflicts with Spain and in Ireland dragged on, the tax burden grew heavier, and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war. Prices rose and the standard of living fell. During this time, repression of Catholics intensified, and Elizabeth authorised commissions in 1591 to interrogate and monitor Catholic householders. To maintain the illusion of peace and prosperity, she increasingly relied on internal spies and propaganda. In her last years, mounting criticism reflected a decline in the public's affection for her.\nOne of the causes for this \"second reign\" of Elizabeth, as it is sometimes called, was the changed character of Elizabeth's governing body, the privy council in the 1590s. A new generation was in power. With the exception of Lord Burghley, the most important politicians had died around 1590: the Earl of Leicester in 1588; Sir Francis Walsingham in 1590; and Sir Christopher Hatton in 1591. Factional strife in the government, which had not existed in a noteworthy form before the 1590s, now became its hallmark. A bitter rivalry arose between the Earl of Essex and Robert Cecil, son of Lord Burghley and their respective adherents, and the struggle for the most powerful positions in the state marred politics. The queen's personal authority was lessening, as is shown in the 1594 affair of Dr. Lopez, her trusted physician. When he was wrongly accused by the Earl of Essex of treason out of personal pique, she could not prevent his execution, although she had been angry about his arrest and seems not to have believed in his guilt.\n\nDuring the last years of her reign, Elizabeth came to rely on the granting of monopolies as a cost-free system of patronage, rather than asking Parliament for more subsidies in a time of war. The practice soon led to price-fixing, the enrichment of courtiers at the public's expense, and widespread resentment. This culminated in agitation in the House of Commons during the parliament of 1601. In her famous \"Golden Speech\" of 30 November 1601 at Whitehall Palace to a deputation of 140 members, Elizabeth professed ignorance of the abuses, and won the members over with promises and her usual appeal to the emotions:\n\nWho keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance and not by intent they might have fallen, what thank they deserve, we know, though you may guess. And as nothing is more dear to us than the loving conservation of our subjects' hearts, what an undeserved doubt might we have incurred if the abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the wringers of the poor, had not been told us!\nThis same period of economic and political uncertainty, however, produced an unsurpassed literary flowering in England. The first signs of a new literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of Elizabeth's reign, with John Lyly's \"Euphues\" and Edmund Spenser's \"The Shepheardes Calender\" in 1578. During the 1590s, some of the great names of English literature entered their maturity, including William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe. During this period and into the Jacobean era that followed, the English theatre reached its highest peaks. The notion of a great Elizabethan era depends largely on the builders, dramatists, poets, and musicians who were active during Elizabeth's reign. They owed little directly to the queen, who was never a major patron of the arts.\n\nAs Elizabeth aged her image gradually changed. She was portrayed as Belphoebe or Astraea, and after the Armada, as Gloriana, the eternally youthful Faerie Queene of Edmund Spenser's poem. Elizabeth gave Edmund Spenser a pension, as this was unusual for her, it indicates that she liked his work. Her painted portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made her look much younger than she was. In fact, her skin had been scarred by smallpox in 1562, leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and cosmetics. Her love of sweets and fear of dentists contributed to severe tooth decay and loss to such an extent that foreign ambassadors had a hard time understanding her speech. André Hurault de Maisse, Ambassador Extraordinary from Henry IV of France, reported an audience with the queen, during which he noticed, \"her teeth are very yellow and unequal ... and on the left side less than on the right. Many of them are missing, so that one cannot understand her easily when she speaks quickly.\" Yet he added, \"her figure is fair and tall and graceful in whatever she does; so far as may be she keeps her dignity, yet humbly and graciously withal.\" Sir Walter Raleigh called her \"a lady whom time had surprised\".\n\nThe more Elizabeth's beauty faded, the more her courtiers praised it. Elizabeth was happy to play the part, but it is possible that in the last decade of her life she began to believe her own performance. She became fond and indulgent of the charming but petulant young Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, who was Leicester's stepson and took liberties with her for which she forgave him. She repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of irresponsibility. After Essex's desertion of his command in Ireland in 1599, Elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived him of his monopolies. In February 1601, the earl tried to raise a rebellion in London. He intended to seize the queen but few rallied to his support, and he was beheaded on 25 February. Elizabeth knew that her own misjudgements were partly to blame for this turn of events. An observer wrote in 1602: \"Her delight is to sit in the dark, and sometimes with shedding tears to bewail Essex.\"\n\nElizabeth's senior adviser, William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley, died on 4 August 1598. His political mantle passed to his son, Robert Cecil, who soon became the leader of the government. One task he addressed was to prepare the way for a smooth succession. Since Elizabeth would never name her successor, Cecil was obliged to proceed in secret. He therefore entered into a coded negotiation with James VI of Scotland, who had a strong but unrecognised claim. Cecil coached the impatient James to humour Elizabeth and \"secure the heart of the highest, to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own actions\". The advice worked. James's tone delighted Elizabeth, who responded: \"So trust I that you will not doubt but that your last letters are so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same, but yield them to you in grateful sort\". In historian J. E. Neale's view, Elizabeth may not have declared her wishes openly to James, but she made them known with \"unmistakable if veiled phrases\".\n\nThe Queen's health remained fair until the autumn of 1602, when a series of deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression. In February 1603, the death of Catherine Carey, Countess of Nottingham, the niece of her cousin and close friend Lady Knollys, came as a particular blow. In March, Elizabeth fell sick and remained in a \"settled and unremovable melancholy\", and sat motionless on a cushion for hours on end. When Robert Cecil told her that she must go to bed, she snapped: \"Must is not a word to use to princes, little man.\" She died on 24 March 1603 at Richmond Palace, between two and three in the morning. A few hours later, Cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed James King of England.\n\nWhile it has become normative to record the death of the Queen as occurring in 1603, following English calendar reform in the 1750s, at the time England observed New Year's Day on 25 March, commonly known as Lady Day. Thus Elizabeth died on the last day of the year 1602 in the old calendar. The modern convention is to use the old calendar for the date and month while using the new for the year.\nElizabeth's coffin was carried downriver at night to Whitehall, on a barge lit with torches. At her funeral on 28 April, the coffin was taken to Westminster Abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet. In the words of the chronicler John Stow:\nWestminster was surcharged with multitudes of all sorts of people in their streets, houses, windows, leads and gutters, that came out to see the obsequy, and when they beheld her statue lying upon the coffin, there was such a general sighing, groaning and weeping as the like hath not been seen or known in the memory of man.\n\nElizabeth was interred in Westminster Abbey, in a tomb shared with her half-sister, Mary I. The Latin inscription on their tomb, \"Regno consortes & urna, hic obdormimus Elizabetha et Maria sorores, in spe resurrectionis\", translates to \"Consorts in realm and tomb, here we sleep, Elizabeth and Mary, sisters, in hope of resurrection\".\n\nElizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects, but others were relieved at her death. Expectations of King James started high but then declined, so by the 1620s there was a nostalgic revival of the cult of Elizabeth. Elizabeth was praised as a heroine of the Protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age. James was depicted as a Catholic sympathiser, presiding over a corrupt court. The triumphalist image that Elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign, against a background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties, was taken at face value and her reputation inflated. Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, recalled: \"When we had experience of a Scottish government, the Queen did seem to revive. Then was her memory much magnified.\" Elizabeth's reign became idealised as a time when crown, church and parliament had worked in constitutional balance.\n\nThe picture of Elizabeth painted by her Protestant admirers of the early 17th century has proved lasting and influential. Her memory was also revived during the Napoleonic Wars, when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion. In the Victorian era, the Elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day, and in the mid-20th century, Elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat. Historians of that period, such as J. E. Neale (1934) and A. L. Rowse (1950), interpreted Elizabeth's reign as a golden age of progress. Neale and Rowse also idealised the Queen personally: she always did everything right; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress.\n\nRecent historians, however, have taken a more complicated view of Elizabeth. Her reign is famous for the defeat of the Armada, and for successful raids against the Spanish, such as those on Cádiz in 1587 and 1596, but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea. In Ireland, Elizabeth's forces ultimately prevailed, but their tactics stain her record. Rather than as a brave defender of the Protestant nations against Spain and the Habsburgs, she is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies. She offered very limited aid to foreign Protestants and failed to provide her commanders with the funds to make a difference abroad.\n\nElizabeth established an English church that helped shape a national identity and remains in place today. Those who praised her later as a Protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all practices of Catholic origin from the Church of England. Historians note that in her day, strict Protestants regarded the Acts of Settlement and Uniformity of 1559 as a compromise. In fact, Elizabeth believed that faith was personal and did not wish, as Francis Bacon put it, to \"make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts\".\n\nThough Elizabeth followed a largely defensive foreign policy, her reign raised England's status abroad. \"She is only a woman, only mistress of half an island,\" marvelled Pope Sixtus V, \"and yet she makes herself feared by Spain, by France, by the Empire, by all\". Under Elizabeth, the nation gained a new self-confidence and sense of sovereignty, as Christendom fragmented. Elizabeth was the first Tudor to recognise that a monarch ruled by popular consent. She therefore always worked with parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the truth—a style of government that her Stuart successors failed to follow. Some historians have called her lucky; she believed that God was protecting her. Priding herself on being \"mere English\", Elizabeth trusted in God, honest advice, and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule. In a prayer, she offered thanks to God that:\n\n[At a time] when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed almost all kings and countries round about me, my reign hath been peacable, and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted Church. The love of my people hath appeared firm, and the devices of my enemies frustrate.\n\nBULLET::::- Early modern Britain\nBULLET::::- English Renaissance\nBULLET::::- Portraiture of Elizabeth I of England\nBULLET::::- Inventory of Elizabeth I of England\nBULLET::::- Protestant Reformation\nBULLET::::- Royal Arms of England\nBULLET::::- Royal eponyms in Canada for Queen Elizabeth I\nBULLET::::- Royal Standards of England\nBULLET::::- Tudor period\nBULLET::::- Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom\n\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- Collinson, Patrick. \"Elizabeth I (1533–1603)\" in \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" (2008) Retrieved 23 Aug 2011\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- .\n\nBULLET::::- Beem, Charles. \"The Foreign Relations of Elizabeth I\" (2011) excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Hodges, J. P. \"The Nature of the Lion: Elizabeth I and Our Anglican Heritage\" (London: Faith Press, 1962).\nBULLET::::- Jones, Norman. \"The Birth of the Elizabethan Age: England in the 1560s\" (Blackwell, 1993)\nBULLET::::- MacCaffrey Wallace T. \"Elizabeth I\" (1993), political biography summarising his multivolume study:\nBULLET::::- MacCaffrey Wallace T. \"The Shaping of the Elizabethan Regime: Elizabethan Politics, 1558–1572\" (1969)\nBULLET::::- MacCaffrey Wallace T. \"Queen Elizabeth and the Making of Policy, 1572–1588\" (1988)\nBULLET::::- MacCaffrey Wallace T. \"Elizabeth I: War and Politics, 1588–1603\" (1994)\nBULLET::::- McLaren, A. N. \"Political Culture in the Reign of Elizabeth I: Queen and Commonwealth, 1558–1585\" (Cambridge University Press, 1999) excerpt and text search\nBULLET::::- Palliser, D. M. \"The Age of Elizabeth: England Under the Later Tudors, 1547–1603\" (1983) survey of social and economic history\nBULLET::::- Wernham, R. B. \"Before the Armada: the growth of English foreign policy, 1485–1588\" (1966), a standard history of foreign policy\n\nBULLET::::- Susan M. Felch, ed. \"Elizabeth I and Her Age\" (Norton Critical Editions) (2009); primary and secondary sources, with an emphasis on literature\nBULLET::::- William Camden. \"History of the Most Renowned and Victorious Princess Elizabeth\". Wallace T. MacCaffrey (ed). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, selected chapters, 1970 edition. .\nBULLET::::- William Camden. \"Annales Rerum Gestarum Angliae et Hiberniae Regnante Elizabetha.\" (1615 and 1625.) Hypertext edition, with English translation. Dana F. Sutton (ed.), 2000. Retrieved 7 December 2007.\nBULLET::::- Clapham, John. \"Elizabeth of England\". E. P. Read and Conyers Read (eds). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1951. .\n\nBULLET::::- Carlson, Eric Josef. \"Teaching Elizabeth Tudor with Movies: Film, Historical Thinking, and the Classroom,\" \"Sixteenth Century Journal,\" Summer 2007, Vol. 38 Issue 2, pp. 419–440\nBULLET::::- Collinson, Patrick. \"Elizabeth I and the verdicts of history,\" \"Historical Research,\" Nov 2003, Vol. 76 Issue 194, pp. 469–491\nBULLET::::- Doran, Susan, and Thomas S. Freeman, eds. \"The Myth of Elizabeth.\"(2003).\nBULLET::::- Greaves, Richard L., ed. \"Elizabeth I, Queen of England\" (1974), excerpts from historians\nBULLET::::- Haigh, Christopher, ed. \"The Reign of Elizabeth I\" (1984), essays by scholars\nBULLET::::- Howard, Maurice. \"Elizabeth I: A Sense Of Place In Stone, Print And Paint,\" \"Transactions of the Royal Historical Society,\" Dec 2004, Vol. 14 Issue 1, pp. 261–268\nBULLET::::- Hulme, Harold. \"Elizabeth I and Her Parliaments: The Work of Sir John Neale,\" \"Journal of Modern History\" Vol. 30, No. 3 (Sept. 1958), pp. 236–240 in JSTOR\nBULLET::::- Montrose, Louis. \"The Subject of Elizabeth: Authority, Gender, and Representation.\" (2006).\nBULLET::::- Watkins, John. \"Representing Elizabeth in Stuart England: Literature, History, Sovereignty\" (2002)\nBULLET::::- Woolf, D. R. \"Two Elizabeths? James I and the Late Queen's Famous Memory,\" \"Canadian Journal of History,\" Aug 1985, Vol. 20 Issue 2, pp. 167–191\n\n"}
{"id": "10129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10129", "title": "Enceladus (disambiguation)", "text": "Enceladus (disambiguation)\n\nEnceladus is a moon of Saturn.\n\nEnceladus may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Enceladus (giant), one of the Gigantes in Greek mythology\nBULLET::::- Enceladus, son of Aegyptus, in Greek mythology\nBULLET::::- USS Enceladus (AK-80), an American cargo ship\n"}
{"id": "10130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10130", "title": "Emperor Jimmu", "text": "Emperor Jimmu\n\nJimmu is recorded as Japan's first ruler in two early chronicles, \"Nihon Shoki\" (721) and \"Kojiki\" (712). \"Nihon Shoki\" gives the dates of his reign as 660–585 BC. In the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737–806), the eighth-century scholar Ōmi no Mifune designated rulers before Ōjin as , a Japanese pendant to the Chinese imperial title \"Tiān-dì\" (天帝), and gave several of them including Jimmu their canonical names. Prior to this time, these rulers had been known as \"Sumera no mikoto\"/\"Ōkimi\". This practice had begun under Empress Suiko, and took root after the Taika Reforms with the ascendancy of the Nakatomi clan.\n\nAccording to the legendary account in the \"Kojiki\", Emperor Jimmu was born on February 13, 711 BC (the first day of the first month of the Chinese calendar), and died, again according to legend, on April 9, 585 BC (the eleventh day of the third month).\n\nBoth the \"Kojiki\" and the \"Nihon Shoki\" give Jimmu's name as or . \"Iware\" indicates a toponym whose precise purport is unclear.\n\nAmong his other names were: , and .\n\nThe Imperial House of Japan traditionally based its claim to the throne on its putative descent from the sun-goddess Amaterasu via Jimmu's great-grandfather Ninigi.\n\nConsort: , Hosuseri's (Ninigi-no-Mikoto's son) daughter\nBULLET::::- First son:\nEmpress: , Kotoshironushi's daughter\nBULLET::::- Second son:\nBULLET::::- Third son: , later Emperor Suizei\n\nIn Japanese mythology, the Age of the Gods is the period before Jimmu's accession.\n\nThe story of Jimmu seems to rework legends associated with the Ōtomo clan (大伴氏), and its function was to establish that clan's links to the ruling family, just as those of Suijin arguably reflect Mononobe tales and the legends in Ōjin's chronicles seem to derive from Soga clan traditions. Jimmu figures as a direct descendant of the sun goddess, Amaterasu via the side of his father, Ugayafukiaezu. Amaterasu had a son called Ame no Oshihomimi no Mikoto and through him a grandson named Ninigi-no-Mikoto. She sent her grandson to the Japanese islands where he eventually married Konohana-Sakuya-hime. Among their three sons was Hikohohodemi no Mikoto, also called Yamasachi-hiko, who married Toyotama-hime. She was the daughter of Ryūjin, the Japanese sea god. They had a single son called Hikonagisa Takeugaya Fukiaezu no Mikoto. The boy was abandoned by his parents at birth and consequently raised by Tamayori-hime, his mother's younger sister. They eventually married and had four sons. The last of these, Kamu-yamato Iware-biko no mikoto, became Emperor Jimmu.\n\nAccording to the chronicles \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\", Jimmu's brothers were born in Takachiho, the southern part of Kyūshū in modern-day Miyazaki Prefecture. They moved eastward to find a location more appropriate for administering the entire country. Jimmu's older brother, Itsuse no Mikoto, originally led the migration, and led the clan eastward through the Seto Inland Sea with the assistance of local chieftain \"Sao Netsuhiko\". As they reached Naniwa (modern-day Osaka), they encountered another local chieftain, \"Nagasunehiko\" (\"the long-legged man\"), and Itsuse was killed in the ensuing battle. Jimmu realized that they had been defeated because they battled eastward against the sun, so he decided to land on the east side of Kii Peninsula and to battle westward. They reached Kumano, and, with the guidance of a three-legged crow, \"Yatagarasu\" (\"eight-span crow\"), they moved to Yamato. There, they once again battled Nagasunehiko and were victorious.\n\nIn Yamato, Nigihayahi no Mikoto, who also claim descent from the Takamagahara gods, was protected by Nagasunehiko. However, when Nigihayahi met Jimmu, he accepted Jimmu's legitimacy. At this point, Jimmu is said to have ascended to the throne of Japan. Upon scaling a Nara mountain to survey the Seto Inland Sea he now controlled, Jimmu remarked that it was shaped like the \"heart\" rings made by mating dragonflies, archaically \"akitsu\" 秋津. A mosquito then tried to steal Jimmu's royal blood but since Jimmu was a god incarnate Emperor, , a dragonfly killed the mosquito. Japan thus received its classical name the Dragonfly Islands, .\n\nAccording to the \"Kojiki\", Jimmu died when he was 126 years old. The Emperor's posthumous name literally means \"divine might\" or \"god-warrior\". It is generally thought that Jimmu's name and character evolved into their present shape just before the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were chronicled in the \"Kojiki\". There are accounts written earlier than either \"Kojiki\" and \"Nihon Shoki\" that present an alternative version of the story. According to these accounts, Jimmu's dynasty was supplanted by that of Ōjin, whose dynasty was supplanted by that of Keitai. The \"Kojiki\" and the \"Nihon Shoki\" then combined these three mythical dynasties into one long and continuous genealogy.\n\nThe traditional site of Jimmu's grave is near Unebiyama in Kashihara, Nara Prefecture.\n\nVeneration of Jimmu was a central component of the imperial cult that formed following the Meiji Restoration. In 1873, a holiday called \"Kigensetsu\" was established on February 11. The holiday commemorated the anniversary of Jimmu's ascension to the throne 2,532 years earlier. After World War II, the holiday was criticized as too closely associated with the \"emperor system.\" It was suspended from 1948 to 1966, but later reinstated as National Foundation Day.\n\nBetween 1873 and 1945 an imperial envoy sent offerings every year to the supposed site of Jimmu's tomb. In 1890 Kashihara Shrine was established nearby, on the spot where Jimmu was said to have ascended to the throne.\n\nBefore and during World War II, expansionist propaganda made frequent use of the phrase \"hakkō ichiu\", a term coined by Tanaka Chigaku based on a passage in the \"Nihon Shoki\" discussing Emperor Jimmu. Some media incorrectly attributed the phrase to Emperor Jimmu. For the 1940 \"Kigensetsu\" celebration, marking the supposed 2,600th anniversary of Jimmu's enthronement, the Peace Tower was constructed in Miyazaki.\n\nThe same year numerous stone monuments relating to key events in Jimmu's life were erected around Japan. The sites at which these monuments were erected are known as Emperor Jimmu Sacred Historical Sites.\n\nBULLET::::- Modern system of ranked Shinto shrines\nBULLET::::- Emishi people\nBULLET::::- Japanese imperial year\nBULLET::::- Jōmon period\n\nBULLET::::- Aston, William George. (1896). \"Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697, Volume 1\". London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.\nBULLET::::- Brown, Delmer M. and Ichirō Ishida, eds. (1979). \"Gukanshō: The Future and the Past\". Berkeley: University of California Press. ;\nBULLET::::- Brownlee, John S. (1997). \"Japanese Historians and the National Myths, 1600–1945: The Age of the Gods\". Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.\nBULLET::::- Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). \"The Kojiki\". Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12 10 May, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May 1919.\nBULLET::::- Earhart, David C. (2007). \"Certain Victory: Images of World War II in the Japanese Media\". Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe.\nBULLET::::- Kitagawa, Joseph Mitsuo. (1987). \"On Understanding Japanese Religion\". Princeton: Princeton University Press. ; ;\nBULLET::::- Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). \"Japan encyclopedia\". Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ;\nBULLET::::- Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). \"The Imperial House of Japan\". Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society.\nBULLET::::- Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). \"Nihon Ōdai Ichiran\"; ou, \"Annales des empereurs du Japon\". Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland.\nBULLET::::- Varley, H. Paul. (1980). \"Jinnō Shōtōki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns\". New York: Columbia University Press. ;\nBULLET::::- A more detailed profile of Jimmu (archived April 2011)\nBULLET::::- A detailed summary of Jimmu's descent legend (archived July 2014)\n"}
{"id": "10133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10133", "title": "Elias Boudinot", "text": "Elias Boudinot\n\nElias Boudinot ( ; May 2, 1740 – October 24, 1821) was a lawyer and statesman from Elizabeth, New Jersey who was a delegate to the Continental Congress (more accurately referred to as the Congress of the Confederation) and served as President of Congress from 1782 to 1783. He was elected as a U.S. Congressman for New Jersey following the American Revolutionary War. He was appointed by President George Washington as Director of the United States Mint, serving from 1795 until 1805.\n\nElias Boudinot was born in Philadelphia on May 2, 1740. His father, Elias Boudinot III, was a merchant and silversmith; he was a neighbor and friend of Benjamin Franklin. His mother, Mary Catherine Williams, was born in the British West Indies; her father was from Wales. Elias' paternal grandfather, Elie (sometimes called Elias) Boudinot, was the son of Jean Boudinot and Marie Suire of Marans, Aunis, France. They were a Huguenot (French Protestant) family who fled to New York about 1687 to avoid the religious persecutions of King Louis XIV.\n\nMary Catherine Williams and Elias Boudinot Sr. were married on August 8, 1729. Over the next twenty years, they had nine children. The first, John, was born in the British West Indies-Antigua. Of the others, only the younger Elias and his siblings Annis, Mary, and Elisha reached adulthood. Annis became one of the first published women poets in the Thirteen Colonies, and her work appeared in leading newspapers and magazines. Elisha Boudinot became Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey.\n\nAfter studying and being tutored at home, Elias Boudinot went to Princeton, New Jersey to read the law as a legal apprentice to Richard Stockton. An attorney, he had married Elias' older sister Annis Boudinot. Richard Stockton was later a signatory of the Declaration of Independence.\n\nIn 1760, Boudinot was admitted to the bar, and began his practice in Elizabeth, New Jersey. He owned land adjacent to the road from Elizabethtown to Woodbridge Township, New Jersey.\n\nAfter getting established, on April 21, 1762, Boudinot married Hannah Stockton (1736–1808), Richard's younger sister. They had two children, Maria Boudinot, who died at age two, and Susan Vergereau Boudinot.\n\nSusan married William Bradford, who became Chief Justice of Pennsylvania and Attorney General under George Washington. After her husband's death in 1795, Susan Boudinot Bradford returned to her parents' home to live. The young widow edited her father's papers. Now held by Princeton University, these provide significant insight into the events of the Revolutionary era.\n\nIn 1805, Elias, Hannah and Susan moved to a new home in Burlington, New Jersey. Hannah died a few years after their move, and Elias lived there for the remainder of his years.\n\nIn his later years, Boudinot invested and speculated in land. He owned large tracts in Ohio including most of Green Township in what is now the western suburbs of Cincinnati, where there is a street bearing his surname. At his death, he willed to the city of Philadelphia for parks and city needs. He was buried in the churchyard of St. Mary's Church, Burlington, New Jersey.\n\nBoudinot became a prominent lawyer and his practice prospered. As the revolution drew near, he aligned with the Whigs, and was elected to the New Jersey provincial assembly in 1775. In the early stages of the Revolutionary War, he was active in promoting enlistment; several times he loaned money to field commanders to purchase supplies. Boudinot helped support the activities of rebel spies. After the British occupation of New York City, spies were sent to Staten Island and Long Island, New York to observe and report on movements of specific British garrisons and regiments.\n\nOn May 5, 1777, General George Washington asked Boudinot to be appointed as commissary general for prisoners. Congress through the board of war concurred. Boudinot was commissioned as a colonel in the Continental Army for this work. He served until July 1778, when competing responsibilities forced him to resign. The commissary managed enemy prisoners, and also was responsible for supplying American prisoners who were held by the British.\n\nIn November 1777, the New Jersey legislature named Boudinot as one of their delegates to the Second Continental Congress. His duties as Commissary prevented his attendance, so in May 1778 he resigned. By early July he had been replaced and attended his first meeting of the Congress on July 7, 1778. As a delegate, he still continued his concerns for the welfare of prisoners of war. His first term ended that year.\n\nIn 1781, Boudinot returned to the Congress, for a term lasting through 1783. In November 1782, he was elected as President of the Continental Congress for a one-year term. The President of Congress was a mostly ceremonial position with no real authority, but the office did require him to handle a good deal of correspondence and sign official documents. On April 15, 1783 he signed the Preliminary Articles of Peace. When the United States (US) government was formed in 1789, Boudinot was elected from New Jersey to the US House of Representatives. He was elected to the second and third congresses as well, where he generally supported the administration. He refused to join the expansion of affiliated groups that formed formal political parties.\n\nIn 1794, he declined to serve another term, and left Congress in early 1795. In October 1795, President George Washington appointed him as Director of the United States Mint, a position he held through succeeding administrations until he retired in 1805.\n\nIn addition to serving in political office, Elias supported many civic, religious, and educational causes during his life. Boudinot served as one of the trustees of the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University) for nearly half a century, from 1772 until 1821. When the Continental Congress was forced to leave Philadelphia in 1783 while he was president, he moved the meetings to Princeton, where they met in the College's Nassau Hall.\n\nOn September 24, 1789, the House of Representatives voted to recommend the First Amendment of the newly drafted Constitution to the states for ratification. The next day, Congressman Boudinot proposed that the House and Senate jointly request of President Washington to proclaim a day of thanksgiving for \"the many signal favors of Almighty God.\" Boudinot said that he\ncould not think of letting the session pass over without offering an opportunity to all the citizens of the United States of joining, with one voice, in returning to Almighty God their sincere thanks for the many blessings he had poured down upon them.\n\nBoudinot was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1814.\n\nA devout Presbyterian, Boudinot supported missions and missionary work. He wrote \"The Age of Revelation\" in response to Thomas Paine's \"The Age of Reason.\" He was one of the founders of the American Bible Society, and after 1816 served as its President.\n\nHe argued for the rights of black and American Indian citizens, and sponsored students to the Board School for Indians in Connecticut. One of these, a young Cherokee named \"Gallegina Uwatie\", also known as \"Buck Watie\", stayed with him in Burlington on his way to the school. The two so impressed each other that \"Gallegina\" asked for and was given permission to adopt the statesman's name. Later known as Elias Boudinot, he was an editor of the \"Cherokee Phoenix\", the nation's first newspaper, which was published in Cherokee and English.\n\nBULLET::::- Princeton University Library holds the Boudinot-Stockton papers, as well as many family possessions and portraits.\nBULLET::::- Elias Boudinot Elementary School in Burlington, New Jersey is named after him, as are the following:\nBULLET::::- Boudinot Street in Philadelphia, located between C and D Streets.\nBULLET::::- Boudinot Avenue in Western Hills, Cincinnati, Ohio home of the original LaRosa's pizzeria.\nBULLET::::- Boudinot Place in Elizabeth, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- Boudinot Street in Princeton, New Jersey.\nBULLET::::- Boudinot Lane in Franklin Township, New Jersey\nBULLET::::- Boudinot-Southard-Ross Farmstead in Bernards Township, Somerset County, New Jersey\n\nBULLET::::- \"Be religiously careful in our choice of all public officers...and judge of the tree by its fruits.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Good government generally begins in the family, and if the moral character of a people once degenerate, their political character must soon follow.\"\nBULLET::::- \"For nearly half a century have I anxiously and critically studied that invaluable treasure [the Bible]; and I still scarcely ever take it up that I do not find something new – that I do not receive some valuable addition to my stock of knowledge or perceive some instructive fact never observed before. In short, were you to ask me to recommend the most valuable book in the world, I should fix on the Bible as the most instructive both to the wise and ignorant. Were you to ask me for one affording the most rational and pleasing entertainment to the inquiring mind, I should repeat, it is the Bible; and should you renew the inquiry for the best philosophy or the most interesting history, I should still urge you to look into your Bible. I would make it, in short, the Alpha and Omega of knowledge; and be assured, that it is for want of understanding the scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, that so little value is set upon them by the world at large.\"\n\nThe Presbyterian Historical Society in Philadelphia has a collection of incoming correspondence and several legal agreements pertaining to land ownership related to Boudinot from 1777–1821 in its holdings. The correspondence dating from 1777–1778 almost exclusively deals with the trading and releasing of prisoners.\n\n\nBULLET::::- Retrieved on 2009-05-18\nBULLET::::- Elias Boudinot at The Political Graveyard\n"}
{"id": "10134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10134", "title": "Electromagnetic spectrum", "text": "Electromagnetic spectrum\n\n! colspan=3  Class\n! style=\"padding:0;font-size:1px;\"   \n! Freq-uency\n! Wave-length\n! Energy per photon\n!colspan=7  Legend\ncolspan=7  \nγ = Gamma raysMIR = Mid infraredHF = High freq.\nHX = Hard X-rays FIR = Far infraredMF = Medium freq.\nSX = Soft X-raysRadio wavesLF = Low freq.\nEUV = Extreme ultravioletEHF = Extremely high freq.VLF = Very low freq.\nNUV = Near ultravioletSHF = Super high freq.VF/ULF = Voice freq.\nVisible lightUHF = Ultra high freq.SLF = Super low freq.\nNIR = Near InfraredVHF = Very high freq.ELF = Extremely low freq.\n\nFreq = Frequency\n\nThe electromagnetic spectrum is the range of frequencies (the spectrum) of electromagnetic radiation and their respective wavelengths and photon energies.\n\nThe electromagnetic spectrum covers electromagnetic waves with frequencies ranging from below one hertz to above 10 hertz, corresponding to wavelengths from thousands of kilometers down to a fraction of the size of an atomic nucleus. This frequency range is divided into separate bands, and the electromagnetic waves within each frequency band are called by different names; beginning at the low frequency (long wavelength) end of the spectrum these are: radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays at the high-frequency (short wavelength) end. The electromagnetic waves in each of these bands have different characteristics, such as how they are produced, how they interact with matter, and their practical applications. The limit for long wavelengths is the size of the universe itself, while it is thought that the short wavelength limit is in the vicinity of the Planck length. Gamma rays, X-rays, and high ultraviolet are classified as \"ionizing radiation\" as their photons have enough energy to ionize atoms, causing chemical reactions.\n\nIn most of the frequency bands above, a technique called spectroscopy can be used to physically separate waves of different frequencies, producing a spectrum showing the constituent frequencies. Spectroscopy is used to study the interactions of electromagnetic waves with matter. Other technological uses are described under electromagnetic radiation.\n\nFor most of history, visible light was the only known part of the electromagnetic spectrum. The ancient Greeks recognized that light traveled in straight lines and studied some of its properties, including reflection and refraction. The study of light continued, and during the 16th and 17th centuries conflicting theories regarded light as either a wave or a particle.\n\nThe first discovery of electromagnetic radiation other than visible light came in 1800, when William Herschel discovered infrared radiation. He was studying the temperature of different colors by moving a thermometer through light split by a prism. He noticed that the highest temperature was beyond red. He theorized that this temperature change was due to \"calorific rays\", a type of light ray that could not be seen.\n\nThe next year, Johann Ritter, working at the other end of the spectrum, noticed what he called \"chemical rays\" (invisible light rays that induced certain chemical reactions). These behaved similarly to visible violet light rays, but were beyond them in the spectrum. They were later renamed ultraviolet radiation.\n\nElectromagnetic radiation was first linked to electromagnetism in 1845, when Michael Faraday noticed that the polarization of light traveling through a transparent material responded to a magnetic field (see Faraday effect). During the 1860s James Maxwell developed four partial differential equations for the electromagnetic field. Two of these equations predicted the possibility and behavior of waves in the field. Analyzing the speed of these theoretical waves, Maxwell realized that they must travel at a speed that was about the known speed of light. This startling coincidence in value led Maxwell to make the inference that light itself is a type of electromagnetic wave.\n\nMaxwell's equations predicted an infinite number of frequencies of electromagnetic waves, all traveling at the speed of light. This was the first indication of the existence of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.\n\nMaxwell's predicted waves included waves at very low frequencies compared to infrared, which in theory might be created by oscillating charges in an ordinary electrical circuit of a certain type. Attempting to prove Maxwell's equations and detect such low frequency electromagnetic radiation, in 1886 the physicist Heinrich Hertz built an apparatus to generate and detect what are now called radio waves. Hertz found the waves and was able to infer (by measuring their wavelength and multiplying it by their frequency) that they traveled at the speed of light. Hertz also demonstrated that the new radiation could be both reflected and refracted by various dielectric media, in the same manner as light. For example, Hertz was able to focus the waves using a lens made of tree resin. In a later experiment, Hertz similarly produced and measured the properties of microwaves. These new types of waves paved the way for inventions such as the wireless telegraph and the radio.\n\nIn 1895 Wilhelm Röntgen noticed a new type of radiation emitted during an experiment with an evacuated tube subjected to a high voltage. He called these radiations x-rays and found that they were able to travel through parts of the human body but were reflected or stopped by denser matter such as bones. Before long, many uses were found for them in the field of medicine.\n\nThe last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was filled in with the discovery of gamma rays. In 1900 Paul Villard was studying the radioactive emissions of radium when he identified a new type of radiation that he first thought consisted of particles similar to known alpha and beta particles, but with the power of being far more penetrating than either. However, in 1910, British physicist William Henry Bragg demonstrated that gamma rays are electromagnetic radiation, not particles, and in 1914, Ernest Rutherford (who had named them gamma rays in 1903 when he realized that they were fundamentally different from charged alpha and beta particles) and Edward Andrade measured their wavelengths, and found that gamma rays were similar to X-rays, but with shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies.\n\nElectromagnetic waves are typically described by any of the following three physical properties: the frequency \"f\", wavelength λ, or photon energy \"E\". Frequencies observed in astronomy range from (1 GeV gamma rays) down to the local plasma frequency of the ionized interstellar medium (~1 kHz). Wavelength is inversely proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma rays have very short wavelengths that are fractions of the size of atoms, whereas wavelengths on the opposite end of the spectrum can be as long as the universe. Photon energy is directly proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma ray photons have the highest energy (around a billion electron volts), while radio wave photons have very low energy (around a femtoelectronvolt). These relations are illustrated by the following equations:\nwhere:\nBULLET::::- \"c\" = is the speed of light in a vacuum\nBULLET::::- \"h\" = = is Planck's constant.\n\nWhenever electromagnetic waves exist in a medium with matter, their wavelength is decreased. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, no matter what medium they are traveling through, are usually quoted in terms of the \"vacuum wavelength\", although this is not always explicitly stated.\n\nGenerally, electromagnetic radiation is classified by wavelength into radio wave, microwave, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays. The behavior of EM radiation depends on its wavelength. When EM radiation interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behavior also depends on the amount of energy per quantum (photon) it carries.\n\nSpectroscopy can detect a much wider region of the EM spectrum than the visible wavelength range of 400 nm to 700 nm in a vacuum. A common laboratory spectroscope can detect wavelengths from 2 nm to 2500 nm. Detailed information about the physical properties of objects, gases, or even stars can be obtained from this type of device. Spectroscopes are widely used in astrophysics. For example, many hydrogen atoms emit a radio wave photon that has a wavelength of 21.12 cm. Also, frequencies of 30 Hz and below can be produced by and are important in the study of certain stellar nebulae and frequencies as high as have been detected from astrophysical sources.\n\nThe types of electromagnetic radiation are broadly classified into the following classes (regions, bands or types):\nBULLET::::1. Gamma radiation\nBULLET::::2. X-ray radiation\nBULLET::::3. Ultraviolet radiation\nBULLET::::4. Visible light\nBULLET::::5. Infrared radiation\nBULLET::::6. Microwave radiation\nBULLET::::7. Radio waves\nThis classification goes in the increasing order of wavelength, which is characteristic of the type of radiation.\n\nThere are no precisely defined boundaries between the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum; rather they fade into each other like the bands in a rainbow (which is the sub-spectrum of visible light). Radiation of each frequency and wavelength (or in each band) has a mix of properties of the two regions of the spectrum that bound it. For example, red light resembles infrared radiation in that it can excite and add energy to some chemical bonds and indeed must do so to power the chemical mechanisms responsible for photosynthesis and the working of the visual system.\n\nThe distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is partly based on sources: the photons generated from nuclear decay or other nuclear and subnuclear/particle process are always termed gamma rays, whereas X-rays are generated by electronic transitions involving highly energetic inner atomic electrons. In general, nuclear transitions are much more energetic than electronic transitions, so gamma-rays are more energetic than X-rays, but exceptions exist. By analogy to electronic transitions, muonic atom transitions are also said to produce X-rays, even though their energy may exceed , whereas there are many (77 known to be less than ) low-energy nuclear transitions (e.g., the nuclear transition of thorium-229), and, despite being one million-fold less energetic than some muonic X-rays, the emitted photons are still called gamma rays due to their nuclear origin.\n\nThe convention that EM radiation that is known to come from the nucleus, is always called \"gamma ray\" radiation is the only convention that is universally respected, however. Many astronomical gamma ray sources (such as gamma ray bursts) are known to be too energetic (in both intensity and wavelength) to be of nuclear origin. Quite often, in high energy physics and in medical radiotherapy, very high energy EMR (in the >10 MeV region)—which is of higher energy than any nuclear gamma ray—is not called X-ray or gamma-ray, but instead by the generic term of \"high energy photons.\"\n\nThe region of the spectrum where a particular observed electromagnetic radiation falls, is reference frame-dependent (due to the Doppler shift for light), so EM radiation that one observer would say is in one region of the spectrum could appear to an observer moving at a substantial fraction of the speed of light with respect to the first to be in another part of the spectrum. For example, consider the cosmic microwave background. It was produced when matter and radiation decoupled, by the de-excitation of hydrogen atoms to the ground state. These photons were from Lyman series transitions, putting them in the ultraviolet (UV) part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Now this radiation has undergone enough cosmological red shift to put it into the microwave region of the spectrum for observers moving slowly (compared to the speed of light) with respect to the cosmos.\n\nElectromagnetic radiation interacts with matter in different ways across the spectrum. These types of interaction are so different that historically different names have been applied to different parts of the spectrum, as though these were different types of radiation. Thus, although these \"different kinds\" of electromagnetic radiation form a quantitatively continuous spectrum of frequencies and wavelengths, the spectrum remains divided for practical reasons related to these qualitative interaction differences.\n\n+Electromagnetic radiation interaction with matter\n! Region of the spectrum\n! Main interactions with matter\nRadio\nCollective oscillation of charge carriers in bulk material (plasma oscillation). An example would be the oscillatory travels of the electrons in an antenna.\nnowrapMicrowave through far infrared\nPlasma oscillation, molecular rotation\nNear infrared\nMolecular vibration, plasma oscillation (in metals only)\nVisible\nMolecular electron excitation (including pigment molecules found in the human retina), plasma oscillations (in metals only)\nUltraviolet\nExcitation of molecular and atomic valence electrons, including ejection of the electrons (photoelectric effect)\nX-rays\nExcitation and ejection of core atomic electrons, Compton scattering (for low atomic numbers)\nGamma rays\nEnergetic ejection of core electrons in heavy elements, Compton scattering (for all atomic numbers), excitation of atomic nuclei, including dissociation of nuclei\nnowrapHigh-energy gamma rays\nCreation of particle-antiparticle pairs. At very high energies a single photon can create a shower of high-energy particles and antiparticles upon interaction with matter.\n\nRadio waves are emitted and received by antennas, which consist of conductors such as metal rod resonators. In artificial generation of radio waves, an electronic device called a transmitter generates an AC electric current which is applied to an antenna. The oscillating electrons in the antenna generate oscillating electric and magnetic fields that radiate away from the antenna as radio waves. In reception of radio waves, the oscillating electric and magnetic fields of a radio wave couple to the electrons in an antenna, pushing them back and forth, creating oscillating currents which are applied to a radio receiver. Earth's atmosphere is mainly transparent to radio waves, except for layers of charged particles in the ionosphere which can reflect certain frequencies.\n\nRadio waves are extremely widely used to transmit information across distances in radio communication systems such as radio broadcasting, television, two way radios, mobile phones, communication satellites, and wireless networking. In a radio communication system, a radio frequency current is modulated with an information-bearing signal in a transmitter by varying either the amplitude, frequency or phase, and applied to an antenna. The radio waves carry the information across space to a receiver, where they are received by an antenna and the information extracted by demodulation in the receiver. Radio waves are also used for navigation in systems like Global Positioning System (GPS) and navigational beacons, and locating distant objects in radiolocation and radar. They are also used for remote control, and for industrial heating.\n\nThe use of the radio spectrum is strictly regulated by governments, coordinated by a body called the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) which allocates frequencies to different users for different uses.\n\nMicrowaves are radio waves of short wavelength, from about 10 centimeters to one millimeter, in the SHF and EHF frequency bands. Microwave energy is produced with klystron and magnetron tubes, and with solid state devices such as Gunn and IMPATT diodes. Although they are emitted and absorbed by short antennas, they are also absorbed by polar molecules, coupling to vibrational and rotational modes, resulting in bulk heating. Unlike higher frequency waves such as infrared and light which are absorbed mainly at surfaces, microwaves can penetrate into materials and deposit their energy below the surface. This effect is used to heat food in microwave ovens, and for industrial heating and medical diathermy. Microwaves are the main wavelengths used in radar, and are used for satellite communication, and wireless networking technologies such as Wi-Fi, although this is at intensity levels unable to cause thermal heating. The copper cables (transmission lines) which are used to carry lower frequency radio waves to antennas have excessive power losses at microwave frequencies, and metal pipes called waveguides are used to carry them. Although at the low end of the band the atmosphere is mainly transparent, at the upper end of the band absorption of microwaves by atmospheric gasses limits practical propagation distances to a few kilometers.\n\nTerahertz radiation or sub-millimeter radiation is a region of the spectrum from about 100 GHz to 30 terahertz (THz) between microwaves and far infrared which can be regarded as belonging to either band. Until recently, the range was rarely studied and few sources existed for microwave energy in the so-called \"terahertz gap\", but applications such as imaging and communications are now appearing. Scientists are also looking to apply terahertz technology in the armed forces, where high-frequency waves might be directed at enemy troops to incapacitate their electronic equipment. Terahertz radiation is strongly absorbed by atmospheric gases, making this frequency range useless for long distance communication.\n\nThe infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum covers the range from roughly 300 GHz to 400 THz (1 mm – 750 nm). It can be divided into three parts:\nBULLET::::- Far-infrared, from 300 GHz to 30 THz (1 mm – 10 μm). The lower part of this range may also be called microwaves or terahertz waves. This radiation is typically absorbed by so-called rotational modes in gas-phase molecules, by molecular motions in liquids, and by phonons in solids. The water in Earth's atmosphere absorbs so strongly in this range that it renders the atmosphere in effect opaque. However, there are certain wavelength ranges (\"windows\") within the opaque range that allow partial transmission, and can be used for astronomy. The wavelength range from approximately 200 μm up to a few mm is often referred to as \"sub-millimeter\" in astronomy, reserving far infrared for wavelengths below 200 μm.\nBULLET::::- Mid-infrared, from 30 to 120 THz (10–2.5 μm). Hot objects (black-body radiators) can radiate strongly in this range, and human skin at normal body temperature radiates strongly at the lower end of this region. This radiation is absorbed by molecular vibrations, where the different atoms in a molecule vibrate around their equilibrium positions. This range is sometimes called the \"fingerprint region\", since the mid-infrared absorption spectrum of a compound is very specific for that compound.\nBULLET::::- Near-infrared, from 120 to 400 THz (2,500–750 nm). Physical processes that are relevant for this range are similar to those for visible light. The highest frequencies in this region can be detected directly by some types of photographic film, and by many types of solid state image sensors for infrared photography and videography.\n\nAbove infrared in frequency comes visible light. The Sun emits its peak power in the visible region, although integrating the entire emission power spectrum through all wavelengths shows that the Sun emits slightly more infrared than visible light. By definition, visible light is the part of the EM spectrum the human eye is the most sensitive to. Visible light (and near-infrared light) is typically absorbed and emitted by electrons in molecules and atoms that move from one energy level to another. This action allows the chemical mechanisms that underlie human vision and plant photosynthesis. The light that excites the human visual system is a very small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. A rainbow shows the optical (visible) part of the electromagnetic spectrum; infrared (if it could be seen) would be located just beyond the red side of the rainbow with ultraviolet appearing just beyond the violet end.\n\nElectromagnetic radiation with a wavelength between 380 nm and 760 nm (400–790 terahertz) is detected by the human eye and perceived as visible light. Other wavelengths, especially near infrared (longer than 760 nm) and ultraviolet (shorter than 380 nm) are also sometimes referred to as light, especially when the visibility to humans is not relevant. White light is a combination of lights of different wavelengths in the visible spectrum. Passing white light through a prism splits it up into the several colors of light observed in the visible spectrum between 400 nm and 780 nm.\n\nIf radiation having a frequency in the visible region of the EM spectrum reflects off an object, say, a bowl of fruit, and then strikes the eyes, this results in visual perception of the scene. The brain's visual system processes the multitude of reflected frequencies into different shades and hues, and through this insufficiently-understood psychophysical phenomenon, most people perceive a bowl of fruit.\n\nAt most wavelengths, however, the information carried by electromagnetic radiation is not directly detected by human senses. Natural sources produce EM radiation across the spectrum, and technology can also manipulate a broad range of wavelengths. Optical fiber transmits light that, although not necessarily in the visible part of the spectrum (it is usually infrared), can carry information. The modulation is similar to that used with radio waves.\n\nNext in frequency comes ultraviolet (UV). The wavelength of UV rays is shorter than the violet end of the visible spectrum but longer than the X-ray.\n\nUV is the longest wavelength radiation whose photons are energetic enough to ionize atoms, separating electrons from them, and thus causing chemical reactions. Short wavelength UV and the shorter wavelength radiation above it (X-rays and gamma rays) are called \"ionizing radiation\", and exposure to them can damage living tissue, making them a health hazard. UV can also cause many substances to glow with visible light; this is called \"fluorescence\".\n\nAt the middle range of UV, UV rays cannot ionize but can break chemical bonds, making molecules unusually reactive. Sunburn, for example, is caused by the disruptive effects of middle range UV radiation on skin cells, which is the main cause of skin cancer. UV rays in the middle range can irreparably damage the complex DNA molecules in the cells producing thymine dimers making it a very potent mutagen.\n\nThe Sun emits significant UV radiation (about 10% of its total power), including extremely short wavelength UV that could potentially destroy most life on land (ocean water would provide some protection for life there). However, most of the Sun's damaging UV wavelengths are absorbed by the atmosphere before they reach the surface. The higher energy (shortest wavelength) ranges of UV (called \"vacuum UV\") are absorbed by nitrogen and, at longer wavelengths, by simple diatomic oxygen in the air. Most of the UV in the mid-range of energy is blocked by the ozone layer, which absorbs strongly in the important 200–315 nm range, the lower energy part of which is too long for ordinary dioxygen in air to absorb. This leaves less than 3% of sunlight at sea level in UV, with all of this remainder at the lower energies. The remainder is UV-A, along with some UV-B. The very lowest energy range of UV between 315 nm and visible light (called UV-A) is not blocked well by the atmosphere, but does not cause sunburn and does less biological damage. However, it is not harmless and does create oxygen radicals, mutations and skin damage.\n\nAfter UV come X-rays, which, like the upper ranges of UV are also ionizing. However, due to their higher energies, X-rays can also interact with matter by means of the Compton effect. Hard X-rays have shorter wavelengths than soft X-rays and as they can pass through many substances with little absorption, they can be used to 'see through' objects with 'thicknesses' less than that equivalent to a few meters of water. One notable use is diagnostic X-ray imaging in medicine (a process known as radiography). X-rays are useful as probes in high-energy physics. In astronomy, the accretion disks around neutron stars and black holes emit X-rays, enabling studies of these phenomena. X-rays are also emitted by the coronas of stars and are strongly emitted by some types of nebulae. However, X-ray telescopes must be placed outside the Earth's atmosphere to see astronomical X-rays, since the great depth of the atmosphere of Earth is opaque to X-rays (with areal density of 1000 g/cm), equivalent to 10 meters thickness of water. This is an amount sufficient to block almost all astronomical X-rays (and also astronomical gamma rays—see below).\n\nAfter hard X-rays come gamma rays, which were discovered by Paul Ulrich Villard in 1900. These are the most energetic photons, having no defined lower limit to their wavelength. In astronomy they are valuable for studying high-energy objects or regions, however as with X-rays this can only be done with telescopes outside the Earth's atmosphere. Gamma rays are used experimentally by physicists for their penetrating ability and are produced by a number of radioisotopes. They are used for irradiation of foods and seeds for sterilization, and in medicine they are occasionally used in radiation cancer therapy. More commonly, gamma rays are used for diagnostic imaging in nuclear medicine, an example being PET scans. The wavelength of gamma rays can be measured with high accuracy through the effects of Compton scattering.\n\nBULLET::::- Bandplan\nBULLET::::- Cosmic ray\nBULLET::::- Digital dividend after digital television transition\nBULLET::::- Electroencephalography\nBULLET::::- Infrared window\nBULLET::::- Ionizing radiation\nBULLET::::- List of international common standards\nBULLET::::- Optical window\nBULLET::::- Ozone layer\nBULLET::::- Radiant energy\nBULLET::::- Radiation\nBULLET::::- Radio window\nBULLET::::- Spectroscopy\nBULLET::::- V band\nBULLET::::- W band\n\nBULLET::::- UnwantedEmissions.com (U.S. radio spectrum allocations resource)\nBULLET::::- Australian Radiofrequency Spectrum Allocations Chart (from Australian Communications and Media Authority)\nBULLET::::- Canadian Table of Frequency Allocations (from Industry Canada)\nBULLET::::- U.S. Frequency Allocation Chart – Covering the range 3 kHz to 300 GHz (from Department of Commerce)\nBULLET::::- UK frequency allocation table (from Ofcom, which inherited the Radiocommunications Agency's duties, pdf format)\nBULLET::::- Flash EM Spectrum Presentation / Tool – Very complete and customizable.\nBULLET::::- How to render the color spectrum / Code – Only approximately right.\nBULLET::::- Poster \"Electromagnetic Radiation Spectrum\" (992 kB)\nBULLET::::- Electromagnetic Spectrum presentation\nBULLET::::- Electromagnetic Spectrum Strategy: A Call to Action U.S. Department of Defense\n"}
{"id": "10136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10136", "title": "Expert system", "text": "Expert system\n\nIn artificial intelligence, an expert system is a computer system that emulates the decision-making ability of a human expert.\nExpert systems are designed to solve complex problems by reasoning through bodies of knowledge, represented mainly as if–then rules rather than through conventional procedural code. The first expert systems were created in the 1970s and then proliferated in the 1980s. Expert systems were among the first truly successful forms of artificial intelligence (AI) software. \nAn expert system is divided into two subsystems: the inference engine and the knowledge base. The knowledge base represents facts and rules. The inference engine applies the rules to the known facts to deduce new facts. Inference engines can also include explanation and debugging abilities.\n\nSoon after the dawn of modern computers in the late 1940s – early 1950s, researchers started realizing the immense potential these machines had for modern society. One of the first challenges was to make such machine capable of “thinking” like humans. In particular, making these machines capable of making important decisions the way humans do. The medical / healthcare field presented the tantalizing challenge to enable these machines to make medical diagnostic decisions.\n\nThus, in the late 1950s, right after the information age had fully arrived, researchers started experimenting with the prospect of using computer technology to emulate human decision-making. For example, biomedical researchers started creating computer-aided systems for diagnostic applications in medicine and biology. These early diagnostic systems used patients’ symptoms and laboratory test results as inputs to generate a diagnostic outcome. \nThese systems were often described as the early forms of expert systems. However, researchers had realized that there were significant limitations when using traditional methods such as flow-charts \n\nstatistical pattern-matching, or probability theory. \n\nThis previous situation gradually led to the development of expert systems, which used knowledge-based approaches. These expert systems in medicine were the MYCIN expert system, the INTERNIST-I expert system and later, in the middle of the 1980s, the CADUCEUS. \n\nExpert systems were formally introduced around 1965 by the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project led by Edward Feigenbaum, who is sometimes termed the \"father of expert systems\"; other key early contributors were Bruce Buchanan and Randall Davis. The Stanford researchers tried to identify domains where expertise was highly valued and complex, such as diagnosing infectious diseases (Mycin) and identifying unknown organic molecules (Dendral). The idea that \"intelligent systems derive their power from the knowledge they possess rather than from the specific formalisms and inference schemes they use\" – as Feigenbaum said – was at the time a significant step forward, since the past research had been focused on heuristic computational methods, culminating in attempts to develop very general-purpose problem solvers (foremostly the conjunct work of Allen Newell and Herbert Simon). Expert systems became some of the first truly successful forms of artificial intelligence (AI) software.\n\nResearch on expert systems was also active in France. While in the US the focus tended to be on rules-based systems, first on systems hard coded on top of LISP programming environments and then on expert system shells developed by vendors such as Intellicorp, in France research focused more on systems developed in Prolog. The advantage of expert system shells was that they were somewhat easier for nonprogrammers to use. The advantage of Prolog environments was that they were not focused only on \"if-then\" rules; Prolog environments provided a much better realization of a complete first order logic environment.\n\nIn the 1980s, expert systems proliferated. Universities offered expert system courses and two thirds of the Fortune 500 companies applied the technology in daily business activities. Interest was international with the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project in Japan and increased research funding in Europe.\n\nIn 1981, the first IBM PC, with the PC DOS operating system, was introduced. The imbalance between the high affordability of the relatively powerful chips in the PC, compared to the much more expensive cost of processing power in the mainframes that dominated the corporate IT world at the time, created a new type of architecture for corporate computing, termed the client-server model. Calculations and reasoning could be performed at a fraction of the price of a mainframe using a PC. This model also enabled business units to bypass corporate IT departments and directly build their own applications. As a result, client server had a tremendous impact on the expert systems market. Expert systems were already outliers in much of the business world, requiring new skills that many IT departments did not have and were not eager to develop. They were a natural fit for new PC-based shells that promised to put application development into the hands of end users and experts. Until then, the main development environment for expert systems had been high end Lisp machines from Xerox, Symbolics, and Texas Instruments. With the rise of the PC and client server computing, vendors such as Intellicorp and Inference Corporation shifted their priorities to developing PC based tools. Also, new vendors, often financed by venture capital (such as Aion Corporation, Neuron Data, Exsys, and many others), started appearing regularly.\n\nThe first expert system to be used in a design capacity for a large-scale product was the SID (Synthesis of Integral Design) software program, developed in 1982. Written in LISP, SID generated 93% of the VAX 9000 CPU logic gates. Input to the software was a set of rules created by several expert logic designers. SID expanded the rules and generated software logic synthesis routines many times the size of the rules themselves. Surprisingly, the combination of these rules resulted in an overall design that exceeded the capabilities of the experts themselves, and in many cases out-performed the human counterparts. While some rules contradicted others, top-level control parameters for speed and area provided the tie-breaker. The program was highly controversial, but used nevertheless due to project budget constraints. It was terminated by logic designers after the VAX 9000 project completion.\n\nDuring the years before the middle of the 1970s, the expectations of what expert systems can accomplish in many fields tended to be extremely optimistic. At the beginning of these early studies, researchers were hoping to develop entirely automatic (i.e., completely computerized) expert systems. The expectations of people of what computers can do were frequently too idealistic. This situation radically changed after Richard M. Karp published his breakthrough paper: “Reducibility among Combinatorial Problems” in the early 1970s. Thanks to Karp’s work it became clear that there are certain limitations and possibilities when one designs computer algorithms. His findings describe what computers can do and what they cannot do. Many of the computational problems related to this type of expert systems have certain pragmatic limitations. These findings laid down the groundwork that led to the next developments in the field. \n\nIn the 1990s and beyond, the term \"expert system\" and the idea of a standalone AI system mostly dropped from the IT lexicon. There are two interpretations of this. One is that \"expert systems failed\": the IT world moved on because expert systems did not deliver on their over hyped promise. The other is the mirror opposite, that expert systems were simply victims of their success: as IT professionals grasped concepts such as rule engines, such tools migrated from being standalone tools for developing special purpose \"expert\" systems, to being one of many standard tools. Many of the leading major business application suite vendors (such as SAP, Siebel, and Oracle) integrated expert system abilities into their suite of products as a way of specifying business logic – rule engines are no longer simply for defining the rules an expert would use but for any type of complex, volatile, and critical business logic; they often go hand in hand with business process automation and integration environments.\n\nThe limitations of the previous type of expert systems have urged researchers to develop new types of approaches. They have developed more efficient, flexible and powerful approaches in order to emulate the human decision-making process. Some of the approaches that researchers have developed are based on new methods of artificial intelligence (AI), and in particular in machine learning and data mining approaches with a feedback mechanism. Related is the discussion on the disadvantages section. \n\nModern systems can incorporate new knowledge more easily and thus update themselves easily. Such systems can generalize from existing knowledge better and deal with vast amounts of complex data. Related is the subject of big data here. Sometimes these type of expert systems are called “intelligent systems.” \n\nAn expert system is an example of a knowledge-based system. Expert systems were the first commercial systems to use a knowledge-based architecture. A knowledge-based system is essentially composed of two sub-systems: the knowledge base and the inference engine.\n\nThe knowledge base represents facts about the world. In early expert systems such as Mycin and Dendral, these facts were represented mainly as flat assertions about variables. In later expert systems developed with commercial shells, the knowledge base took on more structure and used concepts from object-oriented programming. The world was represented as classes, subclasses, and instances and assertions were replaced by values of object instances. The rules worked by querying and asserting values of the objects.\n\nThe inference engine is an automated reasoning system that evaluates the current state of the knowledge-base, applies relevant rules, and then asserts new knowledge into the knowledge base. The inference engine may also include abilities for explanation, so that it can explain to a user the chain of reasoning used to arrive at a particular conclusion by tracing back over the firing of rules that resulted in the assertion.\n\nThere are mainly two modes for an inference engine: forward chaining and backward chaining. The different approaches are dictated by whether the inference engine is being driven by the antecedent (left hand side) or the consequent (right hand side) of the rule. In forward chaining an antecedent fires and asserts the consequent. For example, consider the following rule:\n\nformula_1\n\nA simple example of forward chaining would be to assert Man(Socrates) to the system and then trigger the inference engine. It would match R1 and assert Mortal(Socrates) into the knowledge base.\n\nBackward chaining is a bit less straight forward. In backward chaining the system looks at possible conclusions and works backward to see if they might be true. So if the system was trying to determine if Mortal(Socrates) is true it would find R1 and query the knowledge base to see if Man(Socrates) is true. One of the early innovations of expert systems shells was to integrate inference engines with a user interface. This could be especially powerful with backward chaining. If the system needs to know a particular fact but does not, then it can simply generate an input screen and ask the user if the information is known. So in this example, it could use R1 to ask the user if Socrates was a Man and then use that new information accordingly.\n\nThe use of rules to explicitly represent knowledge also enabled explanation abilities. In the simple example above if the system had used R1 to assert that Socrates was Mortal and a user wished to understand why Socrates was mortal they could query the system and the system would look back at the rules which fired to cause the assertion and present those rules to the user as an explanation. In English if the user asked \"Why is Socrates Mortal?\" the system would reply \"Because all men are mortal and Socrates is a man\". A significant area for research was the generation of explanations from the knowledge base in natural English rather than simply by showing the more formal but less intuitive rules.\n\nAs expert systems evolved, many new techniques were incorporated into various types of inference engines. Some of the most important of these were:\n\nBULLET::::- Truth maintenance. These systems record the dependencies in a knowledge-base so that when facts are altered, dependent knowledge can be altered accordingly. For example, if the system learns that Socrates is no longer known to be a man it will revoke the assertion that Socrates is mortal.\nBULLET::::- Hypothetical reasoning. In this, the knowledge base can be divided up into many possible views, a.k.a. worlds. This allows the inference engine to explore multiple possibilities in parallel. For example, the system may want to explore the consequences of both assertions, what will be true if Socrates is a Man and what will be true if he is not?\nBULLET::::- Uncertainty systems. One of the first extensions of simply using rules to represent knowledge was also to associate a probability with each rule. So, not to assert that Socrates is mortal, but to assert Socrates \"may\" be mortal with some probability value. Simple probabilities were extended in some systems with sophisticated mechanisms for uncertain reasoning, such as Fuzzy logic, and combination of probabilities.\nBULLET::::- Ontology classification. With the addition of object classes to the knowledge base, a new type of reasoning was possible. Along with reasoning simply about object values, the system could also reason about object structures. In this simple example, Man can represent an object class and R1 can be redefined as a rule that defines the class of all men. These types of special purpose inference engines are termed classifiers. Although they were not highly used in expert systems, classifiers are very powerful for unstructured volatile domains, and are a key technology for the Internet and the emerging Semantic Web.\n\nThe goal of knowledge-based systems is to make the critical information required for the system to work explicit rather than implicit. In a traditional computer program the logic is embedded in code that can typically only be reviewed by an IT specialist. With an expert system the goal was to specify the rules in a format that was intuitive and easily understood, reviewed, and even edited by domain experts rather than IT experts. The benefits of this explicit knowledge representation were rapid development and ease of maintenance.\n\nEase of maintenance is the most obvious benefit. This was achieved in two ways. First, by removing the need to write conventional code, many of the normal problems that can be caused by even small changes to a system could be avoided with expert systems. Essentially, the logical flow of the program (at least at the highest level) was simply a given for the system, simply invoke the inference engine. This also was a reason for the second benefit: rapid prototyping. With an expert system shell it was possible to enter a few rules and have a prototype developed in days rather than the months or year typically associated with complex IT projects.\n\nA claim for expert system shells that was often made was that they removed the need for trained programmers and that experts could develop systems themselves. In reality, this was seldom if ever true. While the rules for an expert system were more comprehensible than typical computer code, they still had a formal syntax where a misplaced comma or other character could cause havoc as with any other computer language. Also, as expert systems moved from prototypes in the lab to deployment in the business world, issues of integration and maintenance became far more critical. Inevitably demands to integrate with, and take advantage of, large legacy databases and systems arose. To accomplish this, integration required the same skills as any other type of system.\n\nThe most common disadvantage cited for expert systems in the academic literature is the knowledge acquisition problem. Obtaining the time of domain experts for any software application is always difficult, but for expert systems it was especially difficult because the experts were by definition highly valued and in constant demand by the organization. As a result of this problem, a great deal of research in the later years of expert systems was focused on tools for knowledge acquisition, to help automate the process of designing, debugging, and maintaining rules defined by experts. However, when looking at the life-cycle of expert systems in actual use, other problems – essentially the same problems as those of any other large system – seem at least as critical as knowledge acquisition: integration, access to large databases, and performance.\n\nPerformance could be especially problematic because early expert systems were built using tools (such as earlier Lisp versions) that interpreted code expressions without first compiling them. This provided a powerful development environment, but with the drawback that it was virtually impossible to match the efficiency of the fastest compiled languages (such as C). System and database integration were difficult for early expert systems because the tools were mostly in languages and platforms that were neither familiar to nor welcome in most corporate IT environments – programming languages such as Lisp and Prolog, and hardware platforms such as Lisp machines and personal computers. As a result, much effort in the later stages of expert system tool development was focused on integrating with legacy environments such as COBOL and large database systems, and on porting to more standard platforms. These issues were resolved mainly by the client-server paradigm shift, as PCs were gradually accepted in the IT environment as a legitimate platform for serious business system development and as affordable minicomputer servers provided the processing power needed for AI applications.\n\nAnother major challenge of expert systems emerges when the size of the knowledge base increases. This causes the processing complexity to increase. For instance, when an expert system with 100 million rules was envisioned as the ultimate expert system, it became obvious that such system would be too complex and it would face too many computational problems. An inference engine would have to be able to process huge numbers of rules to reach a decision.\n\nHow to verify that decision rules are consistent with each other is also a challenge when there are too many rules. Usually such problem leads to a satisfiability (SAT) formulation. This is a well-known NP-complete problem Boolean satisfiability problem. If we assume only binary variables, say n of them, and then the corresponding search space is of size 2formula_2. Thus, the search space can grow exponentially.\n\nThere are also questions on how to prioritize the use of the rules in order to operate more efficiently, or how to resolve ambiguities (for instance, if there are too many else-if sub-structures within a single rule) and so on.\n\nOther problems are related to the overfitting and overgeneralization effects when using known facts and trying to generalize to other cases not described explicitly in the knowledge base. Such problems exist with methods that employ machine learning approaches too. \n\nAnother problem related to the knowledge base is how to make updates of its knowledge quickly and effectively. Also how to add a new piece of knowledge (i.e., where to add it among many rules) is challenging. Modern approaches that rely on machine learning methods are easier in this regard.\n\nBecause of the above challenges, it became clear that new approaches to AI were required instead of rule-based technologies. These new approaches are based on the use of machine learning techniques, along with the use of feedback mechanisms.\n\nThe key challenges that expert systems in medicine (if one considers computer-aided diagnostic systems as modern expert systems), and perhaps in other application domains, include issues related to aspects such as: big data, existing regulations, healthcare practice, various algorithmic issues, and system assessment. \n\nHayes-Roth divides expert systems applications into 10 categories illustrated in the following table. The example applications were not in the original Hayes-Roth table, and some of them arose well afterward. Any application that is not footnoted is described in the Hayes-Roth book. Also, while these categories provide an intuitive framework to describe the space of expert systems applications, they are not rigid categories, and in some cases an application may show traits of more than one category.\n\n! Category !! Problem addressed !! Examples\n\nHearsay was an early attempt at solving voice recognition through an expert systems approach. For the most part this category of expert systems was not all that successful. Hearsay and all interpretation systems are essentially pattern recognition systems—looking for patterns in noisy data. In the case of Hearsay recognizing phonemes in an audio stream. Other early examples were analyzing sonar data to detect Russian submarines. These kinds of systems proved much more amenable to a neural network AI solution than a rule-based approach.\n\nCADUCEUS and MYCIN were medical diagnosis systems. The user describes their symptoms to the computer as they would to a doctor and the computer returns a medical diagnosis.\n\nDendral was a tool to study hypothesis formation in the identification of organic molecules. The general problem it solved—designing a solution given a set of constraints—was one of the most successful areas for early expert systems applied to business domains such as salespeople configuring Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) VAX computers and mortgage loan application development.\n\nSMH.PAL is an expert system for the assessment of students with multiple disabilities.\n\nMistral is an expert system to monitor dam safety, developed in the 1990s by Ismes (Italy). It gets data from an automatic monitoring system and performs a diagnosis of the state of the dam. Its first copy, installed in 1992 on the Ridracoli Dam (Italy), is still operational 24/7/365. It has been installed on several dams in Italy and abroad (e.g., Itaipu Dam in Brazil), and on landslide sites under the name of Eydenet, and on monuments under the name of Kaleidos. Mistral is a registered trade mark of CESI.\n\nBULLET::::- AI winter\nBULLET::::- CLIPS\nBULLET::::- Constraint logic programming\nBULLET::::- Constraint satisfaction\nBULLET::::- Knowledge engineering\nBULLET::::- Learning classifier system\nBULLET::::- Rule-based machine learning\n\nBULLET::::- Expert System tutorial on Code Project\n"}
{"id": "10139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10139", "title": "Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford", "text": "Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford\n\nEdward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford (; 12 April 155024 June 1604) was an English peer and courtier of the Elizabethan era. Oxford was heir to the second oldest earldom in the kingdom, a court favourite for a time, a sought-after patron of the arts, and noted by his contemporaries as a lyric poet and court playwright, but his volatile temperament precluded him from attaining any courtly or governmental responsibility and contributed to the dissipation of his estate. Since the 1920s he has been among the most popular alternative candidates proposed for the authorship of Shakespeare's works.\n\nDe Vere was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and Margery Golding. After the death of his father in 1562, he became a ward of Queen Elizabeth and was sent to live in the household of her principal advisor, Sir William Cecil. He married Cecil's daughter, Anne, with whom he had five children. De Vere was estranged from her for five years after he refused to acknowledge her first child as his.\n\nDe Vere was a champion jouster and travelled widely throughout Italy and France. He was among the first to compose love poetry at the Elizabethan court, and he was praised as a playwright, though none of the plays known as his survive. A stream of dedications praised de Vere for his generous patronage of literary, religious, musical, and medical works, and he patronised both adult and boy acting companies, as well as musicians, tumblers, acrobats and performing animals.\n\nHe fell out of favour with the Queen in the early 1580s and was exiled from court after impregnating one of her maids of honour, Anne Vavasour, which instigated violent street brawls between de Vere's retainers and her uncles. De Vere was reconciled to the Queen in 1583, but all opportunities for advancement had been lost. In 1586, the Queen granted de Vere a £1,000 annuity to relieve his financial distress caused by his extravagance and selling off his income-producing lands for ready money. After his wife's death, he married Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's maids of honour, with whom he had an heir, Henry de Vere. He died in 1604, having spent the entirety of his inherited estates.\n\nDe Vere was born heir to the second oldest earldom in England at the de Vere ancestral home, Hedingham Castle, in Essex, north-east of London. He was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and his second wife, Margery Golding. He was probably named to honour Edward VI, from whom he received a gilded christening cup. He had an older half-sister, Katherine, the child of his father's first marriage to Dorothy Neville, and a younger sister, Mary de Vere. Both his parents had established court connections: the 16th Earl accompanying Princess Elizabeth from house arrest at Hatfield to the throne, and the countess being appointed a maid of honour in 1559.\n\nDe Vere was styled Viscount Bulbeck and raised in the Protestant reformed faith. Like many children of the nobility, he was raised by surrogate parents, in his case in the household of Sir Thomas Smith. At eight he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, as an \"impubes\", or immature fellow-commoner, later transferring to St John's. Thomas Fowle, a former fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, was paid £10 annually as de Vere's tutor.\n\nHis father died on 3 August 1562, shortly after making his will. Because he held lands from the Crown by knight service, his son became a royal ward of the Queen and was placed in the household of Sir William Cecil, her secretary of state and chief advisor. At 12, de Vere had become the 17th Earl of Oxford, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, and heir to an estate whose annual income, though assessed at approximately £2,500, may have run as high as £3,500 (£ as of 2019).\n\nWhile living at the Cecil House, de Vere's daily studies consisted of dancing instruction, French, Latin, cosmography, writing exercises, drawing, and common prayers. During his first year at Cecil House, Oxford was briefly tutored by Laurence Nowell, the antiquarian and Anglo-Saxon scholar. In a letter to Cecil, Nowell explains: \"I clearly see that my work for the Earl of Oxford cannot be much longer required\", and his departure after eight months has been interpreted as either a sign of the thirteen-year-old de Vere's intractability as a pupil, or an indication that his precocity surpassed Nowell's ability to instruct him. In May 1564 Arthur Golding, in his dedication to his \"Th' Abridgement of the Histories of Trogus Pompeius\", attributed to his young nephew an interest in ancient history and contemporary events.\n\nIn 1563 de Vere's older half-sister, Katherine, then Baroness Windsor, challenged the legitimacy of the marriage of de Vere's parents in the Ecclesiastical court. His uncle Golding argued that the Archbishop of Canterbury should halt the proceedings since a proceeding against a ward of the Queen could not be brought without prior licence from the Court of Wards and Liveries.\n\nSome time before October 1563 de Vere's mother married Charles Tyrrell, a Gentleman Pensioner. In May 1565 she wrote to Cecil, urging that the money from family properties set aside for de Vere's use during his minority by his father's will should be entrusted to herself and other family friends to protect it and ensure that he would be able to meet the expenses of furnishing his household and suing his livery when he reached his majority; this last would end his wardship though cancelling his debt with that Court, and convey the powers attached to his title. There is no evidence that Cecil ever replied to her request. She died three years later, and was buried beside her first husband at Earls Colne. De Vere's stepfather, Charles Tyrrell, died in March 1570.\n\nIn August 1564 de Vere was among 17 nobles, knights and esquires in the Queen's entourage who were awarded the honorary degree of Master of Arts by the University of Cambridge, and was awarded another by the University of Oxford on a Royal progress in 1566. His future father-in-law, William Cecil, also received honorary degrees of Master of Arts on the same progresses. There is no evidence de Vere ever received a Bachelor of Arts degree. In February 1567 he was admitted to Gray's Inn to study law.\n\nOn 23 July 1567, while practicing fencing in the backyard of Cecil House in the Strand, the seventeen-year-old Oxford killed Thomas Brincknell, an under-cook in the Cecil household. At the coroner's inquest the next day, the jury, which included de Vere's servant and Cecil's protégé, the future historian Raphael Holinshed, found that Brincknell, drunk, had deliberately committed suicide by running onto Oxford's blade. As a suicide he was not buried in consecrated ground, and all his worldly possessions were confiscated, leaving his pregnant wife destitute. She delivered a still-born child shortly after Brinknell's death. Cecil later wrote that he attempted to have the jury find for de Vere's acting in self-defence.\n\nRecords of books purchased for de Vere in 1569 attest to his continued interest in history, as well as literature and philosophy. Among them were editions of a Geneva Bible gilt, Chaucer, Plutarch, two books in Italian, and folio editions of Cicero and Plato. In the same year Thomas Underdown dedicated his translation of the \"Æthiopian History\" of Heliodorus to de Vere, praising his 'haughty courage', 'great skill' and 'sufficiency of learning'. De Vere made the acquaintance of the mathematician and astrologer John Dee in the winter of 1570 and became interested in occultism, studying magic and conjuring.\n\nIn November 1569, de Vere petitioned Cecil for a foreign military posting. Although the Catholic Revolt of the Northern Earls had broken out that year, Elizabeth refused to grant the request. Cecil eventually obtained a position for him under the Earl of Sussex in a Scottish campaign the following spring. De Vere and Sussex became staunch mutual supporters at court. De Vere received his first vote for membership in the Order of the Garter in 1569, but never attained the honour in spite of his high rank and office.\n\nOn 12 April 1571, de Vere attained his majority and took his seat in the House of Lords. Great expectations attended his coming of age; Sir George Buck recalled predictions that 'he was much more like ... to acquire a new erldome then to wast & lose an old erldom', a prophecy that was never fulfilled.\n\nAlthough formal certification of his freedom from Burghley's control was deferred until May 1572, de Vere was finally granted the income of £666 which his father had intended him to have earlier, but properties set aside to pay his father's debts would not come his way for another decade. During his minority as the Queen's ward, one third of his estate had already reverted to the Crown, much of which Elizabeth had long since settled on Robert Dudley. Elizabeth demanded a further payment of £3,000 for overseeing the wardship and a further £4,000 for suing his livery. De Vere pledged double the amount if he failed to pay when it fell due, effectively risking a total obligation of £21,000.\n\nBy 1571, de Vere was a court favourite of Elizabeth's. In May, he participated in the three-day tilt, tourney and barrier, where although he did not win he was given chief honours in celebration of the attainment of his majority, his prowess winning admiring comments from spectators. In August, de Vere attended Paul de Foix, who had come to England to negotiate a marriage between Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the future King Henry III of France. His published poetry dates from this period and, along with Edward Dyer he was one of the first courtiers to introduce vernacular verse to the court.\n\nIn 1562, the 16th Earl of Oxford had contracted with Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon, for his son Edward to marry one of Huntingdon's sisters; when he reached the age of eighteen, he was to choose either Elizabeth or Mary Hastings. However, after the death of the 16th Earl, the indenture was allowed to lapse. Elizabeth Hastings later married Edward Somerset, while Mary Hastings died unmarried.\n\nIn the summer of 1571, de Vere declared an interest in Cecil's 14 year-old daughter, Anne, and received the queen's consent to the marriage. Anne had been pledged to Philip Sidney two years earlier, but after a year of negotiations Sidney's father, Sir Henry, was declining in the Queen's favour and Cecil suspected financial difficulties. In addition, Cecil had been elevated to the peerage as Lord Burghley in February 1571, thus elevating his daughter's rank, so the negotiations were cancelled. Cecil was displeased with the arrangement, given his daughter's age compared to de Vere's, and had entertained the idea of marrying her to the Earl of Rutland instead. The wedding was deferred until Anne was fifteen and finally took place at the Palace of Whitehall on 16 December 1571, together with that of Lady Elizabeth Hastings and Lord Herbert, with the Queen in attendance. The tying of two young English noblemen of great fortune into Protestant families was not lost on Elizabeth's Catholic enemies. Burghley gave de Vere a marriage settlement of land worth £800, and a cash settlement of £3,000. This amount was equal to de Vere's livery fees and was probably intended to be used as such, but the money vanished without a trace.\n\nDe Vere assigned Anne a jointure of some £669, but even though he was of age and a married man, he was still not in possession of his inheritance. After finally paying the Crown the £4,000 it demanded for his livery, he was finally licensed to enter on his lands in May. He was entitled to yearly revenues from his estates and the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of approximately £2,250, but he was not entitled to the income from his mother's jointure until after her death, nor to the income from certain estates set aside to pay his father's debts until 1583. In addition, the fines assessed against de Vere in the Court of Wards for his wardship, marriage, and livery already totalled some £3,306. To guarantee payment, de Vere entered into bonds to the Court totalling £11,000, and two further private bonds for £6,000 apiece.\n\nIn 1572, de Vere's first cousin and closest relative, the Duke of Norfolk, was found guilty of a Catholic conspiracy against Elizabeth and was executed for treason. De Vere had earlier petitioned both the Queen and Burghley on the condemned Norfolk's behalf, to no avail, and it was claimed in a \"murky petition from an unidentified woman\" that he had plotted to provide a ship to assist his cousin's escape attempt to Spain.\n\nThe following summer de Vere planned to travel to Ireland; at this point, his debts were estimated at a minimum of £6,000.\n\nIn the summer of 1574, Elizabeth admonished de Vere \"for his unthriftyness\", and on 1 July de Vere bolted to the continent without permission, travelling to Calais with Lord Edward Seymour, and then to Flanders, \"carrying a great sum of money with him\". Coming as it did during a time of expected hostilities with Spain, Mary, Queen of Scots, interpreted his flight as an indication of his Catholic sympathies, as did the Catholic rebels then living on the continent. Burghley, however, assured the queen that de Vere was loyal, and she sent two Gentlemen Pensioners to summon him back under threat of heavy penalties. De Vere returned to England by the end of the month and was in London on the 28th. His request for a place on the Privy Council was rejected, but the queen's anger was abated and she promised him a licence to travel to Paris, Germany, and Italy on his pledge of good behaviour.\n\nElizabeth issued de Vere a licence to travel in January 1575, and provided him with letters of introduction to foreign monarchs. Prior to his departure, de Vere entered into two indentures. In the first contract he sold his manors in Cornwall, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire to three trustees for £6,000. In the second, since he had no heirs and if he should die abroad the estates would pass to his sister, Mary, he entailed the lands of the earldom on his first cousin, Hugh Vere. The indenture also provided for payment of debts amounting to £9,096, £3,457 of which was still owed to the Queen as expenses for his wardship.\n\nDe Vere left England in the first week of February, and a month later was presented to the King and Queen of France. News that Anne was pregnant had reached him in Paris, and he sent her many extravagant presents in the coming months. But somewhere along the way his mind was poisoned against Anne and the Cecils, and he became convinced that the expected child was not his. The elder Cecils loudly voiced their outrage at the rumours, which probably worsened the situation. In mid-March he travelled to Strasbourg, and then made his way to Venice, via Milan. Although his daughter, Elizabeth, was born at the beginning of July, for unexplained reasons de Vere did not learn of her birth until late September.\n\nHe was so taken with Italian culture and language during his travels that after his return he became known as the \"Italian Earl\" at court. He is recorded by Stow as having introduced various Renaissance fashions to court which immediately became fashionable, such as embroidered or trimmed scented gloves. Elizabeth had a pair of decorated gloves scented with perfume that for many years was known as the \"Earl of Oxford's perfume\".\n\nIn January 1576 de Vere wrote to Lord Burghley from Siena about complaints that had reached him about his creditors' demands, which included the Queen and his sister, and directing that more of his land be sold to pay them. De Vere left Venice in March, intending to return home by way of Lyons and Paris; although one later report has him as far south as Palermo in Sicily. At this point the Italian financier Benedict Spinola had lent de Vere over £4,000 for his 15-month-long continental tour, while in England over 100 tradesmen were seeking settlement of debts totalling thousands of pounds.\n\nOn de Vere's return across the Channel in April, his ship was hijacked by pirates from Flushing who took his possessions, stripped him to his shirt, and might have murdered him had not one of them recognized him.\n\nOn his return he refused to live with his wife and took rooms at Charing Cross. Aside from the unspoken suspicion that Elizabeth was not his child, Burghley's papers reveal a flood of bitter complaints by de Vere against the Cecil family. Upon the Queen's request, de Vere allowed his wife to attend the Queen at court, but only when de Vere was not present and that she not attempt to speak to him. He also stipulated that Burghley must make no further appeals to him on Anne's behalf. He was estranged from Anne for five years.\n\nIn February 1577 it was rumoured that de Vere's sister Mary would marry Lord Gerald Fitzgerald (1559–1580), but by 2 July she was linked with Peregrine Bertie, later Lord Willoughby d'Eresby. His mother, the Duchess of Suffolk, wrote to Lord Burghley that \"my wise son has gone very far with my Lady Mary Vere, I fear too far to turn\". Both the Duchess and her husband Richard Bertie first opposed the marriage, and the Queen initially withheld her consent. De Vere's own opposition to the match was so vehement that for some time Mary's prospective husband feared for his life. On 15 December the Duchess of Suffolk wrote to Burghley describing a plan she and Mary had devised to arrange a meeting between de Vere and his daughter. Whether the scheme came to fruition is unknown. Mary and Bertie were married sometime before March of the following year.\n\nDe Vere had sold his inherited lands in Cornwall, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire prior to his continental tour. On his return to England in 1576 he sold his manors in Devonshire; by the end of 1578 he had sold at least seven more.\n\nIn 1577 de Vere invested £25 in the second of Martin Frobisher's expeditions in search of the Northwest Passage. In July 1577 he asked the Crown for the grant of Castle Rising, which had been forfeited to the Crown due to his cousin Norfolk's attainder in 1572. As soon as it was granted to him, he sold it, along with two other manors, and sank some £3,000 into Frobisher's third expedition. The 'gold' ore brought back turned out to be worthless, and de Vere lost the entire investment.\n\nIn the summer of 1578 de Vere attended the Queen's progress through East Anglia. The royal party stayed at Lord Henry Howard's residence at Audley End. A contretemps occurred during the progress in mid-August when the Queen twice requested de Vere to dance before the French ambassadors, who were in England to negotiate a marriage between the 46 year-old Elizabeth and the younger brother of Henri III of France, the 24 year-old Duke of Anjou. De Vere refused on the grounds that he \"would not give pleasure to Frenchmen\".\n\nIn April the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de Mendoza, wrote to King Philip II of Spain that it had been proposed that if Anjou were to travel to England to negotiate his marriage to the Queen, de Vere, Surrey, and Windsor should be hostages for his safe return. Anjou himself did not arrive in England until the end of August, but his ambassadors were already in England. De Vere was sympathetic to the proposed marriage; Leicester and his nephew Philip Sidney were adamantly opposed to it. This antagonism may have triggered the famous quarrel between de Vere and Sidney on the tennis court at Whitehall. It is not entirely clear who was playing on the court when the fight erupted; what is undisputed is that de Vere called Sidney a 'puppy', while Sidney responded that \"all the world knows puppies are gotten by dogs, and children by men\". The French ambassadors, whose private galleries overlooked the tennis court, were witness to the display. Whether it was Sidney who next challenged de Vere to a duel or the other way around, de Vere did not take it further, and the Queen personally took Sidney to task for not recognizing the difference between his status and de Vere's. Christopher Hatton and Sidney's friend Hubert Languet also tried to dissuade Sidney from pursuing the matter, and it was eventually dropped. The specific cause is not known, but in January 1580 de Vere wrote and challenged Sidney; by the end of the month de Vere was confined to his chambers, and was not released until early February.\n\nDe Vere openly quarrelled with the Earl of Leicester about this time; he was confined to his chamber at Greenwich for some time 'about the libelling between him and my Lord of Leicester'. In the summer of 1580, Gabriel Harvey, apparently motivated by a desire to ingratiate himself with Leicester, satirized de Vere's love for things Italian in verses entitled \"Speculum Tuscanismi\" in \"Three Proper and Witty Familiar Letters\".\n\nAlthough details are unclear, there is evidence that in 1577 de Vere attempted to leave England to see service in the French Wars of Religion on the side of King Henry III. Like many members of older established aristocratic families in England, de Vere inclined to Catholicism; after his return from Italy he was reported to have embraced the religion, perhaps after a distant kinsman, Charles Arundell, introduced de Vere to a seminary priest named Richard Stephens, by. But just as quickly, late in 1580 he denounced a group of Catholics, among them Arundell, Francis Southwell, and Henry Howard, for treasonous activities and asking the Queen's mercy for his own, now repudiated, Catholicism. Elizabeth characteristically delayed in acting on the matter and he was detained under house arrest for a short time.\nLeicester is credited for having \"dislodged de Vere from the pro-French group\", i.e., the group at court which favoured Elizabeth's marriage to the Duke of Anjou. The Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, was also of the view that Leicester was behind de Vere's informing on his fellow Catholics in an attempt to prevent the French marriage. Peck concurs, stating that Leicester was \"intent upon rendering Sussex's allies politically useless\".\n\nThe Privy Council ordered the arrest of both Howard and Arundell; de Vere immediately met secretly with Arundell to convince him to support his allegations against Howard and Southwell, offering him money and a pardon from the Queen. Arundell refused de Vere's offer, and he and Howard initially sought asylum with Mendoza. Only after being assured they would be placed under house arrest in the home of a Privy Council member, did the pair give themselves up. During the first weeks after their arrest they pursued a threefold strategy: they would admit to minor crimes, prove de Vere a liar by his offers of money to testify to his accusations, and demonstrate that their accuser posed the real danger to the Crown. The extensive list to discredit de Vere included atheism, lying, heresy, disobedience to the crown, treason, murder for hire, sexual perversion, and pederasty with his English and Italian servants (\"buggering a boy that is his cook and many other boys\"), habitual drunkenness, vowing to murder various courtiers, and declaring that Elizabeth had a bad singing voice.\n\nArundell and Howard cleared themselves of de Vere's accusations, although Howard remained under house arrest into August, while Arundell was not freed until October or November. None of the three was ever indicted or tried. In the meantime de Vere was at liberty, and won a tournament at Westminster on 22 January. His page's speech at the tournament, describing de Vere's appearance as the Knight of the Tree of the Sun, was published in 1592 in a pamphlet entitled \"Plato, Axiochus\".\n\nOn 14 April 1589 de Vere was among the peers who found Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel, the eldest son and heir of de Vere's cousin, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, guilty of treason; Arundel later died in prison. De Vere later insisted that \"the Howards were the most treacherous race under heaven\" and that \"my Lord Howard [was] the worst villain that lived in this earth.\"\n\nDuring the early 1580s it is likely that the Earl lived mainly at one of his Essex country houses, Wivenhoe, which was sold in 1584. In June 1580 he purchased a tenement and seven acres of land near Aldgate in London from the Italian merchant Benedict Spinola for £2,500. The property, located in the parish of St Botolphs, was known as the Great Garden of Christchurch and had formerly belonged to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He also purchased a London residence, a mansion in Bishopsgate known as Fisher's Folly. According to Henry Howard, de Vere paid a large sum for the property and renovations to it.\nDe Vere's triumph was short-lived. On 23 March 1581 Sir Francis Walsingham advised the Earl of Huntingdon that two days earlier Anne Vavasour, one of the Queen's maids of honour, had given birth to a son, and that \"the Earl of Oxford is avowed to be the father, who hath withdrawn himself with intent, as it is thought, to pass the seas\". De Vere was captured and imprisoned in the Tower, as was Anne and her infant, who would later be known as Sir Edward Vere. Burghley interceded for him, and he was released from the Tower on 8 June, but he remained under house arrest until sometime in July.\n\nWhile de Vere was under house arrest in May, Thomas Stocker dedicated to him his \"Divers Sermons of Master John Calvin\", stating in the dedication that he had been \"brought up in your Lordship's father's house\". De Vere was still under house arrest in mid-July, but took part in an Accession Day tournament at Whitehall on 17 November 1581.\n\nDe Vere was banished from court until June 1583. He appealed to Burghley to intervene with the Queen on his behalf, but his father-in-law repeatedly put the matter in the hands of Sir Christopher Hatton.\n\nAt Christmas 1581 de Vere reconciled with his wife, Anne, but his affair with Anne Vavasour continued to have repercussions. In March 1582 there was a skirmish in the streets of London between de Vere and Anne's uncle, Sir Thomas Knyvet. De Vere was wounded and his servant killed; reports conflict as to whether Kynvet was also injured. There was another fray between Knyvet's and de Vere's retinues on 18 June, and a third six days later, where it was reported that Knyvet had \"slain a man of the Earl of Oxford's in fight\". In a letter to Burghley three years later de Vere offered to attend his father-in-law at his house \"as well as a lame man might\"; it is possible his lameness was a result of injuries from that encounter. On 19 January 1585 Anne Vavasour's brother Thomas sent de Vere a written challenge; it appears to have been ignored.\n\nMeanwhile, the street-brawling between factions continued. Another of de Vere's men was slain that month, and in March Burghley wrote to Sir Christopher Hatton about the death of one of Knyvet's men, thanking Hatton for his efforts \"to bring some good end to these troublesome matters betwixt my Lord and Oxford and Mr Thomas Knyvet\".\n\nOn 6 May 1583, eighteen months after their reconciliation, Edward and Anne's only son was born, and died the same day. The infant was buried at Castle Hedingham three days later.\n\nAfter intervention by Burghley and Sir Walter Raleigh, de Vere was reconciled to the Queen and his two-year exile from court ended at the end of May on condition of his guarantee of good behaviour. However, he never regained his position as a courtier of the first magnitude.\n\nDe Vere's father maintained a company of players known as Oxford's Men, which was discontinued by the 17th Earl two years after his father's death. Beginning in 1580, de Vere patronised both adult and boy companies, a company of musicians, and sponsored performances by tumblers, acrobats, and performing animals. Oxford's Men toured the provinces during 1580–1587. Sometime after November 1583, de Vere bought a sublease of the premises used by the boy companies in the Blackfriars, and then gave it to his secretary, the writer John Lyly. Lyly installed Henry Evans, a Welsh scrivener and theatrical affectionado, as the manager of the new company of Oxford's Boys, composed of the Children of the Chapel and the Children of Paul's, and turned his talents to play writing until the end of June 1584, when the original playhouse lease was voided by its owner. In 1584–1585, \"the Earl of Oxford's musicians\" received payments for performances in the cities of Oxford and Barnstaple. Oxford's Men (also known as Oxford's Players) stayed active until 1602.\n\nOn 6 April 1584, de Vere's daughter, Bridget, was born, and two works were dedicated to him, Robert Greene's \"Gwydonius; The Card of Fancy\", and John Southern's \"Pandora\". Verses in the latter work mention de Vere's knowledge of astronomy, history, languages, and music.\n\nDe Vere's financial situation was steadily deteriorating. At this point he had sold almost all his inherited lands, which cut him off from his principal source of income. Moreover, because the properties were security for his unpaid debt to the Queen in the Court of Wards, he had had to enter into a bond with the purchaser, guaranteeing that he would indemnify them if the Queen were to make a claim against the lands to collect on the debt. To avoid this eventuality, the purchasers of his estates agreed to repay de Vere's debt to the Court of Wards in instalments.\n\nIn 1585 negotiations were underway for King James to come to England to discuss the release of his mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, and in March de Vere was to be sent to Scotland as one of the hostages for James's safety.\n\nIn 1586, de Vere petitioned the Queen for an annuity to relieve his distressed financial situation. His father-in-law made him several large loans, and Elizabeth granted de Vere a £1,000 annuity, to be continued at her pleasure or until he could be provided for otherwise. This annuity was continued by James I. De Vere's widow, Elizabeth, petitioned James I for an annuity of £250 on behalf of her 11-year-old son, Henry, to continue the £1,000 annuity granted to de Vere. Henry ultimately was awarded a £200 annuity for life. James would continue the grant after her death.\n\nAnother daughter, Susan, was born on 26 May 1587. On 12 September, another daughter, Frances, is recorded to be buried at Edmonton. Her birthdate is unknown; presumably she was between one and three years of age.\n\nIn July Elizabeth granted the Earl property which been seized from Edward Jones, who had been executed for his role in the Babington Plot. In order to protect the land from his creditors, the grant was made in the name of two trustees. At the end of November it was agreed that the purchasers of de Vere's lands would pay his entire debt of some £3,306 due to Court of Wards over a five-year period, finishing in 1592.\n\nIn July and August 1588 England was threatened by the Spanish Armada. On 28 July Leicester, who was in overall command of the English land troops, asked for instructions regarding de Vere, stating that \"he seems most willing to hazard his life in this quarrel\". The Earl was offered government of the port of Harwich, but he thought it was unworthy and declined the post; Leicester was glad to be rid of him.\n\nIn December 1588 de Vere had secretly sold his London mansion \"Fisher's Folly\" to Sir William Cornwallis; by January 1591 the author Thomas Churchyard was dealing with rent owing for rooms he had taken in a house on behalf of his patron. De Vere wrote to Burghley outlining a plan to purchase the manorial lands of Denbigh, in Wales, if the Queen would consent, offering to pay for them by commuting his £1,000 annuity and agreeing to abandon his suit to regain the Forest of Essex (Waltham Forest), and to deed over his interests in Hedingham and Brets for the use of his children, who were living under Burghley's guardianship in his home.\n\nIn the spring of 1591 the plan for the purchasers of his land to discharge his debt to the Court of Wards was disrupted by the Queen's taking extents, or writs allowing a creditor to temporarily seize a debtor's property. De Vere complained that his servant Thomas Hampton had taken advantage of these writs by taking money from the tenants to his own use, and had also conspired with another of de Vere's servants to pass a fraudulent document under the Great Seal of England. The Lord Mayor, Thomas Skinner, was also involved. In June de Vere wrote to Burghley reminding him that he made an agreement with Elizabeth to relinquish his claim to the Forest of Essex for three reasons, one of which was the Queen's reluctance to punish Skinner's felony, which had caused de Vere to forfeit £20,000 in bonds and statutes.\n\nIn 1586 Angel Day dedicated \"The English Secretary\", the first epistolary manual for writing model letters in English, to de Vere, and William Webbe praised him as \"most excellent among the rest\" of our poets in his \"Discourse of English Poetry\". In 1588 Anthony Munday dedicated to de Vere the two parts of his \"Palmerin d'Oliva\". The following year \"The Arte of English Poesie\", attributed to George Puttenham, placed de Vere among a \"crew\" of courtier poets; he also considered de Vere among the best comic playwrights of the day. In 1590 Edmund Spenser addressed to de Vere the third of seventeen dedicatory sonnets which preface \"The Faerie Queene\", celebrating his patronage of poets. The composer John Farmer, who was in de Vere's service at the time, dedicated \"The First Set of Divers & Sundry Ways of Two Parts in One\" to him in 1591, noting in the dedication his patron's love of music.\n\nOn 5 June 1588 Anne Cecil died at court of a fever; she was 31.\n\nOn 4 July 1591 de Vere sold the Great Garden property at Aldgate to John Wolley and Francis Trentham. The arrangement was stated to be for the benefit of Francis' sister, Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's Maids of Honour, whom de Vere married later that year. On 24 February 1593 she gave birth to de Vere's only surviving son and heir, Henry de Vere, at Stoke Newington.\n\nBetween 1591 and 1592 de Vere disposed of the last of his large estates; Castle Hedingham, the seat of his earldom, went to Lord Burghley, it was held in trust for de Vere's three daughters by his first marriage. he commissioned his servant, Roger Harlakenden, to sell Colne Priory. Harlekenden contrived to undervalue the land, then purchase it (as well as other parcels that were not meant to be sold) under his son's name; the suits de Vere brought against Harlakenden for fraud dragged out for decades and were never settled in his lifetime.\n\nProtracted negotiations to arrange a match between his daughter Elizabeth and Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton, did not result in marriage; on 19 November 1594, six weeks after Southampton turned 21, 'the young Earl of Southampton, refusing the Lady Vere, payeth £5000 of present money'. In January Elizabeth married William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby. Derby had promised de Vere his new bride would have £1,000 a year, but the financial provision for her was slow in materializing.\n\nHis father-in-law, Lord Burghley, died on 4 August 1598 at the age of 78, leaving substantial bequests to de Vere's two unmarried daughters, Bridget and Susan. The bequests were structured to prevent de Vere from gaining control of his daughters' inheritance by assuming custody of them.\n\nEarlier negotiations for a marriage to William Herbert having fallen through, in May or June 1599 de Vere's 15 year-old daughter Bridget married Francis Norris. Susan married Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.\n\nFrom March to August 1595 de Vere actively importuned the Queen, in competition with Lord Buckhurst, to farm the tin mines in Cornwall. He wrote to Burghley, enumerating years of fruitless attempts to amend his financial situation and complained: 'This last year past I have been a suitor to her Majesty that I might farm her tins, giving £3000 a year more than she had made.' De Vere's letters and memoranda indicate that he pursued his suit into 1596, and renewed it again three years later, but was ultimately unsuccessful in obtaining the tin monopoly.\n\nIn October 1595 de Vere wrote to his brother in law, Sir Robert Cecil, of friction between himself and the ill-fated Earl of Essex, partly over his claim to the property, terming him 'the only person that I dare rely upon in the court'. Cecil seems to have done little to further de Vere's interests in the suit.\n\nIn March he was unable to go to court due to illness, in August he wrote to Burghley from Byfleet, where he had gone for his health: 'I find comfort in this air, but no fortune in the court.' In September de Vere again wrote of ill health, regretting he had not been able to pay attendance to the Queen. Two months later Rowland Whyte wrote to Sir Robert Sidney that 'Some say my Lord of Oxford is dead'. Whether the rumour of de Vere's death was related to the illness mentioned in his letters earlier in the year is unknown. De Vere attended his last Parliament in December, perhaps another indication of failing health.\n\nOn 28 April 1599 de Vere was sued by the widow of his tailor for a debt of £500 for services rendered some two decades earlier. De Vere claimed that not only had he paid the debt, but that the tailor had absconded with 'cloth of gold and silver and other stuff' belonging to him, worth £800. The outcome of the suit is unknown.\n\nIn July 1600 de Vere wrote requesting Sir Robert Cecil's help in securing an appointment as Governor of the Isle of Jersey, once again citing the Queen's unfulfilled promises to him. In February he again wrote for his support, this time for the office of President of Wales. As with his former suits, de Vere was again unsuccessful; during this time he was listed on the Pipe rolls as owing £20 for the subsidy.\n\nAfter the abortive Essex rebellion in February 1601, de Vere was 'the senior of the twenty-five noblemen' who rendered verdicts at the trials of Essex and Southampton for treason. After Essex's co-conspirator Sir Charles Danvers was executed on in March, de Vere became involved in a complicated suit regarding lands which had reverted to the Crown by escheat at Danvers' attainder, a suit opposed by Danvers' kinsmen. De Vere continued to suffer from ill health, which kept him from court. On 4 December he was shocked that Cecil, who had encouraged him to undertake the Danvers suit on the Crown's behalf, had now withdrawn his support for it. As with all his other suits aimed at improving his financial situation, this last of de Vere's suits to the Queen ended in disappointment.\n\nIn the early morning of 24 March 1603, Queen Elizabeth died without naming a successor. A few days beforehand de Vere at his house at Hackney had entertained the Earl of Lincoln, a nobleman known for erratic and violent behaviour similar to his host's. Lincoln reported that after dinner de Vere spoke of the Queen's impending death, claiming that the peers of England should decide the succession, and suggested that since Lincoln had 'a nephew of the blood royal ... Lord Hastings', he should be sent to France to find allies to support this claim. Lincoln relayed this conversation to Sir John Peyton, Lieutenant of the Tower, who, knowing how physically and financially infirm de Vere was, refused to take Lincoln's report as a serious threat to King James' accession.\n\nDe Vere expressed his grief at the late Queen's death, and his apprehension for the future. These fears were unfounded; in letters to Cecil in May and June 1603 he again pressed his decades-long claim to have Waltham Forest (Forest of Essex) and the house and park of Havering restored to him, and on 18 July the new King granted his suit. On 25 July de Vere was among those who officiated at the King's coronation, and a month later James confirmed de Vere's annuity of £1,000.\n\nOn 18 June 1604, de Vere granted the custody of the Forest of Essex to his son-in-law Lord Norris and his cousin, Sir Francis Vere. He died six days later, of unknown causes, at King's Place, Hackney, and was buried on 6 July in the parish church of St. Augustine. In spite of his bouts of ill health, he left no will. Elizabeth's will requested that she be buried with her husband at Hackney. Although this document and the parish registers confirm de Vere's burial there, his cousin Percival Golding later claimed that his body was interred at Westminster.\n\nDe Vere's manuscript verses circulated widely in courtly circles. Three of his poems, , , and , are among the texts that repeatedly appear in the surviving 16th century manuscript miscellanies and poetical anthologies. His earliest published poem was in Thomas Bedingfield's translation of Cardano's \"Comforte\" (1573). Bedingfield's dedication to de Vere is dated 1 January 1572. In addition to his poem, de Vere also contributed a commendatory letter setting forth the reasons why Bedingfield should publish. In 1576 eight of his poems were published in the poetry miscellany \"The Paradise of Dainty Devises\". According to the introduction, all the poems in the collection were meant to be sung, but de Vere's were almost the only genuine love songs in the collection. Oxford's was published in \"The Phoenix Nest\" (1593) and republished in \"England's Helicon\" (1600). appeared in \"The Teares of Fancie\" (1593). \"Brittons Bowre of Delight\" (1597) published under Oxford's name, but the attribution today is not considered certain.\n\nContemporary critics praised de Vere as a poet and a playwright. William Webbe names de Vere as \"the most excellent\" of Elizabeth's courtier poets. Puttenham's \"The Arte of English Poesie\" (1589), places de Vere first on a list of courtier poets and included an excerpt of \"When wert thou born desire\" as an example of \"his excellance and wit\". Puttenham also says that \"highest praise\" should be given to de Vere and Richard Edwardes for \"Comedy and Enterlude\". Francis Meres' \"Palladis Tamia\" (1598) names de Vere first of 17 playwrights listed by rank who are \"the best for comedy amongst us\", and de Vere appears first on a list of seven Elizabethan courtly poets \"who honoured Poesie with their pens and practice\" in Henry Peacham's 1622 \"The Compleat Gentleman\".\n\nSteven W. May writes that de Vere was Elizabeth's \"first truly prestigious courtier poet ... [whose] precedent did at least confer genuine respectability upon the later efforts of such poets as Sidney, Greville, and Raleigh.\" He describes de Vere as a \"competent, fairly experimental poet working in the established modes of mid-century lyric verse\" and his poetry as \"examples of the standard varieties of mid-Elizabethan amorous lyric\". May says that de Vere's youthful love lyrics, which have been described as experimental and innovative, \"create a dramatic break with everything known to have been written at the Elizabethan court up to that time\" by virtue of being lighter in tone and metre and more imaginative and free from the moralizing tone of the courtier poetry of the \"drab\" age, which tended to be occasional and instructive. and describes one poem, in which the author cries out against \"this loss of my good name\", as a \"defiant lyric without precedent in English Renaissance verse\".\n\n<br>Excerpt from \"The Paradise of Dainty Devises\" (1576)\n<br>\n<poem>Framed in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery,\nI stayless stand to abide the shock of shame and infamy.\nMy life through lingering long is lodged, in lair of loathsome ways,\nMy death delayed to keep from life, the harm of hapless days;\nMy spirits, my heart, my wit and force, in deep distress are drowned,\nThe only loss of my good name, is of these griefs the ground.</poem>\n\"Earl of Oxford, before 1576\"\n} May says that Oxford's poetry was \"one man's contribution to the rhetorical mainstream of an evolving Elizabethan poetic\" indistinguishable from \"the output of his mediocre mid-century contemporaries\". C. S. Lewis said that de Vere's poetry shows \"a faint talent\", but is \"for the most part undistinguished and verbose.\" Nelson says that \"contemporary observers such as Harvey, Webbe, Puttenham, and Meres clearly exaggerated de Vere's talent in deference to his rank. By any measure, his poems pale in comparison with those of Sidney, Lyly, Spenser, Shakespeare, Donne, and Jonson.\" He says that his known poems are \"astonishingly uneven\" in quality, ranging from the \"fine\" to the \"execrable\".\n\nDe Vere was sought for his literary and theatrical patronage; 28 works were dedicated to him by such authors as Arthur Golding, John Lyly, Robert Greene, and Anthony Munday, between 1564 and 1599. Of his 33 dedications, 13 appeared in original or translated works of literature, a higher percentage of literary works than other patrons of similar means. His lifelong patronage of writers, musicians, and actors prompted May to term de Vere \"a nobleman with extraordinary intellectual interests and commitments\", whose biography exhibits a \"lifelong devotion to learning\". He goes on to say that \"Oxford's genuine commitment to learning throughout his career lends a necessary qualification to Stone's conclusion that de Vere simply squandered the more than 70,000 pounds he derived from selling off his patrimony ... for which some part of this amount de Vere acquired a splendid reputation for nurture of the arts and sciences\".\n\nThe Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship proposes that de Vere wrote the plays and poems traditionally attributed to William Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon. Though the attribution has been rejected by nearly all academic Shakespeareans, the Oxfordian theory has been among the most popular alternative Shakespeare authorship theories since the 1920s.\n\n\nBULLET::::- De Vere's Patronage of Theater: \"Patrons and Performances Web Site\"\nBULLET::::- Index entry for Edward de Vere at Poets' Corner\nBULLET::::- Edward de Vere Birthplace – Castle Hedingham\n"}
{"id": "10141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10141", "title": "Erinyes", "text": "Erinyes\n\nIn ancient Greek religion and mythology, the Erinyes (; sing. Erinys , ; , pl. of , \"Erinys\"), also known as the Furies, were female chthonic deities of vengeance, sometimes referred to as \"infernal goddesses\" (). A formulaic oath in the \"Iliad\" invokes them as \"the Erinyes, that under earth take vengeance on men, whosoever hath sworn a false oath.\" Walter Burkert suggests they are \"an embodiment of the act of self-cursing contained in the oath.\" They correspond to the Dirae in Roman mythology. The Roman writer Maurus Servius Honoratus wrote that they are called \"Eumenides\" in hell, \"Furiae\" on earth, and \"Dirae\" in heaven.\n\nAccording to Hesiod's \"Theogony\", when the Titan Cronus castrated his father, Uranus, and threw his genitalia into the sea, the Erinyes (along with the Giants and the Meliae) emerged from the drops of blood which fell on the earth (Gaia), while Aphrodite was born from the crests of sea foam. According to variant accounts, they emerged from an even more primordial level—from Nyx (\"Night\"), or from a union between air and mother earth. Their number is usually left indeterminate. Virgil, probably working from an Alexandrian source, recognized three: Alecto or Alekto (\"endless\"), Megaera (\"jealous rage\"), and Tisiphone or Tilphousia (\"vengeful destruction\"), all of whom appear in the \"Aeneid\". Dante Alighieri followed Virgil in depicting the same three-character triptych of Erinyes; in Canto IX of the \"Inferno\" they confront the poets at the gates of the city of Dis. Whilst the Erinyes were usually described as three maiden goddesses, the Erinys Telphousia was usually a by-name for the wrathful goddess Demeter, who was worshipped under the title of Erinys in the Arkadian town of Thelpousa.\n\nThe word \"Erinyes\" is of uncertain etymology; connections with the verb ὀρίνειν \"orinein\", \"to raise, stir, excite\", and the noun ἔρις \"eris\", \"strife\" have been suggested; Beekes, pp. 458–459, has proposed a Pre-Greek origin. The word \"Erinys\" in the singular and as a theonym is first attested in Mycenaean Greek, written in Linear B, in the following forms: , \"e-ri-nu\", and , \"e-ri-nu-we\". These words are found on the KN Fp 1, KN V 52, and KN Fh 390 tablets.\n\nThe Erinyes live in Erebus and are more ancient than any of the Olympian deities. Their task is to hear complaints brought by mortals against the insolence of the young to the aged, of children to parents, of hosts to guests, and of householders or city councils to suppliants—and to punish such crimes by hounding culprits relentlessly. The Erinyes are crones and, depending upon authors, described as having snakes for hair, dog's heads, coal black bodies, bat's wings, and blood-shot eyes. In their hands they carry brass-studded scourges, and their victims die in torment.\n\nAccording to some sources, the three classic Furies sprang forth from the spilled blood of Uranus when he was castrated by his son Cronus. The sisters are:\nBULLET::::- Alecto – Punisher of moral crimes (anger, etc.)\nBULLET::::- Megaera – Punisher of infidelity, oath breakers, and theft\nBULLET::::- Tisiphone – Punisher of murderers\n\nPausanias describe a sanctuary in Athens dedicated to the Erinyes under the name Semnai: \n\nTantalizing myth fragments dealing with the Erinyes are found among the earliest extant records of ancient Greek culture. The Erinyes are featured prominently in the myth of Orestes, which recurs frequently throughout many works of ancient Greek literature. \nFeatured in ancient Greek literature, from poems to plays, the Erinyes form the Chorus and play a major role in the conclusion of Aeschylus's dramatic trilogy the \"Oresteia\". In the first play, \"Agamemnon\", King Agamemnon returns home from the Trojan War, where he is slain by his wife, Clytemnestra, who wants vengeance for her daughter Iphigenia, who was sacrificed by Agamemnon in order to obtain favorable winds to sail to Troy. In the second play, \"The Libation Bearers\", their son Orestes has reached manhood and has been commanded by Apollo's oracle to avenge his father's murder at his mother’s hand. Returning home and revealing himself to his sister Electra, Orestes pretends to be a messenger bringing the news of his own death to Clytemnestra. He then slays his mother and her lover Aegisthus. Although Orestes’ actions were what Apollo had commanded him to do, Orestes has still committed matricide, a grave sacrilege. Because of this, he is pursued and tormented by the terrible Erinyes, who demand yet further blood vengeance.\n\nIn \"The Eumenides\", Orestes is told by Apollo at Delphi that he should go to Athens to seek the aid of the goddess Athena. In Athens, Athena arranges for Orestes to be tried by a jury of Athenian citizens, with her presiding. The Erinyes appear as Orestes' accusers, while Apollo speaks in his defense. The trial becomes a debate about the necessity of blood vengeance, the honor that is due to a mother compared to that due to a father, and the respect that must be paid to ancient deities such as the Erinyes compared to the newer generation of Apollo and Athena. The jury vote is evenly split. Athena participates in the vote and chooses for acquittal. Athena declares Orestes acquitted because of the rules she established for the trial. Despite the verdict, the Erinyes threaten to torment all inhabitants of Athens and to poison the surrounding countryside. Athena, however, offers the ancient goddesses a new role, as protectors of justice, rather than vengeance, and of the city. She persuades them to break the cycle of blood for blood (except in the case of war, which is fought for glory, not vengeance). While promising that the goddesses will receive due honor from the Athenians and Athena, she also reminds them that she possesses the key to the storehouse where Zeus keeps the thunderbolts that defeated the other older deities. This mixture of bribes and veiled threats satisfies the Erinyes, who are then led by Athena in a procession to their new abode. In the play, the \"Furies\" are thereafter addressed as \"Semnai\" (Venerable Ones), as they will now be honored by the citizens of Athens and ensure the city's prosperity.\n\nIn Euripides' \"Orestes\" the Erinyes are for the first time \"equated\" with the Eumenides (Εὐμενίδες, pl. of Εὐμενίς; literally \"the gracious ones\", but also translated as \"Kindly Ones\"). This is because it was considered unwise to mention them by name (for fear of attracting their attention), the ironic name is similar to how Hades, god of the dead is styled Pluton, or Pluto, \"the Rich One\". Using euphemisms for the names of deities serves many religious purposes.\n\nIn Sophocles's play, \"Oedipus at Colonus\", it is significant that he comes to his final resting place in the grove dedicated to the Erinyes. It shows that he has paid his penance for his blood crime, as well as come to integrate the balancing powers to his early over-reliance upon Apollo, the god of the individual, the sun, and reason. He is asked to make an offering to the Erinyes and complies, having made his peace.\n\nThe Erinyes persist as a theme that appears in modern literature. They are mentioned in the poem \"To Brooklyn Bridge\" by Hart Crane. The Eumenides are also featured in T. S. Eliot's play, \"The Family Reunion\", Neil Gaiman's comic book series, \"The Sandman\", and Rick Riordan's book series, Percy Jackson and the Olympians. In the 1875 comic opera \"Trial by Jury\" by W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan, the Learned Judge describes himself as having once \"danced a dance like a semi-despondent fury\" while in Westminster Hall. The movie franchise Alien is said to be inspired by the Erinyes.\n\nBULLET::::- Aeschylus, \"Oresteia\". Trans. Lloyd-Jones. Lines 788–1047.\nBULLET::::- Beekes, Robert S. P. (2009), \"Etymological Dictionary of Greek\", Leiden: E.J. Brill.\nBULLET::::- Burkert, Walter, 1977 (tr. 1985). \"Greek Religion\" (Harvard University Press).\nBULLET::::- Gantz, Timothy, \"Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources\", Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).\nBULLET::::- Graves, Robert; \"The Greek Myths\", Moyer Bell Ltd; Unabridged edition (December 1988), .\nBULLET::::- Hesiod, \"Theogony\". trans. Hugh G. Evelyn-White. 1914. Lines 176–206. Online Text: Perseus Project. Tufts University.\nBULLET::::- Homer, \"The Iliad with an English Translation by A. T. Murray, Ph.D. in Two Volumes\". Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Liddell, Henry George, Robert Scott. \"A Greek-English Lexicon\". Revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones with the assistance of. Roderick McKenzie. Oxford. Clarendon Press. 1940. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library\nBULLET::::- Littleton, Scott. \"Gods, Goddesses, and Mythology, Volume 4\". Marshall Cavendish Corporation, 2005. Google Book Search. Web. 24 October 2011.\nBULLET::::- Pausanias, \"Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.\" Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.\nBULLET::::- Scull, S. A. \"Greek Mythology Systematized\". Philadelphia: Porter & Coates, 1880. Print.\nBULLET::::- Virgil, \"Aeneid\" vii, 324, 341, 415, 476.\nBULLET::::- Wilk, Stephen R. \"Medusa: Solving the Mystery of the Gorgon\". Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. Google Book Search. Web. 24 October 2011.\n\nBULLET::::- The Theoi Project, \"The Erinyes\"\n"}
{"id": "10142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10142", "title": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair", "text": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair\n\nMarquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 4 January 1916 for John Hamilton-Gordon, 7th Earl of Aberdeen.\n\nThe Gordon family descends from John Gordon, who fought as a Royalist against the Covenanters in the Civil War. In 1642 he was created a baronet, of Haddo in the County of Aberdeen, in the Baronetage of Nova Scotia. In 1644 he was found guilty of treason and beheaded, with the baronetcy forfeited. The title was restored after the Restoration for his son John, the second Baronet.\n\nThe second Baronet died without male issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Baronet. He was a noted advocate and served as Lord President of the Court of Session and as Lord Chancellor of Scotland. On 30 November 1682 he was raised to the Peerage of Scotland as Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, Viscount of Formartine and Earl of Aberdeen. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, the second Earl. He sat in the House of Lords as a Scottish Representative Peer from 1721 to 1727. On his death the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage, the third Earl. He was a Scottish Representative Peer from 1747 to 1761 and from 1774 to 1790.\n\nThe third earl was succeeded by his grandson, the fourth Earl, who was the eldest son of George Gordon, Lord Haddo. On 1 June 1814 he was created Viscount Gordon, of Aberdeen in the County of Aberdeen, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, which entitled him to an automatic seat in the House of Lords. Lord Aberdeen was a distinguished diplomat and statesman and served as Foreign Secretary from 1828 to 1830 and from 1841 to 1846 and as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1852 to 1855. Aberdeen married firstly Lady Catherine Elizabeth (1784–1812), daughter of John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Abercorn, and assumed by Royal licence the additional surname of Hamilton in 1818. \n\nWhen Lord Aberdeen died, the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage to Harriet Douglas, the fifth Earl. He sat as Liberal Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire. His eldest son, the sixth Earl, was a sailor and adventurer. He was accidentally drowned off the coast of America in 1870, without marrying or having children.\n\nThe sixth earl of Aberdeen was succeeded by his younger brother, the seventh Earl. John Hamilton-Gordon, was a Liberal politician and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in 1886 and from 1905 to 1915 and as Governor General of Canada from 1893 to 1898. On 4 January 1916 he was created Earl of Haddo, in the County of Aberdeen, and Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll. Both titles are in the Peerage of the United Kingdom.\n\nHe was succeeded by his eldest son, the second Marquess, who was a member of the London County Council and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He was childless and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Marquess. He was notably President of the Federation of British Industries. When he died the titles passed to his eldest son, the fourth Marquess. He was a member of the Aberdeenshire County Council and Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He had four adopted children but no biological issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the fifth Marquess. He was a broadcaster working for the BBC. He never married and on his death in 1984 the titles passed to his fourth and youngest brother, the sixth Marquess. He was Chairman of The Arts Club. the titles are held by his only son, the seventh Marquess, who succeeded in 2002.\n\nNumerous other members of the Gordon family have also gained distinction. The Hon. William Gordon (d. 1816), eldest son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a general in the Army. The Hon. Cosmo Gordon, second son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a colonel in the Army. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1739–1792), third son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a Lord of Session from 1788 to 1792 under the judicial title of Lord Rockville. His son William Duff-Gordon was Member of Parliament for Worcester. In 1815 he succeeded his uncle as second Baron of Halkin according to a special remainder and assumed the additional surname of Duff (see Duff-Gordon baronets for further history of this branch of the family). The Hon. William Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a vice-admiral in the Royal Navy and sat as Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1786–1815), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a soldier and was killed at the Battle of Waterloo.\n\nThe Hon. Sir Robert Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a diplomat and served as British Ambassador to Austria. The Hon. John Gordon (1792–1869), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was an admiral in the Royal Navy. The Hon. Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon (1817–1890), eldest son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a general in the Army and sat as Member of Parliament for Aberdeenshire East. His eldest son, Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon was also a general in the Army. Reverend the Hon. Douglas Hamilton-Gordon (1824–1901), third son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was Chaplain-in-Ordinary to Queen Victoria and Canon of Salisbury. The Hon. Arthur Hamilton-Gordon, fourth son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a Liberal politician and was created Baron Stanmore in 1893 (see this title for more information on him and this branch of the family). Ishbel Hamilton-Gordon, Marchioness of Aberdeen and Temair, daughter of Dudley Marjoribanks, 1st Baron Tweedmouth, and wife of the first Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, was an author, philanthropist and an advocate of woman's interests.\n\nThe family seat is Haddo House, Aberdeenshire. The title Earl of Haddo is the courtesy title for the Marquess's eldest son and heir, the eldest son of whom uses the courtesy title Viscount of Formartine. The Marquesses of Aberdeen and Temair are related to the Marquesses of Huntly. Sir John Gordon (d. c. 1395) of Strathbogie, ancestor of Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet, was the brother of Elizabeth Gordon. She married Sir Alexander Seton (d. 1438) and was the mother of Alexander Gordon, 1st Earl of Huntly (ancestor of the Marquesses of Huntly).\n\nBULLET::::- Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet (1610–1644)\nBULLET::::- Sir John Gordon, 2nd Baronet (c. 1632–1665)\nBULLET::::- Sir George Gordon, 3rd Baronet (1637–1720) (created Earl of Aberdeen in 1682)\n\nBULLET::::- George Gordon, 1st Earl of Aberdeen (1637–1720)\nBULLET::::- George Gordon, Lord Haddo (1674-d. between 1694-1708)\nBULLET::::- William Gordon, 2nd Earl of Aberdeen (1679–1745)\nBULLET::::- George Gordon, 3rd Earl of Aberdeen, (1722–1801)\nBULLET::::- George Gordon, Lord Haddo (1764–1791)\nBULLET::::- George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen (1784–1860) (created Viscount Gordon in 1814)\nBULLET::::- George John James Hamilton-Gordon, 5th Earl of Aberdeen (1816–1864)\nBULLET::::- George Hamilton-Gordon, 6th Earl of Aberdeen (1841–1870)\nBULLET::::- John Campbell Hamilton-Gordon, 7th Earl of Aberdeen (1847–1934) (created Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair in 1916)\n\nBULLET::::- John Campbell Gordon, 1st Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, (1847–1934)\nBULLET::::- George Gordon, 2nd Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1879–1965)\nBULLET::::- Dudley Gladstone Gordon, 3rd Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1883–1972)\nBULLET::::- David George Ian Alexander Gordon, 4th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1908–1974)\nBULLET::::- Archibald Victor Dudley Gordon, 5th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1913–1984)\nBULLET::::- Alastair Ninian John Gordon, 6th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1920–2002)\nBULLET::::- Alexander George Gordon, 7th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (b. 1955)\n\nThe heir apparent is the present holder's son George Ian Alastair Gordon, Earl of Haddo (b. 1983).<br> \nThe heir apparent's heir apparent is his son Ivo Alexander Ninian Gordon, Viscount Formartine (b. 18 July 2012).\n\nBULLET::::- \"John Campbell Gordon, 1st Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1847–1934)\"\nBULLET::::- \"George Gordon, 2nd Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1879–1965)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Dudley Gladstone Gordon, 3rd Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1883–1972)\"\nBULLET::::- \"David George Ian Alexander Gordon, 4th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1908–1974)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Archibald Victor Dudley Gordon, 5th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1913–1984)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Alastair Ninian John Gordon, 6th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (1920–2002)\"\nBULLET::::- Alexander George Gordon, 7th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (b. 1955)\nBULLET::::- (1) George Ian Alastair Gordon, \"Earl of Haddo\" (b. 1983)\nBULLET::::- (2) Ivo Alexander Ninian Gordon, \"Viscount Formartine\" (b. 2012)\nBULLET::::- (3) \"Hon.\" Johnny David Nehemiah Gordon (b. 2014)\nBULLET::::- (4) \"Lord\" Sam Dudley Gordon (b. 1985)\nBULLET::::- (5) Bertie Raiph Dudley Gordon (b. 2016)\nBULLET::::- (6) \"Lord\" Charles Daniel Gordon (b. 1996)\nBULLET::::- Baron Stanmore\nBULLET::::- Duff-Gordon baronets\n\n"}
{"id": "10147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10147", "title": "East Coast Swing", "text": "East Coast Swing\n\nEast Coast Swing (ECS) is a form of social partner dance. It belongs to the group of swing dances. It is danced under fast swing music, including rock and roll and boogie-woogie.\n\nYerrington and Outland equated East Coast Swing to the New Yorker in 1961. Originally known as \"Eastern Swing\" by Arthur Murray Studios, the name East Coast Swing became more common between 1975 and 1980.\n\nThe dance was created by dance studios including the Arthur Murray dance studios in the 1940s, based on the Lindy Hop. Lindy Hop was felt by dance studios to be both too difficult and too unstructured to teach to beginning dancers, but there was market demand for training in Swing Dance. The dance studios had initially dismissed Lindy Hop in particular as a fad. East Coast Swing can be referred to by many different names in different regions of the United States and the World. It has alternatively been called Eastern Swing, Jitterbug, American Swing, East Coast Lindy, Lindy (not to be confused with Lindy Hop), and Triple Swing. Other variants of East Coast Swing that use altered footwork forms are known as Single Swing or \"Single-step Swing\" (where the triple step is replaced by a single step forming a slow, slow, quick, quick rhythm common to Foxtrot), and Double Swing (using a tap-step footwork pattern).\n\nEast Coast Swing is a Rhythm Dance that has both 6 and 8 beat patterns.\nThe name \"East Coast Swing\" was coined initially to distinguish the dance from the street form and the new variant used in the competitive ballroom arena (as well as separating the dance from West Coast Swing, which was developed in California). While based on Lindy Hop, it does have clear distinctions. East Coast Swing is a standardized form of dance developed first for instructional purposes in the Arthur Murray studios, and then later codified to allow for a medium of comparison for competitive ballroom dancers. It can be said that there is no right or wrong way to dance it; however, certain styles of the dance are considered correct \"form\" within the technical elements documented and governed by the National Dance Council of America. The N.D.C.A. oversees all the standards of American Style Ballroom and Latin dances. Lindy Hop was never standardized and later became the inspiration for several other dance forms such as: (European) Boogie Woogie, Jive, East Coast Swing, West Coast Swing and Rock and Roll.\n\nIn practice on the social dance floor, the six count steps of the East Coast Swing are often mixed with the eight count steps of Lindy Hop, Charleston, and less frequently, Balboa.\n\nSingle-step Swing\n\nEast Coast Swing has a 6 count basic step. This is in contrast to the meter of most swing music, which has a 4 count basic rhythm. In practice, however, the 6-count moves of the east coast swing are often combined with 8-count moves from the Lindy hop, Charleston, and Balboa.\n\nDepending on the region and instructor, the basic step of single-step East Coast Swing is either \"rock step, step, step\" or \"step, step, rock step\". In both cases, the rock step always starts on the downbeat.\n\nFor \"rock step, step, step\" the beats, or counts, are the following:\n\nSteps for the \"lead\" (traditionally, the man's part)\nSteps for the \"follow\" (traditionally, the woman's part which mirrors the lead's part)\nFor \"step, step, rock step,\" the rock step occurs on beats 5 and 6, but the overall progression remains the same.\n\nThe normal steps can be substituted with a triple step or double step \"step-tap\" or \"kick-step\" instead of a single step. This is commonly used during songs when a slower tempo makes the single step difficult (an example progression would be \"rock step, triple step, triple step\").\n\nBecause East Coast uses a six step pattern with music employing 4 beats per measure, three measures of music are required to complete two sets of steps, as shown in the following table.\n\nThe rock step starts on 1, 2 the first triple step starts 3a4 and the second on 5a6.\n\nIn single time style (used with faster music) the triple steps are replaced by single steps, so two beats of music are used for each single step while each step in the rock (R) step (S) is still completed in one beat, finishing the cycle in six musical beats. Some instructors will teach vocalizing the single time style as\" \"Quick. Quick. Slow. Slow. \" or \"Back Step. Slow. Slow.\"\n\nThere is the choice to start with triples or with a rock step, however if you check the above chart where a triple step starts on a 1, 2 you can see that the pattern progresses and wraps back around. The choice of starting with a triple or a rock step does have musical consequences as music has phrasing with hits that often happen on 12, or 24 or 36... This means that dancers who choose to start with a rock step will probably find themselves on a rock step on every new phrase. Those who start with a triple will start with a triple on each new phrase. An advantage of starting with the triple step is that dancers can more easily change their foot work right at the start of the musical phrase.\n\nBULLET::::- Lindy hop\nBULLET::::- Charleston\nBULLET::::- West Coast Swing\nBULLET::::- Balboa\nBULLET::::- Jive\nBULLET::::- Hand dancing\n"}
{"id": "10148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10148", "title": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner", "text": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner\n\nErnst Kaltenbrunner (4 October 190316 October 1946) was an Austrian senior official of Nazi Germany during World War II. An \"Obergruppenführer\" (general) in the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS), he held the office of Chief of the Reich Main Security Office (\"Reichssicherheitshauptamt\"; RSHA) between January 1943 and May 1945.\n\nKaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party (NSDAP) in 1930 and the SS in 1931, and by 1935 he was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. In 1938, Kaltenbrunner assisted in the \"Anschluss\" and was given command of the SS and police force in Austria. In January 1943, Kaltenbrunner was appointed a chief of the RSHA, succeeding Reinhard Heydrich, who was assassinated in June 1942. A committed anti-Semite and fanatical Hitler loyalist, Kaltenbrunner oversaw a period in which persecution of Jews intensified. He is considered a major perpetrator of the Holocaust during the final years of the war.\n\nKaltenbrunner was the highest-ranking member of the SS to face trial at the first Nuremberg trials, where he was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity. He was sentenced to death and executed by hanging in October 1946.\n\nBorn in Ried im Innkreis, Austria, Kaltenbrunner was the son of a lawyer, and was educated at the Realgymnasium in Linz. Raised in a nationalist family, Kaltenbrunner was childhood friends with Adolf Eichmann, the infamous SS officer who played a key role in implementing the Nazis' Final Solution against Europe's Jews. After Gymnasium, Kaltenbrunner went on to obtain his doctorate degree in law at Graz University in 1926. He worked at a law firm in Salzburg for a year before opening his own law office in Linz. He had deep scars on his face from dueling in his student days, although some sources attribute them to an automobile accident.\n\nOn 14 January 1934, Kaltenbrunner married Elisabeth Eder (b. 1908) who was from Linz and a Nazi Party member. They had three children. In addition to the children from his marriage, Kaltenbrunner had twins, Ursula and Wolfgang, (b. 1945) with his long-time mistress Gisela Gräfin von Westarp (née Wolf). All the children survived the war.\n\nOn 18 October 1930, Kaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party with NSDAP member number 300,179. In 1931, he was the \"Bezirksredner\" (district speaker) for the Nazi Party in Oberösterreich. Kaltenbrunner went on to join the SS on 31 August 1931, his SS number was 13,039. He first became a \"Rechtsberater\" (legal consultant) for the party in 1929 and later held this same position for SS Abschnitt (Section) VIII beginning in 1932. That same year, he began working at his father's law practice and by 1933 was head of the National-Socialist Lawyers' League in Linz.\n\nIn January 1934, Kaltenbrunner was briefly jailed at the Kaisersteinbruch detention camp with other National Socialists for conspiracy by the Engelbert Dollfuss government. While there he led a hunger strike which forced the government to release 490 of the party members. In 1935, he was jailed again on suspicion of high treason. This charge was dropped, but he was sentenced to six months imprisonment for conspiracy and he lost his license to practice law.\n\nFrom mid-1935 Kaltenbrunner was head of the illegal SS Abschnitt VIII in Linz and was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. To provide Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich and Heinz Jost with new information, Kaltenbrunner repeatedly made trips to Bavaria. Hiding on a train and on a ship that traveled to Passau, he would return with money and orders for Austrian comrades. Kaltenbrunner was arrested again in 1937, by Austrian authorities on charges of being head of the illegal Nazi Party organization in Oberösterreich. He was released in September.\nActing on orders from Hermann Göring, Kaltenbrunner assisted in the \"Anschluss\" with Germany in March 1938, and was awarded the role as the state secretary for public security in the Seyss-Inquart cabinet. Controlled from behind the scenes by Himmler, Kaltenbrunner still led, albeit clandestinely, the Austrian SS as part of his duty to 'coordinate' and manage the Austrian population. Then on 21 March 1938, he was promoted to SS-\"Brigadeführer\". He was a member of the \"Reichstag\" from 10 April 1938 until 8 May 1945. Amid this activity, he helped establish the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp near Linz. Mauthausen was the first Nazi concentration camp opened in Austria following the \"Anschluss\". On 11 September 1938, Kaltenbrunner was promoted to the rank of SS-\"Gruppenführer\", equivalent to a lieutenant general in the army while holding the position of Führer of SS-Oberabschnitt Österreich (re-designated SS-Oberabschnitt Donau in November 1938). Also in 1938, he was appointed High SS and police leader (\"Höherer SS- und Polizeiführer\"; HSSPF) for Donau, which was the primary SS command in Austria (he held that post until 30 January 1943).\n\nIn June 1940, Kaltenbrunner was appointed Police President of Vienna and held that additional post for a year. In July 1940, he was commissioned as a SS-\"Untersturmführer\" in the Waffen-SS Reserve. Throughout his many duties, Kaltenbrunner also developed an impressive intelligence network across Austria moving southeastwards, which eventually brought him to Himmler's attention for the assignment as chief of the RSHA in January 1943. The RSHA was composed of the SiPo (\"Sicherheitspolizei\"; the combined forces of the Gestapo and Kripo) along with the SD (\"Sicherheitsdienst\", Security Service). He replaced Heydrich, who was assassinated in June 1942. Kaltenbrunner held this position until the end of the war. Hardly anyone knew Kaltenbrunner and upon his appointment, Himmler transferred responsibility for both SS personnel and economics from the RSHA to the SS Main Economic and Administrative Office. Nonetheless, he was promoted to SS-\"Obergruppenführer und General der Polizei\" on 21 June 1943. He also replaced Heydrich as President of the International Criminal Police Commission (ICPC), the organization today known as Interpol.\n\nFear of a collapsing home-front due to the Allied bombing campaigns and that another \"stab-in-the-back\" at home could arise, as a result, caused Kaltenbrunner to immediately tighten the Nazi grip within Germany. From what historian Anthony Read relates, Kaltenbrunner's appointment as RSHA chief came as a surprise given the other possible candidates like head of the Gestapo, Heinrich Müller, or even SD foreign intelligence chief, Walter Schellenberg. Historian Richard Grunberger also added the name of Dr. Wilhelm Stuckart, the future minister of the German Interior as another potential candidate for head of the RSHA; however, he suggests that Kaltenbrunner was most likely selected since he was a comparative \"newcomer\" who would be more \"pliable\" in Himmler's hands.\n\nLike many of the ideological fanatics in the regime, Kaltenbrunner was a committed anti-Semite. According to former SS-\"Sturmbannführer\" Hans Georg Mayer, Kaltenbrunner was present at a December 1940 meeting among Hitler, Goebbels, Himmler, and Heydrich where it was decided to gas all Jews incapable of heavy physical work. Under Kaltenbrunner's command, the persecution of Jews picked up pace as \"the process of extermination was to be expedited and the concentration of the Jews in the Reich itself and the occupied countries were to be liquidated as soon as possible.\" Kaltenbrunner stayed constantly informed over the status of concentration camp activities, receiving periodic reports at his office in the RSHA.\n\nTo combat homosexuality across the greater Reich, Kaltenbrunner pushed the Ministry of Justice in July 1943 for an edict mandating compulsory castration for anyone found guilty of this offense. While this was rejected, he still took steps to get the army to review some 6,000 cases to prosecute homosexuals.\nDuring the summer of 1943, Kaltenbrunner conducted his second inspection of the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp. While he was there, 15 prisoners were selected to demonstrate for Kaltenbrunner three methods of killing; by a gunshot to the neck, hanging, and gassing. After the killings were performed, Kaltenbrunner inspected the crematorium and later the quarry. In October 1943, he told Herbert Kappler, the head of German police and security services in Rome, that the \"eradication of the Jews in Italy\" was of \"special interest\" for \"general security.\" Four days later, Kappler's SS and police units began rounding up and deporting Jews by train to Auschwitz concentration camp.\n\nIn 1944 when Hitler was in the process of strong-arming Admiral Horthy into submitting Hungary to the Nazis during an arranged meeting in Klessheim Castle in Salzburg, Kaltenbrunner was present for the negotiations and escorted him out once they were over. Accompanying Horthy and Kaltenbrunner on the journey back to Hungary was Adolf Eichmann, who brought with him a special \"Einsatzkommando\" unit to begin the process of \"rounding up and deporting Hungary's 750,000 Jews.\"\n\nIt was said that even Himmler feared him, as Kaltenbrunner was an intimidating figure with his height, facial scars, and volatile temper. Kaltenbrunner was also a longtime friend of Otto Skorzeny and recommended him for many secret missions, allowing Skorzeny to become one of Hitler's favorite agents. Kaltenbrunner was also responsible for heading Operation Long Jump, a plan to assassinate Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt in Tehran.\n\nImmediately in the wake of the 20 July Plot on Hitler's life in 1944, Kaltenbrunner was summoned to Hitler's wartime headquarters at the \"Wolfsschanze\" (Wolf's Lair) in East Prussia to begin the investigation into who was responsible for the assassination attempt. Once it was revealed that an attempted military coup against Hitler had been launched, Himmler and Kaltenbrunner had to tread carefully, as the military was not under the jurisdiction of the Gestapo or the SD. Since the attempt failed, the conspirators were soon identified. An estimated 5,000 people were eventually executed, with many more sent to concentration camps.\nHistorian Heinz Höhne counted Kaltenbrunner among fanatical Hitler loyalists and described him as being committed \"to the bitter end.\" Field reports from the SD in October 1944 about deteriorating morale in the military prompted Kaltenbrunner to urge the involvement of the RSHA in military court-martial proceedings, but this was rejected by Himmler who thought it unwise to interfere in \"Wehrmacht\" (army) affairs. In December 1944, Kaltenbrunner was granted the additional rank of General of the Waffen-SS. On 15 November 1944 he was awarded the Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross with Swords. In addition, he was awarded the NSDAP Golden Party Badge and the \"Blutorden\" (Blood Order). Using his authority as Chief of the RSHA, Kaltenbrunner issued a decree on 6 February 1945 that allowed policemen to shoot \"disloyal\" people at their discretion, without judicial review.\n\nOn 12 March 1945, a meeting took place in the Vorarlberg between Kaltenbrunner and Carl Jacob Burckhardt, president of the International Committee of the Red Cross (1945–48). Just over a month later, Himmler was informed that SS-\"Obergruppenführer\" (general) Karl Wolff had been negotiating with the Allies for the capitulation of Italy. When questioned by Himmler, Wolff explained that he was operating under Hitler's orders and attempting to play the Allies against one another. Himmler believed him, but Kaltenbrunner did not and told Himmler that an informant claimed Wolff also negotiated with Cardinal Schuster of Milan and was about to surrender occupied Italy to the Allies. Himmler angrily repeated the allegations and Wolff, feigning offense, challenged Himmler to present these statements to Hitler. Unnerved by Wolff's demands, Himmler backed down, and Hitler sent Wolff back to Italy to continue his purported disruption of the Allies.\n\nIn mid-April 1945, three weeks before the war ended, Himmler named Kaltenbrunner commander-in-chief of the remaining German forces in Southern Europe. Kaltenbrunner attempted to organize cells for post-war sabotage in the region and Germany but accomplished little. Hitler made one of his last appearances on 20 April 1945 outside the subterranean \"Führerbunker\" in Berlin, where he pinned medals on boys from the Hitler Youth for their bravery. Kaltenbrunner was among those present, but realizing the end was near, he then fled from Berlin.\n\nOn 12 May 1945 Kaltenbrunner was apprehended along with his adjutant, Arthur Scheidler, and two SS guards in a remote cabin at the top of the Totes Gebirge mountains near Altaussee, Austria, by a search party initiated by the 80th Infantry Division, Third U.S. Army. Information had been gained from Johann Brandauer, the assistant burgermeister of Altaussee, that the party was hiding out with false papers in the cabin. This was supported by an eyewitness sighting by the Altaussee mountain ranger five days earlier. Special Agent Robert E. Matteson from the C.I.C. Detachment organized and led a patrol consisting of Brandauer, four ex-Wehrmacht soldiers, and a squad of US soldiers to effect the arrest. The party climbed over mountainous and glacial terrain for six hours in darkness before arriving at the cabin. After a short standoff, all four men exited the cabin and surrendered without a shot fired. Kaltenbrunner claimed to be a doctor and offered a false name. However, upon their arrival back to town his mistress, Countess Gisela von Westarp, and the wife (Iris) of his adjutant Arthur Scheidler chanced to spot the men being led away, the ladies called out to both men and embraced them. This action resulted in their identification and arrest by US troops. \n\nIn 2001, Ernst Kaltenbrunner's personal Nazi security seal was found in an Alpine lake in Styria, Austria, 56 years after he had thrown it away to hide his identity. The seal was recovered by a Dutch citizen on holiday. The seal has the words \"\"Chef der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD\"\" (Chief of the Security Police and SD) engraved on it. Experts have examined the seal and believe it was discarded in the final days of the war in May 1945.\n\nAt the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was charged with conspiracy to commit crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Due to the areas over which he exercised responsibility as an SS general and as chief of the RSHA, he was acquitted of crimes against peace, but held responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity.\nDuring the initial stages of the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was absent because of two episodes of subarachnoid hemorrhage, which required several weeks of recovery time. After his health improved, the tribunal denied his request for pardon. When he was released from a military hospital he pleaded not guilty to the charges of the indictment against him. Kaltenbrunner said all decrees and legal documents that bore his signature were \"rubber-stamped\" and filed by his adjutant(s). He also said Gestapo Chief Heinrich Müller had illegally affixed his signature to numerous documents in question.\n\nKaltenbrunner argued in his defense that his position as RSHA chief existed only theoretically and said he was only active in matters of espionage and intelligence. He maintained that Himmler, as his superior, was the person culpable for the atrocities committed during his tenure as chief of the RSHA. Kaltenbrunner also asserted that he had no knowledge of the Final Solution before 1943 and went on to claim that he protested against the ill-treatment of the Jews to Himmler and Hitler. Further denials from Kaltenbrunner included statements that he knew nothing of the Commissar Order and that he never visited Mauthausen concentration camp, despite documentation of his visit. At one point, Kaltenbrunner went so far as to avow that \"he\" was responsible for bringing the Final Solution to an end.\n\nOn 30 September 1946, the International Military Tribunal found Kaltenbrunner not guilty of crimes against peace, but guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity (counts three and four). On 1 October 1946, the IMT sentenced him to death by hanging.\n\nKaltenbrunner was executed on 16 October 1946, around 1:15 a.m., in Nuremberg. His body, like those of the other nine executed men and that of Hermann Göring (who committed suicide the previous day), was cremated at the Eastern Cemetery in Munich and the ashes were scattered in a tributary of the River Isar. \n\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Mann\" – 31 August 1931\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Truppführer\" – 1931\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Sturmhauptführer\" – 25 September 1932\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Standartenführer\" – 20 April 1936\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Oberführer\" – 20 April 1937\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Brigadeführer\" – 21 March 1938\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Gruppenführer\" – 11 September 1938\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Untersturmführer der Rerserve der Waffen-SS\" – 1 July 1940\nBULLET::::- \"Generalleutnant der Polizei\" – 1 April 1941\nBULLET::::- SS-\"Obergruppenführer und General der Polizei\" – 21 June 1943\nBULLET::::- \"General der Waffen-SS und Polizei\" – 1 December 1944\n\nBULLET::::- Awards and decorations\nBULLET::::- Honour Chevron for the Old Guard (1934)\nBULLET::::- SS Honour Ring (1938)\nBULLET::::- Sword of honour of the Reichsführer-SS (1938)\nBULLET::::- Anschluss Medal (1938)\nBULLET::::- Sudetenland Medal (1938) with Prague Castle Bar (1939)\nBULLET::::- Golden Party Badge (1939)\nBULLET::::- SS Long Service Award For 4, 8, and 12 Years Service\nBULLET::::- Nazi Party Long Service Award in Bronze and Silver\nBULLET::::- Blood Order (31 May 1942)\nBULLET::::- German Cross in Silver (1943)\nBULLET::::- Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross with Swords (1944)\n\nBULLET::::- Allgemeine SS\nBULLET::::- Glossary of Nazi Germany\nBULLET::::- Holocaust (miniseries) – TV production in which Kaltenbrunner is portrayed\nBULLET::::- Inside the Third Reich (film) – television film in which Kaltenbrunner is portrayed\nBULLET::::- List SS-Obergruppenführer\n\nBULLET::::- Kaltenbrunner defense broadcast during Nuremberg Trial, reported by Matthew Halton and broadcast on April 12, 1946; via the archives of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation; 2m:36s\nBULLET::::- Testimony of Rudolf Hoess in the Nuremberg Trial\nBULLET::::- Nuremberg film at IMDB\nBULLET::::- Seventeen Moments of Spring film at IMDB\nBULLET::::- Holocaust miniseries at IMDB\n"}
{"id": "10150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10150", "title": "Engelbert Dollfuss", "text": "Engelbert Dollfuss\n\nEngelbert Dollfuss (, ; 4 October 1892 – 25 July 1934) was an Austrian politician who served as Chancellor of Austria between 1932 and 1934. Having served as Minister for Forests and Agriculture, he ascended to Federal Chancellor in 1932 in the midst of a crisis for the conservative government. In early 1933, he shut down parliament, assumed dictatorial powers. Suppressing the Socialist movement in February 1934 during the Austrian Civil War and later banned the Austrian Nazi party, he cemented the rule of \"Austrofascism\" through the authoritarian \"First of May Constitution\". Dollfuss was assassinated as part of a failed coup attempt by Nazi agents in 1934. His successor Kurt Schuschnigg maintained the regime until Adolf Hitler's annexation of Austria in 1938.\n\nDollfuss was born to a poor, peasant family in the hamlet of Great Maierhof in the commune of St. Gotthard near Texingtal in Lower Austria. Young Dollfuss spent his childhood in his step-father's house in the nearby commune of Kirnberg, where he also went to elementary school. The local parish priests helped to finance Dollfuss' education, as his parents were unable to do so by themselves alone. He attended high school in Hollabrunn. After graduating from high school, Dollfuss intended to become a priest, and thus he enrolled at the University of Vienna to study theology, but after a few months changed course and started studying law in 1912. As a student, he earned a livelihood giving lessons. He became a member of the Students' Social Movement, a student organisation dedicated to social and charitable work among the workers.\n\nAs the World War I broke out, Dollfuss reported to be recruited in Vienna but was rejected because he was two centimetres shorter than the minimum. The same day he went to St. Pölten where the recruiting commission for his district was located and insisted to be recruited, even though he didn't meet the minimum height standards, and was accepted. As a volunteer, he had a right to choose a regiment in which he would serve, and Dollfuss opted for the Tyrolese militia also known as the \"Kaiserschützen\". He was soon promoted to the rank of corporal. He served for 37 months at the Italian Front, south of Tyrol. By 1916 he was promoted to lieutenant.\n\nAfter the war, he was still a student and was employed by the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union, which helped him to secure his material existence, and it was here where Dollfuss gained his first political experience. There, he organised peasants to help them recover from the war, as well as shield them from the influences of Marxism. Being recognised for his abilities he showed at the Union, he was sent for further studies to Berlin. In Berlin, he began to garner dislike for some of his professors, as academia there was substantially influenced by liberalism and socialism. In his studies, he devoted himself to the Christian principles of economics. In Germany, he became a member of the Federation of German Peasants' Union and of the Preussenkasse – essentially, a central bank for member-cooperatives, where he gained practical experience. In Germany, he met his future wife Alwine Glienke, a descendant of a Pomeranian family. Dollfuss often met with Carl Sonnenschein, leader of social activities of students and the pioneer of the Catholic movement in Berlin.\n\nAfter returning to Vienna, he was a secretary of the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union. He devoted his efforts to consolidate that industry. Dollfuss was instrumental in the founding of the regional Chamber of Agriculture of Lower Austria, becoming its secretary and a director; the Federation of Agriculture and the Agricultural Labourers’ Insurance Institute; in organising the new Agrarian policy of Lower Austria and in laying the foundations for the corporative organisation of agriculture. A few years later, he was representative of Austria at the International Agrarian Congress, where his proposals made him internationally known in that sphere. He was seen as an unofficial leader of the Austrian peasantry.\n\nOn 1 October 1930 Dollfuss was appointed the president of the Federal Railways, the largest industrial corporation in Austria. There, Dollfuss came into contact with all branches of the industry. In March 1931, he was appointed Federal Minister of Agriculture and Forestry.\n\nOn 10 May 1932, Dollfuss, age 39 and with only one year's experience in the Federal Government, was offered the office of Chancellor by President Wilhelm Miklas, also a member of the Christian-Social Party. Dollfuss refused to reply, instead spending the night in his favourite church praying, returning in the morning for a bath and a spartan meal before replying to the President he would accept the offer. Dollfuss was sworn in on 20 May 1932 as head of a coalition government between the Christian-Social Party, the Landbund — a right-wing agrarian party — and Heimatblock, the parliamentary wing of the \"Heimwehr\", a paramilitary ultra-nationalist group. The coalition assumed the pressing task of tackling the problems of the Great Depression. Much of the Austro-Hungarian Empire's industry had been situated in the areas that became part of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia after World War I as a result of the Treaty of Saint-Germain. Postwar Austria was therefore economically disadvantaged.\n\nDollfuss' majority in Parliament was marginal; his government had only a one-vote majority.\n\nIn March 1933, an argument arose over irregularities in the voting procedure. The Social Democratic president of the National Council (the lower house of parliament) Karl Renner resigned to be able to cast a vote as a parliament member. As a consequence, the two vice presidents, belonging to other parties, resigned as well to be able to vote. Without a president, the parliament could not conclude the session. Dollfuss took the three resignations as a pretext to declare that the National Council had become unworkable, and advised President Wilhelm Miklas to issue a decree adjourning it indefinitely. When the National Council wanted to reconvene days after the resignation of the three presidents, Dollfuss had police bar entrance to parliament, effectively eliminating democracy in Austria. From that point onwards, he governed as dictator by emergency decree with absolute power.\n\nDollfuss was concerned that with German National Socialist leader Adolf Hitler becoming Chancellor of Germany in 1933, the Austrian National Socialists (DNSAP) could gain a significant minority in future elections (according to fascism scholar Stanley G. Payne, should elections have been held in 1933, the DNSAP could have mustered about 25% of the votes – contemporary \"Time\" magazine analysts suggest a higher support of 50%, with a 75% approval rate in the Tyrol region bordering Nazi Germany). In addition, the Soviet Union's influence in Europe had increased throughout the 1920s and early 1930s. Dollfuss banned the communists on 26 May 1933 and the DNSAP on 19 June 1933. Under the banner of Christian Social Party, he later established a one-party dictatorship rule largely modeled after fascism in Italy, banning all other Austrian parties including the Social Democratic Labour Party (SDAPÖ). Social Democrats however continued to exist as an independent organization, nevertheless, without its paramilitary \"Republikanischer Schutzbund\", which until 31 March 1933 could have mustered tens of thousands against Dollfuss' government.\n\nDollfuss modelled Austrofascism according to Catholic corporatist ideals with anti-secularist tones and in a similar way to Italian fascism, dropping Austrian pretenses of unification with Germany as long as the Nazi Party remained in power. In August 1933, Benito Mussolini's regime issued a guarantee of Austrian independence. Dollfuss also exchanged 'Secret Letters' with Mussolini about ways to guarantee Austrian independence. Mussolini was interested in Austria forming a buffer zone against Nazi Germany. Dollfuss always stressed the similarity of the regimes of Hitler in Germany and Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union, and was convinced that Austrofascism and Italian fascism could counter totalitarian national socialism and communism in Europe.\n\nIn September 1933 Dollfuss merged his Christian Social Party with elements of other nationalist and conservative groups, including the Heimwehr, which encompassed many workers who were unhappy with the radical leadership of the socialist party, to form the \"Vaterländische Front\", though the Heimwehr continued to exist as an independent organization until 1936, when Dollfuss' successor Kurt von Schuschnigg forcibly merged it into the Front, instead creating the unabidingly loyal \"Frontmiliz\" as paramilitary task force. Dollfuss escaped an assassination attempt in October 1933 by Rudolf Dertill, a 22-year-old who had been ejected from the military for his national socialist views.\n\nIn February 1934 the security forces provoked arrests of Social Democrats and unjustified searches for weapons of the Social Democrats' already outlawed Republikanischer Schutzbund. After the Dollfuss dictatorship took steps against known Social Democrats, the Social Democrats called for nationwide resistance against the government. A civil war began, which lasted sixteen days, from 12 until 27 February. Fierce fighting took place primarily in the East of Austria, especially in the streets of some outer Vienna districts, where large fortress-like municipal workers' buildings were situated, and in the northern, industrial areas of the province of Styria, where Nazi agents had great interest in a bloodbath between security forces and workers' militias. The resistance was suppressed by police and military power. The Social Democrats were outlawed, and their leaders were imprisoned or fled abroad.\n\nDollfuss staged a parliamentary session with just his party members present in April 1934 to have his new constitution approved, effectively the second constitution in the world espousing corporatist ideas after that of the Portuguese \"Estado Novo\". The session retrospectively made all the decrees already passed since March 1933 legal. The new constitution became effective on 1 May 1934 and swept away the last remnants of democracy and the system of the first Austrian Republic.\n\nDollfuss was assassinated on 25 July 1934 by ten Austrian Nazis (Paul Hudl, Franz Holzweber, Otto Planetta and others) of Regiment 89 who entered the Chancellery building and shot him in an attempted \"coup d'état\", the July Putsch. In his dying moments he asked for Viaticum, the Eucharist administered to a person who is dying, but his assassins refused to give it to him. Mussolini had no hesitation in attributing the attack to the German dictator: the news reached him at Cesena, where he was examining the plans for a psychiatric hospital. Mussolini, known as \"Il Duce\", personally gave the announcement to Dollfuss' widow, who was a guest at his villa in Riccione with her children. He also put at the disposal of Ernst Rüdiger Starhemberg, who spent a holiday in Venice, a plane that allowed the prince to rush back to Vienna and to face the assailants with his militia, with the permission of President Wilhelm Miklas.\n\nMussolini also mobilised a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria to thwart the putsch. Then he announced to the world: \"The independence of Austria, for which he has fallen, is a principle that has been defended and will be defended by Italy even more strenuously\", and then replaced in the main square of Bolzano the statue of Walther von der Vogelweide, a Germanic troubadour, with that of Drusus, a Roman general who conquered part of Germany. This was the greatest moment of friction between Fascism and National Socialism and Mussolini himself came down several times to reaffirm the differences in the field. The assassination of Dollfuss was accompanied by uprisings in many regions in Austria, resulting in further deaths. In Carinthia, a large contingent of northern German Nazis tried to seize power but were subdued by the Italian units nearby. At first Hitler was jubilant, but the Italian reaction surprised him. Hitler became convinced that he could not face a conflict with the Western European powers, and he officially denied liability, stating his regret for the murder of the Austrian Prime Minister. He replaced the ambassador to Vienna with Franz von Papen and prevented the conspirators entering Germany, also expelling them from the Austrian Nazi Party. The Nazi assassins in Vienna, after declaring the formation of a new government under Austrian Nazi Anton Rintelen, previously exiled by Dollfuss as Austrian Ambassador to Rome, surrendered after threats from Austrian military of blowing up the Chancellery using dynamite, and were subsequently tried and executed by hanging. Kurt Schuschnigg, previously Minister of Education, was appointed new chancellor of Austria after a few days, assuming the office from Dollfuss’ deputy Starhemberg.\n\nOut of a population of 6.5 million, approximately 500,000 Austrians were present at Dollfuss’ burial in Vienna. He is interred in the Hietzing cemetery in Vienna beside his wife Alwine Dollfuss (d. 1973) and two of his children, Hannerl and Eva, all of whom were in Italy as guests of Rachele Mussolini at the time of his death, an event which saw Mussolini himself shed tears over his slain ally.\n\nIn Bertolt Brecht's 1941 play \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\", Dollfuss is represented by the character \"Dullfeet\".<ref name=\"The New York Times - 9 May 1991- Review/Theater; Brecht's Cauliflower King In Another Resistible Rise\"></ref>\n\nBULLET::::- \"Das Kammersystem in der Landwirtschaft Österreichs\". Agrarverlag, Wien 1929.\nBULLET::::- Mertha, Rudolf, Dollfuß, Engelbert: \"Die Sozialversicherung in der Landwirtschaft Österreichs nach dem Stande von Ende März 1929\". Agrarverlag, Wien 1929.\nBULLET::::- \"Der Führer Bundeskanzler Dr. Dollfuß zum Feste des Wiederaufbaues. 3 Reden. 1. Mai 1934\". Österr. Bundespressedienst, Wien 1934.\nBULLET::::- Tautscher, Anton (Hrsg.): \"So sprach der Kanzler. Dollfuss’ Vermächtnis. Aus seinen Reden\". Baumgartner, Wien 1935.\nBULLET::::- Weber, Edmund (Hrsg.): \"Dollfuß an Oesterreich. Eines Mannes Wort und Ziel\". Reinhold, Wien 1935.\nBULLET::::- Maderthaner, Wolfgang (Hrsg.): \"„Der Führer bin ich selbst.“ Engelbert Dollfuß – Benito Mussolini. Briefwechsel\". Löcker, Wien 2004, .\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "10151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10151", "title": "E. T. A. Hoffmann", "text": "E. T. A. Hoffmann\n\nErnst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (commonly abbreviated as E. T. A. Hoffmann; born Ernst Theodor Wilhelm Hoffmann; 24 January 177625 June 1822) was a German Romantic author of fantasy and Gothic horror, a jurist, composer, music critic and artist. His stories form the basis of Jacques Offenbach's opera \"The Tales of Hoffmann\", in which Hoffmann appears (heavily fictionalized) as the hero. He is also the author of the novella \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", on which Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" is based. The ballet \"Coppélia\" is based on two other stories that Hoffmann wrote, while Schumann's \"Kreisleriana\" is based on Hoffmann's character Johannes Kreisler.\n\nHoffmann's stories highly influenced 19th-century literature, and he is one of the major authors of the Romantic movement.\n\nHoffmann's ancestors, both maternal and paternal, were jurists. His father, Christoph Ludwig Hoffmann (1736–97), was a barrister in Königsberg, Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia), as well as a poet and amateur musician who played the viola da gamba. In 1767 he married his cousin, Lovisa Albertina Doerffer (1748–96). Ernst Theodor Wilhelm, born on 24 January 1776, was the youngest of three children, of whom the second died in infancy.\n\nWhen his parents separated in 1778, the father went to Insterburg (now Chernyakhovsk) with his elder son, Johann Ludwig Hoffmann (1768–after 1822), while Ernst's mother stayed in Königsberg with her relatives: two aunts, Johanna Sophie Doerffer (1745–1803) and Charlotte Wilhelmine Doerffer (c. 1754–79) and their brother, Otto Wilhelm Doerffer (1741–1811), who were all unmarried. This trio raised the youngster.\n\nThe household, dominated by the uncle (whom Ernst nicknamed \"O Weh\"—\"Oh dear!\"—in a play on his initials), was pietistic and uncongenial. Hoffmann was to regret his estrangement from his father. Nevertheless, he remembered his aunts with great affection, especially the younger, Charlotte, whom he nicknamed \"Tante Füßchen\" (\"Aunt Littlefeet\"). Although she died when he was only three years old, he treasured her memory (e.g. see \"Kater Murr\") and embroidered stories about her to such an extent that later biographers sometimes assumed her to be imaginary, until proof of her existence was found after World War II.\n\nBetween 1781 and 1792 he attended the Lutheran school or \"Burgschule\", where he made good progress in classics. He was taught drawing by one Saemann, and counterpoint by a Polish organist named Podbileski, who was to be the prototype of Abraham Liscot in \"Kater Murr\". Ernst showed great talent for piano-playing, and busied himself with writing and drawing. The provincial setting was not, however, conducive to technical progress, and despite his many-sided talents he remained rather ignorant of both classical forms and of the new artistic ideas that were developing in Germany. He had, however, read Schiller, Goethe, Swift, Sterne, Rousseau and Jean Paul, and wrote part of a novel titled \"Der Geheimnisvolle\".\n\nAround 1787 he became friends with Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Younger (1775–1843), the son of a pastor, and nephew of Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Elder, the well-known writer friend of Immanuel Kant. During 1792, both attended some of Kant's lectures at the University of Königsberg. Their friendship, although often tested by an increasing social difference, was to be lifelong.\n\nIn 1794, Hoffmann became enamored of Dora Hatt, a married woman to whom he had given music lessons. She was ten years older, and gave birth to her sixth child in 1795. In February 1796, her family protested against his attentions and, with his hesitant consent, asked another of his uncles to arrange employment for him in Glogau (Głogów), Prussian Silesia.\n\nFrom 1796 Hoffmann obtained employment as a clerk for his uncle, Johann Ludwig Doerffer, who lived in Glogau with his daughter Minna. After passing further examinations he visited Dresden, where he was amazed by the paintings in the gallery, particularly those of Correggio and Raphael. During the summer of 1798, his uncle was promoted to a court in Berlin, and the three of them moved there in August—Hoffmann's first residence in a large city. It was there that Hoffmann first attempted to promote himself as a composer, writing an operetta called \"Die Maske\" and sending a copy to Queen Luise of Prussia. The official reply advised to him to write to the director of the Royal Theatre, a man named Iffland. By the time the latter responded, Hoffmann had passed his third round of examinations and had already left for Posen (Poznań) in South Prussia in the company of his old friend Hippel, with a brief stop in Dresden to show him the gallery.\n\nFrom June 1800 to 1803 he worked in Prussian provinces in the area of Greater Poland and Masovia. This was the first time he had lived without supervision by members of his family, and he started to become \"what school principals, parsons, uncles, and aunts call dissolute.\"\n\nHis first job, at Posen, was endangered after Carnival on Shrove Tuesday 1802, when caricatures of military officers were distributed at a ball. It was immediately deduced who had drawn them, and complaints were made to authorities in Berlin, who were reluctant to punish the promising young official. The problem was solved by \"promoting\" Hoffmann to Płock in New East Prussia, the former capital of Poland (1079–1138), where administrative offices were relocated from Thorn (Toruń). He visited the place to arrange lodging, before returning to Posen where he married \"Mischa\" (Maria, or Marianna Tekla Michalina Rorer, whose Polish surname was Trzcińska). They moved to Płock in August 1802.\n\nHoffmann despaired because of his exile, and drew caricatures of himself drowning in mud alongside ragged villagers. He did make use, however, of his isolation, by writing and composing. He started a diary on 1 October 1803. An essay on the theatre was published in Kotzebue's periodical, \"Die Freimüthige\", and he entered a competition in the same magazine to write a play. Hoffmann's was called \"Der Preis\" (\"The Prize\"), and was itself about a competition to write a play. There were fourteen entries, but none was judged worthy of the award: 100 Friedrichs d'or. Nevertheless, his entry was singled out for praise. This was one of the few good times of a sad period of his life, which saw the deaths of his uncle J. L. Hoffmann in Berlin, his Aunt Sophie, and Dora Hatt in Königsberg.\n\nAt the beginning of 1804 he obtained a post at Warsaw. On his way there, he passed through his hometown and met one of Dora Hatt's daughters. He was never to return to Königsberg.\n\nHoffmann assimilated well with Polish society; the years spent in Prussian Poland he recognized as the happiest of his life. In Warsaw he found the same atmosphere he had enjoyed in Berlin, renewing his friendship with Zacharias Werner, and meeting his future biographer, a neighbour and fellow jurist called Julius Eduard Itzig (who changed his name to Hitzig after his baptism). Itzig had been a member of the Berlin literary group called the \"Nordstern,\" or \"North Stars,\" and he gave Hoffmann the works of Novalis, Ludwig Tieck, Achim von Arnim, Clemens Brentano, Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert, Carlo Gozzi and Calderón. These relatively late introductions marked his work profoundly.\n\nHe moved in the circles of August Wilhelm Schlegel, Adelbert von Chamisso, Friedrich de la Motte Fouqué, Rahel Levin and David Ferdinand Koreff.\n\nAs chief Prussian administrator of the city from 1795 to 1806, Hoffmann was responsible for assigning surnames to Warsaw's Jewish community—a duty he executed based on whims. The names Hoffmann doled out would apparently depend on the day of the week—Monday the names of flowers, Friday the names of fish, or hung-over after drinking with a Prussian army officer military names like Festung, Fojer, Pistolet, and Trompeter.\n\nBut Hoffmann's fortunate position was not to last: on 28 November 1806, during the War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon Bonaparte's troops captured Warsaw, and the Prussian bureaucrats lost their jobs. They divided the contents of the treasury between them and fled. In January 1807, Hoffmann's wife and two-year-old daughter Cäcilia returned to Posen, while he pondered whether to move to Vienna or go back to Berlin. A delay of six months was caused by severe illness. Eventually the French authorities demanded that all former officials swear allegiance or leave the country. As they refused to grant Hoffmann a passport to Vienna, he was forced to return to Berlin.\nHe visited his family in Posen before arriving in Berlin on 18 June 1807, hoping to further his career there as an artist and writer.\n\nThe next fifteen months were some of the worst in Hoffmann's life.\nThe city of Berlin was also occupied by Napoleon's troops. Obtaining only meagre allowances, he had frequent recourse to his friends, constantly borrowing money and still going hungry for days at a time; he learned that his daughter had died. Nevertheless, he managed to compose his Six Canticles for \"a cappella\" choir: one of his best compositions, which he would later attribute to Kreisler in \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\".\n\nOn 1 September 1808 he arrived with his wife in Bamberg, where he began a job as theatre manager. The director, Count Soden, left almost immediately for Würzburg, leaving a man named Heinrich Cuno in charge. Hoffmann was unable to improve standards of performance, and his efforts caused intrigues against him which resulted in him losing his job to Cuno. He began work as music critic for the \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\", a newspaper in Leipzig, and his articles on Beethoven were especially well received, and highly regarded by the composer himself. It was in its pages that the \"Kapellmeister Johannes Kreisler\" character made his first appearance.\n\nHoffmann's breakthrough came in 1809, with the publication of \"Ritter Gluck\", a story about a man who meets, or believes he has met, the composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714–87) more than twenty years after the latter's death. The theme alludes to the work of Jean Paul, who invented the term Doppelgänger the previous decade, and continued to exact a powerful influence over Hoffmann, becoming one of his earliest admirers. With this publication, Hoffmann began to use the pseudonym E. T. A. Hoffmann, telling people that the \"A\" stood for \"Amadeus\", in homage to the composer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756–91). However, he continued to use Wilhelm in official documents throughout his life, and the initials E. T. W. also appear on his gravestone.\n\nThe next year, he was employed at the Bamberg Theatre as stagehand, decorator, and playwright, while also giving private music lessons.\nHe became so enamored of a young singing student, Julia Marc, that his feelings were obvious whenever they were together, and Julia's mother quickly found her a more suitable match. When Joseph Seconda offered Hoffmann a position as musical director for his opera company (then performing in Dresden), he accepted, leaving on 21 April 1813.\n\nPrussia had declared war against France on 16 March during the War of the Sixth Coalition, and their journey was fraught with difficulties. They arrived on the 25th, only to find that Seconda was in Leipzig; on the 26th, they sent a letter pleading for temporary funds. That same day Hoffmann was surprised to meet Hippel, whom he had not seen for nine years.\n\nThe situation deteriorated, and in early May Hoffmann tried in vain to find transport to Leipzig. On 8 May, the bridges were destroyed, and his family were marooned in the city. During the day, Hoffmann would roam, watching the fighting with curiosity. Finally, on 20 May, they left for Leipzig, only to be involved in an accident which killed one of the passengers in their coach and injured his wife.\n\nThey arrived on 23 May, and Hoffmann started work with Seconda's orchestra, which he found to be of the best quality. On 4 June an armistice began, which allowed the company to return to Dresden. But on 22 August, after the end of the armistice, the family was forced to relocate from their pleasant house in the suburbs into the town, and during the next few days the Battle of Dresden raged. The city was bombarded; many people were killed by bombs directly in front of him. After the main battle was over, he visited the gory battlefield. His account can be found in \"Vision auf dem Schlachtfeld bei Dresden\". After a long period of continued disturbance, the town surrendered on 11 November, and on 9 December the company travelled to Leipzig.\n\nOn 25 February Hoffmann quarrelled with Seconda, and the next day he was given notice of twelve weeks. When asked to accompany them on their journey to Dresden in April, he refused, and they left without him. But during July his friend Hippel visited, and soon he found himself being guided back into his old career as a jurist.\n\nAt the end of September 1814, in the wake of Napoleon's defeat, Hoffmann returned to Berlin and succeeded in regaining a job at the \"Kammergericht\", the chamber court. His opera \"Undine\" was performed by the Berlin Theatre. Its successful run came to an end only after a fire on the night of the 25th performance. Magazines clamoured for his contributions, and after a while his standards started to decline. Nevertheless, many masterpieces date from this time.\n\nDuring the period from 1819 Hoffmann was involved with legal disputes, while fighting ill health. Alcohol abuse and syphilis eventually caused weakening of his limbs during 1821, and paralysis from the beginning of 1822. His last works were dictated to his wife or to a secretary.\n\nPrince Metternich's anti-liberal programs began to put Hoffmann in situations that tested his conscience. Thousands of people were accused of treason for having certain political opinions,\nand university professors were monitored during their lectures.\n\nKing Frederick William III of Prussia appointed an Immediate Commission for the investigation of political dissidence; when he found its observance of the rule of law too frustrating, he established a Ministerial Commission to interfere with its processes. The latter was greatly influenced by Commissioner Kamptz. During the trial of \"Turnvater\" Jahn, the founder of the gymnastics association movement, Hoffmann found himself annoying Kamptz, and became a political target. When Hoffmann caricatured Kamptz in a story (\"Meister Floh\"), Kamptz began legal proceedings. These ended when Hoffmann's illness was found to be life-threatening. The King asked for a reprimand only, but no action was ever taken. Eventually \"Meister Floh\" was published with the offending passages removed.\n\nHoffmann died of syphilis in Berlin on 25 June 1822 at the age of 46. His grave is preserved in the Protestant \"Friedhof III der Jerusalems- und Neuen Kirchengemeinde\" (Cemetery No. III of the congregations of Jerusalem Church and New Church) in Berlin-Kreuzberg, south of Hallesches Tor at the underground station Mehringdamm.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Fantasiestücke in Callots Manier\" (collection of previously published stories, 1814)\nBULLET::::- \"Ritter Gluck\", \"Kreisleriana\", \"Don Juan\", \"Nachricht von den neuesten Schicksalen des Hundes Berganza\"\nBULLET::::- \"Der Magnetiseur\", \"Der goldne Topf\" (revised in 1819), \"Die Abenteuer der Silvesternacht\"\nBULLET::::- \"Die Elixiere des Teufels\" (1815)\nBULLET::::- \"Nachtstücke\" (1817)\nBULLET::::- \"Der Sandmann\", \"Das Gelübde\", \"Ignaz Denner\", \"Die Jesuiterkirche in G.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Das Majorat\", \"Das öde Haus\", \"Das Sanctus\", \"Das steinerne Herz\"\nBULLET::::- \"Seltsame Leiden eines Theater-Direktors\" (1819)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1819)\nBULLET::::- \"Die Serapionsbrüder\" (1819)\nBULLET::::- \"Der Einsiedler Serapion\", \"Rat Krespel\", \"Die Fermate\", \"Der Dichter und der Komponist\"\nBULLET::::- \"Ein Fragment aus dem Leben dreier Freunde\", \"Der Artushof\", \"Die Bergwerke zu Falun\", \"Nußknacker und Mausekönig\" (1816)\nBULLET::::- \"Der Kampf der Sänger\", \"Eine Spukgeschichte\", \"Die Automate\", \"Doge und Dogaresse\"\nBULLET::::- \"Alte und neue Kirchenmusik\", \"Meister Martin der Küfner und seine Gesellen\", \"Das fremde Kind\"\nBULLET::::- \"Nachricht aus dem Leben eines bekannten Mannes\", \"Die Brautwahl\", \"Der unheimliche Gast\"\nBULLET::::- \"Das Fräulein von Scuderi\", \"Spielerglück\" (1819), \"Der Baron von B.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Signor Formica\", \"Zacharias Werner\", \"Erscheinungen\"\nBULLET::::- \"Der Zusammenhang der Dinge\", \"Vampirismus\", \"Die ästhetische Teegesellschaft\", \"Die Königsbraut\"\nBULLET::::- \"Prinzessin Brambilla\" (1820)\nBULLET::::- \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" (1820)\nBULLET::::- \"Die Irrungen\" (1820)\nBULLET::::- \"Die Geheimnisse\" (1821)\nBULLET::::- \"Die Doppeltgänger\" (1821)\nBULLET::::- \"Meister Floh\" (1822)\nBULLET::::- \"Des Vetters Eckfenster\" (1822)\nBULLET::::- \"Letzte Erzählungen\" (1825)\n\nBULLET::::- Messa d-moll (1805)\nBULLET::::- Trois Canzonettes à 2 et à 3 voix (1807)\nBULLET::::- 6 Canzoni per 4 voci alla capella (1808)\nBULLET::::- Miserere b-moll (1809)\nBULLET::::- In des Irtisch weiße Fluten (Kotzebue), Lied (1811)\nBULLET::::- Recitativo ed Aria „Prendi l'acciar ti rendo\" (1812)\nBULLET::::- Tre Canzonette italiane (1812); 6 Duettini italiani (1812)\nBULLET::::- Nachtgesang, Türkische Musik, Jägerlied, Katzburschenlied für Männerchor (1819–21)\n\nBULLET::::- \"Die Maske\" (libretto by Hoffmann), Singspiel (1799)\nBULLET::::- \"Die lustigen Musikanten\" (libretto: Clemens Brentano), Singspiel (1804)\nBULLET::::- Incidental music to Zacharias Werner's tragedy \"Das Kreuz an der Ostsee\" (1805)\nBULLET::::- \"Liebe und Eifersucht\" (libretto by Hoffmann after Calderón, translated by August Wilhelm Schlegel) (1807)\nBULLET::::- \"Arlequin\", ballet (1808)\nBULLET::::- \"Der Trank der Unsterblichkeit\" (libretto: Julius von Soden), romantic opera (1808)\nBULLET::::- \"Wiedersehn!\" (libretto by Hoffmann), prologue (1809)\nBULLET::::- \"Dirna\" (libretto: Julius von Soden), melodrama (1809)\nBULLET::::- Incidental music to Julius von Soden's drama \"Julius Sabinus\" (1810)\nBULLET::::- \"Saul, König von Israel\" (libretto: Joseph von Seyfried), melodrama (1811)\nBULLET::::- \"Aurora\" (libretto: Franz von Holbein), heroic opera (1812)\nBULLET::::- \"Undine\" (libretto: Friedrich de la Motte Fouqué), \"Zauberoper\" (1816)\nBULLET::::- \"Der Liebhaber nach dem Tode\" (unfinished)\n\nBULLET::::- Rondo für Klavier (1794/95)\nBULLET::::- Ouvertura. Musica per la chiesa d-moll (1801)\nBULLET::::- Klaviersonaten: A-Dur, f-moll, F-Dur, f-moll, cis-moll (1805–1808)\nBULLET::::- Große Fantasie für Klavier (1806)\nBULLET::::- Sinfonie Es-Dur (1806)\nBULLET::::- Harfenquintett c-moll (1807)\nBULLET::::- Grand Trio E-Dur (1809)\nBULLET::::- Walzer zum Karolinentag (1812)\nBULLET::::- Teutschlands Triumph in der Schlacht bei Leipzig, (by \"Arnulph Vollweiler\", 1814; lost)\nBULLET::::- Serapions-Walzer (1818–1821)\n\nHoffmann is one of the best-known representatives of German Romanticism, and a pioneer of the fantasy genre, with a taste for the macabre combined with realism that influenced such authors as Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), Nikolai Gogol (1809–1852), Charles Dickens (1812–1870), Charles Baudelaire (1821–1867), George MacDonald (1824–1905), Fyodor Dostoevsky (1821–1881), Vernon Lee (1856–1935), Franz Kafka (1883–1924) and Alfred Hitchcock (1899–1980). Hoffmann's story \"Das Fräulein von Scuderi\" is sometimes cited as the first detective story and a direct influence on Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\".\n\nThe twentieth-century Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin characterised Hoffmann's works as Menippea, essentially satirical and self-parodying in form, thus including him in a tradition that includes Cervantes, Diderot and Voltaire.\n\nRobert Schumann's piano suite Kreisleriana (1838) takes its title from one of Hoffmann's books (and according to Charles Rosen's \"The Romantic Generation\", is possibly also inspired by \"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", in which Kreisler appears). Jacques Offenbach's masterwork, the opera \"Les contes d'Hoffmann\" (\"The Tales of Hoffmann\", 1881), is based on the stories, principally \"Der Sandmann\" (\"The Sandman\", 1816), \"Rat Krespel\" (\"Councillor Krespel\", 1818), and \"Das verlorene Spiegelbild\" (\"The Lost Reflection\") from \"Die Abenteuer der Silvester-Nacht\" (\"The Adventures of New Year's Eve\", 1814). \"Klein Zaches genannt Zinnober\" (\"Little Zaches called Cinnabar\", 1819) inspired an aria as well as the operetta \"Le Roi Carotte\", 1872). Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" (1892) is based on \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", and the ballet \"Coppélia\", with music by Delibes, is based on two eerie Hoffmann stories.\n\nHoffmann also influenced 19th-century musical opinion directly through his music criticism. His reviews of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5 in C minor, Op. 67 (1808) and other important works set new literary standards for writing about music, and encouraged later writers to consider music as \"the most Romantic of all the arts.\" Hoffmann's reviews were first collected for modern readers by Friedrich Schnapp, ed., in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann: Schriften zur Musik; Nachlese\" (1963) and have been made available in an English translation in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann's Writings on Music, Collected in a Single Volume\" (2004).\n\nHoffmann strove for artistic polymathy. He created far more in his works than mere political commentary achieved through satire. His masterpiece novel \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" (\"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", 1819–1821) deals with such issues as the aesthetic status of true artistry and the modes of self-transcendence that accompany any genuine endeavour to create. Hoffmann's portrayal of the character Kreisler (a genius musician) is wittily counterpointed with the character of the tomcat Murr – a virtuoso illustration of artistic pretentiousness that many of Hoffmann's contemporaries found offensive and subversive of Romantic ideals.\n\nHoffmann's literature indicates the failings of many so-called artists to differentiate between the superficial and the authentic aspects of such Romantic ideals. The \"self-conscious\" effort to impress must, according to Hoffmann, be divorced from the \"self-aware\" effort to create. This essential duality in \"Kater Murr\" is conveyed structurally through a discursive 'splicing together' of two biographical narratives.\n\nWhile disagreeing with E. F. Bleiler's claim that Hoffman was \"one of the two or three greatest writers of fantasy\", Algis Budrys of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" said that he \"did lay down the groundwork for some of our most enduring themes\".\n\nHistorian Martin Willis argues that Hoffmann's impact on science fiction has been overlooked, saying \"his work reveals a writer dynamically involved in the important scientific debates of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.\" Willis points out that Hoffmann's work is contemporary with \"Frankenstein\" (1818) and with \"the heated debates and the relationship between the new empirical science and the older forms of natural philosophy that held sway throughout the eighteenth century.\" His \"interest in the machine culture of his time is well represented in his short stories, of which the critically renowned \"The Sandman\" (1816) and \"Automata\" (1814) are the best examples. ...Hoffmann's work makes a considerable contribution to our understanding of the emergence of scientific knowledge in the early years of the nineteenth century and to the conflict between science and magic, centred mainly on the 'truths' available to the advocates of either practice. ...Hoffmann's balancing of mesmerism, mechanics, and magic reflects the difficulty in categorizing scientific knowledge in the early nineteenth century.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Robertson Davies invokes Hoffmann as a character (with the pet name of 'ETAH') trapped in Limbo, within his novel \"The Lyre of Orpheus\" (1988).\nBULLET::::- Angela Carter – \"The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman\" (1972)\nBULLET::::- Alexandre Dumas, père translated \"The Nutcracker\" into French, which aided in making the tale popular and widespread.\nBULLET::::- The exotic and supernatural elements in the storyline of Ingmar Bergman's 1982 film \"Fanny and Alexander\" derive largely from the stories of Hoffmann.\nBULLET::::- Andrei Tarkovsky wrote a script titled \"Hoffmaniana\" in which the writer himself is the main protagonist. Due to Tarkovsky's premature death, the film was never made.\nBULLET::::- Freud gives an extensive psychoanalytic analysis of Hoffmann's \"The Sandman\" in his 1919 essay \"Das Unheimliche\".\nBULLET::::- Coppelius is a German classical metal band whose name is taken from a character in Hoffmann's \"The Sandman\". The band's 2010 album \"Zinnober\" includes a track titled \"Klein Zaches\".\nBULLET::::- The Russian show \"Kukly\" was cancelled by government officials after an episode in which Vladimir Putin was portrayed as Hoffmann's Klein Zaches.\nBULLET::::- Malifaux, a tabletop skirmish game, uses the names Hoffman and Coppelius from \"The Sandman\" for characters which reference each other as having an \"unexplained connection\".\nBULLET::::- Dario Argento was planning to film an adaptation of \"The Sandman\" based on Hoffmann's short story and starring Iggy Pop but filming never commenced.\n\nBULLET::::- \"The Tales of Hoffmann\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Tales of Hoffmann (film)\"\nBULLET::::- \"Gofmaniada\", a Russian puppet-animated feature film about Hoffmann and several of his stories.\n\nBULLET::::- Hoffmann's Life and Opinions of the Tom Cat Murr\nBULLET::::- Compositions of E. T. A. Hoffmann in the digitale collection of the Bamberg State Library\nBULLET::::- E. T. A. Hoffmann entry in \"The Encyclopedia of Fantasy\"\n"}
{"id": "10152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10152", "title": "Erasmus", "text": "Erasmus\n\nDesiderius Erasmus Roterodamus (; 28 October 1466 – 12 July 1536), known as Erasmus or Erasmus of Rotterdam, was a Dutch philosopher and Christian humanist who is widely considered to have been one of the greatest scholars of the northern Renaissance. Originally trained as a Catholic priest, Erasmus was an important figure in classical scholarship who wrote in a pure Latin style. Among humanists he enjoyed the sobriquet \"Prince of the Humanists\", and has been called \"the crowning glory of the Christian humanists\". Using humanist techniques for working on texts, he prepared important new Latin and Greek editions of the New Testament, which raised questions that would be influential in the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation. He also wrote \"On Free Will,\" \"In Praise of Folly\", \"Handbook of a Christian Knight\", \"On Civility in Children\", \"\", \"Julius Exclusus\", and many other works.\n\nErasmus lived against the backdrop of the growing European religious Reformation. While he was critical of the abuses within the Catholic Church and called for reform, he nonetheless kept his distance from Luther, Henry VIII, and John Calvin and continued to recognise the authority of the pope, emphasizing a middle way with a deep respect for traditional faith, piety and grace, and rejecting Luther's emphasis on faith alone. Erasmus remained a member of the Catholic Church all his life, remaining committed to reforming the church and its clerics' abuses from within. He also held to the doctrine of synergism, which some Reformers (Calvinists) rejected in favor of the doctrine of monergism. His middle road (\"\"via media\"\") approach disappointed, and even angered, scholars in both camps.\n\nErasmus died suddenly in Basel in 1536 while preparing to return to Brabant and was buried in Basel Minster, the former cathedral of the city. A bronze statue of Erasmus was erected in 1622 in his city of birth, replacing an earlier work in stone.\n\nDesiderius Erasmus is reported to have been born in Rotterdam on 28 October in the late 1460s. He was named after Saint Erasmus of Formiae, whom Erasmus's father Gerard personally favored. A 17th-century legend has it that Erasmus was first named Geert Geerts (also Gerhard Gerhards or Gerrit Gerritsz), but this is unfounded. A well-known wooden picture indicates: \"Goudæ conceptus, Roterodami natus\" (Latin for \"Conceived in Gouda, born in Rotterdam)\". According to an article by historian Renier Snooy (1478–1537), Erasmus was born in Gouda.\n\nThe exact year of his birth is controversial but most agree it was in 1466. Evidence confirming the year of Erasmus' birth in 1466 can be found in his own words: fifteen out of twenty-three statements he made about his age indicate 1466. He was christened \"Erasmus\" after the saint of that name. Although associated closely with Rotterdam, he lived there for only four years, never to return. Information on his family and early life comes mainly from vague references in his writings. His parents were not legally married. His father, Gerard, was a Catholic priest and curate in Gouda. Little is known of his mother, although her known name was Margaretha Rogerius (Latinized form of Dutch surname Rutgers) and she was the daughter of a doctor from Zevenbergen. She may have been Gerard's housekeeper. Although he was born out of wedlock, Erasmus was cared for by his parents until their early deaths from the plague in 1483. This solidified his view of his origin as a stain and cast a pall over his youth.\n\nErasmus was given the highest education available to a young man of his day, in a series of monastic or semi-monastic schools. At the age of nine, he and his older brother Peter were sent to one of the best Latin schools in the Netherlands, located at Deventer and owned by the chapter clergy of the Lebuïnuskerk (St Lebuin's Church), though some earlier biographies assert it was a school run by the Brethren of the Common Life. During his stay there the curriculum was renewed by the principal of the school, Alexander Hegius. For the first time ever Greek was taught at a lower level than a university in Europe, and this is where he began learning it. He also gleaned there the importance of a personal relationship with God but eschewed the harsh rules and strict methods of the religious brothers and educators. His education there ended when plague struck the city about 1483, and his mother, who had moved to provide a home for her sons, died from the infection.\n\nMost likely in 1487, poverty forced Erasmus into the consecrated life as a canon regular of St. Augustine at the canonry of Stein, in South Holland. He took vows there in late 1488 and was ordained to the Catholic priesthood on 25 April 1492. It is said that he never seemed to have actively worked as a priest for a longer time, and certain abuses in religious orders were among the chief objects of his later calls to reform the Church from within.\n\nWhile at Stein, Erasmus met with a fellow canon, Servatius Rogerus, and wrote a series of passionate letters in which he called Rogerus \"half my soul\". This correspondence contrasts sharply with the generally detached and much more restrained attitude he showed in his later life. Later, while tutoring in Paris, he was suddenly dismissed by the guardian of Thomas Grey. Some have taken this as evidence of an illicit affair. No personal denunciation was made of Erasmus during his lifetime, however, and he took pains in later life to distance these earlier episodes by condemning sodomy in his works, and praising sexual desire in marriage between men and women.\n\nSoon after his priestly ordination, he got his chance to leave the canonry when offered the post of secretary to the Bishop of Cambrai, Henry of Bergen, on account of his great skill in Latin and his reputation as a man of letters. To allow him to accept that post, he was given a temporary dispensation from his religious vows on the grounds of poor health and love of Humanistic studies, though he remained a priest. Pope Leo X later made the dispensation permanent, a considerable privilege at the time.\n\nIn 1495, with Bishop Henry's consent and a stipend, Erasmus went on to study at the University of Paris, in the Collège de Montaigu, a centre of reforming zeal, under the direction of the ascetic Jan Standonck, of whose rigors he complained. The University was then the chief seat of Scholastic learning but already coming under the influence of Renaissance humanism. For instance, Erasmus became an intimate friend of an Italian humanist Publio Fausto Andrelini, poet and \"professor of humanity\" in Paris.\n\nThe chief centres of Erasmus's activity were Paris, Leuven (in the Duchy of Brabant, now in Belgium), England, and Basel; yet he never belonged firmly in any one of these places. In 1499 he was invited back to England by William Blount, 4th Baron Mountjoy, who offered to accompany him on his trip back to England. According to Thomas Penn, Erasmus was \"ever susceptible to the charms of attractive, well-connected, and rich young men\". His time in England was fruitful in the making of lifelong friendships with the leaders of English thought in the days of King Henry VIII: John Colet, Thomas More, John Fisher, Thomas Linacre and William Grocyn. At the University of Cambridge, he was the Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity and had the option of spending the rest of his life as an English professor. He stayed at Queens' College, Cambridge, from 1510 to 1515. His rooms were in the \"I\" staircase of Old Court, and he famously hated English ale and English weather.\n\nErasmus suffered from poor health and complained that Queens' could not supply him with enough decent wine (wine was the Renaissance medicine for gallstones, from which Erasmus suffered). Until the early 20th century, Queens' College used to have a corkscrew that was purported to be \"Erasmus' corkscrew\", which was a third of a metre long; even today the college still has what it calls \"Erasmus' chair\". Today Queens' College has an Erasmus Building and an Erasmus Room. His legacy is marked for someone who complained bitterly about the lack of comforts and luxuries to which he was accustomed. As Queens' was an unusually humanist-leaning institution in the 16th century, Queens' College Old Library still houses many first editions of Erasmus' publications, many of which were acquired during that period by bequest or purchase, including Erasmus' New Testament translation, which is signed by friend and Polish religious reformer Jan Łaski. Erasmus' friend, Chancellor John Fisher, was president of Queens' College from 1505 to 1508. His friendship with Fisher is the reason he chose to stay at Queens' while lecturing in Greek at the University.\n\nDuring his first visit to England in 1499, he taught at the University of Oxford. Erasmus was particularly impressed by the Bible teaching of John Colet, who pursued a style more akin to the church fathers than the Scholastics. This prompted him, upon his return from England, to master the Greek language, which would enable him to study theology on a more profound level and to prepare a new edition of Jerome's Bible translation. On one occasion he wrote to Colet: \nI cannot tell you, dear Colet, how I hurry on, with all sails set, to holy literature. How I dislike everything that keeps me back, or retards me.\nDespite a chronic shortage of money, he succeeded in learning Greek by an intensive, day-and-night study of three years, continuously begging his friends to send him books and money for teachers in his letters. Discovery in 1506 of Lorenzo Valla's \"New Testament Notes\" encouraged Erasmus to continue the study of the New Testament.\n\nErasmus preferred to live the life of an independent scholar and made a conscious effort to avoid any actions or formal ties that might inhibit his freedom of intellect and literary expression. Throughout his life, he was offered positions of honor and profit in academia but declined them all, preferring the uncertain but sufficient rewards of independent literary activity. He did however assist his friend John Colet by authoring Greek textbooks and procuring members of staff for the newly established St Paul's School. From 1506 to 1509, he was in Italy: in 1506 he graduated as Doctor of Divinity at the Turin University, and he spent part of the time as a proofreader at the publishing house of Aldus Manutius in Venice. According to his letters, he was associated with the Venetian natural philosopher, Giulio Camillo, but, apart from this, he had a less active association with Italian scholars than might have been expected.\n\nHis residence at Leuven, where he lectured at the University, exposed Erasmus to much criticism from those ascetics, academics and clerics hostile to the principles of literary and religious reform and the loose norms of the Renaissance adherents to which he was devoting his life. In 1517, he supported the foundation at the University, by his friend Hieronymus van Busleyden, of the Collegium Trilingue for the study of Hebrew, Latin, and Greek—after the model of the College of the Three Languages at the University of Alcalá. However, feeling that the lack of sympathy that prevailed at Leuven at that time was actually a form of mental persecution, he sought refuge in Basel, where under the shelter of Swiss hospitality he could express himself freely. Admirers from all quarters of Europe visited him there and he was surrounded by devoted friends, notably developing a lasting association with the great publisher Johann Froben.\n\nOnly when he had mastered Latin did he begin to express himself on major contemporary themes in literature and religion. He felt called upon to use his learning in a purification of the doctrine by returning to the historic documents and original languages of sacred Scripture. He tried to free the methods of scholarship from the rigidity and formalism of medieval traditions, but he was not satisfied with this. His revolt against certain forms of Christian monasticism and scholasticism was not based on doubts about the truth of doctrine, nor from hostility to the organization of the Church itself, nor from rejection of celibacy or monastic lifestyles. He saw himself as a preacher of righteousness by an appeal to reason, applied frankly and without fear of the magisterium. He always intended to remain faithful to Catholic doctrine and therefore was convinced he could criticize frankly virtually everyone and everything. Aloof from entangling obligations, Erasmus was the centre of the literary movement of his time, corresponding with more than five hundred men in the worlds of politics and of thought.\n\nIn 1502, in Spain, Cardinal Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros had put together a team of Spanish translators to create a Compilation of a Bible in four languages, Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic and Latin. Translators for Greek were commissioned from Greece itself and worked closely with Latinists. Cardinal Cisneros's team completed and printed the full new testament, including the Greek translation, in 1514. To do so they developed specific types to print Greek. Cisneros informed Erasmus of the works going on in Spain and may have sent a printed version of the New Testament to him. However, the Spanish team wanted the entire Bible to be released as one single work and withdrew from publication.\n\nThe information and the delay allowed Erasmus to request a \"Publication Privilege\" of four years for the Greek New Testament to ensure that his work would be published first. He obtained it in 1516 from both Pope Leo X, to whom he would dedicate his work, and Emperor Maximilian I. Erasmus' Greek New Testament was published first, in 1516, forcing the Spanish team of Cisneros to wait until 1520 to publish their Complutensian Polyglot Bible.\n\nIt is hard to say if Erasmus' actions had an effect on delaying the publication of Complutensian Polyglot, causing the Spanish team to take more time, or if it made no difference in their perfectionism. The Spanish copy was approved for publication by the Pope in 1520; however, it was not released until 1522 due to the team's insistence on reviewing and editing. Only fifteen errors have been found in the entire six volumes and four languages of Cisneros's bible, an extraordinarily low number for the time. The fear of them publishing first, though, affected Erasmus's work, rushing him to printing and causing him to forego editing. The result was a large number of translation mistakes, transcription errors, and typos, that required further editions to be printed (see \"publication\").\n\nErasmus had been working for years on two projects: a collation of Greek texts and a fresh Latin New Testament. In 1512, he began his work on this Latin New Testament. He collected all the Vulgate manuscripts he could find to create a critical edition. Then he polished the language. He declared, \"It is only fair that Paul should address the Romans in somewhat better Latin.\" In the earlier phases of the project, he never mentioned a Greek text:\n\nMy mind is so excited at the thought of emending Jerome’s text, with notes, that I seem to myself inspired by some god. I have already almost finished emending him by collating a large number of ancient manuscripts, and this I am doing at enormous personal expense.\n\nWhile his intentions for publishing a fresh Latin translation are clear, it is less clear why he included the Greek text. Though some speculate that he intended to produce a critical Greek text or that he wanted to beat the Complutensian Polyglot into print, there is no evidence to support this. He wrote, \"There remains the New Testament translated by me, with the Greek facing, and notes on it by me.\" He further demonstrated the reason for the inclusion of the Greek text when defending his work:\n\nBut one thing the facts cry out, and it can be clear, as they say, even to a blind man, that often through the translator’s clumsiness or inattention the Greek has been wrongly rendered; often the true and genuine reading has been corrupted by ignorant scribes, which we see happen every day, or altered by scribes who are half-taught and half-asleep.\n\nSo he included the Greek text to permit qualified readers to verify the quality of his Latin version. But by first calling the final product \"Novum Instrumentum omne\" (\"All of the New Teaching\") and later \"Novum Testamentum omne\" (\"All of the New Testament\") he also indicated clearly that he considered a text in which the Greek and the Latin versions were consistently comparable to be the essential core of the church's New Testament tradition.\n\nIn a way it is legitimate to say that Erasmus \"synchronized\" or \"unified\" the Greek and the Latin traditions of the New Testament by producing an updated translation of both simultaneously. Both being part of canonical tradition, he clearly found it necessary to ensure that both were actually present in the same content. In modern terminology, he made the two traditions \"compatible\". This is clearly evidenced by the fact that his Greek text is not just the basis for his Latin translation, but also the other way round: there are numerous instances where he edits the Greek text to reflect his Latin version. For instance, since the last six verses of \"Revelation\" were missing from his Greek manuscript, Erasmus translated the Vulgate's text back into Greek. Erasmus also translated the Latin text into Greek wherever he found that the Greek text and the accompanying commentaries were mixed up, or where he simply preferred the Vulgate's reading to the Greek text.\n\nErasmus said it was \"rushed into print rather than edited\", resulting in a number of transcription errors. After comparing what writings he could find, Erasmus wrote corrections between the lines of the manuscripts he was using (among which was Minuscule 2) and sent them as proofs to Froben. His hurried effort was published by his friend Johann Froben of Basel in 1516 and thence became the first published Greek New Testament, the \"Novum Instrumentum omne, diligenter ab Erasmo Rot. Recognitum et Emendatum\". Erasmus used several Greek manuscript sources because he did not have access to a single complete manuscript. Most of the manuscripts were, however, late Greek manuscripts of the Byzantine textual family and Erasmus used the oldest manuscript the least because \"he was afraid of its supposedly erratic text.\" He also ignored much older and better manuscripts that were at his disposal.\n\nIn the second (1519) edition, the more familiar term \"Testamentum\" was used instead of \"Instrumentum\". This edition was used by Martin Luther in his German translation of the Bible, written for people who could not understand Latin. Together, the first and second editions sold 3,300 copies. By comparison, only 600 copies of the Complutensian Polyglot were ever printed. The first and second edition texts did not include the passage (1 John 5:7–8) that has become known as the Comma Johanneum. Erasmus had been unable to find those verses in any Greek manuscript, but one was supplied to him during production of the third edition. The Catholic Church decreed that the \"Comma Johanneum\" was open to dispute (2 June 1927), and it is rarely included in modern scholarly translations.\n\nThe third edition of 1522 was probably used by Tyndale for the first English New Testament (Worms, 1526) and was the basis for the 1550 Robert Stephanus edition used by the translators of the Geneva Bible and King James Version of the English Bible. Erasmus published a fourth edition in 1527 containing parallel columns of Greek, Latin Vulgate and Erasmus' Latin texts. In this edition Erasmus also supplied the Greek text of the last six verses of Revelation (which he had translated from Latin back into Greek in his first edition) from Cardinal Ximenez's \"Biblia Complutensis\". In 1535 Erasmus published the fifth (and final) edition which dropped the Latin Vulgate column but was otherwise similar to the fourth edition. Later versions of the Greek New Testament by others, but based on Erasmus' Greek New Testament, became known as the \"Textus Receptus\".\n\nErasmus dedicated his work to Pope Leo X as a patron of learning and regarded this work as his chief service to the cause of Christianity. Immediately afterwards, he began the publication of his \"Paraphrases of the New Testament\", a popular presentation of the contents of the several books. These, like all of his writings, were published in Latin but were quickly translated into other languages with his encouragement.\n\nErasmus, in his capacity as humanist editor, advised major printers such as Aldus Manutis on which manuscripts to publish.\n\nMartin Luther's movement began in the year following the publication of the New Testament and tested Erasmus' character. The issues between growing religious movements, which would later become known as Protestantism, and the Catholic Church had become so clear that few could escape the summons to join the debate. Erasmus, at the height of his literary fame, was inevitably called upon to take sides, but partisanship was foreign to his nature and his habits. In all his criticism of clerical follies and abuses, he had always protested that he was not attacking the Church itself or its doctrines and had no enmity toward churchmen. The world had laughed at his satire, but few had interfered with his activities. He believed that his work so far had commended itself to the best minds and also to the dominant powers in the religious world.\n\nErasmus did not build a large body of supporters with his letters. He chose to write in Greek and Latin, the languages of scholars. His critiques reached an elite but small audience.\n\n\"Free will does not exist\", according to Luther in his letter \"De Servo Arbitrio\" to Erasmus translated into German by Justus Jonas (1526), in that sin makes human beings completely incapable of bringing themselves to God. Noting Luther's criticism of the Catholic Church, Erasmus described him as \"a mighty trumpet of gospel truth\" while agreeing, \"It is clear that many of the reforms for which Luther calls are urgently needed.\" He had great respect for Luther, and Luther spoke with admiration of Erasmus' superior learning. Luther hoped for his cooperation in a work which seemed only the natural outcome of his own. In their early correspondence, Luther expressed boundless admiration for all Erasmus had done in the cause of a sound and reasonable Christianity and urged him to join the Lutheran party. Erasmus declined to commit himself, arguing that to do so would endanger his position as a leader in the movement for pure scholarship which he regarded as his purpose in life. Only as an independent scholar could he hope to influence the reform of religion. When Erasmus hesitated to support him, the straightforward Luther became angered that Erasmus was avoiding the responsibility due either to cowardice or a lack of purpose. However, any hesitancy on the part of Erasmus stemmed, not from lack of courage or conviction, but rather from a concern over the mounting disorder and violence of the reform movement. To Philip Melanchthon in 1524 he wrote:\n\nI know nothing of your church; at the very least it contains people who will, I fear, overturn the whole system and drive the princes into using force to restrain good men and bad alike. The gospel, the word of God, faith, Christ, and Holy Spirit – these words are always on their lips; look at their lives and they speak quite another language.\n\nAgain, in 1529, he writes “An epistle against those who falsely boast they are Evangelicals” to Vulturius Neocomus (Gerardus Geldenhouwer). Here Erasmus complains of the doctrines and morals of the Reformers:\n\nYou declaim bitterly against the luxury of priests, the ambition of bishops, the tyranny of the Roman Pontiff, and the babbling of the sophists; against our prayers, fasts, and Masses; and you are not content to retrench the abuses that may be in these things, but must needs abolish them entirely...Look around on this ‘Evangelical’ generation, and observe whether amongst them less indulgence is given to luxury, lust, or avarice, than amongst those whom you so detest. Show me any one person who by that Gospel has been reclaimed from drunkenness to sobriety, from fury and passion to meekness, from avarice to liberality, from reviling to well-speaking, from wantonness to modesty. I will show you a great many who have become worse through following it...The solemn prayers of the Church are abolished, but now there are very many who never pray at all...I have never entered their conventicles, but I have sometimes seen them returning from their sermons, the countenances of all of them displaying rage, and wonderful ferocity, as though they were animated by the evil spirit...Who ever beheld in their meetings any one of them shedding tears, smiting his breast, or grieving for his sins ?... Confession to the priest is abolished, but very few now confess to God... They have fled from Judaism that they may become Epicureans.\n\nApart from these perceived moral failings of the Reformers, Erasmus also dreaded any change in doctrine, citing the long history of the Church as a bulwark against innovation. In book I of his \"Hyperaspistes\" he puts the matter bluntly to Luther:\nWe are dealing with this: Would a stable mind depart from the opinion handed down by so many men famous for holiness and miracles, depart from the decisions of the Church, and commit our souls to the faith of someone like you who has sprung up just now with a few followers, although the leading men of your flock do not agree either with you or among themselves – indeed though you do not even agree with yourself, since in this same \"Assertion\" you say one thing in the beginning and something else later on, recanting what you said before.\n\nContinuing his chastisement of Luther—and undoubtedly put off by the notion of there being \"no pure interpretation of Scripture anywhere but in Wittenberg\"—Erasmus touches upon another important point of the controversy:\n\nYou stipulate that we should not ask for or accept anything but Holy Scripture, but you do it in such a way as to require that we permit you to be its sole interpreter, renouncing all others. Thus the victory will be yours if we allow you to be not the steward but the lord of Holy Scripture.\nThough he sought to remain firmly neutral in doctrinal disputes, each side accused him of siding with the other, perhaps because of his neutrality. It was not for lack of fidelity with either side but a desire for fidelity with them both:\nI detest dissension because it goes both against the teachings of Christ and against a secret inclination of nature. I doubt that either side in the dispute can be suppressed without grave loss.\nIn his catechism (entitled \"Explanation of the Apostles' Creed\") (1533), Erasmus took a stand against Luther's teaching by asserting the unwritten Sacred Tradition as just as valid a source of revelation as the Bible, by enumerating the Deuterocanonical books in the canon of the Bible and by acknowledging seven sacraments. He called \"blasphemers\" anyone who questioned the perpetual virginity of Mary. However, he supported lay access to the Bible.\n\nIn a letter to Nikolaus von Amsdorf, Luther objected to Erasmus’ Catechism and called Erasmus a \"viper,\" \"liar,\" and \"the very mouth and organ of Satan.\"\n\nErasmus was accused by the monks against the Reformation to have: prepared the way and was responsible for Martin Luther. Erasmus, they said, had laid the egg, and Luther had hatched it. Erasmus wittily dismissed the charge, claiming that Luther had hatched a different bird entirely.\n\nTwice in the course of the great discussion, he allowed himself to enter the field of doctrinal controversy, a field foreign to both his nature and his previous practice. One of the topics he dealt with was free will, a crucial question. In his \"De libero arbitrio diatribe sive collatio\" (1524), he lampoons the Lutheran view on free will. He lays down both sides of the argument impartially. The \"Diatribe\" did not encourage any definite action; this was its merit to the Erasmians and its fault in the eyes of the Lutherans. In response, Luther wrote his \"De servo arbitrio\" (On the Bondage of the Will) (1525), which attacks the \"Diatribe\" and Erasmus himself, going so far as to claim that Erasmus was not a Christian. Erasmus responded with a lengthy, two-part \"Hyperaspistes\" (1526–27). In this controversy Erasmus lets it be seen that he would like to claim more for free will than St. Paul and St. Augustine seem to allow according to Luther's interpretation. For Erasmus the essential point is that humans have the freedom of choice. The conclusions Erasmus reached drew upon a large array of notable authorities, including, from the Patristic period, Origen, John Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine, in addition to many leading Scholastic authors, such as Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus. The content of Erasmus' works also engaged with later thought on the state of the question, including the perspectives of the \"via moderna\" school and of Lorenzo Valla, whose ideas he rejected.\n\nAs the popular response to Luther gathered momentum, the social disorders, which Erasmus dreaded and Luther disassociated himself from, began to appear, including the German Peasants' War, the Anabaptist disturbances in Germany and in the Low Countries, iconoclasm and the radicalization of peasants across Europe. If these were the outcomes of reform, he was thankful that he had kept out of it. Yet he was ever more bitterly accused of having started the whole \"tragedy\" (as the Catholics dubbed Protestantism).\n\nWhen the city of Basel definitely adopted the Reformation in 1529, Erasmus gave up his residence there and settled in the imperial town of Freiburg im Breisgau.\n\nCertain works of Erasmus laid a foundation for religious toleration and ecumenism. For example, in \"De libero arbitrio\", opposing certain views of Martin Luther, Erasmus noted that religious disputants should be temperate in their language, \"because in this way the truth, which is often lost amidst too much wrangling may be more surely perceived.\" Gary Remer writes, \"Like Cicero, Erasmus concludes that truth is furthered by a more harmonious relationship between interlocutors.\" Although Erasmus did not oppose the punishment of heretics, in individual cases he generally argued for moderation and against the death penalty. He wrote, \"It is better to cure a sick man than to kill him.\"\n\nA test of the Reformation was the doctrine of the sacraments, and the crux of this question was the observance of the Eucharist. In 1530, Erasmus published a new edition of the orthodox treatise of Algerus against the heretic Berengar of Tours in the eleventh century. He added a dedication, affirming his belief in the reality of the Body of Christ after consecration in the Eucharist, commonly referred to as transubstantiation. The sacramentarians, headed by Œcolampadius of Basel, were, as Erasmus says, quoting him as holding views similar to their own in order to try to claim him for their schismatic and \"erroneous\" movement.\n\nWhen his strength began to fail, he decided to accept an invitation by Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent of the Netherlands, to move from Freiburg to Brabant. However, during preparations for the move in 1536, he suddenly died from an attack of dysentery during a visit to Basel. He had remained loyal to the papal authorities in Rome, but he did not have the opportunity to receive the last rites of the Catholic Church; the reports of his death do not mention whether he asked for a priest or not. According to Jan van Herwaarden, this is consistent with his view that outward signs were not important; what mattered is the believer's direct relationship with God, which he noted \"as the [Catholic] church believes\". However, Herwaarden observes that \"he did not dismiss the rites and sacraments out of hand but asserted a dying person could achieve a state of salvation without the priestly rites, provided their faith and spirit were attuned to God.\"\nHe was buried with great ceremony in Basel Minster (the former cathedral) there.\n\nHis last words, as recorded by his friend Beatus Rhenanus, were apparently \"\"Dear God\"\" (). A bronze statue of him was erected in the city of his birth in 1622, replacing an earlier work in stone.\n\nErasmus wrote both on ecclesiastic subjects and those of general human interest. By the 1530s, the writings of Erasmus accounted for 10 to 20 percent of all book sales in Europe. He is credited with coining the adage, \"In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.\" With the collaboration of Publio Fausto Andrelini, he formed a paremiography (collection) of Latin proverbs and adages, commonly titled \"Adagia\". Erasmus is also generally credited with originating the phrase \"Pandora's box\", arising through an error in his translation of Hesiod's \"Pandora\" in which he confused \"pithos\" (storage jar) with \"pyxis\" (box).\n\nHis more serious writings begin early with the \"Enchiridion militis Christiani,\" the \"Handbook of the Christian Soldier\" (1503) (translated into English a few years later by the young William Tyndale). (A more literal translation of \"enchiridion\"—\"dagger\"—has been likened to \"the spiritual equivalent of the modern Swiss Army knife.\") In this short work, Erasmus outlines the views of the normal Christian life, which he was to spend the rest of his days elaborating. The chief evil of the day, he says, is formalism—going through the motions of tradition without understanding their basis in the teachings of Christ. Forms can teach the soul how to worship God, or they may hide or quench the spirit. In his examination of the dangers of formalism, Erasmus discusses monasticism, saint worship, war, the spirit of class and the foibles of \"society.\"\n\nThe \"Enchiridion\" is more like a sermon than a satire. With it Erasmus challenged common assumptions, painting the clergy as educators who should share the treasury of their knowledge with the laity. He emphasized personal spiritual disciplines and called for a reformation which he characterized as a collective return to the Fathers and Scripture. Most importantly, he extolled the reading of scripture as vital because of its power to transform and motivate toward love. Much like the Brethren of the Common Life, he wrote that the New Testament is the law of Christ people are called to obey and that Christ is the example they are called to imitate.\n\nAccording to Ernest Barker, \"Besides his work on the New Testament, Erasmus laboured also, and even more arduously, on the early Fathers. […] Among the Latin Fathers he edited the works of St Jerome, St Hilary, and St Augustine; among the Greeks he worked on Irenaeus, Origen and Chrysostom.\"\n\nErasmus also wrote of the legendary Frisian freedom fighter and rebel Pier Gerlofs Donia (Greate Pier), though more often in criticism than in praise of his exploits. Erasmus saw him as a dim, brutal man who preferred physical strength to wisdom.\n\nOne of Erasmus' best-known works, inspired by \"De triumpho stultitiae\" (written by Italian humanist Faustino Perisauli), is \"The Praise of Folly\", published under the double title \"Moriae encomium\" (Greek, Latinised) and \"Laus stultitiae\" (Latin). A satirical attack on superstitions and other traditions of European society in general and the western Church in particular, it was written in 1509, published in 1511, and dedicated to Sir Thomas More, whose name the title puns.\n\nThe \"Institutio principis Christiani\" or \"Education of a Christian Prince\"\"\" (Basel, 1516) was written as advice to the young king Charles of Spain (later Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor). Erasmus applies the general principles of honor and sincerity to the special functions of the Prince, whom he represents throughout as the servant of the people. \"Education\" was published in 1516, three years after Niccolò Machiavelli’s \"The Prince\" was written; a comparison between the two is worth noting. Machiavelli stated that, to maintain control by political force, it is safer for a prince to be feared than loved. Erasmus preferred for the prince to be loved, and strongly suggested a well-rounded education in order to govern justly and benevolently and avoid becoming a source of oppression.\n\nAs a result of his reformatory activities, Erasmus found himself at odds with both of the great parties. His last years were embittered by controversies with men toward whom he was sympathetic. Notable among these was Ulrich von Hutten, a brilliant but erratic genius who had thrown himself into the Lutheran cause and declared that Erasmus, if he had a spark of honesty, would do the same. In his reply in 1523, \"Spongia adversus aspergines Hutteni\", Erasmus displays his skill in semantics. He accuses Hutten of having misinterpreted his utterances about reform and reiterates his determination never to break with the Church.\n\nThe \"Ciceronianus\" came out in 1528, attacking the style of Latin that was based exclusively and fanatically on Cicero's writings. Etienne Dolet wrote a riposte titled \"Erasmianus\" in 1535.\n\nErasmus' last major work, published the year of his death, is the \"Ecclesiastes\" or \"Gospel Preacher\" (Basel, 1536), a massive manual for preachers of around a thousand pages. Though somewhat unwieldy because Erasmus was unable to edit it properly in his old age, it is in some ways the culmination of all of Erasmus' literary and theological learning, offering prospective preachers advice on nearly every conceivable aspect of their vocation with extraordinarily abundant reference to classical and biblical sources.\n\nErasmus’ \"Sileni Alcibiadis\" is one of his most direct assessments of the need for Church reform. Johann Froben published it first within a revised edition of the \"Adagia\" in 1515, then as a stand-alone work in 1517. This essay has been likened to John Colet's \"Convocation Sermon\", though the styles differ.\n\n\"Sileni\" is the plural (Latin) form of \"Silenus\", a creature often related to the Roman wine god Bacchus and represented in pictorial art as inebriated, merry revellers, variously mounted on donkeys, singing, dancing, playing flutes, etc. Alcibiades was a Greek politician in the 5th century BCE and a general in the Peloponnesian War; he figures here more as a character written into some of Plato's dialogues—a young, debauched playboy whom Socrates tries to convince to seek truth instead of pleasure, wisdom instead of pomp and splendor.\n\nThe term \"Sileni\"—especially when juxtaposed with the character of Alcibiades—can therefore be understood as an evocation of the notion that something on the inside is more expressive of a person's character than what one sees on the outside. For instance, something or someone ugly on the outside can be beautiful on the inside, which is one of the main points of Plato's dialogues featuring \"Alcibiades\" and the \"Symposion\", in which Alcibiades also appears.\n\nIn support of this, Erasmus states, \"Anyone who looks closely at the inward nature and essence will find that nobody is further from true wisdom than those people with their grand titles, learned bonnets, splendid sashes and bejeweled rings, who profess to be wisdom’s peak\". Erasmus lists several Sileni and then questions whether Christ is the most noticeable Silenus of them all. The Apostles were Sileni since they were ridiculed by others. He believes that the things which are the least ostentatious can be the most significant, and that the Church constitutes all Christian people—that despite contemporary references to clergy as the whole of the Church, they are merely its servants. He criticizes those that spend the Church's riches at the people's expense. The true point of the Church is to help people lead Christian lives. Priests are supposed to be pure, yet when they stray, no one condemns them. He criticizes the riches of the popes, believing that it would be better for the Gospel to be most important.\n\nThe popularity of his books is reflected in the number of editions and translations that have appeared since the sixteenth century. Ten columns of the catalogue of the British Library are taken up with the enumeration of the works and their subsequent reprints. The greatest names of the classical and patristic world are among those translated, edited, or annotated by Erasmus, including Saint Ambrose, Aristotle, Saint Augustine, Saint Basil, Saint John Chrysostom, Cicero and Saint Jerome.\n\nIn his native Rotterdam, the University and Gymnasium Erasmianum have been named in his honor. In 2003, a poll showing that most Rotterdammers believed Erasmus to be the designer of the local \"Erasmus Bridge\" instigated the founding of the Erasmus House (Rotterdam), and the Erasmus House (Jakarta) dedicated to celebrating Erasmus' legacy. Three moments in Erasmus' life are celebrated annually. On 1 April, the city celebrates the publication of his best-known book \"The Praise of Folly\". On 11 July, the \"Night of Erasmus\" celebrates the lasting influence of his work. His birthday is celebrated on 28 October.\n\nErasmus' reputation and the interpretations of his work have varied over time. Moderate Catholics recognized him as a leading figure in attempts to reform the Church, while Protestants recognized his initial support for Luther's ideas and the groundwork he laid for the future Reformation, especially in biblical scholarship. By the 1560s, however, there was a marked change in reception.\nAccording to Franz Anton Knittel, Erasmus in his \"Novum Instrumentum omne\" did not incorporate the \"Comma\" from the Codex Montfortianus, because of grammar differences, but used Complutensian Polyglotta. According to him the \"Comma\" was known to Tertullian.\n\nProtestant views of Erasmus fluctuated depending on region and period, with continual support in his native Netherlands and in cities of the Upper Rhine area. However, following his death and in the late sixteenth century, many Reformation supporters saw Erasmus's critiques of Luther and lifelong support for the universal Catholic Church as damning, and second-generation Protestants were less vocal in their debts to the great humanist. Nevertheless, his reception is demonstrable among Swiss Protestants in the sixteenth century: he had an indelible influence on the biblical commentaries of, for example, Konrad Pellikan, Heinrich Bullinger, and John Calvin, all of whom used both his annotations on the New Testament and his paraphrases of same in their own New Testament commentaries.\n\nHowever, Erasmus designated his own legacy and his life works were turned over at his death to his friend the Protestant humanist turned remonstrator Sebastian Castellio for the repair of the breach and divide of Christianity in its Catholic, Anabaptist, and Protestant branches.\n\nBy the coming of the Age of Enlightenment, however, Erasmus increasingly again became a more widely respected cultural symbol and was hailed as an important figure by increasingly broad groups. In a letter to a friend, Erasmus once had written: \"That you are patriotic will be praised by many and easily forgiven by everyone; but in my opinion it is wiser to treat men and things as though we held this world the common fatherland of all.\" Thus, the universalist ideals of Erasmus are sometimes claimed to be important for fixing global governance.\n\nSeveral schools, faculties and universities in the Netherlands and Belgium are named after him, as is Erasmus Hall in Brooklyn, New York, USA.The European Union's Erasmus Programme scholarships enable students to spend up to a year of their university courses in a university in another European country.\n\nEramus is credited with saying \"When I get a little money I buy books; and if any is left, I buy food and clothes.\"\n\nHe is also blamed for the mistranslation from Greek of \"to call a bowl a bowl\" as \"to call a spade a spade\".\n\nBULLET::::- Hans Holbein painted him at least three times, and perhaps as many as seven; some only survive in versions by other artists. His three profile portraits of Erasmus, two (nearly identical) profile portraits and one three-quarters view portrait were all painted in the same year, 1523. Erasmus used the Holbein portraits as gifts for his friends in England, such as William Warham, the Archbishop of Canterbury (as he writes in a letter to Warham regarding the gift portrait, Erasmus quips that \"he might have something of Erasmus should God call him from this place.\") Erasmus spoke favourably of Holbein as an artist and person, but later criticized Holbein whom he had accused of sponging off various patrons to whom Erasmus had recommended, for purposes more of monetary gain than artistic endeavor.\nBULLET::::- Albrecht Dürer also produced portraits of Erasmus, whom he met three times, in the form of an engraving of 1526 and a preliminary charcoal sketch. Concerning the former Erasmus was unimpressed, declaring it an unfavourable likeness of him. Nevertheless, Erasmus and Dürer maintained a close friendship, with Dürer going so far as to solicit Erasmus' support for the Lutheran cause, which Erasmus politely declined. Erasmus wrote a glowing \"encomium\" about the artist, likening him to famous Greek painter of antiquity Apelles. Erasmus was deeply affected by his death in 1528.\nBULLET::::- Quentin Matsys produced the earliest known portraits of Erasmus, including an oil painting in 1517 and a medallion in 1519.\nBULLET::::- In 1622, Hendrick de Keyser cast a statue of Erasmus in bronze replacing an earlier stone version from 1557. This was set up in the public square in Rotterdam, and today may be found outside the church of St Lawrence.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Adagia\" (1500 and later editions)\nBULLET::::- \"Enchiridion militis Christiani\" (1503)\nBULLET::::- \"The Praise of Folly\" (1511)\nBULLET::::- \"\" (1512) (a.k.a. \"De Copia\")\nBULLET::::- \"Disticha de moribus nomine Catonis\" (1513) with commentaries, later edited and translated by Michael Servetus et al.\nBULLET::::- \"Sileni Alcibiadis\" (1515)\nBULLET::::- \"Novum Instrumentum omne\" (1516), the first modern and critical version of the Greek New Testament, part of what is now known as the Textus Receptus.\nBULLET::::- \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" (1516)\nBULLET::::- \"Bellum\" (essay, 1517)\nBULLET::::- \"Colloquia\" (1518); 12 more eds. by 1533\nBULLET::::- \"Lingua, Sive, De Linguae usu atque abusu Liber utillissimus\" (1525)\nBULLET::::- \"Ciceronianus\" (1528)\nBULLET::::- \"De recta Latini Graecique sermonis pronuntiatione\" (\"Dialogue About the Correct Pronunciation of Latin and Greek\", 1528)\nBULLET::::- \"De pueris statim ac liberaliter instituendis\" (1529)\nBULLET::::- \"A handbook on manners for children\" (1530)\nBULLET::::- \"Consultatio de Bello Turcis Inferendo\" (1530)\nBULLET::::- \"A Playne and Godly Exposition or Declaration of the Commune Crede\" (1533)\nBULLET::::- \"Ecclesiastes\" (1535)\nBULLET::::- \"De octo orationis partium constructione libellus\" (1536). Edited and translated by Michael Servetus in 1549.\nBULLET::::- \"Apophthegmatum opus\" (1539)\nBULLET::::- \"The first tome or volume of the Paraphrase of Erasmus vpon the newe testamente\" (1548)\n\nBULLET::::- Damião de Góis, a humanist, a close friend and pupil of Erasmus\nBULLET::::- Rodolphus Agricola\nBULLET::::- Christian humanism\nBULLET::::- List of Erasmus's correspondents\nBULLET::::- Erasmus Student Network\nBULLET::::- Mammotrectus super Bibliam\nBULLET::::- Paulus Bombasius—Erasmus was in regular correspondence with him\nBULLET::::- Textus Receptus\n\nBULLET::::- McDonald, Grantley. \"Biblical Criticism in Early Modern Europe: Erasmus, the Johannine Comma, and Trinitarian Debate\" (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016)\nBULLET::::- Christ-von Wedel, Christine. \"Erasmus of Rotterdam: Advocate of a New Christianity\" (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2013)\nBULLET::::- Bietenholz, Peter G. \"Encounters with a Radical Erasmus. Erasmus' Work as a Source of Radical Thought in Early Modern Europe\" (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009)\nBULLET::::- Dodds, Gregory D. \"Exploiting Erasmus: The Erasmian Legacy and Religious Change in Early Modern England\" (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009)\nBULLET::::- Furey, Constance M. \"Erasmus, Contarini, and the Religious Republic of Letters\". Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.\nBULLET::::- Huizinga, Johan. \"Erasmus and the Age of Reformation, with a Selection from the Letters of Erasmus\", in series, \"Harper Torchbacks\", and also in \"The Cloister Library\". New York: Harper & Row, 1957. xiv, 266 pp.\nBULLET::::- Quinones, Ricardo J. \"Erasmus and Voltaire: Why They Still Matter\" (University of Toronto Press; 2010) 240 pp. Draws parallels between the two thinkers as voices of moderation with relevance today.\nBULLET::::- Swan, Jesse G. \"Erasmus, Calin, Reading and Living,\" in: \"Cahier Calin: Makers of the Middle Ages. Essays in Honor of William Calin\", ed. Richard Utz and Elizabeth Emery (Kalamazoo, MI: Studies in Medievalism, 2011), pp. 5–7.\nBULLET::::- Winters, Adam. \"Erasmus' Doctrine of Free Will\". Jackson, TN: Union University Press, 2005.\nBULLET::::- Zweig, Stefan \"Erasmus of Rotterdam\". Translated by Eden and Cedar Paul. (Garden City Publishing Co., Inc; 1937)\nBULLET::::- The first modern Parallel Greek New Testament, using Erasmus' 1522 edition (used by Tyndale and the King James writers).\nBULLET::::- Garcia-Villoslada, Ricardo. \"'Loyola y Erasmo\", Taurus Ediciones, Madrid, Spain, 1965.\nBULLET::::- Lorenzo Cortesi, \"Esortazione alla filosofia. La Paraclesis di Erasmo da Rotterdam\", Ravenna, SBC Edizioni, 2012,\nBULLET::::- Pep Mayolas, \"Erasme i la construcció catalana d'Espanya\", Barcelona, Llibres de l'Índex, 2014\nBULLET::::- Payne, John B., \"Erasmus, His Theology of the Sacraments\", Research in Theology 1970\n\nBULLET::::- \"Collected Works of Erasmus\" (U of Toronto Press, 1974–2011). 78 volumes published thus far; see U. Toronto Press, in English translation\nBULLET::::- \"The Correspondence of Erasmus\" (U of Toronto Press, 1975–2011), 14 volumes down to 1528 are published\nBULLET::::- Rabil, Albert. \"Erasmus: Recent Critical Editions and Translations,\" \"Renaissance Quarterly\" 54#1 2001. Discusses both the Toronto translation and the entirely separate Latin edition published in Amsterdam since 1969 (online edition)\n\nBULLET::::- Index of Erasmus' Opera Omnia (Latin)\nBULLET::::- Opera (Latin Library)\nBULLET::::- In Our Time podcast from BBC Radio 4 with Melvyn Bragg, and guests Diarmaid MacCulloch, Eamon Duffy, and Jill Kraye.\nBULLET::::- Joseph Sauer: \"Desiderius Erasmus\" (Article in the Catholic Encyclopedia, 1909)\nBULLET::::- James D. Tracy: \"Erasmus of the Low Countries\", Berkeley – Los Angeles – London: University of California Press 1997\nBULLET::::- Desiderius Erasmus: \"War is sweet to those who have no experience of it ...\" Protest against Violence and War - Online-Exhibition (2017)\n"}
{"id": "10153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10153", "title": "Encyclopedia Brown", "text": "Encyclopedia Brown\n\nEncyclopedia Brown is a series of books featuring the adventures of boy detective Leroy Brown, nicknamed \"Encyclopedia\" for his intelligence and range of knowledge. The series of 29 children's novels was written (one co-written) by Donald J. Sobol, with the first book published in 1963 and the last novel published posthumously, in 2012. The Encyclopedia Brown series has spawned a comic strip, a TV series, and compilation books of puzzles and games.\n\nEach book in the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" mystery series is self-contained in that the reader is not required to have read earlier books in order to understand the stories. The major characters, settings, etc. are usually introduced (or reintroduced) in each book.\n\nBooks featuring Brown are subdivided into a number—usually ten or more—of (possibly interlinked) short stories, each of which presents a mystery. The mysteries are intended to be solved by the reader, thanks to the placement of a logical or factual inconsistency somewhere within the text. This is very similar to the layout of Donald Sobol's other book series, \"Two-Minute Mysteries\". Brown, his father, or Sally Kimball invariably solves the case by exposing this inconsistency, in the \"Answers\" section in the back of the book.\n\nOften, these books follow a formula wherein the first chapter involves Brown solving a case at the dinner table for his father, the local police chief in the fictional seaside town of Idaville in an unspecified state. When Chief Brown barely tastes his meal, that is a cue he was handed a difficult case. He pulls out his casebook and goes over it with the family. Encyclopedia solves these cases by briefly closing his eyes while he thinks deeply, then asking a single question which directly leads to him finding the solution.\n\nThe second mystery often begins in the Brown garage on Rover Avenue, where Encyclopedia has set up his own detective agency to help neighborhood children solve cases for \"25 cents per day, plus expenses - No case too small.\" This second case usually involves the town bully and mischief maker Bugs Meany, leader of a gang who call themselves the Tigers, who, after being foiled, will attempt revenge in the third mystery.\n\nIn the third mystery, the plot involves Encyclopedia's partner, close friend, and bodyguard, Sally Kimball, the one person under 14 years of age to physically stand up to Bugs. She is the only reason neither Bugs nor any of his Tigers ever try to physically attack Encyclopedia. Encyclopedia tends to dislike anyone whom Sally has a crush on, possibly indicating that he has a crush on her. Also intelligent, Sally once attempted—in the first book of the series—to prove herself smarter than Encyclopedia by stumping him with a mystery of her own creation. Ironically, the contest was held at the Tigers' clubhouse, with Bugs and the others cheering him on. However, she was beaten in the contest (although Encyclopedia admitted that she almost tricked him), after which she became his friend. In subsequent storylines Bugs or his gang usually set up some sort of trap to get Encyclopedia or Sally in trouble. However, as in the previous story, they make a key mistake which Encyclopedia exposes.\n\nLater cases may find Encyclopedia assisting his father at a crime scene (rarely more serious than larceny, and Encyclopedia is always discreet when helping his father) or interacting with people around town, often exposing scams. One such example is a high school dropout and would-be con artist named Wilford Wiggins who spends time trying to dream up schemes to fleece kids out of their money. Like Bugs, his schemes have an inconsistency which Encyclopedia exposes.\n\nIn some cases it is Sally and not Encyclopedia who figures it out because, as she tells Encyclopedia, \"You are a boy.\" In other words, she notices things that only a girl would find inconsistent. Sally further displays her intelligence in the various mysteries in that she often can deduce who committed the crime, or whether a certain person is lying, but she simply cannot always prove it.\n\nBULLET::::- Chief Brown, Encyclopedia's father and Idaville's Chief of Police\nBULLET::::- Mrs. Brown, Encyclopedia's mother\nBULLET::::- Sally Kimball, Encyclopedia's friend, business partner & bodyguard\nBULLET::::- Encyclopedia's friends:\nBULLET::::- Charlie Stewart, who collects animal teeth\nBULLET::::- Cicero Sturgess, Idaville's leading child actor\nBULLET::::- Benny Breslin, whose loud snoring often proves to be a nuisance on camping trips\nBULLET::::- Pablo Pizarro, Idaville's leading child artist\nBULLET::::- Tyrone Taylor\nBULLET::::- Pinky Plummer\nBULLET::::- Billy and Jody Turner\nBULLET::::- Herb Stein\nBULLET::::- Mort \"Fangs\" Liveright, who can open a bottle of root beer with his teeth\nBULLET::::- Main antagonists:\nBULLET::::- The Tigers: neighborhood bullies whose clubhouse is an unused toolshed behind Mr. Sweeney's Auto Body Shop. The author frequently introduces them by suggesting a different name as an insult, e.g. \"They called themselves the Tigers. They should have called themselves the Mountaineers. They were never on the level.\"\nBULLET::::- Bugs Meany (the leader)\nBULLET::::- Duke Kelly\nBULLET::::- Rocky Graham\nBULLET::::- Spike Larsen\nBULLET::::- Ike Cassidy\nBULLET::::- Dutch Kuller\nBULLET::::- Rowdy Quilp\nBULLET::::- Carl Higgensbottom\nBULLET::::- Rusty Malone\nBULLET::::- Monk Walsh\nBULLET::::- Mugsy Moonsooner\nBULLET::::- Jimbo Dawson\nBULLET::::- Roscoe Tenn\nBULLET::::- Jess Rae\nBULLET::::- Wilford Wiggins, a high school dropout who always tries to get kids to invest in assorted \"get rich quick\" schemes, but is inevitably thwarted by Encyclopedia\n\nFrom December 3, 1978, to September 20, 1980, Encyclopedia Brown was a daily and Sunday comic strip syndicated by Universal Press Syndicate. The artwork was done by Frank Bolle, and Donald J. Sobol was credited as the writer.\n\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books experienced some enduring popularity.\n\nIn 1976, the Mystery Writers of America honored Sobol and his Encyclopedia Brown series with a special Edgar Award.\n\nEducators have used Encyclopedia Brown in classrooms to instruct students in skills such as writing reports. In 1986, the Society for Visual Education, Inc. published a filmstrip series, produced and written by Lynne V. Gibbs, with accompanying audio cassette tapes and workbooks for elementary and middle schools' use. The following four Encyclopedia Brown stories were utilized: \"The Case of the Missing Statue, The Case of the Happy Nephew, The Case of the Kidnapped Pigs\", and \"The Case of the Marble Shooter\". According to WorldCat's library catalog listing, \"As super-sleuth Encyclopedia Brown solves four mysteries, he shows students how he fills out his reports, including selecting a topic, gathering information, taking notes, making an outline, and revising and editing.\"\n\nA live action television series adaptation, also called \"Encyclopedia Brown\", ran on HBO starting in 1989. Scott Bremner played the title role, with Laura Bridge playing Sally. The series ran a little over 10 episodes. It was produced by Howard David Deutsch and directed by Savage Steve Holland. Parts of the series were filmed in Provo, Utah.\n\nThe series began with an hour-long special, \"The Case of the Missing Time Capsule\", and subsequent episodes were 30 minutes long.\n\nA partial list of episodes (not necessarily in airdate order):\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Missing Time Capsule\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Burglared Baseball Cards\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Amazing Race Car\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Flaming Beauty Queen\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Ghostly Rider\"\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Incredible Culpepper\" - a magician, \"The Incredible Culpepper\", has his lion stolen.\nBULLET::::- \"The Case of the Missing U.F.O.\"\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown, The Boy Detective in One Minute Mysteries\" - this episode adapted 6 of the Encyclopedia Brown stories from the books: \"The Case of Natty Nat\" (Encyclopedia's very first case), \"The Case of the Scattered Cards\", \"The Case of the Civil War Sword\", \"The Case of the Foot Warmer\", \"The Case of the Bitter Drink\" and \"The Case of the Great Merko\".\n\nMany of these episodes were later released on VHS.\n\nIn June 2013, Warner Bros. optioned the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books into a feature film. Matt Johnson was in talks to write the movie. Roy Lee and Howard David Deutsch (producer of the 1989 \"Encyclopedia Brown\" TV series) and Jonathan Zakin were announced as producing.\n\nThe Encyclopedia Brown books, in order of publication (parentheses indicate numbers on original release cover art):\n\nBULLET::::1. \"Encyclopedia Brown, Boy Detective\" (1963, illustrated by Lois Lenski , 1982 reissue )\nBULLET::::2. \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Secret Pitch\" (1965, illustrated by Roy McKie , reissued in 1976 as \"Encyclopedia Brown Strikes Again\", )\nBULLET::::3. \"Encyclopedia Brown Finds the Clues\" illustrated by Tomie DePaola (1966, )\nBULLET::::4. \"Encyclopedia Brown Gets His Man\" (1967, illustrated by Dick Bruna )\nBULLET::::5. \"Encyclopedia Brown Solves Them All\" (1968,illustrated by Anita Lobel )\nBULLET::::6. \"Encyclopedia Brown Keeps the Peace\" (1969, illustrated by Martha Alexander )\nBULLET::::7. \"Encyclopedia Brown Saves the Day\" (1970,illustrated by James Stevenson )\nBULLET::::8. \"Encyclopedia Brown Tracks Them Down\" (1971, )\nBULLET::::9. \"Encyclopedia Brown Shows the Way\" (1972, )\nBULLET::::10. \"Encyclopedia Brown Takes the Case\" (1973, )\nBULLET::::11. \"Encyclopedia Brown Lends a Hand\" (1974, , reissued as \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Exploding Plumbing and Other Mysteries\", )\nBULLET::::12. \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Dead Eagles\" (1975, )\nBULLET::::13. \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Midnight Visitor\" (1977, )\nBULLET::::14. \"Encyclopedia Brown Carries On\" (1980, )\nBULLET::::15. \"Encyclopedia Brown Sets the Pace\" (1981, )\nBULLET::::16. (15) \"Encyclopedia Brown Takes the Cake\" (1982, ) (Co-written with Glenn Andrews)\nBULLET::::17. (16) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Mysterious Handprints\" (1985, )\nBULLET::::18. (17) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\" (1988, )\nBULLET::::19. (18) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Disgusting Sneakers\" (1990, )\nBULLET::::20. (19) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Two Spies\" (1995, )\nBULLET::::21. (20) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of Pablo's Nose\" (1996, )\nBULLET::::22. (21) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Sleeping Dog\" (1998, )\nBULLET::::23. (22) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Slippery Salamander\" (2000, )\nBULLET::::24. (23) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Jumping Frogs\" (2003, )\nBULLET::::25. (24) \"Encyclopedia Brown Cracks the Case\" (2007, )\nBULLET::::26. (25) \"Encyclopedia Brown, Super Sleuth\" (2009, )\nBULLET::::27. (26) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Secret UFOs\" (2010, )\nBULLET::::28. (27) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Carnival Crime\" (2011, )\nBULLET::::29. (28) \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Soccer Scheme\" (2012, )\n\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Record Book of Weird and Wonderful Facts\" (1979, )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's First Book of Puzzles and Games\" (1980, ) (Note: Jim Razzi is listed as the author, with an acknowledgement of being based upon the Encyclopedia Brown series created by Donald J. Sobol.)\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Second Book of Puzzles and Games\" (1980, ) (Note: Jim Razzi is listed as the author, with an acknowledgement of being based upon the Encyclopedia Brown series created by Donald J. Sobol.)\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Third Book of Puzzles and Games\" (1981, ) (Note: Jim Razzi is listed as the author, with an acknowledgement of being based upon the Encyclopedia Brown series created by Donald J. Sobol.)\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Fourth Book of Puzzles and Games\" (1981, ) (Note: Jim Razzi is listed as the author, with an acknowledgement of being based upon the Encyclopedia Brown series created by Donald J. Sobol.)\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Second Record Book of Weird and Wonderful Facts\" (1981, )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Wacky Crimes\" (1983 )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Wacky Spies\" (1984 )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Wacky Sports\" (1984 )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Wacky Animals\" (1985, )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Third Record Book of Weird and Wonderful Facts\" (1985, )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Comic Strips #1\" (1985, ) (Note: This is a compilation of the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" newspaper comic strips. Elliot Caplin is listed as the author. Most of the comics are based on the Donald J. Sobol stories, but there are some original stories too.)\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Comic Strips #2\" (1985, ) (Note: This is a compilation of the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" newspaper comic strips. Elliot Caplin is listed as the author. Most of the comics are based on the Donald J. Sobol stories, but there are some original stories too.)\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Wacky Cars\" (1987, )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Wacky Outdoors\" (1988 )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown's Book of Strange But True Crimes\" (1992, )\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopedia Brown and his Best Cases Ever\" (2013, ) (Note: This book is a commemorative book released in celebration of Encyclopedia Brown's 50th. anniversary. The book contains a letter from Donald J. Sobol detailing the history of the book series and its creation as well as 15 cases selected from the previously published books.)\nBULLET::::- The \"Book of Puzzles and Games\" books (4 books in total) were sometimes included in Encyclopedia Brown box sets with the original Encyclopedia Brown mystery books by Sobol.\nBULLET::::- Encyclopedia Brown books have also been released in Ebook format, as well as on compact disc and audio cassette tape.\n\nFrom January 15 to June 30, 1989, a special Solve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes was held in conjunction with the Encyclopedia Brown books and Bantam Books. In the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\", Sobol presented an unsolved mystery for the contestant to solve and submit an answer for a chance to win a prize. The mystery for the contest was called \"The Case of the Missing Birthday Gift\", wherein Encyclopedia had to solve the case of a stolen bicycle that was given as a birthday gift to Willie Grant on his tenth birthday. The Tigers make an appearance as the suspects in the case; Bugs Meany, Jack Beck, and Rocky Graham all show up at the Tigers' clubhouse.\n\nContestants were allowed to enter as many times as they wished, provided they used a separate envelope for each entry. The sweepstakes was only available to USA and Canada residents. No purchase was necessary, as one could either use the official form in the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\" or send in a 3\" by 5\" index card with the solution and the contestant's contact information.\n\nThe satirical newspaper \"The Onion\" ran an article in 2003 titled \"Idaville Detective 'Encyclopedia' Brown Found Dead In Library Dumpster\", which stated that Encyclopedia Brown, now a middle-aged police detective, had been murdered. The article parodied the books' tendency to have crimes solved through knowledge of trivia, and ended with Bugs Meany, who was now police commissioner, stating that he had an alibi for the murder in that \"I was at the North Pole watching the penguins.\"\n\nEd Brubaker and Sean Phillips' \"Criminal: Last of the Innocent\" graphic novel features a reference to Encyclopedia Brown, with a grown-up analogue of Encyclopedia featured in the comic, as confirmed by Ed Brubaker himself.\n\nThe Das Racist song \"Rainbow in the Dark\" features the lyric \"Wikipedia Brown\" as a reference to Encyclopedia Brown.\n\nIn \"The Simpsons\" episode \"500 Keys\", the grave of Encyclopedia Brown is shown briefly next to those of Nancy Drew and The Hardy Boys, to which Lisa comments \"Jeez, they're dropping like flies\".\n\nBULLET::::- Encyclopedia Brown at KidsReads.com\nBULLET::::- Encyclopedia Brown at Thrilling Detective\n"}
{"id": "10158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10158", "title": "Empire", "text": "Empire\n\nAn empire is a sovereign state functioning as an aggregate of nations or people that are ruled over by an emperor or another kind of monarch. The territory and population of an empire is commonly of greater extent than the one of a kingdom.\n\nAn empire can be made solely of contiguous territories, such as the Austro-Hungarian Empire or the Russian Empire, or of territories far remote from the homeland, such as a colonial empire. Aside from the more formal usage, the word \"empire\" can also refer colloquially to a large-scale business enterprise (e.g. a transnational corporation), a political organisation controlled by a single individual (a political boss), or a group (political bosses). The word \"empire\" is associated with such other words as \"imperialism\", \"colonialism\", and \"globalization\". Empire is often used to describe a displeasure to overpowering situations.\n\nAn imperial political structure can be established and maintained in two ways: (i) as a territorial empire of direct conquest and control with force or (ii) as a coercive, hegemonic empire of indirect conquest and control with power. The former method provides greater tribute and direct political control, yet limits further expansion because it absorbs military forces to fixed garrisons. The latter method provides less tribute and indirect control, but avails military forces for further expansion. Territorial empires (e.g. the Mongol Empire and Median Empire) tend to be contiguous areas. The term, on occasion, has been applied to maritime empires or thalassocracies (e.g. the Athenian and British empires) with looser structures and more scattered territories.\n\nAn empire is a multi-ethnic or multinational state with political and/or military dominion of populations who are culturally and ethnically distinct from the imperial (ruling) ethnic group and its culture. This is in contrast to a federation, which is an extensive state voluntarily composed of autonomous states and peoples. An empire is a large polity which rules over territories outside of its original borders.\n\nDefinitions of what physically and politically constitute an empire vary. It might be a state affecting imperial policies or a particular political structure. Empires are typically formed from diverse ethnic, national, cultural, and religious components. 'Empire' and 'colonialism' are used to refer to relationships between powerful state or society versus a less powerful one.\n\nTom Nairn and Paul James define empires as polities that \"extend relations of power across territorial spaces over which they have no prior or given legal sovereignty, and where, in one or more of the domains of economics, politics, and culture, they gain some measure of extensive hegemony over those spaces for the purpose of extracting or accruing value\". Rein Taagepera has defined an empire as \"any relatively large sovereign political entity whose components are not sovereign\".\n\nThe terrestrial empire's maritime analogue is the thalassocracy, an empire composed of islands and coasts which are accessible to its terrestrial homeland, such as the Athenian-dominated Delian League.\n\nFurthermore, empires can expand by both land and sea. Stephen Howe notes that empires by land can be characterized by expansion over terrain, \"extending directly outwards from the original frontier\" while an empire by sea can be characterized by colonial expansion and empire building \"by an increasingly powerful navy\".\n\nHowever, sometimes an empire is only a semantic construction, such as when a ruler assumes the title of \"emperor\". That ruler's nation logically becomes an \"empire\", despite having no additional territory or hegemony. Examples of this form of empire are the Central African Empire, or the Korean Empire proclaimed in 1897 when Korea, far from gaining new territory, was on the verge of being annexed by the Empire of Japan, one of the last to use the name officially. Among the last states in the 20th century known as empires in this sense were the Central African Empire, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Manchukuo, Germany, and Korea.\n\nEmpires originated as different types of states, although they commonly began as powerful monarchies. Ideas about empires have changed over time, ranging from public approval to universal distaste. Empires are built out of separate units with some kind of diversity – ethnic, national, cultural, religious – and imply at least some inequality between the rulers and the ruled. Without this inequality, the system would be seen as a commonwealth. Throughout history, the major powers of the world constantly seek to conquer other parts of the world. Imperialism is the idea of a major power controlling another nation or land with the intentions to use the native people and resources to help the mother country in any way possible. Many empires were the result of military conquest, incorporating the vanquished states into a political union, but imperial hegemony can be established in other ways. The Athenian Empire, the Roman Empire, and the British Empire developed at least in part under elective auspices. The Empire of Brazil declared itself an empire after separating from the Portuguese Empire in 1822. France has twice transitioned from being called the French Republic to being called the French Empire while it retained an overseas empire.\n\nEuropeans began applying the designation of \"empire\" to non-European monarchies, such as the Qing Empire and the Mughal Empire, as well as the Maratha Empire, eventually leading to the looser denotations applicable to any political structure meeting the criteria of \"imperium\". Some monarchies styled themselves as having greater size, scope, and power than the territorial, politico-military, and economic facts support. As a consequence, some monarchs assumed the title of \"emperor\" (or its corresponding translation, \"tsar\", \"empereur\", \"kaiser\", \"shah\" etc.) and renamed their states as \"The Empire of ...\". \nEmpires were seen as an expanding power, administration, ideas and beliefs followed by cultural habits from place to place. Empires tend to impose their culture on the subject states to strengthen the imperial structure. This can have notable effects that outlast the empire itself, both positive and negative. Most histories of empires have been hostile, especially if the authors were promoting nationalism. Stephen Howe, although himself hostile, listed positive qualities: the guaranteed stability, security, and legal order for their subjects. They tried to minimize ethnic and religious antagonism inside the empire. The aristocracies that ruled them were often more cosmopolitan and broad-minded than their nationalistic successors. \n\nstyle=\"background:#f8eaba; text-align:center;\"\n\nThe earliest known empire appeared in Egypt when King Narmer of the Upper Valley conquered the Lower Valley circa 3000 BC and laid the foundations for the Old Kingdom. The Akkadian Empire, established by Sargon of Akkad (24th century BC), was an early all-Mesopotamian empire. This imperial achievement was repeated by Hammurabi of Babylon in the 17th century BC. In the 15th century BC, the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, ruled by Thutmose III, was ancient Africa's major force upon incorporating Nubia and the ancient city-states of the Levant.\n\nCirca 1500 BC in China rose the Shang Empire which was succeeded by the Zhou Empire circa 1100 BC. Both surpassed in territory their contemporary Near Eastern empires. The Zhou Empire dissolved in 770 BC into feudal multi-state system which lasted for five and a half centuries until the universal conquest of Qin in 221 BC.\n\nThe first empire comparable to Rome in organization was the Neo-Assyrian Empire (916–612 BC). The Median Empire was the first empire within the territory of Persia. By the 6th century BC, after having allied with the Babylonians to defeat the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Medes were able to establish their own empire, which was the largest of its day and lasted for about sixty years.\nstyle=\"background:#f8eaba; text-align:center;\"\n\nThe Axial Age (mid-First Millennium BC) witnessed unprecedented imperial expansion in the Indo-Mediterranean region and China. The successful and extensive Achaemenid Empire (550–330 BC), also known as the first Persian Empire, covered Mesopotamia, Egypt, parts of Greece, Thrace, the Middle East, much of Central Asia, and North-Western India. It is considered the first great empire in history or the first \"world empire\". It was overthrown and replaced by the short-lived empire of Alexander the Great. His Empire was succeeded by three Empires ruled by the Diadochi—the Seleucid, Ptolemaic, and Macedonian, which, despite being independent, are called the \"Hellenistic Empire\" by virtue of their similarities in culture and administration.\n\nMeanwhile, in the western Mediterranean the Empires of Carthage and Rome began their rise. Having decisively defeated Carthage in 202 BC, Rome defeated Macedonia in 200 BC and the Seleucids in 190–189 BC to establish an all-Mediterranean Empire. The Seleucid Empire broke apart and its former eastern part was absorbed by the Parthian Empire. In 30 BC Rome annexed Ptolemaic Egypt.\n\nIn India during the Axial Age appeared the Maurya Empire—a geographically extensive and powerful empire, ruled by the Mauryan dynasty from 321 to 185 BC. The empire was founded in 322 BC by Chandragupta Maurya through the help of Chanakya, who rapidly expanded his power westward across central and western India, taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers following the withdrawal by Alexander the Great. By 320 BC, the Maurya Empire had fully occupied northwestern India as well as defeating and conquering the satraps left by Alexander. Under Emperor Asoka the Great, the Maurya Empire became the first Indian empire to conquer the whole Indian Peninsula — an achievement repeated only twice, by the Gupta and Mughal Empires. In the reign of Asoka Buddhism spread to become the dominant religion in many parts of the ancient India.\n\nIn 221 BC, China became an empire when the State of Qin ended the chaotic Warring States period through its conquest of the other six states and proclaimed the Qin Empire (221–207 BC). The Qin Empire is known for the construction of the Great Wall of China and the Terracotta Army, as well as the standardization of currency, weights, measures and writing system. It laid the foundation for China's first golden age, the Han Empire (202 BC–AD 9, AD 25–220). The Han Empire expanded into Central Asia and established trade through the Silk Road. Confucianism was, for the first time, adopted as an official state ideology. During the reign of the Emperor Wu of Han, the Xiongnu were pacified. By this time, only four empires stretched between the Pacific and the Atlantic: the Han Empire of China, the Kushan Empire, the Parthian Empire of Persia, and the Roman Empire. The collapse of the Han Empire in AD 220 saw China fragmented into the Three Kingdoms, only to be unified once again by the Jin Empire (AD 266–420). The relative weakness of the Jin Empire plunged China into political disunity that would last from AD 304 to AD 589 when the Sui Empire (AD 581–618) reunited China.\n\nThe Romans were the first nation to invent and embody the concept of empire in their two mandates: to wage war and to make and execute laws. They were the most extensive Western empire until the early modern period, and left a lasting impact on Western Europe. Many languages, cultural values, religious institutions, political divisions, urban centers, and legal systems can trace their origins to the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire governed and rested on exploitative actions. They took slaves and money from the peripheries to support the imperial center. However, the absolute reliance on conquered peoples to carry out the empire's fortune, sustain wealth, and fight wars would ultimately lead to the collapse of the Roman Empire. The Romans were strong believers in what they called their \"civilizing mission\". This term was legitimized and justified by writers like Cicero who wrote that only under Roman rule could the world flourish and prosper. This ideology, that was envisioned to bring a new world order, was eventually spread across the Mediterranean world and beyond. People started to build houses like Romans, eat the same food, wear the same clothes and engage in the same games. Even rights of citizenship and authority to rule were granted to people not of Roman or Italian birth.\n\nThe Latin word \"imperium\", referring to a magistrate's power to command, gradually assumed the meaning \"The territory in which a magistrate can effectively enforce his commands\", while the term \"\"imperator\"\" was originally an honorific meaning \"commander\". The title was given to generals who were victorious in battle. Thus, an \"empire\" may include regions that are not legally within the territory of a state, but are under either direct or indirect control of that state, such as a colony, client state, or protectorate. Although historians use the terms \"Republican Period\" and \"Imperial Period\" to identify the periods of Roman history before and after absolute power was assumed by Augustus, the Romans themselves continued to refer to their government as a republic, and during the Republican Period, the territories controlled by the republic were referred to as \"\"Imperium Romanum\"\". The emperor's actual legal power derived from holding the office of \"consul\", but he was traditionally honored with the titles of \"imperator\" (commander) and \"princeps\" (first man or, chief). Later, these terms came to have legal significance in their own right; an army calling their general \"\"imperator\"\" was a direct challenge to the authority of the current emperor.\n\nThe legal systems of France and its former colonies are strongly influenced by Roman law. Similarly, the United States was founded on a model inspired by the Roman Republic, with upper and lower legislative assemblies, and executive power vested in a single individual, the president. The president, as \"commander-in-chief\" of the armed forces, reflects the ancient Roman titles \"imperator princeps\". The Roman Catholic Church, founded in the early Imperial Period, spread across Europe, first by the activities of Christian evangelists, and later by official imperial promulgation.\n\nIn Western Asia, the term \"Persian Empire\" came to denote the Iranian imperial states established at different historical periods of pre–Islamic and post–Islamic Persia.\n\nIn East Asia, various Chinese empires dominated the political, economic and cultural landscapes during this era, the most powerful of which was probably the Tang Empire (618–690, 705–907). Other influential Chinese empires during the post-classical period include the Sui Empire (581–618), the Great Liao Empire (916–1125), the Song Empire (960–1279), the Western Xia Empire (1038–1227), the Great Jin Empire (1115–1234), the Western Liao Empire (1124–1218), the Great Yuan Empire (1271–1368), and the Great Ming Empire (1368–1644). During this period, Japan and Korea underwent voluntary Sinicization. The Sui, Tang and Song empires had the world's largest economy and were the most technologically advanced during their time; the Great Yuan Empire was the world's ninth largest empire by total land area; while the Great Ming Empire is famous for the seven maritime expeditions led by Zheng He.\n\nThe 7th century saw the emergence of the Islamic Empire, also referred to as the Islamic Caliphate. The Rashidun Caliphate expanded from the Arabian Peninsula and swiftly conquered the Persian Empire and much of the Byzantine Roman Empire. Its successor state, the Umayyad Caliphate, expanded across North Africa and into the Iberian Peninsula. By the beginning of the 8th century, the Umayyad Caliphate had become the largest empire in history, it would not be surpassed in size until the establishment of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century. In 750 the Caliphate clashed with the Tang China at Talas. By this time only these two Empires stretched between the Atlantic and the Pacific. From the 11th century Moroccan empires began to appear, starting with the Almoravid Empire, dominating territories in both Europe as well as Sub-Saharan Africa.\n\nstyle=\"background:#f8eaba; text-align:center;\"\n\nThe Ajuran Sultanate was a Somali empire in the medieval times that dominated the Indian Ocean trade. They belonged to the Somali Muslim sultanate that ruled over large parts of the Horn of Africa in the Middle Ages. Through a strong centralized administration and an aggressive military stance towards invaders, the Ajuran Sultanate successfully resisted an Oromo invasion from the west and a Portuguese incursion from the east during the Gaal Madow and the Ajuran-Portuguese wars. Trading routes dating from the ancient and early medieval periods of Somali maritime enterprise were strengthened or re-established, and foreign trade and commerce in the coastal provinces flourished with ships sailing to and coming from many kingdoms and empires in East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Europe, Middle East, North Africa and East Africa.\n\nIn the 7th century, Maritime Southeast Asia witnessed the rise of a Buddhist thallasocracy, the Srivijaya Empire, which thrived for 600 years and was succeeded by the Hindu-Buddhist Majapahit Empire that ruled from the 13th to 15th centuries. In the Southeast Asian mainland, the Hindu-Buddhist Khmer Empire was centered in the city of Angkor and flourished from the 9th to 13th centuries. Following the demise of the Khmer Empire, the Siamese Empire flourished alongside the Burmese and Lan Chang Empires from the 13th through the 18th centuries. In Eastern Europe, during the year of 917, the Byzantine Empire was forced to recognize the Imperial title of Bulgarian rulers (who were called Tsars). The Bulgarian Empire remained a major power in the Balkans until its fall in the late 14th century.\n\nAt the time, in the Medieval West, the title \"empire\" had a specific technical meaning that was exclusively applied to states that considered themselves the heirs and successors of the Roman Empire. Among these were the \"Byzantine Empire\", which was the actual continuation of the Eastern portion of the Roman Empire, the Carolingian Empire, the largely Germanic Holy Roman Empire, and the Russian Empire. Yet, these states did not always fit the geographic, political, or military profiles of empires in the modern sense of the word. To legitimise their \"imperium\", these states directly claimed the title of \"Empire\" from Rome. The \"sacrum Romanum imperium\" (Holy Roman Empire), which lasted from 800 to 1806, claimed to have exclusively comprehended Christian principalities, and was only nominally a discrete imperial state. The Holy Roman Empire was not always centrally-governed, as it had neither core nor peripheral territories, and was not governed by a central, politico-military elite. Hence, Voltaire's remark that the Holy Roman Empire \"was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire\" is accurate to the degree that it ignores German rule over Italian, French, Provençal, Polish, Flemish, Dutch, and Bohemian populations, and the efforts of the ninth-century Holy Roman Emperors (i.e., the Ottonians) to establish central control. Voltaire's \"nor an empire\" observation applies to its late period.\n\nIn 1204, after the Fourth Crusade conquered Constantinople, the crusaders established a Latin Empire (1204–1261) in that city, while the defeated Byzantine Empire's descendants established two smaller, short-lived empires in Asia Minor: the Empire of Nicaea (1204–1261) and the Empire of Trebizond (1204–1461). \nConstantinople was retaken in 1261 by the Byzantine successor state centered in Nicaea, re-establishing the Byzantine Empire until 1453, by which time the Turkish-Muslim Ottoman Empire (ca. 1300–1918), had conquered most of the region. The Ottoman Empire was a successor of the Abbasid Empire and it was the most powerful empire to succeed the Abbasi empires at the time, as well as one of the most powerful empires in the world. The Ottoman Empire centered on modern day Turkey, dominated the eastern Mediterranean, overthrew the Byzantine Empire to claim Constantinople and it would start battering at Austria and Malta, which were countries that were key to central and to south-west Europe respectively — mainly for their geographical location. The reason these occurrences of batterings were so important was because the Ottomans were Muslim, and the rest of Europe was Christian, so there was a sense of religious fighting going on. This was not just a rivalry of East and West but a rivalry between Christians and Muslims. Both the Christians and Muslims had alliances with other countries, and they had problems in them as well. The flows of trade and of cultural influences across the supposed great divide never ceased, so the countries never stopped bartering with each other. These epochal clashes between civilizations profoundly shaped many people's thinking back then, and continues to do so in the present day. Modern hatred against Muslim communities in South-Eastern Europe, mainly in Bosnia and Kosovo, has often been articulated in terms of seeing them as unwelcome residues of this imperialism: in short, as Turks. Moreover, Eastern Orthodox imperialism was not re-established until the coronation of Peter the Great as Emperor of Russia in 1721. Likewise, with the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars (1803–1815), the Austrian Empire (1804–1867) emerged reconstituted as the Empire of Austria–Hungary (1867–1918), having \"inherited\" the imperium of Central and Western Europe from the losers of said wars.\n\nIn the thirteenth century, Genghis Khan expanded the Mongol Empire to be the largest contiguous empire in the world. However, within two generations, the empire was separated into four discrete khanates under Genghis Khan's grandsons. One of them, Kublai Khan, conquered China and established the Yuan dynasty with the imperial capital at Beijing. One family ruled the whole Eurasian land mass from the Pacific to the Adriatic and Baltic Seas. The emergence of the Pax Mongolica had significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia. The Safavid Empire of Iran was also founded.\nThe Islamic gunpowder empires started to develop from the 15th century.\n\nIn the Indian subcontinent, the Delhi Sultanate conquered most of the Indian peninsula and spread Islam across it. It later got broken with the establishment of the Bengal Sultanate. In the 15th century, the Mughal Empire was founder by Timur and Genghis Khan's direct descendant Babur. His successors such Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan extended the empire. Meanwhile, the Sur Empire was also established in the north by Sher Shah Suri.\nIn the 17th century, Muhammad Aurangzeb Alamgir expanded the Mughal Empire, controlling most of the South Asia through Sharia, which became the world's largest economy and leading manufacturing power. with a nominal GDP that valued a quarter of world GDP, superior than the combination of Europe's GDP. It has been estimated that the Mughal emperors controlled an unprecedented one-fourh of the world's entire economy, was home to one-fourth of the world's population at the time.\n\nAfter the death of Aurangzeb, which marks the end of the medieval India and the beginning of European invasion in India, the empire was weakened by Nader Shah's invasion.\n\nThe Mysore Empire was soon established by Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan, allies of Napoleone Bonaparte. Other independent empires were also been established, such as those ruled by the Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad and Hyderabad State's Nizam of Hyderabad.\n\nIn the pre-Columbian Americas, two Empires were prominent—the Azteca in Mesoamerica and Inca in Peru. Both existed for several generations before the arrival of the Europeans. Inca had gradually conquered the whole of the settled Andean world as far south as today Santiago in Chile.\n\nIn Oceania, the Tonga Empire was a lonely empire that existed from the Late Middle Ages to the Modern period.\n\nIn the 15th century, Castile (Spain) landing in the so-called \"New World\" (first, the Americas, and later Australia), along with Portuguese travels around the Cape of Good Hope and along the coast of Africa bordering the southeast Indian Ocean, proved ripe opportunities for the continent's Renaissance-era monarchies to establish colonial empires like those of the ancient Romans and Greeks. In the Old World, colonial imperialism was attempted and established on the Canary Islands and Ireland. These conquered lands and people became \"de jure\" subordinates of the empire, rather than \"de facto\" imperial territories and subjects. Such subjugation often elicited \"client-state\" resentment that the empire unwisely ignored, leading to the collapse of the European colonial imperial system in the late 19th century and the early and mid-20th century. Portuguese discovery of Newfoundland in the New World gave way to many expeditions led by England (later Britain), Spain, France, and the Dutch Republic. In the 18th century, the Spanish Empire was at its height because of the great mass of goods taken from conquered territory in the Americas (nowadays Mexico, parts of the United States, the Caribbean, most of Central America, and South America) and the Philippines.\nstyle=\"background:#f8eaba; text-align:center;\"\n\nThe British established their first empire (1583–1783) in North America by colonising lands that made up British America, including parts of Canada, the Caribbean and the Thirteen Colonies. In 1776, the Continental Congress of the Thirteen Colonies declared itself independent from the British Empire, thus beginning the American Revolution. Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa, with subsequent exploration leading to the rise of the Second British Empire (1783–1815), which was followed by the Industrial Revolution and Britain's Imperial Century (1815–1914). It became the largest empire in world history, encompassing one quarter of the world's land area and one fifth of its population. The impacts of this period are still prominent in the current age \"including widespread use of the English language, belief in Protestant religion, economic globalization, modern precepts of law and order, and representative democracy.\"\n\nThe Great Qing Empire of China (1636–1912) was the fifth largest empire in world history by total land area, and laid the foundation for the modern territorial claims of both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China. Apart from having direct control over much of East Asia, the empire also exerted domination over other states through the Chinese tributary system. The multiethnic and multicultural nature of the Great Qing Empire was crucial to the subsequent birth of the nationalistic concept of \"zhonghua minzu\". The empire reached its peak during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor, after which the empire entered a period of prolonged decline, culminating in its collapse as a result of the Xinhai Revolution.\n\nThe Ashanti Empire (or Confederacy), also Asanteman (1701–1896), was a West African state of the Ashanti, the Akan people of the Ashanti Region, Akanland in modern-day Ghana. The Ashanti (or Asante) were a powerful, militaristic and highly disciplined people in West Africa. Their military power, which came from effective strategy and an early adoption of European firearms, created an empire that stretched from central Akanland (in modern-day Ghana) to present day Benin and Ivory Coast, bordered by the Dagomba kingdom to the north and Dahomey to the east. Due to the empire's military prowess, sophisticated hierarchy, social stratification and culture, the Ashanti empire had one of the largest historiographies of any indigenous Sub-Saharan African political entity.\n\nThe Sikh Empire (1799–1846) was established in the Punjab region of India. The empire collapsed when its founder, Ranjit Singh, died and its army fell to the British. During the same period, the Maratha Empire (also known as the Maratha Confederacy) was a Hindu state located in present-day India. It existed from 1674 to 1818, and at its peak, the empire's territories covered much of Southern Asia. The empire was founded and consolidated by Shivaji. After the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, it expanded greatly under the rule of the Peshwas. In 1761, the Maratha army lost the Third Battle of Panipat, which halted the expansion of the empire. Later, the empire was divided into a confederacy of states which, in 1818, were lost to the British during the Anglo-Maratha wars.\n\nThe French emperors Napoleon I and Napoleon III (See: Premier Empire, Second French Empire) each attempted establishing a western imperial hegemony centered in France. The French colonial empire constituted the overseas colonies, protectorates and mandate territories that came under French rule from the 16th century onward. A distinction is generally made between the \"first colonial empire,\" that existed until 1814, and the \"second colonial empire\", which began with the conquest of Algiers in 1830. The second colonial empire came to an end after the decolonizations of Indochina (1954), Algeria (1962) and French Africa. At its apex, it was one of the largest empires in history : including metropolitan France, the total amount of land under French sovereignty reached 11,500,000 km2 (4,400,000 sq mi), with a population of 110 million people in 1939.\n\nThe Empire of Brazil (1822–1889) was the only South American modern monarchy, established by the heir of the Portuguese Empire as an independent nation eventually became an emerging international power. The new country was huge but sparsely populated and ethnically diverse. In 1889 the monarchy was overthrown in a sudden coup d'état led by a clique of military leaders whose goal was the formation of a republic.\n\nThe German Empire (1871–1918), another \"heir to the Holy Roman Empire\", arose in 1871.\n\nThe term \"American Empire\" refers to the United States' cultural ideologies and foreign policy strategies. The term is most commonly used to describe the U.S.'s status since the 20th century, but it can also be applied to the United States' world standing before the rise of nationalism in the 20th century. The United States is not traditionally recognized as an empire, in part because the U.S. adopted a different political system from those that previous empires had used. Despite these systematic differences, the political objectives and strategies of the United States government have been quite similar to those of previous empires. Due to this similarity some scholars confess: \"When it walks like a duck, talks like a duck, it's a duck.\" Academic, Krishna Kumar, argues the distinct principles of nationalism and imperialism may result in common practice; that is, the pursuit of nationalism can often coincide with the pursuit of imperialism in terms of strategy and decision making. Throughout the 19th century, the United States government attempted to expand its territory by any means necessary. Regardless of the supposed motivation for this constant expansion, all of these land acquisitions were carried out by imperialistic means. This was done by financial means in some cases, and by military force in others. Most notably, the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the Texas Annexation (1845), and the Mexican Cession (1848) highlight the imperialistic goals of the United States during this “modern period” of imperialism. The U.S. government has stopped pursuing additional territories since the mid 20th century. However, some scholars still consider U.S. foreign policy strategies to be imperialistic. This idea is explored in the \"contemporary usage\" section.\n\nIn time, an empire may change from one political entity to another. For example, the Holy Roman Empire, a German re-constitution of the Roman Empire, metamorphosed into various political structures (i.e., federalism), and eventually, under Habsburg rule, re-constituted itself in 1804 as the Austrian Empire, an empire of much different politics and scope, which in turn became the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1867. The Roman Empire, perennially reborn, also lived on as the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire) – temporarily splitting into the Latin Empire, the Empire of Nicaea and the Empire of Trebizond before its remaining territory and centre became part of the Ottoman Empire. A similarly persistent concept of empire saw the Mongol Empire become the Khanate of the Golden Horde, the Yuan Empire of China, and the Ilkhanate before resurrection as the Timurid Empire and as the Mughal Empire. After 1945 the Empire of Japan retained its Emperor but lost its colonial possessions and became the State of Japan.\n\nAn autocratic empire can become a republic (e.g., the Central African Empire in 1979), or it can become a republic with its imperial dominions reduced to a core territory (e.g., Weimar Germany shorn of the German colonial empire (1918–1919), or the Ottoman Empire (1918–1923)). The dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire after 1918 provides an example of a multi-ethnic superstate broken into constituent nation-oriented states: the republics, kingdoms, and provinces of Austria, Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Czechoslovakia, Ruthenia, Galicia, \"et al\". In the aftermath of World War I the Russian Empire also broke up and became reduced to the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) before re-forming as the USSR (1922–1991) – sometimes seen as the core of a Soviet Empire.\n\nAfter the Second World War(1939–1945), the deconstruction of colonial empires quickened and became commonly known as decolonisation. The British Empire evolved into a loose, multinational Commonwealth of Nations, while the French colonial empire metamorphosed to a Francophone commonwealth. The same process happened to the Portuguese Empire, which evolved into a Lusophone commowealth, and to the former territories of the extinct Spanish Empire, which alongside the Lusophone countries of Portugal and Brazil, created an Ibero-American commowealth. France returned the French territory of Kwang-Chou-Wan to China in 1946. The British gave Hong Kong back to China in 1997 after 150 years of rule. The Portuguese territory of Macau reverted to China in 1999. Macau and Hong Kong did not become part of the provincial structure of China; they have autonomous systems of government as Special Administrative Regions of the People's Republic of China.\n\nFrance still governs overseas territories (French Guiana, Martinique, Réunion, French Polynesia, New Caledonia, St Martin, Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, Guadeloupe, TAAF, Wallis and Futuna, Saint Barthélemy, and Mayotte), and exerts hegemony in Francophone Africa (29 francophone countries such as Chad, Rwanda, \"et cetera\"). Fourteen British Overseas Territories remain under British sovereignty. Sixteen countries of the Commonwealth of Nations share their head of state, Queen Elizabeth II, as Commonwealth Realms.\n\nIn 2004 Eliot A. Cohen summarized the contemporary transition from empire: \"The Age of Empire may indeed have ended, but then an age of American hegemony has begun, regardless of what one calls it.\"\n\nThe fall of the Roman Empire in the West is seen as one of the most pivotal points in all of human history. This event traditionally marks the transition from classical civilization to the birth of Europe. The Roman Empire started to decline at the end of the reign of the last of the Five Good Emperors, Marcus Aurelius in 161–180 A.D. There is still a debate over the cause of the fall of one of the largest empires in the history. Piganiol argues that the Roman Empire under its authority can be described as \"a period of terror\", holding its imperial system accountable for its failure. Another theory blames the rise of Christianity as the cause, arguing that the spread of certain Christian ideals caused internal weakness of the military and state. In the book \"The Fall of the Roman Empire\", by Peter Heather, he contends that there are many factors, including issues of money and manpower, which produce military limitations and culminate in the Roman army's inability to effectively repel invading barbarians at the frontier. The Western Roman economy was already stretched to its limit in the 4th and 5th Centuries C.E. due to continual conflict and loss of territory which, in turn, generated loss of revenue from the tax base. There was also the looming presence of the Persians which, at any time, took a large percentage of the fighting force's attention. At the same time the Huns, a nomadic warrior people from the steppes of Asia, are also putting extreme pressure on the German tribes outside of the Roman frontier. The German tribes really had no other choice, geographically, but to move into Roman territory. At this point, without increased funding, the Roman army could no longer effectively defend its borders against major waves of Germanic tribes. This inability is illustrated by the crushing defeat at Adrianople in 378 C.E. and, later, the Battle of Frigidus.\n\nContemporaneously, the concept of \"empire\" is politically valid, yet is not always used in the traditional sense. For example, Japan is considered the world's sole remaining empire because of the continued presence of the Japanese Emperor in national politics. Despite the semantic reference to imperial power, Japan is a \"de jure\" constitutional monarchy, with a homogeneous population of 127 million people that is 98.5 percent ethnic Japanese, making it one of the largest nation-states.\n\nCharacterizing some aspects of American foreign policy and international behavior as \"American Empire\" is controversial but not uncommon. This characterization is controversial because of the strong tendency in American society to reject claims of American imperialism. The initial motivations for the inception of the United States eventually led to the development of this tendency, which has been perpetuated by the country-wide obsession with this national narrative. The United States was formed because colonists did not like being under control of the British Empire. Essentially, the United States was formed in an attempt to reject imperialism. This makes it very hard for people to acknowledge America's status as an empire. This active rejection of imperialist status is not limited to high-ranking government officials, as it has been ingrained in American society throughout its entire history. As David Ludden explains, \"journalists, scholars, teachers, students, analysts, and politicians prefer to depict the U.S. as a nation pursuing its own interests and ideals\". This often results in imperialist endeavors being presented as measures taken to enhance national security. Ludden explains this phenomenon with the concept of \"ideological blinders\", which he says prevent American citizens from realizing the true nature of America's current systems and strategies. These \"ideological blinders\" that people wear have resulted in an \"invisible\" American empire of which most American citizens are unaware.\n\nStuart Creighton Miller posits that the public's sense of innocence about Realpolitik (cf. American exceptionalism) impairs popular recognition of US imperial conduct since it governed other countries via surrogates. These surrogates were domestically-weak, right-wing governments that would collapse without US support. Former President G. W. Bush's Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, said: \"We don't seek empires. We're not imperialistic; we never have been.\" This statement directly contradicts Thomas Jefferson who, in the 1780s while awaiting the fall of the Spanish empire, said: \"till our population can be sufficiently advanced to gain it from them piece by piece\". In turn, historian Sidney Lens argues that from its inception, the US has used every means available to dominate other nations.\n\nSince the European Union began in 1993 as a west European trade bloc, it has established its own currency, the Euro (1999), established discrete military forces, and exercised its limited hegemony in parts of eastern Europe and Asia. The political scientist Jan Zielonka suggests that this behaviour is imperial because it coerces its neighbouring countries into adopting its \"European\" economic, legal, and political structures.\n\nIn his book review of \"Empire\" (2000) by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Mehmet Akif Okur posits that since the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the US, the international relations determining the world's balance of power (political, economic, military) have been altered. These alterations include the intellectual (political science) trends that perceive the contemporary world's order via the re-territorrialisation of \"political space\", the re-emergence of \"classical imperialist practices\" (the \"inside\" vs. \"outside\" duality, cf. the Other), the deliberate weakening of international organisations, the restructured international economy, economic nationalism, the expanded arming of most countries, the proliferation of nuclear weapon capabilities and the politics of identity emphasizing a state's \"subjective\" perception of its place in the world, as a nation and as a civilisation. These changes constitute the \"Age of Nation Empires\"; as imperial usage, \"nation-empire\" denotes the return of geopolitical power from \"global\" power blocs to \"regional\" power blocs (i.e., centred upon a \"regional power\" state [China, Russia, U.S., \"et al\".]) and regional multi-state power alliances (i.e., Europe, Latin America, South East Asia). Nation-empire regionalism claims sovereignty over their respective (regional) political (social, economic, ideologic), cultural, and military spheres.\n\nThe chart below shows a timeline of polities that have been called empires. Dynastic changes are marked with a white line.\n\nBULLET::::- The Roman Empire's timeline listed below only includes the Western portion. The Byzantine continuation of the Roman Empire is listed separately.\nBULLET::::- The Empires of Nicaea and Trebizond were Byzantine successor states.\nBULLET::::- The Empire of Bronze Age Egypt is not included in the graph. Established by Narmer circa 3000 BC, it lasted as long as China until it was conquered by Achaemenid Persia in 525 BC.\nBULLET::::- Japan is presented for the period of its overseas Empire (1895–1945). The original Japanese Empire of \"the Eight Islands\" would be third persistent after Egypt and China.\nBULLET::::- Many Indian empires are also included, though only Mauryans, Guptas, Delhi Sultans, Mughals and Marathas ruled most of the India.\n\nEmpires have been the dominant international organization in world history:\n\nSimilarly, Anthony Pagden, Eliot A. Cohen, Jane Burbank and Frederick Cooper estimate that \"empires have always been more frequent, more extensive political and social forms than tribal territories or nations have ever been\". Many empires endured for centuries, while the age of the ancient Egyptian, Chinese and Japanese Empires is counted in millennia. \"Most people throughout history have lived under imperial rule.\" \nPolitical scientist Hedley Bull wrote that \"in the broad sweep of human history ... the form of states system has been the exception rather than the rule\". His colleague Robert Gilpin confirmed this conclusion for the pre-modern period:\n\nHistorian Michael Doyle who undertook an extensive research on empires extended the observation into the modern era:\nExpert on warfare Quincy Wright generalized on what he called \"universal empire\"—empire unifying all the contemporary system:\n\nGerman Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck finds that the macro-historic process of imperial expansion gave rise to global history in which the formations of universal empires were most significant stages. A later group of political scientists, working on the phenomenon of the current unipolarity, in 2007 edited research on several pre-modern civilizations by experts in respective fields. The overall conclusion was that the balance of power was inherently unstable order and usually soon broke in favor of imperial order. Yet before the advent of the unipolarity, world historian Arnold Toynbee and political scientist Martin Wight had drawn the same conclusion with an unambiguous implication for the modern world:\nThe earliest thinker to approach the phenomenon of universal empire from a theoretical point of view was Polybius (2:3): \n\nFichte, having witnessed the battle at Jena in 1806 when Napoleon overwhelmed Prussia, described what he perceived as a deep historical trend:\n\nFichte's later compatriot, Geographer Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859), in the mid-Nineteenth century observed a macro-historic trend of imperial growth in both Hemispheres: \"Men of great and strong minds, as well as whole nations, acted under influence of one idea, the purity of which was utterly unknown to them.\"\nThe imperial expansion filled the world circa 1900. Two famous contemporary observers—Frederick Turner and Halford Mackinder described the event and drew implications, the former predicting American overseas expansion and the latter stressing that the world empire is now in sight.\n\nFriedrich Ratzel, writing at the same time, observed that the \"drive toward the building of continually larger states continues throughout the entirety of history\" and is active in the present. He drew \"Seven Laws of Expansionism\". His seventh law stated: \"The general trend toward amalgamation transmits the tendency of territorial growth from state to state and increases the tendency in the process of transmission.\" He commented on this law to make its meaning clear: \"There is on this small planet sufficient space for only one great state.\"\n\nTwo other contemporaries—Kang Yu-wei and George Vacher de Lapouge—stressed that imperial expansion cannot indefinitely proceed on the definite surface of the globe and therefore world empire is imminent. Kang Yu-wei in 1885 believed that the imperial trend will culminate in the contest between Washington and Berlin and Vacher de Lapouge in 1899 estimated that the final contest will be between Russia and America in which America is likely to triumph.\n\nThe above envisaged contests indeed took place, known to us as World War I and II. Writing during the Second, political scientists Derwent Whittlesey, Robert Strausz-Hupé and John H. Herz concluded: “Now that the earth is at last parceled out, consolidation has commenced.” In \"this world of fighting superstates there could be no end to war until one state had subjected all others, until world empire had been achieved by the strongest. This undoubtedly is the logical final stage in the geopolitical theory of evolution.\" \n\nWriting in the last year of the War, German Historian Ludwig Dehio drew a similar conclusion:\n\nThe year after the War and in the first year of the nuclear age, Albert Einstein and British Philosopher Bertrand Russell, known as prominent pacifists, outlined for the near future a perspective of world empire (world government established by force). Einstein believed that, unless world government is established by agreement, an imperial world government would come by war or wars. Russell expected a third World War to result in a world government under the empire of the United States. Three years later, another prominent pacifist, Theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, generalized on the ancient Empires of Egypt, Babylon, Persia and Greece to imply for the modern world: \"The analogy in present global terms would be the final unification of the world through the preponderant power of either America or Russia, whichever proved herself victorious in the final struggle.\"\n\nRussian colleague of Russell and Neighbour, Georgy Fedotov, wrote in 1945: All empires are but stages on the way to the sole Empire which must swallow all others. The only question is who will build it and on which foundations. Universal unity is the only alternative to annihilation. Unity by conference is utopian but unity by conquest by the strongest Power is not and probably the uncompleted in this War will be completed in the next. \"Pax Atlantica\" is the best of possible outcomes.\n\nOriginally drafted as a secret study for the Office of Strategic Services (the precursor of the CIA) in 1944 and published as a book three years later, \"The Struggle for the World...\" by James Burnham concludes: If either of the two Superpowers wins, the result would be a universal empire which in our case would also be a world empire. The historical stage for a world empire had already been set prior to and independently of the discovery of atomic weapons but these weapons make a world empire inevitable and imminent. \"The atomic weapons ... will not permit the world to wait.\" Only a world empire can establish monopoly on atomic weapons and thus guarantee the survival of civilization. A world empire \"is in fact the objective of the Third World War which, in its preliminary stages, has already began\". The issue of a world empire \"will be decided, and in our day. In the course of the decision, both of the present antagonists may, it is true, be destroyed, but one of them must be.\" In 1951, Hans Morgenthau concluded that the \"best\" outcome of World War III would be world empire:\n\nExpert on earlier civilizations, Toynbee, further developed the subject of World War III leading to world empire:\n\nThe year this volume of A Study of History was published, US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles announced \"a knock-out blow\" as an official doctrine, a detailed Plan was elaborated and \"Fortune\" magazine mapped the design. Section VIII, \"Atomic Armaments\", of the famous National Security Council Report 68 (NSC 68), approved by President Harry Truman in 1951, uses the term \"blow\" 17 times, mostly preceded by such adjectives as \"powerful\", \"overwhelming\", or \"crippling\". Another term applied by the strategists was \"Sunday punch\".\n\nA pupil of Toynbee, William McNeill, associated on the case of ancient China, which \"put a quietus upon the disorders of the warring states by erecting an imperial bureaucratic structure ... The warring states of the Twentieth century seem headed for a similar resolution of their conflicts.\" The ancient \"resolution\" McNeill evoked was one of the most sweeping universal conquests in world history, performed by Qin in 230–221 BC. Chinese classic Sima Qian (d. 86 BC) described the event (6:234): \"Qin raised troops on grand scale\" and \"the whole world celebrated a great bacchanal\". Herman Kahn of the RAND Corporation criticized to an assembled group of SAC officers their war plan (SIOP-62). He did not use the term bacchanal but he coined on the occasion an associating word: \"Gentlemen, you do not have a war plan. You have a \"wargasm\"!\" History did not completely repeat itself but it passed close.\n\nAccording to the circumscription theory of Robert Carneiro, \"the more sharply circumscribed area, the more rapidly it will become politically unified.\" The Empires of Egypt, China and Japan are named the most durable political structures in human history. Correspondingly, these are the three most circumscribed civilizations in human history. The Empires of Egypt (established by Narmer c. 3000 BC) and China (established by Cheng in 221 BC) endured for over two millennia. German Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck, criticizing the Western idea of progress, emphasized that China and Egypt remained at one particular stage of development for millennia. This stage was universal empire. The development of Egypt and China came to a halt once their empires \"reached the limits of their natural habitat\". Sinology does not recognize the Eurocentric view of the \"inevitable\" imperial fall; Egyptology and Japanology pose equal challenges.\n\nCarneiro explored the Bronze Age civilizations. Stuart J. Kaufman, Richard Little and William Wohlforth researched the next three millennia, comparing eight civilizations. They conclude: The \"rigidity of the borders\" contributed importantly to hegemony in every concerned case. Hence, \"when the system's borders are rigid, the probability of hegemony is high\".\n\nThe circumscription theory was stressed in the comparative studies of the Roman and Chinese Empires. The circumscribed Chinese Empire recovered from all falls, while the fall of Rome, by contrast, was fatal. \"What counteracted this [imperial] tendency in Europe ... was a countervailing tendency for the geographical boundaries of the system to expand.\" If \"Europe had been a closed system, some great power would eventually have succeeded in establishing absolute supremacy over the other states in the region\".\n\nHis 1945 book on the four centuries of the European power struggle, Ludwig Dehio titled \"The Precarious Balance\". He explained the durability of the European states system by its overseas expansion: \"Overseas expansion and the system of states were born at the same time; the vitality that burst the bounds of the Western world also destroyed its unity.\" Edward Carr causally linked the end of the overseas outlet for imperial expansion and World Wars. In the nineteenth century, he wrote during the Second World War, imperialist wars were waged against \"primitive\" peoples. \"It was silly for European countries to fight against one another when they could still ... maintain social cohesion by continuous expansion in Asia and Africa. Since 1900, however, this has no longer been possible: \"the situation has radically changed\". Now wars are between \"imperial powers.\" Hans Morgenthau wrote that the very imperial expansion into relatively empty geographical spaces in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth centuries, in Africa, Eurasia, and western North America, deflected great power politics into the periphery of the earth, thereby reducing conflict. For example, the more attention Russia, France and the United States paid to expanding into far-flung territories in imperial fashion, the less attention they paid to one another, and the more peaceful, in a sense, the world was. But by the late nineteenth century, the consolidation of the great nation-states and empires of the West was consummated, and territorial gains could only be made at the expense of one another. John H. Herz outlined one \"chief function\" of the overseas expansion and the impact of its end: \n\nSome later commentators drew similar conclusions:\n\nThe opportunity for any system to expand in size seems almost a necessary condition for it to remain balanced, at least over the long haul. Far from being impossible or exceedingly improbable, systemic hegemony is likely under two conditions: \"when the boundaries of the international system remain stable and no new major powers emerge from outside the system.\" With the system becoming global, further expansion is precluded. The geopolitical condition of \"global closure\" will remain to the end of history. Since \"the contemporary international system is global, we can rule out the possibility that geographic expansion of the system will contribute to the emergence of a new balance of power, as it did so many times in the past.\" As Quincy Wright had put it, \"this process can no longer continue without interplanetary wars.\"\n\nOne of leading experts on world-system theory, Christopher Chase-Dunn, noted that the circumscription theory is applicable for the global system, since the global system is circumscribed. In fact, within less than a century of its circumscribed existence the global system overcame the centuries-old balance of power and reached the unipolarity. Given \"constant spatial parameters\" of the global system, its unipolar structure is neither historically unusual nor theoretically surprising.\n\nRandall Schweller theorized that a \"closed international system\", such as the global became a century ago, would reach \"entropy\" in a kind of thermodynamic law. Once the state of entropy is reached, there is no going back. The initial conditions are lost forever. Stressing the curiosity of the fact, Schweller writes that since the moment the modern world became a closed system, the process has worked in only one direction: from many poles to two poles to one pole. Thus unipolarity might represent the entropy—stable and permanent loss of variation—in the global system.\n\nChalmers Johnson argues that the US globe-girding network of hundreds of military bases already represents a global empire in its initial form:\n\nSimon Dalby associates the network of bases with the Roman imperial system:\n\nKenneth Pomeranz and Harvard Historian Niall Ferguson share the above-cited views: \"With American military bases in over 120 countries, we have hardly seen the end of empire.” This “vast archipelago of US military bases … far exceeds 19th-century British ambitions. Britain’s imperium consisted of specific, albeit numerous, colonies and clients; the American imperial vision is much more global…”\n\nAnother Harvard Historian Charles S. Maier opens his \"Among Empires: American Ascendancy and Its Predecessors\" with these words: \"What a substratum for empire! Compared with which, the foundation of the Macedonian, the Roman and the British, sink into insignificance.\"\n\nOne of the most accepted distinctions between earlier empires and the American Empire is the latter's “global” or “planetary” scope. French former Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine wondered: \"The situation is unprecedented: What previous empire subjugated the entire world...?\" The quests for universal empire are old but the present quest outdoes the previous in \"the notable respect of being the first to actually be global in its reach.\" For Historian Eric Hobsbawm, a \"key novelty of the US imperial project is that all other great powers and empires knew that they were not the only ones...\" Another Historian Paul Kennedy, who made his name in the 1980s with his prediction of the imminent US “imperial overstretch,” in 2002 acknowledged about the present world system: \n\nWalter Russell Mead observes that the United States attempts to repeate “globally” what the ancient empires of Egypt, China and Rome had each accomplished on a regional basis. Professor Emeritus of Sociology at the University of Leeds, Zygmunt Bauman, concludes that due to its planetary dimension, the new empire cannot be drawn on a map:\n\n\"Times Atlas of Empires\" numbers 70 empires in the world history. Niall Ferguson lists numerous parallels between them and the United States. He concludes: “To those who would still insist on American exceptionalism, the historian of empires can only retort: as exceptional as all the other 69 empires.” Fareed Zakaria stressed one element not exceptional for the American Empire—the concept of exceptionalism. All dominant empires thought they were special.\n\nIn 1945, Historian Ludwig Dehio predicted global unification due to the circumscription of the global system, although he did not use this term. Being global, the system can neither expand nor be subject to external intrusion as the European states system had been for centuries:\n\nFifteen years later, Dehio confirmed his hypothesis: The European system owed its durability to its overseas outlet. “But how can a multiple grouping of world states conceivably be supported from outside in the framework of a finite globe?”\n\nDuring the same time, Quincy Wright developed a similar concept. Balance-of-power politics has aimed less at preserving peace than at preserving the independence of states and preventing the development of world empire. In the course of history, the balance of power repeatedly reemerged, but on ever-wider scale. Eventually, the scale became global. Unless we proceed to “interplanetary wars,” this pattern can no longer continue. In spite of significant reversals, the “trend towards world unity” can “scarcely be denied.” World unity appears to be “the limit toward which the process of world history seems to tend.”\n\nFive scholars—Hornell Hart, Raoul Naroll, Louis Morano, Rein Taagepera and the author of the circumscription theory Robert Carneiro—researched expanding imperial cycles. They worked with historical atlases but the advent of YouTube provided us with a better visualization. They reached the same conclusion—that a world empire is pre-determined—and attempted to estimate the time of its appearance. Naroll and Carneiro found that this time is close at hand: around the year 2200 and 2300 respectively.\n\nThe founder of the Paneuropean Union, Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, writing yet in 1943, drew a more specific and immediate future imperial project: After the War America is bound “to take over the command of the skies.” The danger of “the utter annihilation of all enemy towns and lands” can “only be prevented by the air superiority of a single power … America’s air role is the only alternative to intercontinental wars.” Despite his outstanding anti-imperialism, Coudenhove-Kalergi detailed: \n\nCoudenhove-Kalergi envisaged a kind of Pax Americana modeled on “Pax Romana”:\nThis period would be necessary transitory stage before World State is eventually established, though he did not specify how the last transformation is expected to occur. Coudenhove-Kalergi's follower in the teleological theory of World State, Toynbee, supposed the traditional way of universal conquest and emphasized that the world is ripe for conquest: \"…Hitler's eventual failure to impose peace on the world by the force of arms was due, not to any flaw in his thesis that the world was ripe for conquest, but to an accidental combination of incidental errors in his measures…\" But \"in falling by so narrow a margin to win the prize of world-dominion for himself, Hitler had left the prize dangling within the reach of any successor capable of pursuing the same aims of world-conquest with a little more patience, prudence, and tact.\" With his \"revolution of destruction,\" Hitler has performed the \"yeoman service\" for \"some future architect of a \"Pax Ecumenica\"... For a post-Hitlerian empire-builder, Hitler's derelict legacy was a gift of the Gods.\"\n\nThe next “architect of a Pax Ecumenica,” known more commonly as Pax Americana, demonstrated “more patience, prudence, and tact.” Consequently, as President Dwight Eisenhower put it, the NATO allies became “almost psychopathic” whenever anyone talked about a US withdrawal, and the reception of his successor John Kennedy in Berlin was “almost hysterical,” as Chancellor Conrad Adenauer characterized it . John Ikenberry finds that the Europeans wanted a stronger, more formal and more imperial system than the United States was initially willing to provide. In the end the United States settled for this “form of empire—a Pax Americana with formal commitments to Europe.” According to a much debated thesis, the United States became “empire by invitation.” The period discussed in the thesis (1945–1952) ended precisely the year Toynbee theorized on \"some future architect of a Pax Ecumenica.”\n\nDissociating America from Rome, Eisenhower gave a pessimistic forecast. In 1951, before he became President, he had written on West Europe: “We cannot be a modern Rome guarding the far frontiers with our legions if for no other reason than that these are not, politically, our frontiers. What we must do is to assist these [West European] peoples.” Two years later, he wrote: When it was decided to deploy US divisions to Europe, no one had “for an instant” thought that they would remain there for “several decades”—that the United States could “build a sort of Roman Wall with its own troops and so protect the world.”\n\nEisenhower assured Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev on Berlin in 1959: “Clearly we did not contemplate 50 years in occupation there.” It lasted, remarks Marc Trachtenberg, from July 1945 to September 1994, 10 months short of 50 years. Notably, when the US troops eventually left, they left eastward. Confirming the theory of the “empire by invitation,” with their first opportunity East European states extended the “invitation.”\n\nChalmers Johnson regards the global military reach of the United States as empire in its “initial” form. Dimitri Simes finds that most of the world sees the United States as a \"nascent\" imperial power. Some scholars concerned how this empire would look in its ultimate form. The ultimate form of empire was described by Michael Doyle in his \"Empires\". It is empire in which its two main components—the ruling core and the ruled periphery—merged to form one integrated whole. At this stage the \"empire\" as defined ceases to exist and becomes \"world state\". Doyle examplifies the transformation on the case of the Roman Emperor Caracalla whose legislation in AD 212 extended the Roman citizenship to all inhabitants of the Mediterranean world.\n\nInternational Relations scholar Alexander Wendt in his 2003 article “Why the World State is Inevitable…” supposed the pathway of universal conquest and subsequent consolidation provided the conquering power recognizes all conquered members. Replying on criticism, Wendt invoked the example of the Roman Empire: A \"world empire would be an unstable equilibrium, still subject to the struggle for recognition.\" However, conquest can \"produce a proper ‘state’ if, as a result of internal reform, the world empire eventually recognizes all of its members (like the Roman Empire did, for example).”\n\nDoyle's case of the Roman Empire had also been evoked by Susan Strange in her 1988 article, \"The Future of the American Empire.\" Strange emphasized that the most persistent empires were those which best managed to integrate the ruling core and the peripheral allies. The article is partly a reply on the published a year earlier bestseller The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers which predicted imminent US \"imperial overstretch.\" Strange found this outcome unlikely, stressing the fact that the peripheral allies have been successfully recruited into the American Empire.\n\nEnvisaging a world empire of either the United States or the Soviet Union (whoever is victorious in World War III), Bertrand Russell projected the Roman scenario too: \"Like the Romans, they will, in the course of time, extend citizenship to the vanquished. There will then be a true world state, and it will be possible to forget that it will have owed its origin to conquest.\"\n\nTo the case of Caracalla, Toynbee added the Abbasid cosmopolitan reformation of 750 AD. Both \"were good auguries for the prospect that, in a post-Modern chapter of Western history, a supranational commonwealth originally based on the hegemony of a paramount power over its satellites might eventually be put on the sounder basis of a constitutional partnership in which all the people of all the partner states would have their fare share in the conduct of common affairs.”\n\nHistorian Maks Ostrovski finds above mentioned cosmopolitan reformations to be the characteristic fate of persistent empires. When such a reformation occurs in our world, he writes, the green card would be abolished since all earth inhabitants would have it by birth. This cosmopolitan World State, as the records of earlier circumscribed civilizations suggest, will last millennia.\n\nBULLET::::- Colonialism\nBULLET::::- Comparative studies of the Roman and Han empires\nBULLET::::- Democratic empire\nBULLET::::- Empire-building\nBULLET::::- Hegemony\nBULLET::::- Historical powers\nBULLET::::- Imperialism\nBULLET::::- Linguistic imperialism\nBULLET::::- Military globalization\nBULLET::::- Nomadic empire\nBULLET::::- Soviet Empire\nBULLET::::- World state\nLists:\nBULLET::::- List of empires\nBULLET::::- List of largest empires\nBULLET::::- List of extinct countries, empires, etc.\nBULLET::::- List of countries spanning more than one continent\nBULLET::::- List of Hindu Empires and Dynasties\n\nBULLET::::- Citations\n\nBULLET::::- Abernethy, David. \"The Dynamics of Global Dominance: European Empires 1414–1980\". New Haven: Yale University Press 2000.\nBULLET::::- Barkey, Karen. \"Empire of Difference: The Ottomans in Comparative Perspective\". New York: Cambridge University Press 2008.\nBULLET::::- Burbank, Jane and Frederick Cooper. \"Empires in World History: Power and the Politics of Difference\". Princeton: Princeton University Press 2010.\nBULLET::::- Colomer, Josep \"The European Empire\". Amazon Books, 2016.\nBULLET::::- Colomer, Josep \"Great Empires, Small Nations. The uncertain future of the sovereign state\". London: Routledge, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Cooper, Frederick. \"Colonialism in Question: Theory, Knowledge, History\". Berkeley: University of California Press 1997.\nBULLET::::- Darwin, John. \"After Tamerlane: The Global History of Empire since 1405\". London: Bloomsbury Press 2008.\nBULLET::::- Elliott, J.H. \"Empires of the Atlantic World: Britain and Spain in America, 1492–1830\". New Haven: Yale University Press 2006.\nBULLET::::- Findlay, Ronald and Kevin H. O'Rourke. \"Power and Plenty: Trade, Power, and the World Economy in the Second Millennium\". Princeton: Princeton University Press 2007.\nBULLET::::- Gilpin, Robert \"War and Change in World Politics\" pp. 110–116\nBULLET::::- Written for the United Nations Research Institute on Development, UNRISD, Geneva.\nBULLET::::- Kamen, Henry. \"Empire: How Spain Became a World Power, 1492–1763\". New York: HarperCollins 2003,\nBULLET::::- Kennedy, Paul. \"The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000\". New York: Random House 1987.\nBULLET::::- Innis, Harold (1950, rev. 1972). \"Empire and Communications\". Rev. by Mary Q. Innis; foreword by Marshall McLuhan. Toronto, Ont.: University of Toronto Press.\nBULLET::::- Kumar, Krishan. \"Visions of empire: How five imperial regimes shaped the world\" (Princeton UP, 2019), examines the Roman, Ottoman, Habsburg, Russian, British and French empires. excerpts\nBULLET::::- Pagden, Anthony. \"Peoples and Empires: A Short History of European Migration, Exploration, and Conquest from Greece to the Present\". New York: Modern Library 2001.\nBULLET::::- Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. \"The Portuguese Empire in Asia, 1500–1700\". London: Longman 1993.\nBULLET::::- Tracy, James D., ed. \"The Rise of Merchant Empires: State Power and World Trade, 1350–1750\". New York: Cambridge University Press 1990.\n\nBULLET::::- Index of Colonies and Possessions\nBULLET::::- Gavrov, Sergey Modernization of the Empire. Social and Cultural Aspects of Modernization Processes in Russia\nBULLET::::- Mehmet Akif Okur, Rethinking Empire After 9/11: Towards A New Ontological Image of World Order, Perceptions, Journal of International Affairs, Volume XII, Winter 2007, pp. 61–93.\n"}
{"id": "10160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10160", "title": "Final Solution", "text": "Final Solution\n\nThe Final Solution or the Final Solution to the Jewish Question (\"Endlösung der Judenfrage\") was a Nazi plan for the genocide of Jews during World War II. The \"Final Solution to the Jewish question\" was the official code name for the murder of all Jews within reach, which was not restricted to the European continent. This policy of deliberate and systematic genocide starting across German-occupied Europe was formulated in procedural and geopolitical terms by Nazi leadership in January 1942 at the Wannsee Conference held near Berlin, and culminated in the Holocaust, which saw the killing of 90% of Polish Jews, and two thirds of the Jewish population of Europe.\n\nThe nature and timing of the decisions that led to the Final Solution is an intensely researched and debated aspect of the Holocaust. The program evolved during the first 25 months of war leading to the attempt at \"murdering every last Jew in the German grasp\". Most historians agree, wrote Christopher Browning, that the Final Solution cannot be attributed to a single decision made at one particular point in time. \"It is generally accepted the decision-making process was prolonged and incremental.\" In 1940, following the Fall of France, Adolf Eichmann devised the Madagascar Plan to move Europe's Jewish population to the French colony, but the plan was abandoned for logistical reasons, mainly a naval blockade. There were also preliminary plans to deport Jews to Palestine and Siberia. In 1941, wrote Raul Hilberg, in the first phase of the mass murder of Jews, the mobile killing units began to pursue their victims across occupied eastern territories; in the second phase, stretching across all of German-occupied Europe, the Jewish victims were sent on death trains to centralized extermination camps built for the purpose of systematic implementation of the Final Solution.\n\nThe term \"Final Solution\" was a euphemism used by the Nazis to refer to their plan for the annihilation of the Jewish people. Historians have shown that the usual tendency of the German leadership was to be extremely guarded when discussing the Final Solution. Euphemisms were, in Mark Roseman's words, \"their normal mode of communicating about murder\".\n\nFrom gaining power in January 1933 until the outbreak of war in September 1939, the Nazi persecution of the Jews in Germany was focused on intimidation, expropriating their money and property, and encouraging them to emigrate. According to the Nazi Party policy statement, the Jews and Gypsies (although numerically fewer), were the only \"alien people in Europe\". In 1936, the Bureau of Romani Affairs in Munich was taken over by Interpol and renamed \"The Center for Combating the Gypsy Menace\". Introduced at the end of 1937, the \"final solution of the Gypsy Question\" entailed round-ups, expulsions, and incarceration of Romani in concentration camps built at, until this point in time, Dachau, Buchenwald, Flossenbürg, Mauthausen, Natzweiler, Ravensbruck, Taucha, and Westerbork. After the Anschluss with Austria in 1938, special offices were established in Vienna and Berlin to \"facilitate\" Jewish emigration, without covert plans for their forthcoming annihilation.\n\nThe outbreak of war and the invasion of Poland brought a population of 3.5 million Polish Jews under the control of the Nazi and Soviet security forces, and marked the start of a far more savage persecution, including mass killings. In the German-occupied zone of Poland, Jews were forced into hundreds of makeshift ghettos, pending other arrangements. Two years later, with the launch of Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the German top echelon began to pursue Hitler's new anti-Semitic plan to eradicate, rather than expel, Jews. Hitler's earlier ideas about forcible removal of Jews from the German-controlled territories in order to achieve \"Lebensraum\" were abandoned after the failure of the air campaign against Britain, initiating a naval blockade of Germany.<ref name=\"CRB/Path\"></ref> \"Reichsführer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler became the chief architect of a new plan, which came to be called \"The Final Solution to the Jewish question\". On 31 July 1941, \"Reichsmarschall\" Hermann Göring wrote to Reinhard Heydrich (Himmler's deputy and chief of the RSHA), authorising him to make the \"necessary preparations\" for a \"total solution of the Jewish question\" and coordinate with all affected organizations. Göring also instructed Heydrich to submit concrete proposals for the implementation of the new projected goal.\n\nBroadly speaking, the extermination of Jews was carried out in two major operations. With the onset of Operation Barbarossa, mobile killing units of the SS, the Einsatzgruppen, and Order Police battalions were dispatched to the occupied Soviet Union for the express purpose of killing all Jews. During the early stages of the invasion, Himmler himself visited Białystok in the beginning of July 1941, and requested that, \"as a matter of principle, any Jew\" behind the German-Soviet frontier was to be \"regarded as a partisan\". His new orders gave the SS and police leaders full authority for the mass murder behind the front lines. By August 1941, all Jewish men, women, and children were shot. In the second phase of annihilation, the Jewish inhabitants of central, western, and south-eastern Europe were transported by Holocaust trains to camps with newly-built gassing facilities. Raul Hilberg wrote: \"In essence, the killers of the occupied USSR moved to the victims, whereas outside this arena, the victims were brought to the killers. The two operations constitute an evolution not only chronologically, but also in complexity.\" Massacres of about one million Jews occurred before plans for the Final Solution were fully implemented in 1942, but it was only with the decision to annihilate the entire Jewish population that extermination camps such as Auschwitz II Birkenau and Treblinka were fitted with permanent gas chambers to kill large numbers of Jews in a relatively short period of time.\n\nThe plans to exterminate all the Jews of Europe were formalized at the Wannsee Conference, held at an SS guesthouse near Berlin, on 20 January 1942. The conference was chaired by Heydrich and attended by 15 senior officials of the Nazi Party and the German government. Most of those attending were representatives of the Interior Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, and the Justice Ministry, including Ministers for the Eastern Territories. At the conference, Heydrich indicated that approximately 11,000,000 Jews in Europe would fall under the provisions of the \"Final Solution\". This figure included not only Jews residing in Axis-controlled Europe, but also the Jewish populations of the United Kingdom and of neutral nations (Switzerland, Ireland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal, and European Turkey). Eichmann's biographer David Cesarani wrote that Heydrich's main purpose in convening the conference was to assert his authority over the various agencies dealing with Jewish issues. \"The simplest, most decisive way that Heydrich could ensure the smooth flow of deportations\" to death camps, according to Cesarani, \"was by asserting his total control over the fate of the Jews in the Reich and the east\" under the single authority of the RSHA. A copy of the minutes of this meeting was found by the Allies in March 1947; it was too late to serve as evidence during the first Nuremberg Trial, but was used by prosecutor General Telford Taylor in the subsequent Nuremberg Trials.\n\nAfter the end of World War II, surviving archival documents provided a clear record of the Final Solution policies and actions of Nazi Germany. They included the Wannsee Conference Protocol, which documented the co-operation of various German state agencies in the SS-led Holocaust, as well as some 3,000 tons of original German records captured by Allied armies, including the Einsatzgruppen reports, which documented the progress of the mobile killing units assigned, among other tasks, to kill Jewish civilians during the attack on the Soviet Union in 1941. The evidential proof which documented the mechanism of the Holocaust was submitted at Nuremberg.\n\nThe Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union codenamed Operation Barbarossa, which commenced on 22 June 1941, set in motion a \"war of annihilation\" which quickly opened the door to the systematic mass murder of European Jews. For Hitler, Bolshevism was merely \"the most recent and most nefarious manifestation of the eternal Jewish threat\". On 3 March 1941, Wehrmacht Joint Operations Staff Chief Alfred Jodl repeated Hitler's declaration that the \"Jewish-Bolshevik intelligentsia would have to be eliminated\" and that the forthcoming war would be a confrontation between two completely opposing cultures. In May 1941, Gestapo leader Heinrich Müller wrote a preamble to the new law limiting the jurisdiction of military courts in prosecuting troops for criminal actions because: \"This time, the troops will encounter an especially dangerous element from the civilian population, and therefore, have the right and obligation to secure themselves.\"\n\nHimmler assembled a force of about 3,000 men from Security Police, Gestapo, Kripo, SD, and the Waffen-SS, as the so-called \"special commandos of the security forces\" known as the \"Einsatzgruppen\", to eliminate both communists and Jews in occupied territories. These forces were supported by 21 battalions of Orpo Reserve Police under Kurt Daluege, adding up to 11,000 men. The explicit orders given to the Order Police varied between locations, but for Police Battalion 309 participating in the first mass murder of 5,500 Polish Jews in the Soviet-controlled Białystok (a Polish provincial capital), Major Weiss explained to his officers that Barbarossa is a war of annihilation against Bolshevism, and that his battalions would proceed ruthlessly against all Jews, regardless of age or sex.\n\nAfter crossing the Soviet demarcation line in 1941, what had been regarded as exceptional in the Greater Germanic Reich became a normal way of operating in the east. The crucial taboo against the killing of women and children was breached not only in Białystok, but also in Gargždai in late June. By July, significant numbers of women and children were being killed behind all front-lines not only by the Germans, but also by the local Ukrainian and Lithuanian auxiliary forces. On 29 July 1941, at a meeting of SS officers in Vileyka (Polish Wilejka, now Belarus), the \"Einsatzgruppen\" had been given a dressing-down for their low execution figures. Heydrich himself issued an order to include the Jewish women and children in all subsequent shooting operations. Accordingly, by the end of July the entire Jewish population of Vileyka, men, women and children, were murdered. Around 12 August, no less than two-thirds of the Jews shot in Surazh were women and children of all ages. In late August 1941 the \"Einsatzgruppen\" murdered 23,600 Jews in the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre. A month later, the largest mass shooting of Soviet Jews took place on 29–30 September in the ravine of Babi Yar, near Kiev, where more than 33,000 Jewish people of all ages were systematically machine-gunned. In mid-October 1941, HSSPF South, under the command of Friedrich Jeckeln, had reported the indiscriminate killing of more than 100,000 people.\n\nBy the end of December 1941, before the Wannsee Conference, over 439,800 Jewish people had been murdered, and the Final Solution policy in the east became common knowledge within the SS. Entire regions were reported \"free of Jews\" by the \"Einsatzgruppen\". Addressing his district governors in the General Government on 16 December 1941, Governor-General Hans Frank said: \"But what will happen to the Jews? Do you believe they will be lodged in settlements in Ostland? In Berlin, we were told: why all this trouble; we cannot use them in the Ostland or the Reichskommissariat either; liquidate them yourselves!\" Two days later, Himmler recorded the outcome of his discussion with Hitler. The result was: \"\"als Partisanen auszurotten\"\" (\"exterminate them as partisans\"). Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer wrote that the remark is probably as close as historians will ever get to a definitive order from Hitler for the genocide carried out during the Holocaust. Within two years, the total number of shooting victims in the east had risen to between 618,000 and 800,000 Jews.\n\nSeveral scholars have suggested that the Final Solution began in the newly formed district of \"Bezirk Bialystok\". The German army took over Białystok within days. On Friday, 27 June 1941, the Reserve Police Battalion 309 arrived in the city and set the Great Synagogue on fire with hundreds of Jewish men locked inside. The burning of the synagogue was followed by a frenzy of killings both inside the homes around the Jewish neighbourhood of Chanajki, and in the city park, lasting until night time. The next day, some 30 wagons of dead bodies were taken to mass graves. As noted by Browning, the killings were led by a commander \"who correctly intuited and anticipated the wishes of his Führer\" without direct orders. For reasons unknown, the number of victims in the official report by Major Weis was cut in half. The next mass shooting of Polish Jews within the newly formed \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\" took place in two days of 5–7 August in occupied Pińsk, where over 12,000 Jews died at the hands of Waffen SS, not the \"Einsatzgruppen\". An additional 17,000 Jews perished there in a ghetto uprising crushed a year later with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police.\n\nAn Israeli historian Dina Porat claimed that the Final Solution, i.e.: \"the systematic overall physical extermination of Jewish communities one after the other – began in Lithuania\" during the massive German chase after the Red Army across the Baltic states in \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\". The subject of the Holocaust in Lithuania has been analysed by Konrad Kweit from USHMM who wrote: \"Lithuanian Jews were among the first victims of the Holocaust [beyond the eastern borders of occupied Poland]. The Germans carried out the mass executions [...] signaling the beginning of the 'Final Solution'.\" About 80,000 Jews were killed in Lithuania by October (including in formerly Polish Wilno) and about 175,000 by the end of 1941 according to official reports.\n\nWithin one week from the start of Operation Barbarossa, Heydrich issued an order to his \"Einsatzgruppen\" for the on-the-spot execution of all Bolsheviks, interpreted by the SS to mean all Jews. One of the first indiscriminate massacres of men, women, and children in Reichskommissariat Ukraine took the lives of over 4,000 Polish Jews in occupied Łuck on 2–4 July 1941, murdered by \"Einsatzkommando\" 4a assisted by the Ukrainian People's Militia. Formed officially on 20 August 1941, the \"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\" – stretching from prewar east-central Poland to Crimea – had become operational theatre of the \"Einsatzgruppe\" C. Within the Soviet Union proper, between 9 July 1941 and 19 September 1941 the city of Zhytomyr was made \"Judenfrei\" in three murder operations conducted by German and Ukrainian police in which 10,000 Jews perished. In the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre of 26–28 August 1941 some 23,600 Jews were shot in front of open pits (including 14,000–18,000 people expelled from Hungary). After an incident in Bila Tserkva in which 90 small children left behind had to be shot separately, Blobel requested that Jewish mothers hold them in their arms during mass shootings. Long before the conference at Wannsee, 28,000 Jews were shot by SS and Ukrainian military in Vinnytsia on 22 September 1941, followed by the 29 September massacre of 33,771 Jews at Babi Yar. In Dnipropetrovsk, on 13 October 1941 some 10,000–15,000 Jews were shot. In Chernihiv, 10,000 Jews were put to death and only 260 Jews were spared. In mid-October, during the Krivoy-Rog massacre of 4,000–5,000 Soviet Jews the entire Ukrainian auxiliary police force actively participated. In the first days of January 1942 in Kharkiv, 12,000 Jews were murdered, but smaller massacres continued in this period on daily basis in countless other locations. In August 1942 in the presence of only a few German SS men over 5,000 Jews were massacred in Polish Zofjówka by the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police leading to the town's complete sweep from existence.\n\nHistorians find it difficult to determine precisely when the first concerted effort at annihilation of all Jews began in the last weeks of June 1941 during Operation Barbarossa. Dr. Samuel Drix (\"Witness to Annihilation\"), Jochaim Schoenfeld (\"Holocaust Memoirs\"), and several survivors of the Janowska concentration camp, who were interviewed in the film \"Janovska Camp at Lvov\", among other witnesses, have argued that the Final Solution began in Lwów (Lemberg) in \"Distrikt Galizien\" of the General Government during the German advance across Soviet-occupied Poland. Statements and memoirs of survivors emphasize that, when Ukrainian nationalists and \"ad hoc\" Ukrainian People's Militia (soon reorganized as the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police) began to murder women and children, rather than only male Jews, the \"Final Solution\" had begun. Witnesses have said that such murders happened both prior to and during the pogroms reportedly triggered by the NKVD prisoner massacre. The question of whether there was some coordination between the Lithuanian and Ukrainian militias remains open (i.e. collaborating for a joint assault in Kovno, Wilno, and Lwów).\n\nThe killings continued uninterrupted. On 12 October 1941, in Stanisławów, some 10,000–12,000 Jewish men, women, and children were shot at the Jewish cemetery by the German uniformed SS-men and Ukrainian Auxiliary Police during the so-called \"Bloody Sunday\" \"\". The shooters began firing at 12 noon and continued without stopping by taking turns. There were picnic tables set up on the side with bottles of vodka and sandwiches for those who needed to rest from the deafening noise of gunfire. It was the single largest massacre of Polish Jews in \"Generalgouvernement\" prior to mass gassings of \"Aktion Reinhard\", which commenced at Bełżec in March 1942. Notably, the extermination operations in Chełmno had begun on 8 December 1941, one-and-a-half month before Wannsee, but Chełmno – located in \"Reichsgau Wartheland\" – was not a part of Reinhard, and neither was Auschwitz-Birkenau functioning as an extermination center until November 1944 in Polish lands annexed by Hitler and added to Germany proper.\n\nThe conference at Wannsee gave impetus to the so-called \"second sweep\" of the Holocaust by the bullet in the east. Between April and July 1942 in Volhynia, 30,000 Jews were murdered in death pits with the help of dozens of newly formed Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\". Owing to good relations with the Ukrainian \"Hilfsverwaltung\", these auxiliary battalions were deployed by the SS also in Russia Center, Russia South, and in Byelorussia; each with about 500 soldiers divided into three companies. They participated in the extermination of 150,000 Volhynian Jews alone, or 98 percent of the Jewish inhabitants of the entire region. In July 1942 the Completion of the Final Solution in the General Government territory which included \"Distrikt Galizien\", was ordered personally by Himmler. He set the initial deadline for 31 December 1942.\n\nWhen the Wehrmacht invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the area of the General Government was enlarged by the inclusion of regions that had been annexed by the Soviet Union since the 1939 invasion. The killings of Jews from the Łódź Ghetto in the \"Warthegau\" district began in early December 1941 with the use of gas vans [approved by Heydrich] at the Kulmhof extermination camp. The deceptive guise of \"Resettlement in the East\" organised by SS Commissioners, was also tried and tested at Chełmno. By the time the European-wide Final Solution was formulated two months later, Heydrich's RSHA had already confirmed the effectiveness of industrial killing by exhaust fumes, and the strength of deception.\n\nConstruction work on the first killing centre at Bełżec in occupied Poland began in October 1941, three months before the Wannsee Conference. The new facility was operational by March the following year.<ref name=\"M/MPwB\"></ref> By mid-1942, two more death camps had been built on Polish lands: Sobibór operational by May 1942, and Treblinka operational in July. From July 1942, the mass murder of Polish and foreign Jews took place at Treblinka as part of Operation Reinhard, the deadliest phase of the Final Solution. More Jews were killed at Treblinka than at any other Nazi extermination camp apart from Auschwitz. By the time the mass killings of Operation Reinhard ended in 1943, roughly two million Jews in German-occupied Poland had been murdered. The total number of people killed in 1942 in Lublin/Majdanek, Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka was 1,274,166 by Germany's own estimation, not counting Auschwitz II Birkenau nor \"Kulmhof\". Their bodies were buried in mass graves initially. Both Treblinka and Bełżec were equipped with powerful crawler excavators from Polish construction sites in the vicinity, capable of most digging tasks without disrupting surfaces. Although other methods of extermination, such as the cyanic poison Zyklon B, were already being used at other Nazi killing centres such as Auschwitz, the \"Aktion Reinhard\" camps used lethal exhaust gases from captured tank engines.\n\nThe \"Holocaust by bullets\" (as opposed to the \"Holocaust by gas\") went on in the territory of occupied Poland in conjunction with the ghetto uprisings, irrespective of death camps' quota. In two weeks of July 1942, the Słonim Ghetto revolt, crushed with the help of Latvian, Lithuanian, and Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\", cost the lives of 8,000–13,000 Jews. The second largest mass shooting (to that particular date) took place in late October 1942 when the insurgency was suppressed in the Pińsk Ghetto; over 26,000 men, women and children were shot with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police before the ghetto's closure. During the suppression of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising (the largest single revolt by Jews during World War II), 13,000 Jews were killed in action before May 1943. Numerous other uprisings were quelled without impacting the pre-planned Nazi deportations actions.\n\nAbout two-thirds of the overall number of victims of the Final Solution were killed before February 1943, which included the main phase of the extermination programme in the West launched by Eichmann on 11 June 1942 from Berlin. The Holocaust trains run by the Deutsche Reichsbahn and several other national railway systems delivered condemned Jewish captives from as far as Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Moravia, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, and even Scandinavia. The cremation of exhumed corpses to destroy any evidence left behind began in early spring and continued throughout summer. The nearly completed clandestine programme of murdering all deportees was explicitly addressed by Heinrich Himmler in his Posen speeches made to the leadership of the Nazi Party on 4 October and during a conference in Posen (Poznan) of 6 October 1943 in occupied Poland. Himmler explained why the Nazi leadership found it necessary to kill Jewish women and children along with the Jewish men. The assembled functionaries were told that the Nazi state policy was \"the extermination of the Jewish people\" as such.\n\nOn 19 October 1943, five days after the prisoner revolt in Sobibór, Operation Reinhard was terminated by Odilo Globocnik on behalf of Himmler. The camps responsible for the killing of nearly 2,700,000 Jews were soon closed. Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka were dismantled and ploughed over before spring. The operation was followed by the single largest German massacre of Jews in the entire war carried out on 3 November 1943; with approximately 43,000 prisoners shot one-by-one simultaneously in three nearby locations by the Reserve Police Battalion 101 hand-in-hand with the Trawniki men from Ukraine. Auschwitz alone had enough capacity to fulfill the Nazis' remaining extermination needs.\n\nUnlike Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka, and Lublin-Majdanek, which were built in the occupied General Government territory inhabited by the largest concentrations of Jews, the killing centre at Auschwitz subcamp of Birkenau operated in Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany directly. The new gas chambers at Bunker I were finished around March 1942 when the Final Solution was officially launched at Belzec. Until mid-June 20,000 Silesian Jews were killed there using Zyklon B. In July 1942, Bunker II became operational. In August, another 10,000–13,000 Polish Jews from Silesia perished, along with 16,000 French Jews declared 'stateless', and 7,700 Jews from Slovakia.\n\nThe infamous 'Gate of Death' at Auschwitz II for the incoming freight trains was built of brick and cement mortar in 1943, and the three-track rail spur was added. Until mid-August, 45,000 Thessaloniki Jews were murdered in a mere six months, including over 30,000 Jews from Sosnowiec (Sosnowitz) and Bendzin Ghettos. The spring of 1944 marked the beginning of the last phase of the Final Solution at Birkenau. The new big ramps and sidings were constructed, and two freight elevators were installed inside Crematoria II and III for moving the bodies faster. The size of the \"Sonderkommando\" was nearly quadrupled in preparation for the Special Operation Hungary (\"Sonderaktion Ungarn\"). In May 1944, Auschwitz-Birkenau became the site of one of the two largest mass murder operations in modern history, after the \"Großaktion Warschau\" deportations of the Warsaw Ghetto inmates to Treblinka in 1942. It is estimated that until July 1944 approximately 320,000 Hungarian Jews were gassed at Birkenau in less than eight weeks. The entire operation was photographed by the SS. In total, between April and November 1944, Auschwitz II received over 585,000 Jews from over a dozen regions as far as Greece, Italy, and France, including 426,000 Jews from Hungary, 67,000 from Łódź, 25,000 from Theresienstadt, and the last 23,000 Jews from the General Government. Auschwitz was liberated by the Red Army on 27 January 1945, when the gassing had already stopped.\n\nHistorians disagree as to when and how the Nazi leadership decided that the European Jews should be exterminated. The controversy is commonly described as the functionalism versus intentionalism debate which began in the 1960s, and subsided thirty years later. In the 1990s, the attention of mainstream historians moved away from the question of top executive orders triggering the Holocaust, and focused on factors which were overlooked earlier, such as personal initiative and ingenuity of countless functionaries in charge of the killing fields. No written evidence of Hitler ordering the Final Solution has ever been found to serve as a \"smoking gun\", and therefore, this one particular question remains unanswered.\n\nHitler made numerous predictions regarding the Holocaust of the Jews of Europe prior to the beginning of World War II. During a speech given on 30 January 1939, on the sixth anniversary of his accession to power, Hitler said:\n\nRaul Hilberg, in his book \"The Destruction of the European Jews\", was the first historian to systematically document and analyse the Nazi project to kill every Jew in Europe. The book was initially published in 1961, and issued in an enlarged version in 1985.\n\nHilberg's analysis of the steps that led to the destruction of European Jews revealed that it was \"an administrative process carried out by bureaucrats in a network of offices spanning a continent\". Hilberg divides this bureaucracy into four components or hierarchies: the Nazi Party, the civil service, industry, and the Wehrmacht armed forces – but their cooperation is viewed as \"so complete that we may truly speak of their fusion into a machinery of destruction\". For Hilberg, the key stages in the destruction process were: definition and registration of the Jews; expropriation of property; concentration into ghettoes and camps; and, finally, annihilation. Hilberg gives an estimate of 5.1 million as the total number of Jews killed. He breaks this figure down into three categories: Ghettoization and general privation: over 800,000; open-air shootings: over 1,300,000; extermination camps: up to 3,000,000.\n\nWith respect to the \"functionalism versus intentionalism\" debate about a master plan for the Final Solution, or the lack thereof, Hilberg posits what has been described as \"a kind of structural determinism\". Hilberg argues that \"a destruction process has an inherent pattern\" and the \"sequence of steps in a destruction process is thus determined\". If a bureaucracy is motivated \"to inflict maximum damage upon a group of people\", it is \"inevitable that a bureaucracy—no matter how decentralized its apparatus or how unplanned its activities—should push its victims through these stages\", culminating in their annihilation.\n\nIn his monograph, \"The Origins Of The Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939 – March 1942\", Christopher Browning argues that Nazi policy toward the Jews was radicalized twice: in September 1939, when the invasion of Poland implied policies of mass expulsion and massive loss of Jewish lives; and in spring 1941, when preparation for Operation Barbarossa involved the planning of mass execution, mass expulsion, and starvation – to dwarf what had happened in Jewish Poland.\n\nBrowning believes that the \"Final Solution as it is now understood—the systematic attempt to murder every last Jew within the German grasp\" took shape during a five-week period, from 18 September to 25 October 1941. During this time: the sites of the first extermination camps were selected, different methods of killing were tested, Jewish emigration from the Third Reich was forbidden, and 11 transports departed for Łódź as a temporary holding station. During this period, Browning writes, \"The vision of the Final Solution had crystallised in the minds of the Nazi leadership, and was being turned into reality.\" This period was the peak of Nazi victories against the Soviet Army on the Eastern Front, and, according to Browning, the stunning series of German victories led to both an expectation that the war would soon be won, and the planning of the final destruction of the \"Jewish-Bolshevik enemy\".\n\nBrowning describes the creation of the extermination camps, which were responsible for the largest number of deaths in the Final Solution, as bringing together three separate developments within the Third Reich: the concentration camps which had been established in Germany since 1933; an expansion of the gassing technology of the Nazi euthanasia programme to provide killing mechanism of greater efficiency and psychological detachment; and the creation of \"factories of death\" to be fed endless streams of victims by mass uprooting and deportation that utilized the experience and personnel from earlier population resettlement programmes—especially the HSSPF and Adolf Eichmann's RSHA for \"Jewish affairs and evacuations\".\n\nPeter Longerich argues that the search for a finite date on which the Nazis embarked upon the extermination of the Jews is futile, in his book \"Holocaust: The Nazi Persecution and Murder of the Jews\" (2011). Longerich writes: \"We should abandon the notion that it is historically meaningful to try to filter the wealth of available historical material and pick out a single decision\" that led to the Holocaust.\n\nTimothy Snyder writes that Longerich \"grants the significance of Greiser's murder of Jews by gas at Chełmno in December 1941\", but also detects a significant moment of escalation in spring 1942, which includes \"the construction of the large death factory at Treblinka for the destruction of the Warsaw Jews, and the addition of a gas chamber to the concentration camp at Auschwitz for the murder of the Jews of Silesia\". Longerich suggests that it \"was only in the summer of 1942, that mass killing was finally understood as the realization of the Final Solution, rather than as an extensively violent preliminary to some later program of slave labor and deportation to the lands of a conquered USSR\". For Longerich, to see mass killing as the Final Solution was an acknowledgement by the Nazi leadership that there would not be a German military victory over the USSR in the near future.\n\nDavid Cesarani emphasises the improvised, haphazard nature of Nazi policies in response to changing war time conditions in his overview, \"Final Solution: The Fate Of The European Jews 1933–49\" (2016). \"Cesarani provides telling examples\", wrote Mark Roseman, \"of a lack of coherence and planning for the future in Jewish policy, even when we would most expect it. The classic instance is the invasion of Poland in 1939, when not even the most elementary consideration had been given to what should happen to Poland's Jews either in the shorter or longer term. Given that Poland was home to the largest Jewish population in the world, and that, in a couple of years, it would house the extermination camps, this is remarkable.\"\n\nWhereas Christopher Browning places the Nazi plan to exterminate the Jews in the context of the Wehrmacht victories on the Eastern front, Cesarani argues that the German subsequent realisation that there would be no swift victory over the Soviet Union \"scuppered the last territorial 'solution' still on the table: expulsion to Siberia\". Germany's declaration of war on the United States on 11 December 1941, \"meant that holding European Jews hostage to deter the US from entering the conflict was now pointless. As Joseph Goebbels put it when he summarised a secret speech Hitler made on 12 December 1941: 'The world war is here, the destruction of the Jews must be the inevitable consequence'.\" Cesarani concludes, the Holocaust \"was rooted in anti-Semitism, but it was shaped by war\". The fact that the Nazis were, ultimately, so successful in killing between five and six million Jews was not due to the efficiency of the Third Reich or the clarity of their policies. \"Rather, the catastrophic rate of killing was due to German persistence … and the duration of the murderous campaigns. This last factor was largely a consequence of allied military failure.\"\nThe entry of the U.S. into the War is also crucial to the time-frame proposed by Christian Gerlach, who argued in his 1997 thesis, that the Final Solution decision was announced on 12 December 1941, when Hitler addressed a meeting of the Nazi Party (the \"Reichsleiter\") and of regional party leaders (the \"Gauleiter\"). The day after Hitler's speech, on 13 December 1941 Joseph Goebbels wrote in his diary:\n\nCesarani notes that by 1943, as the military position of the German forces deteriorated, the Nazi leadership became more openly explicit about the Final Solution. In March, Goebbels confided to his diary: \"On the Jewish question especially, we are in it so deeply that there is no getting out any longer. And that is a good thing. Experience teaches that a movement and a people who have burned their bridges fight with much greater determination and fewer constraints than those that have a chance of retreat.\"\n\nWhen Himmler addressed senior SS personnel and leading members of the regime in the Posen speeches on 4 October 1943, he used \"the fate of the Jews as a sort of blood bond to tie the civil and military leadership to the Nazi cause\".\n\nIn May 1944, Himmler told senior army officers that, \"The Jewish question has been solved in Germany and in the countries occupied by Germany. It has been solved uncompromisingly, as was appropriate in view of the struggle in which we were engaged for the life of our nation.\" Himmler explained that it was important that even women and children had to die, so that no \"hate-filled avengers\" would be able to confront our children and grandchildren.\n\nBULLET::::- Korherr Report written in 1943 on the progress of the Final Solution\nBULLET::::- Höfle Telegram with arrivals for the camps of \"Einsatz Reinhardt\"\nBULLET::::- The role of railways in the Final Solution\nBULLET::::- History of the Jews during World War II\nBULLET::::- Madagascar Plan for Jewish relocation\nBULLET::::- Porajmos, Romani genocide during World War II\n\nBULLET::::- Newer edition by Univ. of Nebraska Press / Yad Vashem 2007.\n\nBULLET::::- Website of the House of the Wannsee Conference\nBULLET::::- The Development of the Final Solution—lecture from Dr. Havi Dreifuss, Yad Vashem\nBULLET::::- Elimination of the Jewish National Home in Palestine: The Einsatzkommando of the Panzer army Africa, 1942 by Klaus-Michael Mallmann and Martin Cüppers\nBULLET::::- Death Decree: Göring directive officially launches the Final Solution\n"}
{"id": "10163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10163", "title": "Eusebius (disambiguation)", "text": "Eusebius (disambiguation)\n\nEusebius (AD 263 – 339; also called Eusebius of Caesarea and Eusebius Pamphili) was a Roman historian, exegete and Christian polemicist. \n\nEusebius (; Greek Εὐσέβιος \"pious\" from \"eu\" (εὖ) \"well\" and \"sebein\" (σέβειν) \"to respect\") may also refer to:\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Esztergom, Hungarian priest, hermit, founder of the Order of Saint Paul the First Hermit\nBULLET::::- Eusebius (praepositus sacri cubiculi), under Constantius II\nBULLET::::- Eusebius (consul 347) (died c. 350), Roman consul in 347\nBULLET::::- Eusebius (consul 359), Roman consul in 359\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Alexandria (6th century), Christian author\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Angers (died 1081), bishop of Angers\nBULLET::::- Saint Eusebius of Cremona (died c. 423)\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Dorylaeum (5th century), bishop of Dorylaeum, opponent of Nestorianism and Monophysitism\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Emesa (300–360), bishop of Emesa\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Laodicea (died 268), bishop of Laodicea\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Myndus (4th century), Neoplatonist philosopher\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Nicomedia (died 341), bishop of Berytus, Nicomedia and Constantinople, leader of Arianism\nBULLET::::- Saint Eusebius of Rome (died 357), priest and martyr\nBULLET::::- Saint Eusebius of Samosata (died 4th-century), bishop of Samosata\nBULLET::::- Saint Eusebius of Vercelli (283–371), bishop of Vercelli, opponent of Arianism\nBULLET::::- Saint Eusebius (bishop of Milan) (died 462), archbishop of Milan\nBULLET::::- Saint Eusebius the Hermit (4th century), solitary monk of Syria\nBULLET::::- Pope Eusebius (died 310), Pope in 309 or 310\nBULLET::::- Eusebius, bishop of Paris until his death in 555\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Thessalonika (6th or 7th century), bishop of Thessalonika during the time of Pope Gregory the Great\nBULLET::::- Hwaetberht (died c. 740s), Abbot of Monkwearmouth-Jarrow Priory, who wrote under the pen-name of \"Eusebius\"\nBULLET::::- Eusebius, one of the \"personae\" of Robert Schumann\n\nEusebius is also the name of:\nBULLET::::- Jerome (347–420), Christian scholar and church father, whose full name was \"Eusebius Sophronius Hieronymus\"\nBULLET::::- Karl Eusebius of Liechtenstein (1611–1684), the second prince of Liechtenstein\n\nBULLET::::- Eusebia (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Eusebeia (Greek: εὐσέβεια), a Greek philosophical and Biblical concept meaning inner piety, spiritual maturity, or godliness.\n"}
{"id": "10164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10164", "title": "Eurystheus", "text": "Eurystheus\n\nIn Greek mythology, Eurystheus (; meaning \"broad strength\" in folk etymology and pronounced ) was king of Tiryns, one of three Mycenaean strongholds in the Argolid, although other authors including Homer and Euripides cast him as ruler of Argos.\n\nEurystheus was the son of Sthenelus and Nicippe, and he was a grandson of the hero Perseus, as was his opponent Heracles. He was married to Antimache, daughter of Amphidamas.\n\nEurystheus was a cousin of Heracles.\n\nIn the contest of wills between Hera and Zeus over whose candidate would be hero, fated to defeat the remaining creatures representing an old order and bring about the reign of the Twelve Olympians, Eurystheus was Hera's candidate and Heracles—though his name implies that at one archaic stage of myth-making he had carried \"Hera's fame\"—was the candidate of Zeus. The arena for the actions that would bring about this deep change are the Twelve Labors imposed on Heracles by Eurystheus. The immediate necessity for the Labours of Heracles is as penance for Heracles' murder of his own family, in a fit of madness, which had been sent by Hera; however, further human rather than mythic motivation is supplied by mythographers who note that their respective families had been rivals for the throne of Mycenae. Details of the individual episodes may be found in the article on the Labours of Heracles, but Hera was connected with all of the opponents Heracles had to overcome.\n\nHeracles' human stepfather Amphitryon was also a grandson of Perseus, and since Amphitryon's father (Alcaeus) was older than Eurystheus' father (Sthenelus), he might have received the kingdom, but Sthenelus had banished Amphitryon for accidentally killing (a familiar mytheme) the eldest son in the family (Electryon). When, shortly before his son Heracles was born, Zeus proclaimed the next-born descendant of Perseus should get the kingdom, Hera thwarted his ambitions by delaying Alcmene's labour and having her candidate Eurystheus born prematurely.Heracles' first task was to slay the Nemean Lion and bring back its skin, which Heracles decided to wear. Eurystheus was so scared by Heracles' fearsome guise that he hid in a subterranean bronze winejar, and from that moment forth all labors were communicated to Heracles through a herald, Copreus.\n\nFor his second labour, to slay the Lernaean Hydra, Heracles took with him his nephew, Iolaus, as a charioteer. When Eurystheus found out that Heracles' nephew had helped him he declared that the labour had not been completed alone and as a result did not count towards the ten labours set for him.\n\nEurystheus' third task did not involve killing a beast, but capturing one alive—the Ceryneian Hind, a golden-horned hind or doe sacred to Artemis. Heracles knew that he had to return the hind, as he had promised, to Artemis, so he agreed to hand it over on the condition that Eurystheus himself come out and take it from him. Eurystheus did come out, but the moment Heracles let the hind go, she sprinted back to her mistress, and Heracles departed, saying that Eurystheus had not been quick enough.\n\nWhen Heracles returned with the Erymanthian Boar, Eurystheus was again frightened and hid in his jar, begging Heracles to get rid of the beast; Heracles obliged.\n\nThe fifth labour proposed by Eurystheus was to clear out the numerous stables of Augeias. Striking a deal with Augeias, Heracles proposed a payment of a tenth of Augeias' cattle if the labour was completed successfully. Not believing the task feasible, Augeias agreed, asking his son Phyleus to witness.\nHeracles rerouted two nearby rivers (Alpheis and Peneios) through the stable, clearing out the dung rapidly. When Augeias learned of Heracles' bargain for the task, he refused payment. Heracles brought the case to court, and Phyleus testified against his father. Enraged, Augeias banished both Phyleus and Heracles from the land before the court had cast their vote. However, Eurystheus refused to credit the labour to Heracles, as he had performed it for payment. So Heracles went and drove Augeias out of the kingdom and installed Phyleus as king. Heracles then took his tenth of the cattle and left them to graze in a field by his home.\n\nFor his sixth labour, Heracles had to drive the Stymphalian Birds off the marshes they plagued. He did so, shooting down several birds with his Hydra-poisoned arrows and bringing them back to Eurystheus as proof.\n\nFor his seventh labour, Heracles captured the Cretan Bull. He used a lasso and rode it back to his cousin. Eurystheus offered to sacrifice the bull to Hera his patron, who hated Heracles. She refused the sacrifice because it reflected glory on Heracles. The bull was released and wandered to Marathon, becoming known as the Marathonian Bull.\n\nWhen Heracles brought back the man-eating Mares of Diomedes successfully, Eurystheus dedicated the horses to Hera and allowed them to roam freely in the Argolid. Bucephalus, Alexander the Great's horse, was said to be descended from these mares.\n\nTo acquire the belt of Hippolyte, queen of the Amazons was Heracles ninth task. This task was at the request of Eurystheus' daughter, Admete. For the tenth labour, he stole the cattle of the giant Geryon, which Eurystheus then had sacrificed to Hera.\n\nTo extend what may have once been ten Labours to the canonical dozen, it was said that Eurystheus didn't count the Hydra, as he was assisted, nor the Augean stables, as Heracles received payment for his work. For the eleventh labour Heracles had to obtain the Apples of the Hesperides; he convinced their father, the Titan Atlas, to help him, but did his share of work by temporarily holding up the sky in the Titan's stead. For his final labour, he was to capture Cerberus, the three-headed hound that guarded the entrance to Hades. When he managed to bring the struggling animal back, the terrified Eurystheus hid in his jar one more time, begging Heracles to leave for good and take the dog with him.\n\nAfter Heracles died, Eurystheus remained bitter over the indignity the hero had caused him. He attempted to destroy Heracles' many children (the Heracleidae, led by Hyllus), who fled to Athens. He attacked the city but was soundly defeated, and Eurystheus and his sons were killed. Though it is widely told that Hyllus killed Eurystheus. The stories about the killer of Eurystheus and the fate of his corpse vary, but the Athenians believed the burial site of Eurystheus remained on their soil and served to protect the country against the descendants of Heracles, who traditionally included the Spartans and Argives.\n\nAfter Eurystheus' death, the brothers Atreus and Thyestes, whom he had left in charge during his absence, took over the city, the former exiling the latter and assuming the kingship, while Tiryns returned to the overlordship of Argos.\n\nEurystheus was a character in \"Heracleidae\", a play by Euripides. Macaria, one of the daughters of Heracles, and her brothers and sisters hid from Eurystheus in Athens, ruled by King Demophon. As Eurystheus prepared to attack, an oracle told Demophon that he would win if and only if a noble woman was sacrificed to Persephone. Macaria volunteered for the sacrifice and a spring was named the Macarian spring in her honor. Eurystheus speaks prophetically of his burial within Attica, claiming that he will be an anti-hero of sorts, though one who will eventually protect the Athenians.\n\nBULLET::::- Eurystheus appears in the 2014 film \"Hercules\" portrayed by Joseph Fiennes. Here, Eurystheus is responsible for the death of Hercules' family rather than Hercules under Hera's spell, having drugged Hercules and sent three black wolves to attack him. The wolves killed Hercules' family, though Hercules believed that it was he who killed his own family. Hercules avenges his family by stabbing Eurystheus with his own dagger.\n\nBULLET::::- Kerenyi, Karl. \"The Heroes of the Greeks\". New York: Thames and Hudson, 1959.\n"}
{"id": "10165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10165", "title": "Effects unit", "text": "Effects unit\n\nAn effects unit or effects pedal is an electronic or digital device that alters the sound of a musical instrument or other audio source. \n\nCommon effects include distortion/overdrive, often used with electric guitar in electric blues and rock music; dynamic effects such as volume pedals and compressors, which affect loudness; filters such as wah-wah pedals and graphic equalizers, which modify frequency ranges; modulation effects, such as chorus, flangers and phasers; pitch effects such as pitch shifters; and time effects, such as reverb and delay, which create echoing sounds and emulate the sound of different spaces.\n\nMost modern effects use solid-state electronics or computer chips. Some effects, particularly older ones such as Leslie speakers and spring reverbs, use mechanical components or vacuum tubes. Effects are often used as stompboxes, which are typically placed on the floor and controlled with footswitches. They are also built into amplifiers, tabletop units designed for DJs and record producers, and rackmounts, and are widely used as software VSTs.\n\nMusicians, audio engineers and record producers use effects units during live performances or in the studio, typically with electric guitar, bass guitar, electronic keyboard or electric piano. While guitar effects are most frequently used with electric or electronic instruments, effects can also be used with acoustic instruments, drums and vocals.\n\nAn effects unit is also called an \"effect box\", \"effects device\", \"effects processor\" or simply \"effects\". In audio engineer parlance, a signal without effects is \"dry\" and an effect-processed signal is \"wet\". The abbreviation \"F/X\" or \"FX\" is sometimes used. A pedal-style unit may be called a \"stomp box\", \"stompbox\", \"effects pedal\" or \"pedal\". A musician bringing many pedals to a live show or recording session often mounts the pedals on a guitar pedalboard, to reduce set-up and tear-down time and, for pedalboards with lids, protect the pedals during transportation. When a musician has multiple effects in a rack mounted road case, this case may be called an \"effects rack\" or \"rig\". When rackmounted effects are mounted in a roadcase, this also speeds up a musician's set-up and tear-down time, because all of the effects can be connected together inside the rack case and all of the units can be plugged into a powerbar.\n\nEffects units are available in a variety of formats or form factors. Stompboxes are primarily used units in live performance and (in some cases) studio recordings. Rackmount devices saw a heavy usage during the later 20th century, due to their advanced processing power and desirable tones. However, by the 21st century, with the advent of digital Plug-Ins and more powerful Stompboxes for live usage, the need and practicality of rackmounted effects units went down, and as such, prices of rack effects have diminished due to lower usage. An effects unit can consist of analog or digital circuitry or a combination of the two. During a live performance, the effect is plugged into the electrical \"signal\" path of the instrument. In the studio, the instrument or other sound-source's auxiliary output is patched into the effect. Form factors are part of a studio or musician's outboard gear.\n\nStompboxes are small plastic or metal chassis which usually lie on the floor or in a pedalboard to be operated by the user's feet. Pedals are often rectangle-shaped, but there are a range of other shapes (e.g., the circle-shaped Fuzz Face). Typical simple stompboxes have a single footswitch, one to three potentiometers (\"pots\" or \"knobs\") for controlling the effect, and a single LED that indicates if the effect is on. A typical distortion or overdrive pedal's three potentiometers, for example, control the level or intensity of the distortion effect, the tone of the effected signal and the volume (level) of the effected signal. Depending on the type of pedal, the potentiometers may control different parameters of the effect. For a chorus effect, for example, the knobs may control the depth and speed of the effect. Complex stompboxes may have multiple footswitches, many knobs, additional switches or buttons that are operated with the fingers, and an alphanumeric LED display that indicates the status of the effect with short acronyms (e.g., DIST for \"distortion\").\nSome pedals have two knobs stacked on top of each other, enabling the unit to provide two knobs per single knob space.\n\nAn \"effects chain\" or \"signal chain\" is formed by connecting two or more stompboxes. Effect chains are typically created between the guitar and the amp or between the preamplifier (\"preamp\") and the power amp. When a pedal is off or inactive, the electric audio signal coming into the pedal diverts onto a \"bypass\", an unaltered \"dry\" signal that continues on to other effects down the chain. In this way, a musician can combine effects within a chain in a variety of ways without having to reconnect boxes during a performance.\nA \"controller\" or \"effects management system\" lets the musician create multiple effect chains, so they can select one or several chains by tapping a single switch. The switches are usually organized in a row or a simple grid.\n\nTo preserve the clarity of the tone, it is most common to put compression, wah and overdrive pedals at the start of the chain; modulation (chorus, flanger, phase shifter) in the middle; and time-based units (delay/echo, reverb) at the end. When using many effects, unwanted noise and hum can be introduced into the sound. Some performers use a noise gate pedal at the end of a chain to reduce unwanted noise and hum introduced by overdrive units or vintage gear.\n\nRackmounted effects are typically built in a thin metal chassis with metal \"ears\" designed to be screwed into a 19-inch rack that is standard to the telecommunication, computing and music technology industries. Rackmounted effects may be one, two or three rack spaces high. When purchased from the store, rack-mounted equipment is not equipped with the rugged chassis features used on stompboxes and amps that are designed to be transported as standalone units, such as corner protectors. Rackmounted units are typically mounted in a rack, which is housed in a road case, a tough plastic case with removable front and rear covers that can be latched on during transportation to protect the knobs and switches and then removed during performances. A rackmount unit may contain electronic circuitry identical to a stompbox's, although its circuits are typically more complex. Unlike stompboxes, rackmounts usually have several different types of effects.\nRackmounts are most commonly used in recording studios and \"front of house\" live sound mixing situations, though professional musicians who play electric bass, electric guitar, or synthesizers may use them in place of stompboxes, to create a rackmounted head unit for their speaker cabinet(s). Rackmounts are controlled by knobs, switches or buttons on their front panel, and often by a MIDI digital control interface. During live performances, a musician can operate rackmounted effects using a \"foot controller\". By setting up effects in a rack-mounted road case, this speeds up set-up and tear-down, because all of the effects can be connected together with patch cords (which can be left connected permanently) and all of the units can be plugged into a power bar. This means that a musician only needs to plug in the main power bar into AC Mains power and plug their instrument into the rack, and the last effect unit's output into their instrument amplifier and/or the PA system.\n\n\"Shock mount\" racks are designed for musicians who frequently move gear between venues. Shock mounts help to protect electronic devices from bumps during transportation. Devices that are less than 19 inches wide may use special \"ear\" adapters to mount on a rack.\n\nA multi-effects device (also called a \"multi-FX\" device) is a single electronics effects pedal or rackmount device that contains many different electronic effects. Multi-FX devices allow users to \"preset\" combinations of different effects, allowing musicians quick on-stage access to different effects combinations. Multi-effects units typically have a range of distortion, chorus, flanger, phaser and reverb effects. The most expensive multi-effects units may also have looper functions. Pedal-style multieffects range from fairly inexpensive stompboxes that contain two pedals and a few knobs to control the effects to large, expensive floor units with many pedals and knobs. Rackmounted multieffects units are typically mounted in a rack. Guitarists and bassists may mount their rackmounted multieffects unit in the same rack with their preamplifier and power amplifier.\n\nA tabletop unit is a type of multi-effects device that sits on a desk and is controlled manually. One such example is the Pod guitar amplifier modeler. Digital effects designed for DJs are often sold in tabletop models, so that the units can be placed alongside a DJ mixer, turntables and CD scratching gear. For a DJ, a pedal located on the floor would not be practical because she/he would find it hard to adjust the knobs.\n\nEffects are often incorporated into amplifiers and even some types of instruments. Electric guitar amplifiers typically have built-in reverb and distortion, while acoustic guitar and keyboard amplifiers tend to only have built-in reverb. Some acoustic instrument amplifiers have reverb, chorus, compression and equalization (bass and treble) effects. Vintage guitar amps (and their 2010-era reissued models) typically have tremolo and vibrato effects, and sometimes reverb. The Fender Bandmaster Reverb amp, for example, had built-in reverb and vibrato. Built-in effects may offer the user less control than standalone pedals or rackmounted units. For example, on some lower- to mid-priced bass amplifiers, the only control on the audio compression effect is a button or switch to turn it on or off, or a single knob. In contrast, a pedal or rackmounted unit would typically provide ratio, threshold and attack knobs and sometimes \"soft knee\" or other options to allow the user to control the compression.\n\nSince the 2000s, guitar amplifiers began having built-in multi-effects units or digital modeling effects. Bass amplifiers are less likely to have built-in effects, although some may have a compressor/limiter or fuzz bass effect. Bass amps from the 1980s sometimes included built-in bass chorus.\n\nInstruments with built-in effects include Hammond organs, electronic organs, electronic pianos and digital synthesizers. Built-in effects for keyboard typically include reverb, chorus and, for Hammond organ, vibrato. Many \"clonewheel organs\" include an overdrive effect. Occasionally, acoustic-electric and electric guitars will have built-in effects, such as a preamp or equalizer.\n\nThe earliest sound effects were strictly studio productions. In the mid to late 1940s, recording engineers and experimental musicians such as Les Paul began manipulating reel-to-reel recording tape to create echo effects and unusual, futuristic sounds. Microphone placement (\"miking\") techniques were used in spaces with specially designed acoustic properties to simulate echo chambers. In 1948 DeArmond released the Trem-Trol, the first commercially available stand-alone effects unit. This device produced a tremolo by passing an instrument's electrical signal through a water-based electrolytic fluid. Most stand-alone effects of the 1950s and early 60s such as the Gibson GA-VI vibrato unit and the Fender reverb box, were expensive and impractical, requiring bulky transformers and high voltages. The original stand-alone units were not especially in-demand as many effects came built into amplifiers. The first popular stand-alone was the 1958 Watkins Copicat, a relatively portable tape echo effect made famous by the British band, The Shadows.\n\nEffects built into guitar amplifiers were the first effects that musicians used regularly outside the studio. From the late 1940s onward, the Gibson Guitar Corp. began including vibrato circuits in combo amplifiers. The 1950 Ray Butts EchoSonic amp was the first to feature the spring reverb \"echo\" sound, which quickly became popular with guitarists such as Chet Atkins, Carl Perkins, Scotty Moore, Luther Perkins, and Roy Orbison. By the 1950s, tremolo, vibrato and reverb were available as built-in effects on many guitar amplifiers. Both Premier and Gibson built tube-powered amps with spring reverb. Fender began manufacturing the tremolo amps Tremolux in 1955 and Vibrolux in 1956.\n\nDistortion was not an effect originally intended by amplifier manufacturers, but could often easily be achieved by \"overdriving\" the power supply in early tube amplifiers. In the 1950s, guitarists began deliberately increasing gain beyond its intended levels to achieve \"warm\" distorted sounds. Among the first musicians to experiment with distortion were Willie Johnson of Howlin' Wolf, Goree Carter, Joe Hill Louis, Ike Turner, Guitar Slim, and Chuck Berry.\n\nIn 1954 Pat Hare produced heavily distorted power chords for several recordings (including James Cotton's \"), creating \"a grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound,\" accomplished by turning the volume knob on his amplifier \"all the way to the right until the speaker was screaming.\" Link Wray's 1958 recording \"Rumble\" inspired young musicians such as Pete Townshend of The Who, Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin, Jeff Beck, Dave Davies of The Kinks, and Neil Young to explore distortion by various means. In 1966, the British company Marshall Amplification began producing the Marshall 1963, a guitar amplifier capable of producing the distorted \"crunch\" that rock musicians were starting to seek.\n\nThe electronic transistor finally made it possible to cram the aural creativity of the recording studio into small, highly portable stompbox units. Transistors replaced vacuum tubes, allowing for much more compact formats and greater stability. The first transistorized guitar effect was the 1962 Maestro Fuzz Tone pedal, which became a sensation after its use in the 1965 Rolling Stones hit \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\".\n\nWarwick Electronics manufactured the first wah-wah pedal, The Clyde McCoy, in 1967 and that same year Jim Morris of Kelsey-Morris Sound developed the first octave effect, which Jimi Hendrix named \"Octavio\". In 1968, Univox began marketing Shin-ei's Uni-Vibe pedal, an effect designed by noted audio engineer Fumio Mieda that mimicked the odd phase shift and chorus effects of the Leslie rotating speakers used in Hammond organs. The pedals soon became favorite effects of guitarists Jimi Hendrix and Robin Trower. Upon first hearing the Octavia, Hendrix allegedly rushed back to the studio and immediately used it to record the guitar solos on \"Purple Haze\" and \"Fire\". In 1976, Roland subsidiary Boss Corporation released the CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, the first chorus pedal, created by taking a chorus circuit from an amplifier and putting it into a stompbox. By the mid-1970s a variety of solid-state effects pedals including flangers, chorus pedals, ring modulators and phase shifters were available.\nIn the 1980s, digital rackmount units began replacing stompboxes as the effects format of choice. Often musicians would record \"dry\", unaltered tracks in the studio and effects would be added in post-production. The success of Nirvana's 1991 album \"Nevermind\" helped to re-ignite interest in stompboxes. Some grunge guitarists would chain several fuzz pedals together and plug them into a tube amplifier. Throughout the 1990s, musicians committed to a \"lo-fi\" aesthetic such as J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr., Stephen Malkmus of Pavement and Robert Pollard of Guided by Voices continued to use analog effects pedals.\nEffects and effects units—stompboxes in particular—have been celebrated by pop and rock musicians in album titles, songs and band names. The Big Muff, a fuzzbox manufactured by Electro-Harmonix, is commemorated by the Depeche Mode song \"Big Muff\" and the Mudhoney EP \"Superfuzz Bigmuff\". Nine Inch Nails, Pink Floyd, George Harrison, They Might Be Giants and Joy Division are among the many musicians who have referenced effects units in their music.\n\nDistortion effects create \"warm\", \"gritty\", and \"fuzzy\" sounds by \"clipping\" an instrument's audio signal, which distorts the shape of its wave form and adds overtones. Distortion effects are sometimes called \"gain\" effects, as distorted guitar sounds were first achieved by increasing the electric power supply, e.g. gain, to tube amplifiers.\n\nDistortion and overdrive: Distortion and overdrive units re-shape or \"clip\" an audio signal's wave form so that it has flattened peaks, creating \"warm\" sounds by adding harmonics or \"gritty\" sounds by adding inharmonic overtones. In tube amplifiers, distortion is created by compressing the instrument's out-going electrical signal in vacuum tubes or \"valves\". Distortion pedals produce perfectly flattened peaks or \"hard\" clipping. Overdrive pedals produce \"soft\" tube-like distortion by compressing the sine wave without completely flattening it. Much like tube amps, overdrive units produce \"clean\" sounds at quieter volumes and distorted \"warm\" sounds at louder volumes. Distortion and overdrive pedals may either be transistor-based or digital. While distortion pedals are most associated with electric guitar, they are also used with bass guitar (fuzz bass), Hammond organ and electric piano.<br>\nDistortion and overdrive effects: Boss DS-1 Distortion, Ibanez Tube Screamer, Marshall ShredMaster, MXR Distortion +, Pro Co RAT.\n\nFuzz: A fuzz pedal or \"fuzzbox\" is a type of overdrive pedal that clips a sound-wave until it is nearly a squarewave, resulting in a heavily distorted or \"fuzzy\" sound. Fuzzboxes may contain frequency multiplier circuitry to achieve a harsh timbre by adding complex harmonics. The Rolling Stones' song \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\", with the main riff played by Keith Richards with fuzz guitar, greatly popularized the use of fuzz effects. Fuzz bass (also called \"bass overdrive\") is a style of playing the electric bass that produces a buzzy, overdriven sound via a tube or transistor amp or by using a fuzz or overdrive pedal.\n<br>\nFuzz effects: Arbiter Fuzz Face, Electro-Harmonix Big Muff, Shin-ei Companion FY-2, Univox Super-Fuzz, Vox Tone Bender, Z.Vex Fuzz Factory.\n\nAlso called volume and amplitude effects, dynamics effects modify the volume of an instrument. Dynamics effects were among the first effects introduced to guitarists.\n\nBoost/volume pedal: A boost or \"clean boost\" pedal amplifies the volume of an instrument by increasing the amplitude of its audio signal. These units are generally used for \"boosting\" volume during solos and preventing signal loss in long \"effects chains\". A guitarist switching from rhythm guitar to lead guitar for a guitar solo may use a boost to increase the volume of their solo.\n\nTreadle-based volume pedals are used by electric instrument players (guitar, bass, keyboards) to adjust the volume of their instrument with one foot while their hands are being used to play their instrument. Treadle-style volume pedals are often also used to create swelling effects by removing the attack of a note or chord, as popularised by pedal steel guitar players. This enables electric guitar and pedal steel players to imitate the soft swelling sound that an orchestra string section can produce, in which a note or chord starts very softly and then grows in volume. Treadle-based volume pedals do not usually have batteries or require external power.\nVolume effects: Electro-Harmonix LPB-1, Fender Volume Pedal, MXR Micro Amp, Ernie Ball Volume Pedal.\n\nCompressor: Compressors make loud sounds quieter and quiet sounds louder by decreasing or \"compressing\" the dynamic range of an audio signal. A compressor is often used to stabilize volume and smooth a note's \"attack\" by dampening its onset and amplifying its sustain. A compressor can also function as a limiter with extreme settings of its controls.<br>\nCompressor effects: Keeley Compressor, MXR Dyna Comp, Boss CS-3 Compression Sustainer.\n\nNoise gate: Noise gates attenuate hum, hiss, and static in the signal by greatly diminishing the volume when the signal falls below a set threshold. Noise gates are often used by electric guitarist who play with vintage amps, which can have unwanted hum in the tone, and by guitarists from heavy metal who use high distortion levels, which add noise to the signal even when no notes are being played. Noise gates mute the signal when it falls below a certain threshold. This means that during bars of rest for the guitarist in a song, the hum or noise from the amp or distortion pedal will not be heard by the audience. Noise gates are expanders—meaning that, unlike compressors, they increase the dynamic range of an audio signal to make quiet sounds even quieter. If used with extreme settings and combined with reverb, they can create unusual sounds, such as the gated drum effect used in 1980s pop songs, a style popularized by the Phil Collins song \"In the Air Tonight\".<br>\nNoise gate effects: Boss NS-2 Noise Suppressor.\n\nFilter effects alter the frequency content of an audio signal that passes through them by either boosting or weakening specific frequencies or frequency regions.\n\nEqualizer: An equalizer is a set of linear filters that strengthen (\"boost\") or weaken (\"cut\") specific frequency regions. While basic home stereos often have equalizers for two bands, to adjust bass and treble, professional graphic equalizers offer much more targeted control over the audio frequency spectrum. Audio engineers use highly sophisticated equalizers to eliminate unwanted sounds, make an instrument or voice more prominent, and enhance particular aspects of an instrument's tone.<br>\nEqualizer effects: Boss GE-7 Equalizer, MXR 10-band EQ Pedal.\n\nTalk box: A talk box directs the sound from an electric guitar or synthesizer into the mouth of a performer using a tube, allowing the sound to be shaped into vowels and consonants with movements of the mouth. The modified sound is then picked up by a microphone. In this way the guitarist is able create the effect that the guitar \"licks\" are \"talking\". Some famous uses of the talkbox include Bon Jovi's \"Livin' on a Prayer\", Stevie Wonder's \"Black Man\", Mötley Crüe's \"Kickstart My Heart\", Joe Walsh's \"Rocky Mountain Way\", Alice in Chains's \"Man in the box\" and Peter Frampton's \"Show Me the Way\".<br>\nTalk boxes: Dunlop HT1 Heil Talk Box, Rocktron Banshee.\n\nWah-wah: A wah-wah pedal creates vowel-like sounds by altering the frequency spectrum produced by an instrument—i.e., how loud it is at each separate frequency—in what is known as a spectral glide or \"sweep\".\nThe device is operated by a foot treadle that opens and closes a potentiometer. Wah-wah pedals are often used by funk and rock guitarists.<br>\nWah effects: Dunlop Cry Baby, Morley Power Wah, Musitronics Mu-Tron III.\n\n\"Modulation\", in general electronics, means the altering of signal strength. In audio devices, modulation is a control feature that varies the strength of some effect over time to alter tonal properties. Some modulation effects mix (\"modulate\") an instrument's audio signal with a signal generated by the effect called a carrier wave. Other modulation effects split an instrument's audio signal in two, altering one portion of the signal and mixing it with the unaltered portion.\n\nChorus: Chorus pedals mimic the effect choirs and string orchestras produce naturally, by having slight variations in timbre and pitch, by mixing sounds with slight differences in timbre and pitch. A chorus effect splits the instrument-to-amplifier audio signal, and adds a slight delay and frequency variations or \"vibrato\" to part of the signal while leaving the rest unaltered. A well-known usage of chorus is the lead guitar in \"Come As You Are\" by Nirvana.<br>\nChorus effects: Boss CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, Electro-Harmonix Small Clone, TC Electronic Stereo Chorus.\n\nFlanger: A flanger creates a \"whooshing\" \"jet plane\" or \"spaceship\" sound, simulating a studio effect that was first produced by recording a track on two synchronized tapes and periodically slowing one tape by pressing the edge of its reel (the \"flange\"). When the two tapes' audio signals are later mixed, a comb filter effect can be heard. Flanger units add a variably delayed version of the audio signal to the original or signal, creating a comb filter or Doppler effect. Some famous uses of flanger effects include \"Walking on the Moon\" by The Police, the intro to \"Ain't Talkin' 'Bout Love\" by Van Halen, and \"Barracuda\" by Heart.<br>\nFlanger effects: Electro-Harmonix Electric Mistress, MXR Flanger, Boss BF-3 Flanger.\n\nPhaser: A phaser or \"phase shifter\" creates a slight rippling effect—amplifying some aspects of the tone while diminishing others—by splitting an audio signal in two and altering the phase of one portion. Three well-known examples of phaser are the two handed tapping part on the Van Halen instrumental \"Eruption\" and the keyboard parts on Billy Joel's \"Just the Way You Are\" and Paul Simon's \"Slip Slidin' Away\".<br>\nPhase shift effects: Uni-Vibe, Electro-Harmonix Small Stone, MXR Phase 90.\n\nRing modulator: A ring modulator produces a resonant, metallic sound by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave generated by the device's internal oscillator. The original sound wave is suppressed and replaced by a \"ring\" of inharmonic higher and lower pitches or \"sidebands\". A notable use of ring modulation is the guitar in the Black Sabbath song \"Paranoid\".<br>\nRing modulator effects: Moogerfooger MF-102 Ring Modulator.\n\nTremolo: A tremolo effect produces a slight, rapid variation in the volume of a note or chord. The \"tremolo effect\" should not be confused with the misleadingly-named \"tremolo bar\", a device on a guitar bridge that creates a vibrato or \"pitch-bending\" effect. In transistorized effects, a tremolo is produced by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a sub-audible carrier wave in such a way that generates amplitude variations in the sound wave. Tremolo effects are built-in effects in some vintage guitar amplifiers. The guitar intro in the Rolling Stones' \"Gimme Shelter\" features a tremolo effect.<br>\nTremolo effects: Demeter TRM-1 Tremulator, Fender Tremolux.\n\nVibrato: Vibrato effects produce slight, rapid variations in pitch, mimicking the fractional semitone variations produced naturally by opera singers and violinists when they are prolonging a single note. Vibrato effects often allow the performer to control the rate of the variation as well as the difference in pitch (e.g. \"depth\"). A vibrato with an extreme \"depth\" setting (e.g., half a semitone or more) will produce a dramatic, ululating sound. In transistorized effects, vibrato is produced by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave in such a way that generates frequency variations in the sound wave. Guitarists often use the terms \"vibrato\" and \"tremolo\" misleadingly. A so-called \"vibrato unit\" in a guitar amplifier actually produces tremolo, while a \"tremolo arm\" or \"whammy bar\" on a guitar produces vibrato.<br>\nVibrato effects: Boss VB-2 Vibrato.\n\nPitch/frequency effects modify pitch by altering the frequency of a sound wave or sound signal or adding new harmonies.\n\nPitch shifter and harmonizer: A pitch shifter (also called an \"octaver\" for effects that shift pitch by an octave) raises or lowers (e.g. \"transposes\") each note a performer plays by a pre-set interval. For example, a pitch shifter set to increase the pitch by a fourth will raise each note four diatonic intervals above the notes actually played. Simple, less expensive pitch shifters raise or lower the pitch by one or two octaves, while more sophisticated and expensive devices offer a range of interval alterations. A pitch shifter can be used by an electric guitarist to play notes that would normally only be available on an electric bass. As well, a bass player with a four string electric bass can use an octave pedal to obtain low notes that would normally only be obtainable with a five-string bass with a low \"B\" string.\n\nA harmonizer is a type of sophisticated pitch shifter that combines the altered pitch with the original pitch to create a two note harmony based on the original pitch, or even with some pedals, three note harmony. Some hamonizers are able to create chorus-like effects by adding very tiny shifts in pitch.<br> \nPitch shift effects: DigiTech Whammy, Electro-Harmonix POG.\n\nTime-based effects delay the sound signal, add reverb or echos, or, if a long delay is possible, enable musicians to record \"loops\".\nDelay/echo: Delay/echo units produce an echo effect by adding a duplicate instrument-to-amplifier electrical signal to the original signal at a slight time-delay. The effect can either be a single echo called a \"slap\" or \"slapback,\" or multiple echos. A well-known use of delay is the lead guitar in the U2 song \"Where the Streets Have No Name\", and also the opening riff of \"Welcome to the Jungle\" by Guns N'Roses.<br>\nDelay effects: Boss DD-3 Digital Delay, MXR Carbon Copy, Electro-Harmonix Deluxe Memory Man, Line 6 DL4, Roland RE-201.\n\nLooper pedal: A looper pedal or \"phrase looper\" allows a performer to record and later replay a phrase, riff or passage from a song. Loops can be created on the spot during a performance (live looping) or they can be pre-recorded. By using a looper pedal, a singer-guitarist in a one person band can play the backing chords (or riffs) to a song, loop them with the pedal, and then sing and do a guitar solo over the chords. Some units allow a performer to layer multiple loops, enabling the performer to create the effect of a full band. The first loop effects were created with reel-to-reel tape using a tape loop. High-end boutique tape loop effects are still used by some studio producers who want a vintage sound. Digital loop effects recreate this effect using an electronic memory.<br>\nLooper effects: Boss RC-30 Loop Station.\nReverb: Reverb units simulate the spacious sounds produced naturally in a huge stone cathedral (or other acoustic space such as a hall or room). This is done by creating a large number of echoes that gradually fade away in volume or \"decay\". One early technique for creating a reverb effect was to send an amplified signal of the music via a speaker to another room with reflective surfaces, such as a tile bathroom, and then record the natural reverberations that were produced. A plate reverb system uses an electromechanical transducer to create vibrations in a plate of metal. Spring reverb systems, which are often used in guitar amplifiers, use a transducer to create vibrations in a spring. Digital reverb effects use various signal processing algorithms to create the reverb effect, often by using multiple feedback delay circuits. Rockabilly and surf guitar are two genres that make heavy use of reverb.<br>\nReverb effects: Electro-Harmonix Holy Grail, Fender Reverb Unit.\n\nAudio feedback: Audio feedback is an effect produced when amplified sound is picked up by a microphone or guitar pickup and played back through a guitar amplifier, initiating a \"feedback loop\", which usually consists of high-pitched sound. Feedback that occurs from a vocal mic into a PA system is almost always avoided. However, in some styles of rock music, electric guitar players intentionally create feedback by playing their instrument directly in front of a heavily amplified, distorted guitar amplifier's speaker enclosure. The creative use of feedback effects was pioneered by guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix in the 1960s. This technique creates sustained, high-pitched overtones and unusual sounds not possible through regular playing techniques. Guitar feedback effects can be difficult to perform, because it is difficult to determine the sound volume and guitar position relative to a guitar amp's loudspeaker necessary for achieving the desired feedback sound. Guitar feedback effects are used in a number of rock genres, including psychedelic rock, heavy metal music and punk rock.\nEBow is a brand name of Heet Sound Products, of Los Angeles, California, for a small, handheld, battery-powered resonator. The Ebow was invented by Greg Heet, as a way to make a note on an electric guitar string resonate continuously, creating an effect that sounds similar to a bowed violin note or a sustained pipe organ note. The resonator uses a pickup – inductive string driver – feedback circuit, including a sensor coil, driver coil, and amplifier, to induce forced string resonance. The Ebow brand resonator is monophonic, and drives only one string at a time.\n\nOther handheld guitar and bass resonators on the market, manufactured under the tradename SRG, produced by Aescher Europa, in Germany, are available in both monophonic (one note at a time) and polyphonic (multiple notes at once) models, which include multiple onboard trigger switch effects, such as HPF (high pass filter) for enhancing harmonics and producing feedback effects, and LPF (low pass filter), producing a bass boost with a cello sound on heavy gauge strings. Later EBow models, such as the plus Ebow, contain a mode slide switch on the back, which allows the player to either produce just sustain or overtone feedback in addition to sustain.\n\nPedals such as the Boss DF-2 and FB-2 use an internally generated signal matched to the pitch of the guitar that can be sustained indefinitely by depressing the pedal.\n\nMany compressor pedals are often also marketed as \"sustainer pedals\". As a note is sustained, it loses energy and volume due to diminishing vibration in the string. The compressor pedal boosts its electrical signal to the specified dynamic range, slightly prolonging the duration of the note. This, combined with heavy distortion and the close proximity of the guitar and the speaker cabinet, can lead to infinite sustain at higher volumes.\n\nEnvelope follower: An envelope follower activates an effect once a designated volume is reached. One effect that uses an envelope follower is the \"auto-wah\", which produces a \"wah\" effect depending on how loud or soft the notes are being played.\n\nGuitar amplifier modeling: Amplifier modeling is a digital effect that replicates the sound of various amplifiers, most often vintage analog \"tube\" amps and famous brands of speaker cabinets (e.g., the Ampeg SVT 8x10\" bass cabinet). Sophisticated modeling effects can simulate different types of speaker cabinets (e.g., the sound of an 8x10\" cabinet) and miking techniques. A rotary speaker simulator mimics the doppler and chorus effect sound of a vintage Leslie speaker system by replicating its volume and pitch modulations, overdrive capacity and phase shifts.\n\nPitch correction/vocal effects: Pitch correction effects use signal-processing algorithms to re-tune faulty intonation in a vocalist's performance or create unusual vocoder-type vocal effects. One of the best known examples of this is Autotune, a software program and effect unit which can be used to both correct pitch (it moves a pitch to the nearest semitone), and add vocal effects. Some stompbox-style vocal pedals contain multiple effects, such as reverb and pitch correction.\n\nSimulators: Simulators enable electric guitars to mimic the sound of other instruments such as acoustic guitar, electric bass and sitar. Pick up simulators used on guitars with single-coil pick ups replicate the sound of guitars with humbucker pick ups, or vice versa. A de-fretter is a bass guitar effect that simulates the sound of a fretless bass. The effect uses an envelope-controlled filter and voltage-controlled amplifier to \"soften\" a note's attack both in volume and timbre.\n\nBitcrusher filters: Bitcrushers rely on conversion of the audio signal into a digital format (ADC) and the reduction of sound fidelity by utilising bit (and sometimes sample rates) low enough to cause significant colouration and filtering within the audible frequency range.\nRotating speakers are specially constructed amplifier/loudspeakers used to create special audio effects using the Doppler effect by rotating the speakers or a sound-directing duct. The rotating speaker creates a chorus-type effect. Named after its inventor, Donald Leslie, it is particularly associated with the Hammond organ but is used with a variety of instruments as well as vocals. The Hammond/Leslie combination has become an element in many genres of music. The Leslie Speaker and the Hammond Organ brands are currently owned by Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporation. The stompbox that simulates this effect is the Uni-Vibe pedal.\n\nThe Korg Kaoss Pad is a small touchpad MIDI controller, sampler, and effects processor for audio and musical instruments, made by Korg. The Kaoss Pad's touchpad can be used to control its internal effects engine, which can be applied to a line-in signal or to samples recorded from the line-in. Effects types include pitch shifting, distortion, filtering, wah-wah, tremolo, flanging, delay, reverberation, auto-panning, gating, phasing, and ring modulation.\nThe Kaoss Pad can also be used as a MIDI controller.\n\nBass effects are electronic effects units that are designed for use with the low pitches created by an electric bass or for an upright bass used with a bass amp or PA system. Two examples of bass effects are fuzz bass and bass chorus. Some bass amplifiers have built-in effects, such as overdrive or chorus. Upright bassists in jazz, folk, blues and similar genres may use a bass preamplifier, a small electronic device that matches the impedance between the piezoelectric pickup and the amp or PA system. Bass preamps also allow for the gain of the signal to be boosted or cut. Some models also offer equalization controls, a compressor, and a DI box connection.\n\nBoutique pedals are designed by smaller, independent companies and are typically produced in limited quantities. Some may even be hand-made, with hand-soldered connections. These pedals are mainly distributed online or through mail-order, or sold in a few music stores. They are often more expensive than mass-produced pedals and offer higher-quality components, innovative designs, in-house-made knobs, and hand-painted artwork or etching. Some boutique companies focus on re-creating classic or vintage effects.<br>Some boutique pedal manufacturers include: BJFE, Pete Cornish, Emlyn Crowther, Death By Audio, Robert Keeley, Roger Linn, Roger Mayer, Strymon, T-Rex Engineering, ToadWorks and Z.Vex Effects.\n\nThere is also a niche market for modifying or \"modding\" effects. Typically, vendors provide either custom modification services or sell new effects pedals they have already modified. The Ibanez Tube Screamer, Boss DS-1, Pro Co RAT and DigiTech Whammy are some of the most often-modified effects. Common modifications include value changes in capacitors or resistors, adding true-bypass so that the effect's circuitry is no longer in the signal path, substituting higher-quality components, replacing the unit's original operational amplifiers (op-amps), or adding functions to the device, such as allowing additional control of some factor or adding another output jack.\n\nNot all stompboxes and rackmounted electronic devices designed for musicians are effects. Strobe tuner and regular electronic tuner pedals indicate whether a guitar string is too sharp or flat. Stompbox-format tuner pedals route the electric signal for the instrument through the unit via a 1/4\" patch cable. These pedal-style tuners usually have an output so that the signal can be plugged into a guitar amp to produce sound. Rackmount power conditioner devices deliver a voltage of the proper level and characteristics to enable equipment to function properly (e.g., by providing transient impulse protection). A rackmounted wireless receiver unit is used to enable a guitarist or bassist to move around on stage without being connected to a cable. A footswitch pedal such as the \"A/B\" pedal routes a guitar signal to an amplifier or enables a performer to switch between two guitars, or between two amplifiers.\nGuitar amplifiers and electronic keyboards may have switch pedals for turning built-in reverb and distortion effects on and off; the pedals contain only a switch, with the circuitry for the effect being housed in the amplifier chassis. Some musicians who use rackmounted effects or laptops employ a MIDI controller pedalboard or armband remote controls to trigger sound samples, switch between different effects or control effect settings. A pedal keyboard uses pedals, but it is not an effect unit; it is a foot-operated keyboard in which the pedals are typically used to play basslines.\n\nBULLET::::- Acoustic wave — for natural audio effects\nBULLET::::- Audio signal processing\nBULLET::::- Outboard gear — for more generic article\nBULLET::::- Sound effect\nBULLET::::- Vintage musical equipment\n<br>\nBULLET::::- Digital signal processor\nBULLET::::- Frequency divider\nBULLET::::- Frequency mixer\nBULLET::::- Frequency multiplier\nBULLET::::- Linear filter\nBULLET::::- Non-linear filter\n"}
{"id": "10166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10166", "title": "Enron", "text": "Enron\n\nEnron Corporation was an American energy, commodities, and services company based in Houston, Texas. It was founded in 1985 as a merger between Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth, both relatively small regional companies. Before its bankruptcy on December 3, 2001, Enron employed approximately 29,000 staff and was a major electricity, natural gas, communications and pulp and paper company, with claimed revenues of nearly $101 billion during 2000. \"Fortune\" named Enron \"America's Most Innovative Company\" for six consecutive years.\n\nAt the end of 2001, it was revealed that Enron's reported financial condition was sustained by institutionalized, systematic, and creatively planned accounting fraud, known since as the Enron scandal. Enron has since become a well-known example of willful corporate fraud and corruption. The scandal also brought into question the accounting practices and activities of many corporations in the United States and was a factor in the enactment of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002. The scandal also affected the greater business world by causing the dissolution of the Arthur Andersen accounting firm, which had been Enron's main auditor for years.\n\nEnron filed for bankruptcy in the Southern District of New York in late 2001 and selected Weil, Gotshal & Manges as its bankruptcy counsel. It ended its bankruptcy during November 2004, pursuant to a court-approved plan of reorganization. A new board of directors changed the name of Enron to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp., and emphasized reorganizing and liquidating certain operations and assets of the pre-bankruptcy Enron. On September 7, 2006, Enron sold Prisma Energy International Inc., its last remaining business, to Ashmore Energy International Ltd. (now AEI).\n\nOne of Enron's primary predecessors was the Northern Natural Gas Company, which was formed in 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska just a few months after Black Tuesday. The low cost of natural gas and cheap labor supply during the Great Depression helped to fuel the company's early beginnings. The company doubled in size by 1932 and was able to bring the first natural gas to Minnesota. Over the next 50 years, Northern expanded even more as it acquired many energy companies and created new divisions within. It was reorganized in 1979 as the main subsidiary of a holding company, InterNorth, which was a diversified energy and energy-related products company. Although most of the acquisitions conducted were successful, some ended poorly. InterNorth competed with Cooper Industries over a hostile takeover of Crouse-Hinds Company, an electrical products manufacturer. InterNorth was ultimately unsuccessful as Cooper bought out Crouse-Hinds. Cooper and InterNorth feuded over numerous suits during the course of the takeover that were eventually settled after the transaction was completed. The subsidiary Northern Natural Gas operated the largest natural gas pipeline company in North America. By the 1980s, InterNorth became a major force for natural gas production, transmission, and marketing as well as for natural gas liquids, and was an innovator in the plastics industry. In 1983, InterNorth merged with the Belco Petroleum Company, a Fortune 500 oil exploration and development company founded by Arthur Belfer.\n\nThe Houston Natural Gas (HNG) corporation was initially formed from the Houston Oil Co. in 1925 to provide gas to customers in the Houston market through the building of gas pipelines. Under the leadership of CEO Robert Herring from 1967 to 1981, the company became a large dominant force in the energy industry with a large pipeline network as a result from a prosperous period of growth in the early to mid-1970s. This growth was largely a result of the exploitation of the unregulated Texas natural gas market and the commodity surge in the early 1970s. Toward the end of the 1970s, HNG's luck began to run out with rising gas prices forcing clients to switch to oil. In addition, with the passing of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, the Texas market was more difficult to profit from and as a result, HNG's profits fell. After Herring's death in 1981, M.D. Matthews briefly took over as CEO in a 3-year stint with initial success, but ultimately, a big dip in earnings led to his exit. In 1984, Kenneth Lay succeeded Matthews and inherited the troubled, but large diversified energy conglomerate.\n\nInterNorth, in its conservative success, became a target of corporate takeovers, the most prominent being corporate raider Irwin Jacobs. InterNorth CEO Sam Segnar, in searching for a company to merge with to fend off takeover attempts as a poison pill, discovered HNG. In May 1985, Internorth acquired HNG for $2.3 billion, 40% higher than the current market price, in order to avoid the corporate takeover attempt. The combined assets of the two companies would create the second largest gas pipeline system at the time in the United States. Internorth’s north-south pipelines that served Iowa and Minnesota complemented HNG’s Florida and California east-west pipelines well.\n\nThe company was initially named \"HNG/InterNorth Inc.\", even though InterNorth was technically the parent. At the outset, Segnar was CEO for a short time, before he was fired by the Board of Directors whereupon Lay was tapped to be the new CEO. Lay moved the headquarters of the new company back to energy capital Houston. The company then set out to find a new name, spent upwards of $100,000 in focus groups and consulting before \"Enteron\" was suggested. The name was eventually dismissed over its apparent likening to an intestine and shortened to \"Enron.\" (The distinctive logo was one of the final major projects of legendary graphic designer Paul Rand before his death in 1996.) Enron still had some lingering problems left over from its merger, however. The company had to pay Jacobs, who was still a threat, over $350 million and reorganize the company. Lay sold off any parts of the company that he believed didn't belong in the long-term future of Enron. Lay consolidated all the gas pipeline efforts under the Enron Gas Pipeline Operating Company. In addition, the company began to ramp up its electric power and natural gas efforts. In 1988 and 1989, the company began adding power plants and cogeneration units to its portfolio. In 1989, Jeffrey Skilling, then a consultant at McKinsey & Company, came up with the idea to link natural gas to consumers in more ways, effectively turning natural gas into a commodity. Enron adopted the idea and called it the \"Gas Bank.\" The division's success prompted Skilling to join Enron as the head of the Gas Bank in 1991. Another major development inside Enron was the beginning of the company's pivot to overseas that was expanded upon in the 1990s. Starting in 1989, the company received a $56 million loan from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) for a power plant in Argentina.\n\nBULLET::::- New regulations gradually create a market-pricing system for natural gas. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order 436 (1985) provides blanket approval for pipelines that choose to become common carriers transporting gas intrastate. FERC Order 451 (1986) deregulates the wellhead, and FERC Order 490 (April 1988) authorizes producers, pipelines, and others to terminate gas sales or purchases without seeking prior FERC approval. As a result of these orders, more than 75% of gas sales are conducted through the spot market, and unprecedented market volatility exists.\n\nBULLET::::- Houston Natural Gas, run by Kenneth Lay merges with Internorth, a natural gas company in Omaha, Nebraska, to form an interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline with approximately 37,000 miles of pipeline.\n\nBULLET::::- Lay is appointed Chairman and Chief Executive of the combined company. The company chooses the name \"Enron\" after rejecting \"Enteron\"\n\nBULLET::::- Company moves headquarters to Houston, where Ken Lay lives. Enron is both a natural oil and gas company.\nBULLET::::- \"Enron's vision:\" To become the premier natural-gas pipeline in America\n\nBULLET::::- Enron Oil, Enron's flourishing petroleum marketing operation, reports loss of $85 million in 8-K filings. True loss of $142 – $190 million is concealed until 1993. Two top Enron Oil executives in Valhalla plead guilty to defraud and to filing false tax returns. One serves time in prison.\n\nBULLET::::- The Company's major strategy shift - to pursue unregulated markets in addition to its regulated pipeline business- is decided in a gathering that became known as the \"Come to Jesus\" meeting.\nBULLET::::- Enron enters UK energy market and becomes the first U.S. company to construct a power plant in Great Britain after electric industry there is privatized. The power plant is located in Teesside, UK.\n\nBULLET::::- Enron launches \"Gas Bank\", that will be run by CEO Jeff Skilling in 1990, which allows gas producers and wholesale buyers to purchase firm gas supplies and hedge the price risk at the same time.\nBULLET::::- Enron begins offering financing to oil and gas producers.\nBULLET::::- Transwestern Pipeline Company, owned by Enron, is the first merchant pipeline in the United States to stop selling gas and become a transportation only pipeline.\n\nBULLET::::- Enron launches plan to expand U.S. natural gas business abroad\nBULLET::::- Enron becomes a natural gas market maker in the United States. Begins trading futures and options on the New York Mercantile Exchange and over the counter market using financial instruments such as swaps and options.\nBULLET::::- Ken Lay and Rich Kinder hire Jeff Skilling from McKinsey & Company to become Chief Executive Officer of \"Enron Gas Services\", Enron's \"Gas Bank\". Enron Gas Services eventually morphs into \"Enron Capital and Trade Resources\" (ECT).\nBULLET::::- Jeff Skilling hires Andrew Fastow from the banking industry; he starts as account director and quickly rises within the ranks of ECT\n\nBULLET::::- Enron adopts mark-to-market accounting practices, reporting income and value of assets at their replacement cost\nBULLET::::- Rebecca Mark becomes Chairman and CEO of Enron Development Corp., a unit formed to pursue international markets\nBULLET::::- Andy Fastow forms the first of many off-balance-sheet partnerships for legitimate purposes. Later, off-balance-sheet partnerships and transactions will become a way for money losing ventures to be concealed and income reporting to be accelerated.\n\nBULLET::::- Enron acquires Transportadora de Gas del Sur\n\nOver the course of the 1990s, Enron made a few changes to its business plan that greatly improved the perceived profitability of the company. First, Enron invested heavily in overseas assets, specifically energy. Another major shift was the gradual transition of focus from a producer of energy to a company that acted more like an investment firm and sometimes a hedge fund, making profits off the margins of the products it traded. These products were traded through the Gas Bank concept, now called the Enron Finance Corp. headed by Skilling.\n\nWith the success of the Gas Bank trading natural gas, Skilling looked to expand the horizons of his division, Enron Capital & Trade. Skilling hired Andrew Fastow in 1990 to help with this.\n\nStarting in 1994 under the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Congress allowed states to deregulate their electricity utilities, allowing them to be opened for competition. California was one such state to do so. Enron, seeing an opportunity with rising prices, was eager to jump into the market. In 1997, Enron acquired Portland General Electric (PGE). Although an Oregon utility, it had potential to begin serving the massive California market since PGE was a regulated utility. The new Enron division, Enron Energy, ramped up its efforts by offering discounts to potential customers in California for switching their electric supplier to Enron from their previous supplier, starting in 1998. Enron Energy also began to sell natural gas to customers in Ohio and wind power in Iowa. However, in 1999, the company ended its retail endeavor, only offering wholesale energy as it was revealed it was spending upwards of $100 million a year.\n\nAs fiber optic technology progressed in the 1990s, multiple companies, including Enron, attempted to make money by \"keeping the continuing network costs low,\" which was done by owning their own network. In 1997, FTV Communications LLC, a limited liability company formed by Enron subsidiary FirstPoint Communications, Inc., Williams Communications Group, Inc. and Touch America. FTV constructed a 1,380 mile fiber optic network between Portland and Las Vegas. In 1998, Enron constructed a building in a rundown area of Las Vegas near E Sahara, building right over the \"backbone\" of fiber optic cables providing service to technology companies nationwide. The location had the ability to send \"the entire Library of Congress anywhere in the world within minutes\" and could stream \"video to the whole state of California.\" The location was also more protected from natural disasters than areas such as Los Angeles or the East Coast. According to \"Wall Street Daily\", \"Enron had a secret,\" it \"wanted to trade bandwidth like it traded oil, gas, electricity, etc. It launched a secret plan to build an enormous amount of fiber optic transmission capacity in Las Vegas ... it was all part of Enron’s plan to essentially own the internet.\" Enron sought to have all US internet service providers rely on their Nevada facility to supply bandwidth, which Enron would sell in a fashion similar to other commodities.\n\nIn January 2000, Kenneth Lay and Jeffrey Skilling announced to analysts that they were going to open trading for their own \"high-speed fiber-optic networks that form the backbone for Internet traffic\". Investors quickly bought Enron stock following the announcement \"as they did with most things Internet-related at the time\", with stock prices rising from $40 per share in January 2000 to $70 per share in March, peaking at $90 in the summer of 2000. Enron executives obtained windfall gains from the rising stock prices, with a total of $924 million of stocks sold by high-level Enron employees between 2000 and 2001. Head of Enron Broadband Services, Kenneth Rice, sold 1 million shares himself, earning about $70 million in returns. As prices of existing fiber optic cables plummeted due to the vast oversupply of the system, with only 5% of the 40 million miles being active wires, Enron purchased the inactive \"dark fibers\", expecting to buy them at low cost and then make a profit as the need for more usage by internet providers increased, with Enron expecting to lease its acquired dark fibers in 20 year contracts to providers. However, Enron's accounting would use estimates to determine how much their dark fiber would be worth when \"lit\" and apply those estimates to their current income, adding exaggerated revenue to their accounts since transactions were not yet made and it was not known if the cables would ever be active. Enron's trading with other energy companies within the broadband market was its attempt to lure large telecommunications companies, such as Verizon Communications, into its broadband scheme to create its own new market.\n\nBy the second quarter of 2001, Enron Broadband Services was reporting losses. On March 12, 2001, a proposed 20-year deal between Enron and Blockbuster Inc. to stream movies on demand over Enron's connections was cancelled, with Enron shares dropping from $80 per share in mid-February 2001 to below $60 the week after the deal was killed. The branch of the company that Jeffrey Skilling \"said would eventually add $40 billion to Enron's stock value\" added only about $408 million in revenue for Enron in 2001, with the company's broadband arm closed shortly after its meager second-quarter earnings report in July 2001.\n\nFollowing the bankruptcy of Enron, telecommunications holdings were sold for \"pennies on the dollar.\" In 2002, Rob Roy of Switch Communications purchased Enron's Nevada facility in an auction attended only by Roy. Enron's \"fiber plans were so secretive that few people even knew about the auction.\" The facility was sold for only $930,000. Following the sale, Switch expanded to control \"the biggest data center in the world.\"\n\nEnron, seeing stability after the merger, began to look overseas for new possible energy opportunities in 1991. Enron's first such opportunity was a natural gas power plant utilizing cogeneration that the company built in Teesside, UK. The power plant was so large it could produce up to 3% of the United Kingdom's electricity demand with a capacity of over 1,875 megawatts. Seeing the success in England, the company developed and diversified its assets worldwide under the name of Enron International (EI), headed by former HNG executive Rebecca Mark. By 1994, EI's portfolio included assets in The Philippines, Australia, Guatemala, Germany, France, India, Argentina, the Caribbean, China, England, Colombia, Turkey, Bolivia, Brazil, Indonesia, Norway, Poland, and Japan. The division was becoming a large share of earnings for Enron, contributing 25% of earnings in 1996. Mark and EI believed the water industry was the next market to be deregulated by authorities and seeing the potential, searched for ways to enter the market, similar to PGE.\n\nIn 1998, Enron International acquired Wessex Water for $2.88 billion. Wessex Water became the core asset of a new company, Azurix, which expanded to other water companies. After Azurix's promising IPO in June 1999, Enron \"sucked out over $1 billion in cash while loading it up with debt,\" according to Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, authors of \"\". Additionally, British water regulators required Wessex to cut its rates by 12% starting in April 2000, and an upgrade was required of the utility's aging infrastructure, estimated at costing over a billion dollars. By the end of 2000 Azurix had an operating profit of less than $100 million and was $2 billion in debt. In August 2000, after Azurix stock took a plunge following its earnings report, Mark resigned from Azurix and Enron. Azurix assets, including Wessex, were eventually sold by Enron.\n\nIn 1990, Enron's Chief Operating Officer Jeffrey Skilling hired Andrew Fastow, who was well acquainted with the burgeoning deregulated energy market that Skilling wanted to exploit. In 1993, Fastow began establishing numerous limited liability special-purpose entities (a common business practice in the energy industry); however, it also allowed Enron to transfer liability so that it would not appear in its accounts, allowing it to maintain a robust and generally increasing stock price and thus keeping its critical investment grade credit ratings.\n\nEnron was originally involved in transmitting and distributing electricity and natural gas throughout the United States. The company developed, built, and operated power plants and pipelines while dealing with rules of law and other infrastructures worldwide. Enron owned a large network of natural gas pipelines, which stretched coast to coast and border to border including Northern Natural Gas, Florida Gas Transmission, Transwestern Pipeline company and a partnership in Northern Border Pipeline from Canada. The states of California, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island had already passed power deregulation laws by July 1996, the time of Enron's proposal to acquire Portland General Electric corporation. During 1998, Enron began operations in the water sector, creating the Azurix Corporation, which it part-floated on the New York Stock Exchange during June 1999. Azurix failed to become successful in the water utility market, and one of its major concessions, in Buenos Aires, was a large-scale money-loser.\n\nEnron grew wealthy due largely to marketing, promoting power, and its high stock price. Enron was named \"America's Most Innovative Company\" by the magazine \"Fortune\" for six consecutive years, from 1996 to 2001. It was on the \"Fortune\"s \"100 Best Companies to Work for in America\" list during 2000, and had offices that were stunning in their opulence. Enron was hailed by many, including labor and the workforce, as an overall great company, praised for its large long-term pensions, benefits for its workers and extremely effective management until the exposure of its corporate fraud. The first analyst to question the company's success story was Daniel Scotto, an energy market expert at BNP Paribas, who issued a note in August 2001 entitled \"Enron: All stressed up and no place to go\", which encouraged investors to sell Enron stocks, although he only changed his recommendation on the stock from \"buy\" to \"neutral.\"\n\nAs was later discovered, many of Enron's recorded assets and profits were inflated or even wholly fraudulent and nonexistent. One example of fraudulent records was during 1999 when Enron promised to repay Merrill Lynch's investment with interest in order to show a profit on its books. Debts and losses were put into entities formed \"offshore\" that were not included in the company's financial statements, and other sophisticated and arcane financial transactions between Enron and related companies were used to eliminate unprofitable entities from the company's books.\n\nThe company's most valuable asset and the largest source of honest income, the 1930s-era Northern Natural Gas company, was eventually purchased by a group of Omaha investors, who relocated its headquarters back to Omaha; it is now a unit of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Energy. NNG was established as collateral for a $2.5 billion capital infusion by Dynegy Corporation when Dynegy was planning to buy Enron. When Dynegy examined Enron's financial records carefully, they repudiated the deal and dismissed their CEO, Chuck Watson. The new chairman and CEO, the late Daniel Dienstbier, had been president of NNG and an Enron executive at one time and was forced out of Enron by Ken Lay. Dienstbier was an acquaintance of Warren Buffett. NNG continues to be profitable now.\n\nIn 2001, after a series of revelations involving irregular accounting procedures perpetrated throughout the 1990s involving Enron and its auditor Arthur Andersen that bordered on fraud, Enron filed for the then largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy in history (since surpassed by those of Worldcom during 2002 and Lehman Brothers during 2008), resulting in $11 billion in shareholder losses.\n\nAs the scandal progressed, Enron share prices decreased from US $90.56 during the summer of 2000, to just pennies. Enron had been considered a blue chip stock investment, so this was an unprecedented event in the financial world. Enron's demise occurred after the revelation that much of its profit and revenue were the result of deals with special-purpose entities (limited partnerships which it controlled). This meant that many of Enron's debts and the losses that it suffered were not reported in its financial statements.\n\nA rescue attempt by a similar, smaller energy company, Dynegy, failed during late November due to concerns about an unexpected restatement of earnings. Enron filed for bankruptcy on December 2, 2001. In addition, the scandal caused the dissolution of Arthur Andersen, which at the time was one of the \"Big Five\" - the world's foremost accounting firms. The company was found guilty of obstruction of justice during 2002 for destroying documents related to the Enron audit. Since the SEC is not allowed to accept audits from convicted felons, Andersen was forced to stop auditing public companies. Although the conviction was dismissed in 2005 by the Supreme Court, the damage to the Andersen name has prevented it from reviving as a viable business even on a limited scale.\n\nEnron also withdrew a naming-rights deal with the Houston Astros Major League Baseball club to have its name associated with their new stadium, which was known formerly as Enron Field (now Minute Maid Park).\n\nEnron used a variety of deceptive, bewildering, and fraudulent accounting practices and tactics to cover its fraud in reporting Enron's financial information. Special-purpose entities were created to mask significant liabilities from Enron's financial statements. These entities made Enron seem more profitable than it actually was, and created a dangerous spiral in which, each quarter, corporate officers would have to perform more and more financial deception to create the illusion of billions of dollars in profit while the company was actually losing money. This practice increased their stock price to new levels, at which point the executives began to work on insider information and trade millions of dollars' worth of Enron stock. The executives and insiders at Enron knew about the offshore accounts that were hiding losses for the company; the investors, however, did not. Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow directed the team which created the off-books companies, and manipulated the deals to provide himself, his family, and his friends with hundreds of millions of dollars in guaranteed revenue, at the expense of the corporation for which he worked and its stockholders.\n\nDuring 1999, Enron initiated EnronOnline, an Internet-based trading operation, which was used by virtually every energy company in the United States. By promoting the company's aggressive investment strategy, Enron president and chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling helped make Enron the biggest wholesaler of gas and electricity, trading over $27 billion per quarter. The corporation's financial claims, however, had to be accepted at face value. Under Skilling, Enron adopted mark-to-market accounting, in which anticipated future profits from any deal were tabulated as if currently real. Thus, Enron could record gains from what over time might turn out to be losses, as the company's fiscal health became secondary to manipulating its stock price on Wall Street during the so-called Tech boom. But when a company's success is measured by undocumented financial statements, actual balance sheets are inconvenient. Indeed, Enron's unscrupulous actions were often gambles to keep the deception going and so increase the stock price. An advancing price meant a continued infusion of investor capital on which debt-ridden Enron in large part subsisted (much like a financial \"pyramid\" or \"Ponzi scheme\"). Attempting to maintain the illusion, Skilling verbally attacked Wall Street Analyst Richard Grubman, who questioned Enron's unusual accounting practice during a recorded conference telephone call. When Grubman complained that Enron was the only company that could not release a balance sheet along with its earnings statements, Skilling replied, \"Well, thank you very much, we appreciate that ... asshole.\" Though the comment was met with dismay and astonishment by press and public, it became an inside joke among many Enron employees, mocking Grubman for his perceived meddling rather than Skilling's offensiveness. \n\nEnron initially planned to retain its three domestic pipeline companies as well as most of its overseas assets. However, before emerging from bankruptcy, Enron sold its domestic pipeline companies as CrossCountry Energy for $2.45 billion and later sold other assets to Vulcan Capital Management.\n\nEnron sold its last business, Prisma Energy, during 2006, leaving Enron asset-less. During early 2007, its name was changed to Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation. Its goal is to repay the old Enron's remaining creditors and end Enron's affairs.\n\nAzurix, the former water utility part of the company, remains under Enron ownership, although it is currently asset-less. It is involved in several litigations against the government of Argentina claiming compensation relating to the negligence and corruption of the local governance during its management of the Buenos Aires water concession during 1999, which resulted in substantial amounts of debt (approx. $620 million) and the eventual collapse of the branch.\n\nSoon after emerging from bankruptcy during November 2004, Enron's new board of directors sued 11 financial institutions for helping Lay, Fastow, Skilling and others hide Enron's true financial condition. The proceedings were dubbed the \"megaclaims litigation.\" Among the defendants were Royal Bank of Scotland, Deutsche Bank and Citigroup. , Enron has settled with all of the institutions, ending with Citigroup. Enron was able to obtain nearly $7.2 billion to distribute to its creditors as a result of the megaclaims litigation. As of December 2009, some claim and process payments were still being distributed.\n\nEnron has been featured since its bankruptcy in popular culture, including in The Simpsons episodes That '90s Show (Homer buys Enron stocks while Marge chooses to keep her own Microsoft stocks) and Special Edna, which features a scene of an Enron-themed amusement park ride. The 2007 film Bee Movie also featured a joke reference to a parody company of Enron called \"Honron\" (a play on the words honey and Enron). The 2017 book \"Bittersweet Symphony\" by Rebecca McNutt featured main character Bailey Kane discussing Enron while remarking, \"in devastation there is opportunity, you know.\" The book also mentions in passing that deceased Enron executive J. Clifford Baxter \"tried to complain, he tried to live with it, he tried to do the right thing but nobody heard him…\" The 2003 documentary The Corporation (2003 film) made frequent references to Enron post-bankruptcy, calling the company a \"bad apple.\" Season 1, episode #20 of the CBS crime drama television series Cold Case features a main character briefly mentioning that another character, Randy Price, is wanted by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for an \"Enron-type scandal.\"\n\nDuring August 2000, Enron's stock price attained its greatest value of $90.56. At this time Enron executives, who possessed inside information on the hidden losses, began to sell their stock. At the same time, the general public and Enron's investors were told to buy the stock. Executives told the investors that the stock would continue to increase until it attained possibly the $130 to $140 range, while secretly unloading their shares.\n\nAs executives sold their shares, the price began to decrease. Investors were told to continue buying stock or hold steady if they already owned Enron because the stock price would rebound in the near future. Kenneth Lay's strategy for responding to Enron's continuing problems was his demeanor. As he did many times, Lay would issue a statement or make an appearance to calm investors and assure them that Enron was doing well. In February 2001 an article by Bethany McLean appeared in \"Fortune\" magazine questioning whether Enron stock was overvalued.\n\nBy August 15, 2001, Enron's stock price had decreased to $42. Many of the investors still trusted Lay and believed that Enron would rule the market. They continued to buy or retain their stock as the equity value decreased. As October ended, the stock had decreased to $15. Many considered this a great opportunity to buy Enron stock because of what Lay had been telling them in the media.\n\nLay was accused of selling more than $70 million worth of stock at this time, which he used to repay cash advances on lines of credit. He sold another $29 million worth of stock in the open market. Also, Lay's wife, Linda, was accused of selling 500,000 shares of Enron stock totaling $1.2 million on November 28, 2001. The money earned from this sale did not go to the family but rather to charitable organizations, which had already received pledges of contributions from the foundation. Records show that Mrs. Lay made the sale order sometime between 10:00 and 10:20 am. News of Enron's problems, including the millions of dollars in losses they hid, became public about 10:30 that morning, and the stock price soon decreased to less than one dollar.\n\nFormer Enron executive Paula Rieker was charged with criminal insider trading and sentenced to two years probation. Rieker obtained 18,380 Enron shares for $15.51 a share. She sold that stock for $49.77 a share during July 2001, a week before the public was told what she already knew about the $102 million loss. In 2002, after the tumultuous fall of Enron's external auditor, and management consultant, Andersen LLP, former Andersen Director, John M. Cunningham coined the phrase, \"We have all been Enroned.\"\n\nThe fallout resulted in both Lay and Skilling being convicted of conspiracy, fraud, and insider trading. Lay died before sentencing, Skilling got 24 years and 4 months and a $45 million penalty (later reduced). Fastow was sentenced to six years of jail time, and Lou Pai settled out of court for $31.5 million.\n\nDuring October 2000, Daniel Scotto, the most renowned utility analyst on Wall Street, suspended his ratings on all energy companies conducting business in California because of the possibility that the companies would not receive full and adequate compensation for the deferred energy accounts used as the basis for the California Deregulation Plan enacted during the late 1990s. Five months later, Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) was forced into bankruptcy. Republican Senator Phil Gramm, husband of Enron Board member Wendy Gramm and also the second largest recipient of campaign contributions from Enron, succeeded in legislating California's energy commodity trading deregulation. Despite warnings from prominent consumer groups which stated that this law would give energy traders too much influence over energy commodity prices, the legislation was passed during December 2000.\n\nAs the periodical Public Citizen reported, \"Because of Enron's new, unregulated power auction, the company's 'Wholesale Services' revenues quadrupled—- from $12 billion in the first quarter of 2000 to $48.4 billion in the first quarter of 2001.\"\n\nAfter passage of the deregulation law, California had a total of 38 Stage 3 rolling blackouts declared, until federal regulators intervened during June 2001. These blackouts occurred as a result of a poorly designed market system that was manipulated by traders and marketers, as well as from poor state management and regulatory oversight. Subsequently, Enron traders were revealed as intentionally encouraging the removal of power from the market during California's energy crisis by encouraging suppliers to shut down plants to perform unnecessary maintenance, as documented in recordings made at the time. These acts contributed to the need for rolling blackouts, which adversely affected many businesses dependent upon a reliable supply of electricity, and inconvenienced a large number of retail customers. This scattered supply increased the price, and Enron traders were thus able to sell power at premium prices, sometimes up to a factor of 20x its normal peak value.\n\n!Corporate Leadership and Central Management\n\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Lay: Chairman, and Chief executive officer\nBULLET::::- Jeffrey Skilling: President, Chief operating officer, and CEO (February–August 2001)\nBULLET::::- Andrew Fastow: Chief financial officer\nBULLET::::- Richard Causey: Chief accounting officer\nBULLET::::- Rebecca Mark-Jusbasche: CEO of Enron International and Azurix\nBULLET::::- Lou Pai: CEO of Enron Energy Services\nBULLET::::- Forrest Hoglund: CEO of Enron Oil and Gas\nBULLET::::- Dennis Ulak: President of Enron Oil and Gas International\nBULLET::::- Jeffrey Sherrick: President of Enron Global Exploration & Production Inc.\nBULLET::::- Richard Gallagher: Head of Enron Wholesale Global International Group\nBULLET::::- Kenneth \"Ken\" Rice: CEO of Enron Wholesale and Enron Broadband Services\nBULLET::::- J. Clifford Baxter: CEO of Enron North America\nBULLET::::- Sherron Watkins: Head of Enron Global Finance\nBULLET::::- Jim Derrick: Enron General Counsel\nBULLET::::- Mark Koenig: Head of Enron Investor Relations\nBULLET::::- Joan Foley: Head of Enron Human Resources\nBULLET::::- Richard Kinder: President and COO of Enron (1990-December 1996);\nBULLET::::- Greg Whalley: President and COO of Enron (August 2001– Bankruptcy)\nBULLET::::- Jeff McMahon: CFO of Enron (October 2001-Bankruptcy)\n\n!Board of Directors of Enron Corporation\n\nBULLET::::- Kenneth Lay: Chairman of the Board\nBULLET::::- Robert A. Belfer\nBULLET::::- Norman P. Blake Jr.\nBULLET::::- Ronnie C. Chan\nBULLET::::- John H. Duncan\nBULLET::::- Wendy L. Gramm\nBULLET::::- Ken L. Harrison\nBULLET::::- Robert K. Jaedicke\nBULLET::::- Charles A. LeMaistre\nBULLET::::- John Mendelsohn\nBULLET::::- Jerome J. Meyer\nBULLET::::- Richard K. Gallagher\nBULLET::::- Paulo V. Ferraz Pereira\nBULLET::::- Frank Savage:\nBULLET::::- John A. Urquhart:\nBULLET::::- John Wakeham:\nBULLET::::- Herbert S. Winokur Jr.\n\nEnron traded in more than 30 different products, including the following:\n\nBULLET::::- Products traded on EnronOnline\nBULLET::::- Petrochemicals\nBULLET::::- Plastics\nBULLET::::- Power\nBULLET::::- Pulp and paper\nBULLET::::- Steel\nBULLET::::- Weather Risk Management\nBULLET::::- Oil and LNG transportation\nBULLET::::- Broadband\nBULLET::::- Principal investments\nBULLET::::- Risk management for commodities\nBULLET::::- Shipping / freight\nBULLET::::- Streaming media\nBULLET::::- Water and wastewater\n\nIt was also an extensive futures trader, including sugar, coffee, grains, hogs, and other meat futures. At the time of its bankruptcy filing during December 2001, Enron was structured into seven distinct business units.\n\nBULLET::::- EnronOnline (commodity trading platform).\nBULLET::::- ClickPaper (transaction platform for pulp, paper, and wood products).\nBULLET::::- EnronCredit (the first global online credit department to provide live credit prices and enable business-to-business customers to hedge credit exposure instantly via the Internet).\nBULLET::::- ePowerOnline (customer interface for Enron Broadband Services).\nBULLET::::- Enron Direct (sales of fixed-price contracts for gas and electricity; Europe only).\nBULLET::::- EnergyDesk (energy-related derivatives trading; Europe only).\nBULLET::::- NewPowerCompany (online energy trading, joint venture with IBM and AOL).\nBULLET::::- Enron Weather (weather derivatives).\nBULLET::::- DealBench (online business services).\nBULLET::::- Water2Water (water storage, supply, and quality credits trading).\nBULLET::::- HotTap (customer interface for Enron's U.S. gas pipeline businesses).\nBULLET::::- Enromarkt (business to business pricing and information platform; Germany only).\n\nBULLET::::- Enron Intelligent Network (broadband content delivery).\nBULLET::::- Enron Media Services (risk management services for media content companies).\nBULLET::::- Customizable Bandwidth Solutions (bandwidth and fiber products trading).\nBULLET::::- Streaming Media Applications (live or on-demand Internet broadcasting applications).\n\nBULLET::::- Enron Power (electricity wholesaling).\nBULLET::::- Enron Natural Gas (natural gas wholesaling).\nBULLET::::- Enron Clean Fuels (biofuel wholesaling).\nBULLET::::- Enron Pulp and Paper, Packaging, and Lumber (risk management derivatives for forest products industry).\nBULLET::::- Enron Coal and Emissions (coal wholesaling and CO2 offsets trading).\nBULLET::::- Enron Plastics and Petrochemicals (price risk management for polymers, olefins, methanol, aromatics, and natural gas liquids).\nBULLET::::- Enron Weather Risk Management (Weather Derivatives).\nBULLET::::- Enron Steel (financial swap contracts and spot pricing for the steel industry).\nBULLET::::- Enron Crude Oil and Oil Products (petroleum hedging).\nBULLET::::- Enron Wind Power Services (wind turbine manufacturing and wind farm operation).\nBULLET::::- MG Plc. (U.K. metals merchant).\nBULLET::::- Enron Energy Services (Selling services to industrial end users).\nBULLET::::- Enron International (operation of all overseas assets).\n\nBULLET::::- Commodity Management.\nBULLET::::- Energy Asset Management.\nBULLET::::- Energy Information Management.\nBULLET::::- Facility Management.\nBULLET::::- Capital Management.\nBULLET::::- Azurix Inc. (water utilities and infrastructure).\n\nBULLET::::- Energy Infrastructure Development (developing, financing, and operation of power plants and related projects).\nBULLET::::- Enron Global Exploration & Production Inc. (upstream oil and natural gas international development).\nBULLET::::- Elektro Electricidade e Servicos SA (Brazilian electric utility).\nBULLET::::- Northern Border Pipeline.\nBULLET::::- Houston Pipeline.\nBULLET::::- Transwestern Pipeline.\nBULLET::::- Florida Gas Transmission.\nBULLET::::- Northern Natural Gas Company.\nBULLET::::- Natural Gas Storage.\nBULLET::::- Compression Services.\nBULLET::::- Gas Processing and Treatment.\nBULLET::::- Engineering, Procurement, and Construction Services.\nBULLET::::- EOTT Energy Inc. (oil transportation).\n\nEnron manufactured gas valves, circuit breakers, thermostats, and electrical equipment in Venezuela by means of INSELA SA, a 50–50 joint venture with General Electric. Enron owned three paper and pulp products companies: Garden State Paper, a newsprint mill; as well as Papiers Stadacona and St. Aurelie Timberlands. Enron had a controlling stake in the Louisiana-based petroleum exploration and production company Mariner Energy.\n\nEnron opened EnronOnline, an electronic trading platform for energy commodities, on November 29, 1999. Conceptualized by the company's European Gas Trading team, it was the first web-based transaction system that allowed buyers and sellers to buy, sell, and trade commodity products globally. It allowed users to do business only with Enron. The site allowed Enron to transact with participants in the global energy markets. The main commodities offered on EnronOnline were natural gas and electricity, although there were 500 other products including credit derivatives, bankruptcy swaps, pulp, gas, plastics, paper, steel, metals, freight, and TV commercial time. At its maximum, more than $6 billion worth of commodities were transacted by means of EnronOnline every day.\n\nAfter Enron's bankruptcy in late 2001, EnronOnline was sold to the Swiss financial giant UBS. Within a year, UBS abandoned its efforts to relaunch the division, and closed it in November 2002.\n\nEnron International (EI) was Enron's wholesale asset development and asset management business. Its primary emphasis was developing and building natural gas power plants outside North America. Enron Engineering and Construction Company (EECC) was a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron International, and built almost all of Enron International's power plants. Unlike other business units of Enron, Enron International had a strong cash flow on bankruptcy filing. Enron International consisted of all of Enron's foreign power projects, including ones in Europe.\n\nThe company's Teesside plant was one of the largest gas-fired power stations in the world, built and operated by Enron from 1989, and produced 3 percent of the United Kingdom's energy needs. Enron owned half of the plant's equity, with the remaining 50 per cent split between four regional electricity companies.\n\nRebecca Mark was the CEO of Enron International until she resigned to manage Enron's newly acquired water business, Azurix, during 1997. Mark had a major role in the development of the Dabhol project in India, Enron's largest international endeavor.\n\nEnron International constructed power plants and pipelines across the globe. Some are presently still operating, including the massive Teesside plant in England. Others, like a barge-mounted plant off Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic, cost Enron money by lawsuits and investment losses. Puerto Plata was a barge-mounted power plant next to the hotel \"Hotelero del Atlantico\". When the plant was activated, winds blew soot from the plant onto the hotel guests' meals, blackening their food. The winds also blew garbage from nearby slums into the plant's water-intake system. For some time the only solution was to hire men who would row out and push the garbage away with their paddles. Through mid-2000 the company collected a paltry $3.5 million from a $95 million investment. Enron also had other investment projects in Europe, South America, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Jamaica, Venezuela, and across the Caribbean.\n\nAround 1992 Indian experts came to the United States to find energy investors to help with India's energy shortage problems. During December 1993, Enron finalized a 20-year power-purchase contract with the Maharashtra State Electricity Board. The contract allowed Enron to construct a massive 2,015 megawatt power plant on a remote volcanic bluff south of Mumbai. Construction would be completed in two phases, and Enron would form the Dabhol Power Company to help manage the plant. The power project was the first step in a $20 billion scheme to help rebuild and stabilize India's power grid. Enron, GE (which was selling turbines to the project), and Bechtel (which was actually constructing the plant), each contributed 10% equity.\n\nDuring 1996, when India's Congress Party was no longer in power, the Indian government assessed the project as being excessively expensive and refused to pay for the plant and stopped construction. The Maharashtra State Electricity Board (MSEB), the local state-owned utility, was required by contract to continue to pay Enron plant maintenance charges, even if no power was purchased from the plant. The MSEB determined that it could not afford to purchase the power (at Rs. 8 per unit kWh) charged by Enron. The plant operator was unable to find alternate customers for Dabhol power due to the absence of a free market in the regulated structure of utilities in India. From 1996 until Enron's bankruptcy during 2001 the company tried to revive the project and revive interest in India's need for the power plant without success.\n\nDuring the summer of 2001, Enron made an attempt to sell a number of Enron International's assets, many of which were not sold. The public and media believed it was unknown why Enron wanted to sell these assets, suspecting it was because Enron was in need of cash. Employees who worked with company assets were told in 2000 that Jeff Skilling believed that business assets were an outdated means of company worth, and instead he wanted to build a company based on \"intellectual assets\".\n\nEnron Global Exploration & Production Inc. (EGEP) was an Enron subsidiary that was born from the split of domestic assets via EOG Resources (formerly Enron Oil and Gas EOG) and international assets via EGEP (formerly Enron Oil and Gas Int'l, Ltd EOGIL). \nAmong the EGEP assets were the Panna-Mukta and the South Tapti fields, discovered by the Indian state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), which operated the fields initially.\nDecember 1994, a joint venture began between ONGC (40%), Enron (30%) and Reliance (30%).\nMid year of 2002, British Gas (BG) completed the acquisition of EGEP's 30% share of the Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields for $350 million, a few months before Enron filed bankruptcy.\n\nDuring the mid-1990s, Enron established an endowment for the Enron Prize for Distinguished Public Service, awarded by Rice University's Baker Institute to \"recognize outstanding individuals for their contributions to public service\". Recipients were:\n\nBULLET::::- 1995: Colin Powell.\nBULLET::::- 1997: Mikhail Gorbachev.\nBULLET::::- 1999 (early): Eduard Shevardnadze.\nBULLET::::- 1999 (late): Nelson Mandela.\nBULLET::::- 2001: Alan Greenspan.\n\nGreenspan, because of his position as the Fed chairman, was not at liberty to accept the $10,000 honorarium, the $15,000 sculpture, nor the crystal trophy, but only accepted the \"honor\" of being named an Enron Prize recipient. The situation was further complicated because a few days earlier, Enron had filed paperwork admitting it had falsified financial statements for five years. Greenspan did not mention Enron a single time during his speech. At the ceremony, Ken Lay stated, \"I'm looking forward to our first woman recipient.\" The next morning, it was reported in the \"Houston Chronicle\" that no decision had been made on whether the name of the prize would be changed. 19 days after the prize was awarded to Greenspan, Enron declared bankruptcy.\n\nDuring early 2002, Enron was awarded Harvard's (in)famous Ig Nobel Prize for 'Most Creative Use of Imaginary Numbers.' The various former members of Enron management team all refused to accept the award in person, although no reason was given at the time.\n\nBULLET::::- George W. Bush, sitting U.S. president at the time of Enron's collapse, received $312,500 to his campaigns and $413,800 to his presidential war chest and inaugural fund.\nBULLET::::- Dick Cheney, sitting U.S. vice president at the time of Enron's collapse, met with Enron executives six times to develop a new energy policy. He refused to show minutes to Congress.\nBULLET::::- John Ashcroft, attorney general at the time, recused himself from the DOJ's investigation into Enron due to receiving $57,499 when running for senate seat in 2000.\nBULLET::::- Lawrence Lindsay, White House Economic Advisor at the time, made $50,000 as a consultant with Enron before moving to the White House in 2000.\nBULLET::::- Karl Rove, White House Senior Advisor at the time, waited five months before selling $100,000 of Enron stock.\nBULLET::::- Marc F. Racicot, Republican National Committee Chairman Nominee at the time, was handpicked by George W. Bush and continued to serve as a lawyer with a firm that lobbies for Enron.\n\nBULLET::::- \"\", an award-winning 2005 documentary film which examines the collapse of the Enron Corporation\nBULLET::::- \"\", a television movie aired by CBS in January 2003 based on the book Anatomy of Greed by Brian Cruver\nBULLET::::- \"\", a book by Robert Bryce\nBULLET::::- \"ENRON\", a 2009 play by British playwright Lucy Prebble\nBULLET::::- Dot-com bubble\nBULLET::::- \"Mr. Robot\", a USA Network television series featuring a fictional corporation called \"E Corp\", based on Enron including the logo.\nBULLET::::- Enron Scandal, a website talking all about the Enron Scandal.\nBULLET::::- FRONTLINE interviews re: ENRON and Arthur Andersen\n\nhttps://www.econcrises.org/2016/12/07/enron-corporation-2001/\n\nBULLET::::- Robert Bryce, \"Pipe Dreams: Greed, Ego, and the Death of Enron\" (PublicAffairs, 2002) .\nBULLET::::- Lynn Brewer, Matthew Scott Hansen, \"House of Cards, Confessions of An Enron Executive\" (Virtualbookworm.com Publishing, 2002) .\nBULLET::::- Kurt Eichenwald, \"Conspiracy of Fools: A True Story\" (Broadway Books, 2005) .\nBULLET::::- Peter C. Fusaro, Ross M. Miller, \"What Went Wrong at Enron: Everyone's Guide to the Largest Bankruptcy in U.S. History\" (Wiley, 2002), .\nBULLET::::- Loren Fox, \"Enron: The Rise and Fall.\" (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2003).\nBULLET::::- Judith Haney \"Enron's Bust: Was it the result of Over-Confidence or a Confidence Game?\" USNewsLink/ December 13, 2001.\nBULLET::::- Marc Hodak, \"The Enron Scandal\", Organizational Behavior Research Center Papers (SSRN), June 4, 2007.\nBULLET::::- Bethany McLean, Peter Elkind, \"\" (Portfolio, 2003) .\nBULLET::::- Mimi Swartz, Sherron Watkins, \"Power Failure: The Inside Story of the Collapse of Enron\" (Doubleday, 2003) .\nBULLET::::- Daniel Scotto \"American Financial Analyst: The First Analyst to recommend the selling of Enron Stock\".\n\nBULLET::::- Portland General Electric Company\nBULLET::::- Northern Natural Gas Company\nBULLET::::- \"Enron—Legal News Archives\", Breaking Legal News\nBULLET::::- Enron and the Cult of Personality, Everything2.com\nBULLET::::- Enron's Code of Ethics, TheSmokingGun.com\nBULLET::::- \"The Fall of Enron\", HBS Research paper\nBULLET::::- Public Citizen Access to Justice, Financial Reform, and Government Accountability, Citizen.org\nBULLET::::- The story of the Enron scandal, the-accounting-adventurista.com\n\nBULLET::::- Yahoo!: Enron Corp. Company Profile\nBULLET::::- Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. Profile, Hoovers.com\nBULLET::::- Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. profile, Google Finance\nBULLET::::- Enron Chronology\nBULLET::::- (Contains the ENRON historical stock quotes from 1997 to 2002.)\n"}
{"id": "10168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10168", "title": "Eusebius of Alexandria", "text": "Eusebius of Alexandria\n\nEusebius of Alexandria is an author to whom certain extant homilies are attributed.\n\nNothing is known of the author. In all events, he was not a patriarch of Alexandria, as is affirmed in an early biography, written by one Johannes, a notary, and stating that Eusebius was called by Cyril to be his successor in the episcopate.\n\nThere has been much dispute regarding the details of his life and the age in which he lived. Galland (Vet. Patr. Biblioth., VIII, 23) says: \"de Eusebio qui vulgo dicitur episcopus Alexandræ incerta omnia\" (Concerning Eusebius, commonly called bishop of Alexandria there is nothing sure). His writings have been attributed to Eusebius of Emesa, Eusebius of Cæsarea, and others. According to an old biography said to have been written by his notary, the monk John, and discovered by Cardinal Mai, he lived in the fifth century and led a monastic life near Alexandria. The fame of his virtues attracted the attention of Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, who visited him with his clergy, and in 444, when dying, had him elected his successor, and consecrated him bishop, though much against his will. Eusebius displayed great zeal in the exercise of his office and did much good by his preaching. Among those he converted was a certain Alexander, a man of senatorial rank. After having ruled his see for seven or, according to another account, for twenty years, he made Alexander his successor and retired to the desert, whence Cyril had summoned him and there died in the odor of sanctity.\n\nWhile Mai seems to have established the existence of a Eusebius of Alexandria who lived in the fifth century, it had been objected than neither the name of Eusebius or his successor Alexander, appears in the list of the occupants of that ancient see. Dioscurus is mentioned as the immediate successor of Cyril. Nor does the style of the homilies seem on the whole in keeping with the age of Cyril. It may be noted, however, that the biographer of Eusebius expressly states that the Cyril in question is the great opponent of Nestorius. Various solution of the difficulty have been proposed. Thilo thinks that the authorship of the homilies is to be assigned either to a certain monk – one of four brothers 3 of the fifth century, or to a presbyter and court chaplain of Justinian I, who took an active part in the theological strifes of the sixth century. Mai suggests that after the death of Cyril, there were two bishops at Alexandria, Dioscurus, the Monophysite leader, and Eusebius, the head of the Catholic party. The homilies cover a variety of subjects, and the author is one of the earliest patristic witnesses to the doctrine regarding the descent of Christ into Hell. A list of homilies with the complete text is given by Mai. They may also be found in Migne, which was published with an introduction by Rand in \"Modern Philology\", II, 261.\n\nThese homilies enjoyed some renown in the Eastern Church in the sixth and seventh centuries.\n\nThe discourses belong probably to the fifth or sixth century, and possibly originated in Alexandria. They deal with the life of Jesus of Nazareth and with questions of ecclesiastical life and practise, which they resolve in a monastic-ascetic way. Their literary character is not quite clear; while most of them are adapted for public delivery, not a few bear the character of ecclesiastical pronouncements. They are now in print except four included among John Chrysostom's works. The fragments preserved in the so-called \"Sacra parallela\" are to be found in Karl Holl's \"Fragmente vornicänischer Kirchenväter.\" A homily concerning the observance of Sunday is attributed by Zahn to Eusebius of Emesa.\n"}
{"id": "10169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10169", "title": "Eusebius of Angers", "text": "Eusebius of Angers\n\nEusebius (Bruno) of Angers (died September 1, 1081) was bishop of Angers, France.\n\nHe first appears in the historical record as bishop of Angers at the synod of Rheims in 1049, and for a long time had been an adherent of Berengar's doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As such he was regarded by Berengar himself and by his opponents Theodwin of Liège, Durand of Troarne, and Humbert of Mourmoutiers. But when he recognized the strength of the opposition, he favored a compromise; at any rate he advised Berengar is 1054 to swear to the formula presented to him.\n\nNevertheless, Berengar considered him his friend many years later and requested him to silence a certain Galfrid Martini or to arrange a disputation. In his reply Eusebius not only regretted the whole controversy, but also stated that he would abide by the words of the Bible, according to which the bread and wine after the consecration become the body and blood of the Lord (see transubstantiation); if one asks how this can take place, the answer must be that it is not according to the order of nature but in accordance with the divine omnipotence; at any rate one must be careful not to give offense to the plain Christian. The epistle is a downright renunciation of Berengar in case he should still maintain his view.\n\nIn favor of the supposition that Eusebius changed his opinion from deference to the Count of Anjou, the decided opponent of Berengar and his doctrine, it can be adduced that he did not defend Berengar against the hostilities of the court, and that for a long time he sided with this violent prince. It is also possible that the fact impressed itself upon Eusebius that the religious consciousness of the time more and more opposed Berengar. Our knowledge, however, is too fragmentary to pass a very accurate sentence.\n"}
{"id": "10172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10172", "title": "Eusebius", "text": "Eusebius\n\nEusebius of Caesarea (; , \"Eusébios tés Kaisareías\";  260/265 – 339/340), also known as Eusebius Pamphili (from the ), was a historian of Christianity, exegete, and Christian polemicist. He became the bishop of Caesarea Maritima about 314 AD. Together with Pamphilus, he was a scholar of the Biblical canon and is regarded as an extremely learned Christian of his time. He wrote \"Demonstrations of the Gospel\", \"Preparations for the Gospel\", and \"On Discrepancies between the Gospels\", studies of the Biblical text. As \"Father of Church History\" (not to be confused with the title of Church Father), he produced the \"Ecclesiastical History\", \"On the Life of Pamphilus\", the \"Chronicle\" and \"On the Martyrs\". He also produced a biographical work on the first Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great, who ruled between 306 and 337 AD.\n\nAlthough Eusebius' works are regarded as giving insight into the history of the early church, he was not without prejudice, especially in regard to the Jews, for while \"Eusebius indeed blames the Jews for the crucifixion of Jesus, but he nevertheless also states that forgiveness can be granted even for this sin and that the Jews can receive salvation.\" Nor can his works be trusted to be from subjectivism, for some scholars believe that \"Eusebius is a notoriously unreliable historian, and so anything he reports should be critically scrutinized.\" This is especially true of his \"'Life of Constantine'\", which he wrote as an eulogy shortly after the emperor's death in 337 A.D, and which is \"Often maligned for perceived factual errors, deemed by some so hopelessly flawed that it cannot be the work of Eusebius at all.\" Yet others see him as a \"Constantinian flunky,\" for as a trusted adviser to Constantine, it was politically expedient for him to present Constantine in the best light as possible. Never recognized as a saint, except in the Egyptian and Ethiopian Coptic Churches, the likely reason for this is that traditional sources view Arius finding support \" ... from Eusebius of Nicomedia, and our Eusebius, who by that time was bishop of Caesarea.\"\n\nLittle is known about the life of Eusebius. His successor at the See of Caesarea, Acacius, wrote a \"Life of Eusebius\", a work that has since been lost. Eusebius' own surviving works probably only represent a small portion of his total output. Beyond notices in his extant writings, the major sources are the 5th-century ecclesiastical historians Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret, and the 4th-century Christian author Jerome. There are assorted notices of his activities in the writings of his contemporaries Athanasius, Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Alexander of Alexandria. Eusebius' pupil, Eusebius of Emesa, provides some incidental information.\n\nIn his \"Ecclesiastical History\", Eusebius writes of Dionysius of Alexandria as his contemporary. If this is true, Eusebius' birth must have been before Dionysius' death in autumn 264; most modern scholars date the birth to some point in the five years between 260 and 265. He was presumably born in the town in which he lived for most of his adult life, Caesarea Maritima. He was baptized and instructed in the city, and lived in Syria Palaestina in 296, when Diocletian's army passed through the region (in the \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius recalls seeing Constantine traveling with the army). Eusebius was made presbyter by Agapius of Caesarea. Some, like theologian and ecclesiastical historian John Henry Newman, understand Eusebius' statement that he had heard Dorotheus of Tyre \"expound the Scriptures wisely in the Church\" to indicate that Eusebius was Dorotheus' pupil while the priest was resident in Antioch; others, like the scholar D. S. Wallace-Hadrill, deem the phrase too ambiguous to support the contention.\n\nBy the 3rd century, Caesarea had a population of about 100,000. It had been a pagan city since Pompey had given control of the city to the gentiles during his command of the eastern provinces in the 60s BC. The gentiles retained control of the city for the three centuries to follow, despite Jewish petitions for joint governorship. Gentile government was strengthened by the city's refoundation under Herod the Great (r. 37–4 BC), when it had taken on the name of Augustus Caesar. In addition to the gentile settlers, Caesarea had large Jewish and Samaritan minorities. Eusebius was probably born into the Christian contingent of the city. Caesarea's Christian community presumably had a history reaching back to apostolic times, but it is a common claim that no bishops are attested for the town before about 190, even though the Apostolic Constitutions 7.46 states that Zacchaeus was the first bishop.\n\nThrough the activities of the theologian Origen (185/6–254) and the school of his follower Pamphilus (later 3rd century – 309), Caesarea became a center of Christian learning. Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information, or which churches were using which gospels, regarding the texts which became the New Testament. The information used to create the late-fourth-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the Ecclesiastical History [HE] of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen's list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were accepted by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.\n\nOn his deathbed, Origen had made a bequest of his private library to the Christian community in the city. Together with the books of his patron Ambrosius, Origen's library (including the original manuscripts of his works) formed the core of the collection that Pamphilus established. Pamphilus also managed a school that was similar to (or perhaps a re-establishment of) that of Origen. Pamphilus was compared to Demetrius of Phalerum and Pisistratus, for he had gathered Bibles \"from all parts of the world\". Like his model Origen, Pamphilus maintained close contact with his students. Eusebius, in his history of the persecutions, alludes to the fact that many of the Caesarean martyrs lived together, presumably under Pamphilus.\n\nSoon after Pamphilus settled in Caesarea (\"ca\". 280s), he began teaching Eusebius, who was then somewhere between twenty and twenty-five. Because of his close relationship with his schoolmaster, Eusebius was sometimes called \"Eusebius Pamphili\": \"Eusebius, son of Pamphilus\". The name may also indicate that Eusebius was made Pamphilus' heir. Pamphilus gave Eusebius a strong admiration for the thought of Origen. Neither Pamphilus nor Eusebius knew Origen personally; Pamphilus probably picked up Origenist ideas during his studies under Pierius (nicknamed \"Origen Junior\") in Alexandria. In Caesarea, Origenist thought was continued in the generation after his death by Theotecnus, bishop of the city for much of the late 3rd century and an alumnus of Origen's school.\n\nEusebius' \"Preparation for the Gospel\" bears witness to the literary tastes of Origen: Eusebius quotes no comedy, tragedy, or lyric poetry, but makes reference to all the works of Plato and to an extensive range of later philosophic works, largely from Middle Platonists from Philo to the late 2nd century. Whatever its secular contents, the primary aim of Origen and Pamphilus' school was to promote sacred learning. The library's biblical and theological contents were more impressive: Origen's Hexapla and Tetrapla; a copy of the original Aramaic version of the Gospel of Matthew; and many of Origen's own writings. Marginal comments in extant manuscripts note that Pamphilus and his friends and pupils, including Eusebius, corrected and revised much of the biblical text in their library. Their efforts made the hexaplaric Septuagint text increasingly popular in Syria and Palestine. Soon after joining Pamphilus' school, Eusebius started helping his master expand the library's collections and broaden access to its resources. At about this time Eusebius compiled a \"Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms\", presumably for use as a general reference tool.\n\nIn the 290s, Eusebius began work on his \"magnum opus\", the \"Ecclesiastical History\", a narrative history of the Church and Christian community from the Apostolic Age to Eusebius' own time. At about the same time, he worked on his \"Chronicle\", a universal calendar of events from the Creation to, again, Eusebius' own time. He completed the first editions of the \"Ecclesiastical History\" and \"Chronicle\" before 300.\n\nEusebius succeeded Agapius as Bishop of Caesarea soon after 313 and was called on by Arius who had been excommunicated by his bishop Alexander of Alexandria. An episcopal council in Caesarea pronounced Arius blameless. Eusebius, a learned man and famous author, enjoyed the favour of the Emperor Constantine. Because of this he was called upon to present the creed of his own church to the 318 attendees of the Council of Nicaea in 325.\" However, the anti-Arian creed from Palestine prevailed becoming the basis for the Nicene Creed.\n\nThe theological views of Arius, that taught the subordination of the Son to the Father, continued to be a problem. Eustathius of Antioch strongly opposed the growing influence of Origen's theology as the root of Arianism. Eusebius, an admirer of Origen, was reproached by Eustathius for deviating from the Nicene faith. Eusebius prevailed and Eustathius was deposed at a synod in Antioch.\n\nHowever, Athanasius of Alexandria became a more powerful opponent and in 334, he was summoned before a synod in Caesarea (which he refused to attend). In the following year, he was again summoned before a synod in Tyre at which Eusebius of Caesarea presided. Athanasius, foreseeing the result, went to Constantinople to bring his cause before the Emperor. Constantine called the bishops to his court, among them Eusebius. Athanasius was condemned and exiled at the end of 335. Eusebius remained in the Emperor's favour throughout this time and more than once was exonerated with the explicit approval of the Emperor Constantine. After the Emperor's death (c.337), Eusebius wrote the Life of Constantine, an important historical work because of eye witness accounts and the use of primary sources. Eusebius died c.339.\n\nMuch like his birth, the exact date of Eusebius' death is unknown. However, there is primary text evidence from a council held in Antioch that by the year 341, his successor Acacius had already filled the seat as Bishop. Socrates and Sozomen write about Eusebius' death, and place it just before Constantine's son Constantine II died, which was in early 340. They also say that it was after the second banishment of Athanasius, which began in mid 339. This means that his death occurred some time between the second half of 339 and early 340.\n\nOf the extensive literary activity of Eusebius, a relatively large portion has been preserved. Although posterity suspected him of Arianism, Eusebius had made himself indispensable by his method of authorship; his comprehensive and careful excerpts from original sources saved his successors the painstaking labor of original research. Hence, much has been preserved, quoted by Eusebius, which otherwise would have been lost.\n\nThe literary productions of Eusebius reflect on the whole the course of his life. At first, he occupied himself with works on Biblical criticism under the influence of Pamphilus and probably of Dorotheus of Tyre of the School of Antioch. Afterward, the persecutions under Diocletian and Galerius directed his attention to the martyrs of his own time and the past, and this led him to the history of the whole Church and finally to the history of the world, which, to him, was only a preparation for ecclesiastical history.\n\nThen followed the time of the Arian controversies, and dogmatic questions came into the foreground. Christianity at last found recognition by the State; and this brought new problems—apologies of a different sort had to be prepared. Lastly, Eusebius wrote eulogies in praise of Constantine. To all this activity must be added numerous writings of a miscellaneous nature, addresses, letters, and the like, and exegetical works that extended over the whole of his life and that include both commentaries and an important treatise on the location of biblical place names and the distances between these cities.\n\nPamphilus and Eusebius occupied themselves with the textual criticism of the Septuagint text of the Old Testament and especially of the New Testament. An edition of the Septuagint seems to have been already prepared by Origen, which, according to Jerome, was revised and circulated by Eusebius and Pamphilus. For an easier survey of the material of the four Evangelists, Eusebius divided his edition of the New Testament into paragraphs and provided it with a synoptical table so that it might be easier to find the pericopes that belong together. These canon tables or \"Eusebian canons\" remained in use throughout the Middle Ages, and illuminated manuscript versions are important for the study of early medieval art, as they are the most elaborately decorated pages of many Gospel books. Eusebius detailed in \"Epistula ad Carpianum\" how to use his canons.\n\nThe \"Chronicle\" ( (\"Pantodape historia\")) is divided into two parts. The first part, the \"Chronography\" ( (\"Chronographia\")), gives an epitome of universal history from the sources, arranged according to nations. The second part, the \"Canons\" ( (\"Chronikoi kanones\")), furnishes a synchronism of the historical material in parallel columns, the equivalent of a parallel timeline.\n\nThe work as a whole has been lost in the original Greek, but it may be reconstructed from later chronographists of the Byzantine school who made excerpts from the work, especially George Syncellus. The tables of the second part have been completely preserved in a Latin translation by Jerome, and both parts are still extant in an Armenian translation. The loss of the Greek originals has given the Armenian translation a special importance; thus, the first part of Eusebius' \"Chronicle\", of which only a few fragments exist in the Greek, has been preserved entirely in Armenian, though with lacunae. The \"Chronicle\" as preserved extends to the year 325.\n\nIn his \"Church History\" or \"Ecclesiastical History\", Eusebius wrote the first surviving history of the Christian Church as a chronologically-ordered account, based on earlier sources, complete from the period of the Apostles to his own epoch. The time scheme correlated the history with the reigns of the Roman Emperors, and the scope was broad. Included were the bishops and other teachers of the Church, Christian relations with the Jews and those deemed heretical, and the Christian martyrs through 324. Although its accuracy and biases have been questioned, it remains an important source on the early church due to Eusebius's access to materials now lost.\n\nEusebius' \"Life of Constantine\" (\"Vita Constantini\") is a eulogy or panegyric, and therefore its style and selection of facts are affected by its purpose, rendering it inadequate as a continuation of the \"Church History.\" As the historian Socrates Scholasticus said, at the opening of his history which was designed as a continuation of Eusebius, \"Also in writing the life of Constantine, this same author has but slightly treated of matters regarding Arius, being more intent on the rhetorical finish of his composition and the praises of the emperor, than on an accurate statement of facts.\" The work was unfinished at Eusebius' death. Some scholars have questioned the Eusebian authorship of this work.\n\nBefore he compiled his church history, Eusebius edited a collection of martyrdoms of the earlier period and a biography of Pamphilus. The martyrology has not survived as a whole, but it has been preserved almost completely in parts. It contained:\n\nBULLET::::- an epistle of the congregation of Smyrna concerning the martyrdom of Polycarp;\nBULLET::::- the martyrdom of Pionius;\nBULLET::::- the martyrdoms of Carpus, Papylus, and Agathonike;\nBULLET::::- the martyrdoms in the congregations of Vienne and Lyon;\nBULLET::::- the martyrdom of Apollonius.\n\nOf the life of Pamphilus, only a fragment survives. A work on the martyrs of Palestine in the time of Diocletian was composed after 311; numerous fragments are scattered in legendaries which have yet to be collected. The life of Constantine was compiled after the death of the emperor and the election of his sons as Augusti (337). It is more a rhetorical eulogy on the emperor than a history but is of great value on account of numerous documents incorporated in it.\n\nTo the class of apologetic and dogmatic works belong:\n\nBULLET::::- The \"Apology for Origen\", the first five books of which, according to the definite statement of Photius, were written by Pamphilus in prison, with the assistance of Eusebius. Eusebius added the sixth book after the death of Pamphilus. We possess only a Latin translation of the first book, made by Rufinus;\nBULLET::::- A treatise against Hierocles (a Roman governor), in which Eusebius combated the former's glorification of Apollonius of Tyana in a work entitled \"A Truth-loving Discourse\" (Greek: \"Philalethes logos\"); in spite of manuscript attribution to Eusebius, however, it has been argued (by Thomas Hagg and more recently, Aaron Johnson that this treatise \"Against Hierocles\" was written by someone other than Eusebius of Caesarea.\nBULLET::::- \"Praeparatio evangelica\" (\"Preparation for the Gospel\"), commonly known by its Latin title, which attempts to prove the excellence of Christianity over every pagan religion and philosophy. The \"Praeparatio\" consists of fifteen books which have been completely preserved. Eusebius considered it an introduction to Christianity for pagans. But its value for many later readers is more because Eusebius studded this work with so many lively fragments from historians and philosophers which are nowhere else preserved. Here alone is preserved Pyrrho's translation of the Buddhist Three marks of existence upon which Pyrrho based Pyrrhonism. Here alone is a summary of the writings of the Phoenician priest Sanchuniathon of which the accuracy has been shown by the mythological accounts found on the Ugaritic tables. Here alone is the account from Diodorus Siculus's sixth book of Euhemerus' wondrous voyage to the island of Panchaea where Euhemerus purports to have found his true history of the gods. And here almost alone is preserved writings of the neo-Platonist philosopher Atticus along with so much else.\nBULLET::::- \"Demonstratio evangelica\" (\"Proof of the Gospel\") is closely connected to the \"Praeparatio\" and comprised originally twenty books of which ten have been completely preserved as well as a fragment of the fifteenth. Here Eusebius treats of the person of Jesus Christ. The work was probably finished before 311;\nBULLET::::- Another work which originated in the time of the persecution, entitled \"Prophetic Extracts\" (\"Eclogae propheticae\"). It discusses in four books the Messianic texts of Scripture. The work is merely the surviving portion (books 6–9) of the \"General elementary introduction\" to the Christian faith, now lost. The fragments given as the Commentary on Luke in the PG have been claimed to derive from the missing tenth book of the General Elementary Introduction see D. S. Wallace-Hadrill); however, Aaron Johnson has argued that they cannot be associated with this work.\n\nBULLET::::- The treatise \"On Divine Manifestation\" or \"On the Theophania\" (\"Peri theophaneias\"), of unknown date. It treats of the incarnation of the Divine Logos, and its contents are in many cases identical with the \"Demonstratio evangelica.\" Only fragments are preserved in Greek, but a complete Syriac translation of the \"Theophania\" survives in an early 5th-century manuscript. Samuel Lee, the editor (1842) and translator (1843) of the Syriac \"Theophania\" thought that the work must have been written \"after the general peace restored to the Church by Constantine, and before either the 'Praeparatio,' or the 'Demonstratio Evangelica,' was written . . . it appears probable . . . therefore, that this was one of the first productions of Eusebius, if not the first after the persecutions ceased.\" Hugo Gressmann, noting in 1904 that the \"Demonstratio\" seems to be mentioned at IV. 37 and V. 1, and that II. 14 seems to mention the extant practice of temple prostitution at Hieropolis in Phoenica, concluded that the \"Theophania\" was probably written shortly after 324. Others have suggested a date as late as 337.\nBULLET::::- A polemical treatise against Marcellus of Ancyra, the \"Against Marcellus\", dating from about 337;\nBULLET::::- A supplement to the last-named work, also against Marcellus, entitled \"Ecclesiastical Theology\", in which he defended the Nicene doctrine of the Logos against the party of Athanasius.\n\nA number of writings, belonging in this category, have been entirely lost.\n\nAll of the exegetical works of Eusebius have suffered damage in transmission. The majority of them are known to us only from long portions quoted in Byzantine catena-commentaries. However these portions are very extensive. Extant are:\n\nBULLET::::- An enormous Commentary on the Psalms.\nBULLET::::- A commentary on Isaiah, discovered more or less complete in a manuscript in Florence early in the 20th century and published 50 years later.\nBULLET::::- Small fragments of commentaries on Romans and 1 Corinthians.\n\nEusebius also wrote a work \"Quaestiones ad Stephanum et Marinum\", \"On the Differences of the Gospels\" (including solutions). This was written for the purpose of harmonizing the contradictions in the reports of the different Evangelists. This work was recently (2011) translated into the English language by David J. Miller and Adam C. McCollum (edited by Roger Pearse) and was published under the name \"Eusebius of Caesarea: Gospel Problems and Solutions.\" The original work was also translated into Syriac, and lengthy quotations exist in a \"catena\" in that language, and also in Coptic and Arabic catenas.\n\nEusebius also wrote treatises on Biblical archaeology:\n\nBULLET::::- A work on the Greek equivalents of Hebrew Gentilic nouns;\nBULLET::::- A description of old Judea with an account of the loss of the ten tribes;\nBULLET::::- A plan of Jerusalem and the Temple of Solomon.\n\nThese three treatises have been lost.\n\nThe addresses and sermons of Eusebius are mostly lost, but some have been preserved, e.g., a sermon on the consecration of the church in Tyre and an address on the thirtieth anniversary of the reign of Constantine (336).\n\nMost of Eusebius' letters are lost. His letters to Carpianus and Flacillus exist complete. Fragments of a letter to the empress Constantia also exists.\n\nEusebius is fairly unusual in his preterist, or fulfilled eschatological view. Saying \"The Holy Scriptures foretell that there will be unmistakable signs of the Coming of Christ. Now there were among the Hebrews three outstanding offices of dignity, which made the nation famous, firstly the kingship, secondly that of prophet, and lastly the high priesthood. The prophecies said that the abolition and complete destruction of all these three together would be the sign of the presence of the Christ. And that the proofs that the times had come, would lie in the ceasing of the Mosaic worship, the desolation of Jerusalem and its Temple, and the subjection of the whole Jewish race to its enemies...The holy oracles foretold that all these changes, which had not been made in the days of the prophets of old, would take place at the coming of the Christ, which I will presently shew to have been fulfilled as never before in accordance with the predictions.\" (Demonstratio Evangelica VIII)\n\nFrom a dogmatic point of view, Eusebius stands entirely upon the shoulders of Origen. Like Origen, he started from the fundamental thought of the absolute sovereignty (\"monarchia\") of God. God is the cause of all beings. But he is not merely a cause; in him everything good is included, from him all life originates, and he is the source of all virtue. God sent Christ into the world that it may partake of the blessings included in the essence of God. Christ is God and is a ray of the eternal light; but the figure of the ray is so limited by Eusebius that he expressly distinguishes the Son as distinct from Father as a ray is also distinct from its source the sun.\n\nEusebius was intent upon emphasizing the difference of the persons of the Trinity and maintaining the subordination of the Son (Logos, or Word) to God. The Logos, the Son (Jesus) is an hypostasis of God the Father whose generation, for Eusebius, took place before time. The Logos acts as the organ or instrument of God, the creator of life, the principle of every revelation of God, who in his absoluteness and transcendence is enthroned above and isolated from all the world. Eusebius, with most of the Christian tradition, assumed God was immutable. Therefore, to Eusebius's mind, the Logos must possess divinity by participation (and not originally like the Father), so that he can change, unlike God the Father. Thus he assumed a human body without altering the immutable divine Father. Eusebius never calls Jesus \"o theós\", but \"theós\" because in all contrary attempts he suspected either polytheism (three distinct gods) or Sabellianism (three modes of one divine person).\n\nLikewise, Eusebius described the relation of the Holy Spirit within the Trinity to that of the Son to the Father. No point of this doctrine is original with Eusebius, all is traceable to his teacher Origen. The lack of originality in his thinking shows itself in the fact that he never presented his thoughts in a system. After nearly being excommunicated due to charges of heresy by Alexander of Alexandria, Eusebius submitted and agreed to the Nicene Creed at the First Council of Nicea in 325.\n\nEusebius held that men were sinners by their own free choice and not by the necessity of their natures. Eusebius said, \"The Creator of all things has impressed a natural law upon the soul of every man, as an assistant and ally in his conduct, pointing out to him the right way by this law; but, by the free liberty with which he is endowed, making the choice of what is best worthy of praise and acceptance, because he has acted rightly, not by force, but from his own free-will, when he had it in his power to act otherwise, As, again, making him who chooses what is worst, deserving of blame and punishment, as having by his own motion neglected the natural law, and becoming the origin and fountain of wickedness, and misusing himself, not from any extraneous necessity, but from free will and judgment. The fault is in him who chooses, not in God. For God has not made nature or the substance of the soul bad; for he who is good can make nothing but what is good. Everything is good which is according to nature. Every rational soul has naturally a good free-will, formed for the choice of what is good. But when a man acts wrongly, nature is not to be blamed; for what is wrong, takes place not according to nature, but contrary to nature, it being the work of choice, and not of nature\".\n\nAccording to Bl. Theodoret of Cyrrus' Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius originally held Arian sympathies and the Arians counted him among them in their letters, but he was later reconciled with the Church during the Council of Nicaea, which he presided at, and published a letter explaining why he had chosen the to agree with the use of \"Con-substantial with the Father\" in the Creed, which Arians abhorred. It has been debated whether Eusebius subscribed to Arianism at all, as the earliest manuscripts of The Ecclesiastical History do not contain pro-Arian language and neither does Rufinus of Aquileia's translation.\n\nBy the time of the Byzantine Iconoclasm several centuries later, Eusebius had unfairly gained the reputation of having been an Arian, and was roundly condemned as such by Patriarch Nikephoros I of Constantinople. A letter Eusebius is supposed to have written to Constantine's daughter Constantia, refusing to fulfill her request for images of Christ, was quoted in the decrees (now lost) of the Iconoclast Council of Hieria in 754, and later quoted in part in the rebuttal of the Hieria decrees in the Second Council of Nicaea of 787, now the only source from which some of the text is known. The authenticity, or authorship of the letter remain uncertain.\n\nThe first Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great, had converted to Christianity directly after the Battle of the Milvian Bridge in 312 A.D, after reputedly seeing a flaming cross in the sky which was emblazoned with the words \"\"In Hoc Signo Vinces\";\" which translates to \"\"In this Sign Conquer.\"\" According to Eusebius, in the evening before the battle Constantine went to sleep unsure what this sign could mean, but then had a dream in which Christ appeared to him, and commanded him to make a likeness of the sign which he had seen in the heavens, as it would protect him in all future engagements with his enemies. The next day, Constantine promised the Christian god that if his army were to win the battle, he would adopt the Christian religion - which is precisely what happened. In the June, 2002 edition of the 'Church History' journal, Pier Beatrice reports that Eusebius testified that the word \"homoousios\" (consubstantial) \" ... was inserted in the Nicene Creed solely by the personal order of Constantine.\"\"According to Eusebius of Caesarea, the word \"homoousios\" was inserted in the Nicene Creed solely by the personal order of Constantine\".\" But this statement is highly problematic. It is very difficult to explain the seeming paradoxical fact that this word, along with the explanation given by Constantine, was accepted by the 'Arian' Eusebius, whereas it has left no traces at all in the works of his opponents, the leaders of the anti-Arian party such as Alexander of Alexandria, Ossius of Cordova, Marcellus of Ancyra, and Eustathius of Antioch, who are usually considered Constantine's theological advisers and the strongest supporters of the council. Neither before nor during Constantine's time is there any evidence of a normal, well-established Christian use of the term \"homoousios\" in its strictly Trinitarian meaning.\n\nHaving once excluded any relationship of the Nicene \"homoousios\" with the Christian tradition, it becomes legitimate to propose a new explanation, based on an analysis of two pagan documents which have so far never been taken into account. The main thesis of this paper is that \"homoousios\" came straight from Constantine's Hermetic background. As can be clearly seen in the \"Poimandres,\" and even more clearly in an inscription mentioned exclusively in the \"Theosophia,\" in the theological language of Egyptian paganism the word \"homoousios\" meant that the Nous-Father and the Logos-Son, who are two distinct beings, share the same perfection of the divine nature.\"\nBULLET::::- Edward Gibbon openly distrusted the writings of Eusebius concerning the number of martyrs, by noting a passage in the shorter text of the \"Martyrs of Palestine\" attached to the \"Ecclesiastical History\" (Book 8, Chapter 2) in which Eusebius introduces his description of the martyrs of the Great Persecution under Diocletian with: \"\"Wherefore we have decided to relate nothing concerning them except the things in which we can vindicate the Divine judgment. [...] We shall introduce into this history in general only those events which may be useful first to ourselves and afterwards to posterity.\"\" In the longer text of the same work, chapter 12, Eusebius states: \"\"I think it best to pass by all the other events which occurred in the meantime: such as [...] the lust of power on the part of many, the disorderly and unlawful ordinations, and the schisms among the confessors themselves; also the novelties which were zealously devised against the remnants of the Church by the new and factious members, who added innovation after innovation and forced them in unsparingly among the calamities of the persecution, heaping misfortune upon misfortune. I judge it more suitable to shun and avoid the account of these things, as I said at the beginning.\"\"\nBULLET::::- When his own honesty was challenged by his contemporaries, Gibbon appealed to a chapter heading in Eusebius' \"Praeparatio evangelica\" (Book XII, Chapter 31) in which Eusebius discussed \"\"That it will be necessary sometimes to use falsehood as a remedy for the benefit of those who require such a mode of treatment.\"\"\nBULLET::::- Although Gibbon refers to Eusebius as the 'gravest' of the ecclesiastical historians, he also suggests that Eusebius was more concerned with the passing political concerns of his time than his duty as a reliable historian.\nBULLET::::- Jacob Burckhardt (19th century cultural historian) dismissed Eusebius as \"the first thoroughly dishonest historian of antiquity\".\nBULLET::::- Other critics of Eusebius' work cite the panegyrical tone of the \"Vita\", plus the omission of internal Christian conflicts in the \"Canones\", as reasons to interpret his writing with caution.\n\nAlternate views have suggested that Gibbon's dismissal of Eusebius is inappropriate:\n\nBULLET::::- With reference to Gibbon's comments, Joseph Barber Lightfoot (late 19th century theologian and former Bishop of Durham) pointed out that Eusebius' statements indicate his honesty in stating what he was not going to discuss, and also his limitations as a historian in not including such material. He also discusses the question of accuracy. \"The manner in which Eusebius deals with his very numerous quotations elsewhere, where we can test his honesty, is a sufficient vindication against this unjust charge.\" Lightfoot also notes that Eusebius cannot always be relied on: \"A far more serious drawback to his value as a historian is the loose and uncritical spirit in which he sometimes deals with his materials. This shows itself in diverse ways. He is not always to be trusted in his discrimination of genuine and spurious documents.\"\nBULLET::::- Averil Cameron (professor at King's College and Oxford) and Stuart Hall (historian and theologian), in their recent translation of the \"Life of Constantine\", point out that writers such as Burckhardt found it necessary to attack Eusebius in order to undermine the ideological legitimacy of the Habsburg empire, which based itself on the idea of Christian empire derived from Constantine, and that the most controversial letter in the \"Life\" has since been found among the papyri of Egypt.\nBULLET::::- In \"Church History\" (Vol. 59, 1990), Michael J. Hollerich (assistant professor at the Jesuit Santa Clara University, California) replies to Burckhardt's criticism of Eusebius, that \"Eusebius has been an inviting target for students of the Constantinian era. At one time or another they have characterized him as a political propagandist, a good courtier, the shrewd and worldly adviser of the Emperor Constantine, the great publicist of the first Christian emperor, the first in a long succession of ecclesiastical politicians, the herald of Byzantinism, a political theologian, a political metaphysician, and a caesaropapist. It is obvious that these are not, in the main, neutral descriptions. Much traditional scholarship, sometimes with barely suppressed disdain, has regarded Eusebius as one who risked his orthodoxy and perhaps his character because of his zeal for the Constantinian establishment.\" Hollerich concludes that \"... the standard assessment has exaggerated the importance of political themes and political motives in Eusebius's life and writings and has failed to do justice to him as a churchman and a scholar\".\n\nWhile many have shared Burckhardt's assessment, particularly with reference to the \"Life of Constantine\", others, while not pretending to extol his merits, have acknowledged the irreplaceable value of his works which may principally reside in the copious quotations that they contain from other sources, often lost.\n\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Caesarea.\nBULLET::::- \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" (\"Church History\") first seven books \"ca\". 300, eighth and ninth book \"ca\". 313, tenth book \"ca\". 315, epilogue \"ca\". 325.\nBULLET::::- \"Contra Hieroclem\" (\"Against Hierocles\").\nBULLET::::- \"Onomasticon\" (\"On the Place-Names in Holy Scripture\").\nBULLET::::- \"De Martyribus Palestinae\" (\"On the Martyrs of Palestine\").\nBULLET::::- \"Praeparatio Evangelica\" (\"Preparation for the Gospel\").\nBULLET::::- \"Demonstratio Evangelica\" (\"Demonstration of the Gospel\").\nBULLET::::- \"Theophania\" (\"Theophany\").\nBULLET::::- \"Laudes Constantini\" (\"In Praise of Constantine\") 335.\nBULLET::::- \"Vita Constantini\" (\"The Life of the Blessed Emperor Constantine\") \"ca\". 336–39.\nBULLET::::- Gregory Thaumaturgus. \"Oratio Panegyrica\".\nBULLET::::- Salmond, S.D.F., trans. From \"Ante-Nicene Fathers\", Vol. 6. Edited by Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson, and A. Cleveland Coxe. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co., 1886. Revised and edited for New Advent by Kevin Knight. Online at New Advent. Accessed 31 January 2010.\nBULLET::::- Jerome.\nBULLET::::- \"Chronicon\" (\"Chronicle\") \"ca\". 380.\nBULLET::::- \"de Viris Illustribus\" (\"On Illustrious Men\") 392.\nBULLET::::- \"Epistulae\" (\"Letters\").\nBULLET::::- Origen.\nBULLET::::- Church Fathers\nBULLET::::- Constantine I and Christianity\nBULLET::::- Early Christianity\nBULLET::::- Fifty Bibles of Constantine\n\nBULLET::::- Sabrina Inowlocki & Claudio Zamagni (eds), \"Reconsidering Eusebius: Collected papers on literary, historical, and theological issues\" (Leiden, Brill, 2011) (Vigiliae Christianae, Supplements, 107).\n\n\nBULLET::::- WMF project links\n\nBULLET::::- Primary sources\nBULLET::::- Church History (Eusebius); The Life of Constantine (Eusebius), online at ccel.org.\nBULLET::::- History of the Martyrs in Palestine (Eusebius), English translation (1861) William Cureton. Website tertullian.org.\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Caesarea, The Gospel Canon Tables\nBULLET::::- Eusebius, Six extracts from the Commentary on the Psalms.\nBULLET::::- \"Opera Omnia\" by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes complete Greek text of Eusebius' works\n\nBULLET::::- Secondary sources\nBULLET::::- \"Eusebius\" in \"New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1917)\nBULLET::::- Eusebius of Caesarea at the Tertullian Project\nBULLET::::- Extensive bibliography at EarlyChurch.org\nBULLET::::- Chronological list of Eusebius's writings\n"}
{"id": "10174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10174", "title": "Empiricism", "text": "Empiricism\n\nIn philosophy, empiricism is a theory that states that knowledge comes only or primarily from sensory experience. It is one of several views of epistemology, the study of human knowledge, along with rationalism and skepticism. Empiricism emphasises the role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions. However, empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sense experiences.\n\nEmpiricism in the philosophy of science emphasises evidence, especially as discovered in experiments. It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on \"a priori\" reasoning, intuition, or revelation.\n\nEmpiricism, often used by natural scientists, says that \"knowledge is based on experience\" and that \"knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification\". Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.\n\nThe English term \"empirical\" derives from the Ancient Greek word ἐμπειρία, \"empeiria\" (roughly ”in test”), which is cognate with and translates to the Latin \"experientia\", from which the words \"experience\" and \"experiment\" are derived .\n\nA central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be \"empirically\" based on the evidence of the senses. Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment. The term \"semi-empirical\" is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms, established scientific laws, and previous experimental results in order to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.\n\nPhilosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience. This view is commonly contrasted with rationalism, which states that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses. For example, John Locke held that some knowledge (e.g. knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone. Similarly Robert Boyle, a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we have innate ideas. The main continental rationalists (Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz) were also advocates of the empirical \"scientific method\".\n\nThe Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy, founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada, accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge. This is enumerated in his work \"Vaiśeṣika Sūtra\".\n\nThe earliest Western proto-empiricists were the Empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, who rejected the three doctrines of the Dogmatic school, preferring to rely on the observation of phantasiai (i.e., phenomena, the appearances). The Empiric school was closely allied with Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism. \n\nThe notion of \"tabula rasa\" (\"clean slate\" or \"blank tablet\") connotes a view of mind as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words \"white paper\") on which experience leaves marks. This denies that humans have innate ideas. The image dates back to Aristotle:\nWhat the mind (\"nous\") thinks must be in it in the same sense as letters are on a tablet (\"grammateion\") which bears no actual writing (\"grammenon\"); this is just what happens in the case of the mind. (Aristotle, \"On the Soul\", 3.4.4301).\n\nAristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality, and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active \"nous\". These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's \"Phaedo\" and \"Apology\", as well as others). Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato, and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as \"\"nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu\"\" (Latin for \"nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses\").\n\nThis idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school. Stoic epistemology generally emphasized that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it. The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as \"When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon.\"\n\nDuring the Middle Ages Aristotle's theory of \"tabula rasa\" was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi, developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail. For Avicenna (Ibn Sina), for example, the \"tabula rasa\" is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education, and knowledge is attained through \"empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts\" developed through a \"syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts\". The intellect itself develops from a material intellect (\"al-'aql al-hayulani\"), which is a potentiality \"that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect (\"al-'aql al-fa'il\"), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge\". So the immaterial \"active intellect\", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.\n\nIn the 12th century CE the Andalusian Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as \"Abubacer\" or \"Ebn Tophail\" in the West) included the theory of \"tabula rasa\" as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel, \"Hayy ibn Yaqdhan\" in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child \"from a \"tabula rasa\" to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society\" on a desert island, through experience alone. The Latin translation of his philosophical novel, entitled \"Philosophus Autodidactus\", published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke's formulation of \"tabula rasa\" in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\".\n\nA similar Islamic theological novel, \"Theologus Autodidactus\", was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century. It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society.\n\nDuring the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to mind into scholasticism. Bonaventure (1221–1274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.\n\nIn the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way. In political and historical writing Niccolò Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing. Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the \"effectual truth\" instead. Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) said, \"If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings.\"\n\nSignificantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno, and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon, who regarded Telesio as \"the first of the moderns.” Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers René Descartes and Pierre Gassendi.\n\nThe decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520 – 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody, made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his \"Dialogo della musica antica e moderna\" (Florence, 1581). The Italian word he used for \"experiment\" was \"esperienza\". It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf. Coelho, ed. \"Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei\"), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history. Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of 'Pythagoras' hammers' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded \"experience and demonstration\" as the \"sine qua non\" of valid rational enquiry.\n\nBritish empiricism, though it was not a term used at the time, derives from the 17th century period of early modern philosophy and modern science. The term became useful in order to describe differences perceived between two of its founders Francis Bacon, described as an \"empiricist\", and René Descartes, who is described as a \"rationalist\". Bacon's philosophy of nature was heavily derived from the works of the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and the Swiss physician Paracelsus. Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza, in the next generation, are often also described as an empiricist and a rationalist respectively. John Locke, George Berkeley, and David Hume were the primary exponents of empiricism in the 18th century Enlightenment, with Locke being normally known as the founder of empiricism as such.\n\nIn response to the early-to-mid-17th century \"continental rationalism\" John Locke (1632–1704) proposed in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1689) a very influential view wherein the \"only\" knowledge humans can have is \"a posteriori\", i.e., based upon experience. Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a \"tabula rasa\", a \"blank tablet\", in Locke's words \"white paper\", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written. There are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection. In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas. The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is. Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is. For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure. If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple. Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities. For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple. Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes. Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations. According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes.\nA generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop, George Berkeley (1685–1753), determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism. In response to Locke, he put forth in his \"Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things \"only\" exist either as a \"result\" of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving. (For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.) In his text \"Alciphron\", Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God. Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism.\n\nThe Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711–1776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism. Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers. He wrote for example, \"Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated. But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities—by ‘proofs’ meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition.\" And,\n\nHume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: \"relations of ideas\" and \"matters of fact\" (see also Kant's analytic-synthetic distinction). Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g. \"that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides\") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g. \"the sun rises in the East\") are examples of the second. All of people's \"ideas\", in turn, are derived from their \"impressions\". For Hume, an \"impression\" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation. To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an \"idea\". Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations.\nHume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason. Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated \"habits\", developed in response to accumulated sense experiences. Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method—that of the problem of induction. Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument. Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past. Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past.\n\nHume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable. According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom. Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt.\n\nMost of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is \"rationally\" unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit. According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism, anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences. Phenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events. Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist—hence the closely related term subjective idealism. By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences. This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part. As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the \"permanent possibility of sensation\".\nMill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for \"all\" meaningful knowledge including mathematics. As summarized by D.W. Hamlin:\n\nMill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience. The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations. This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such \"groups of permanent possibilities of sensation\" might exist in the first place. Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered. In the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of \"reality\" that goes beyond mere \"possibilities of sensation\", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism. Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms. Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the \"gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all\". Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics. It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science, the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction.\n\nThe phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data. If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter. But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement. The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation. There is, however, no \"finite\" set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer. According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal. But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer. If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer. And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man).\n\nLogical empiricism (also \"logical positivism\" or \"neopositivism\") was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g. a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein. Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath, Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle, along with A.J. Ayer, Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach.\n\nThe neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences. They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848–1925) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language. This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions. By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies, they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the \"analytic\" (a priori) and the \"synthetic\" (a posteriori). On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called verification principle. Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable is devoid of meaning. As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems.\n\nIn the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists—at least before the 1930s—any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions. In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of \"phenomenalism\" in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics. That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called \"protocol sentences\", for example, \"\"X\" at location \"Y\" and at time \"T\" observes such and such.\" The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic–synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.) came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman, W.V. Quine, Hilary Putnam, Karl Popper, and Richard Rorty. By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists.\n\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose. The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s. James popularized the term \"pragmatism\", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of \"pragmaticism\". Along with its \"pragmatic theory of truth\", this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.\nCharles Peirce (1839–1914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method. Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright. Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation. In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the \"data-driven\" strict-empiricist view.\n\nAmong Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before. To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning. The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today. Peirce's approach \"presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them. According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism, the conclusions of science are always tentative. The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth\".\nIn his Harvard \"Lectures on Pragmatism\" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the \"three cotary propositions of pragmatism\" (L: \"cos, cotis\" whetstone), saying that they \"put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism\". First among these he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street. That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses. Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference, its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique—in a word, incorrigible. This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or \"thisness\"—what the Scholastics called its \"haecceity\"—that stands beyond control and correction. Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them. This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on \"indirect perception\".\n\nAround the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842–1910) coined the term \"radical empiricism\" to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism—though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures. James maintained that the empirically observed \"directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support\", by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena. James' \"radical empiricism\" is thus \"not\" radical in the context of the term \"empiricism\", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term \"empirical\". His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.\n\nJohn Dewey (1859–1952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism. The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated. Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism was that reality is determined by past experience. Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience. The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation, in physical sciences as in ethics. Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known \"a posteriori\".\n\nBULLET::::- \"\"\nBULLET::::- \"\"\n\nBULLET::::- Achinstein, Peter, and Barker, Stephen F. (1969), \"The Legacy of Logical Positivism: Studies in the Philosophy of Science\", Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.\nBULLET::::- Aristotle, \"On the Soul\" (\"De Anima\"), W. S. Hett (trans.), pp. 1–203 in \"Aristotle, Volume 8\", Loeb Classical Library, William Heinemann, London, UK, 1936.\nBULLET::::- Aristotle, \"Posterior Analytics\".\nBULLET::::- Barone, Francesco (1986), \"Il neopositivismo logico\", Laterza, Roma Bari\nBULLET::::- Berlin, Isaiah (2004), \"The Refutation of Phenomenalism\", Isaiah Berlin Virtual Library.\nBULLET::::- Bolender, John (1998), \"Factual Phenomenalism: A Supervenience Theory\"', \"Sorites\", no. 9, pp. 16–31.\nBULLET::::- Chisolm, R. (1948), \"The Problem of Empiricism\", \"Journal of Philosophy\" 45, 512–17.\nBULLET::::- Cushan, Anna-Marie (1983/2014). \"Investigation into Facts and Values: Groundwork for a theory of moral conflict resolution\". [Thesis, Melbourne University], Ondwelle Publications (online): Melbourne.\nBULLET::::- Dewey, John (1906), \"Studies in Logical Theory\".\nBULLET::::- \"Encyclopædia Britannica\", \"Empiricism\", vol. 4, p. 480.\nBULLET::::- Hume, D., \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", L.A. Selby-Bigge (ed.), Oxford University Press, London, UK, 1975.\nBULLET::::- Hume, David. \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\", in \"Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals\", 2nd edition, L.A. Selby-Bigge (ed.), Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1902. Gutenberg press full-text\nBULLET::::- James, William (1911), \"The Meaning of Truth\".\nBULLET::::- Keeton, Morris T. (1962), \"Empiricism\", pp. 89–90 in Dagobert D. Runes (ed.), \"Dictionary of Philosophy\", Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ.\nBULLET::::- Leftow, Brian (ed., 2006), \"Aquinas: Summa Theologiae, Questions on God\", pp. vii \"et seq\".\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Development of Aristotle's Thought\", vol. 1, pp. 153ff.\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"George Berkeley\", vol. 1, p. 297.\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Empiricism\", vol. 2, p. 503.\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Mathematics, Foundations of\", vol. 5, pp. 188–89.\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Axiomatic Method\", vol. 5, pp. 192ff.\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Epistemological Discussion\", subsections on \"A Priori Knowledge\" and \"Axioms\".\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Phenomenalism\", vol. 6, p. 131.\nBULLET::::- \"Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" (1969), \"Thomas Aquinas\", subsection on \"Theory of Knowledge\", vol. 8, pp. 106–07.\nBULLET::::- Marconi, Diego (2004), \"Fenomenismo\"', in Gianni Vattimo and Gaetano Chiurazzi (eds.), \"L'Enciclopedia Garzanti di Filosofia\", 3rd edition, Garzanti, Milan, Italy.\nBULLET::::- Markie, P. (2004), \"Rationalism vs. Empiricism\" in Edward D. Zalta (ed.), \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", Eprint.\nBULLET::::- Maxwell, Nicholas (1998), \"The Comprehensibility of the Universe: A New Conception of Science\", Oxford University Press, Oxford.\nBULLET::::- Mill, J.S., \"An Examination of Sir William Rowan Hamilton's Philosophy\", in A.J. Ayer and Ramond Winch (eds.), \"British Empirical Philosophers\", Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 1968.\nBULLET::::- Morick, H. (1980), \"Challenges to Empiricism\", Hackett Publishing, Indianapolis, IN.\nBULLET::::- Peirce, C.S., \"Lectures on Pragmatism\", Cambridge, Massachusetts, March 26 – May 17, 1903. Reprinted in part, \"Collected Papers\", CP 5.14–212. Published in full with editor's introduction and commentary, Patricia Ann Turisi (ed.), \"Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking: The 1903 Harvard \"Lectures on Pragmatism\"\", State University of New York Press, Albany, NY, 1997. Reprinted, pp. 133–241, Peirce Edition Project (eds.), \"The Essential Peirce, Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2 (1893–1913)\", Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, 1998.\nBULLET::::- Rescher, Nicholas (1985), \"The Heritage of Logical Positivism\", University Press of America, Lanham, MD.\nBULLET::::- Rock, Irvin (1983), \"The Logic of Perception\", MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nBULLET::::- Rock, Irvin, (1997) \"Indirect Perception\", MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nBULLET::::- Runes, D.D. (ed., 1962), \"Dictionary of Philosophy\", Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ.\nBULLET::::- Sini, Carlo (2004), \"Empirismo\", in Gianni Vattimo et al. (eds.), \"Enciclopedia Garzanti della Filosofia\".\nBULLET::::- Solomon, Robert C., and Higgins, Kathleen M. (1996), \"A Short History of Philosophy\", pp. 68–74.\nBULLET::::- Sorabji, Richard (1972), \"Aristotle on Memory\".\nBULLET::::- Thornton, Stephen (1987), \"Berkeley's Theory of Reality\", Eprint\nBULLET::::- Vanzo, Alberto (2014), \"From Empirics to Empiricists\", \"Intellectual History Review\", 2014, Eprint available here and here.\nBULLET::::- Ward, Teddy (n.d.), \"Empiricism\", Eprint.\nBULLET::::- Wilson, Fred (2005), \"John Stuart Mill\", in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", Eprint.\nBULLET::::- Empiricist Man\n"}
{"id": "10175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10175", "title": "Estampie", "text": "Estampie\n\nThe estampie (, Occitan and , ) is a medieval dance and musical form which was a popular instrumental and vocal form in the 13th and 14th centuries. The name was also applied to poetry . \n\nThe estampie is similar in form to the lai, consisting of a succession of repeated sections . According to Johannes de Grocheio, there were both vocal and instrumental estampies (for which he used the Latin calque \"stantipes\"), which differed somewhat in form, in that the vocal estampie begins with a refrain, which is repeated at the end of each verse . Also according to Grocheio, the repeating sections in both the vocal and instrumental estampie were called \"puncta\" (singular \"punctus\") , in the form: \n\nThe two statements of each punctus differ only in their endings, described as \"apertum\" (\"open\") and \"clausum\" (\"closed\") by Grocheio, who believed that six \"puncta\" were standard for the stantipes (his term for the estampie), though he was aware of stantipes with seven \"puncta\" . The structure can therefore be diagrammed as: \n\nSometimes the same two endings are used for all the \"puncta\", producing the structure \n\nA similar structure was shared with the saltarello, another medieval dance.\n\nThe earliest reported example of this musical form is the song \"Kalenda maya\", written by the troubadour Raimbaut de Vaqueiras (1180–1207) to the melody of an estampida played by French jongleurs . \"Two poetry treatises describe the \"estampie\" as a poetic and musical form, and a music treatise provides details about it as both a vocal form and an instrumental dance\" . Fourteenth-century examples include estampies with subtitles such as \"Isabella\" and \"Tre fontane\" . Non-estampie dances found in Br. Lib. Add 29987 include dance pairs such as \"Lamento di Tristano\" and \"La Manfredina\" (each paired with a following \"rotta\"), and Dança amorosa (paired with a following \"troto\") .\n\nThough the estampie is generally monophonic, there are also two-voice compositions in the form of an estampie, such as the three for keyboard in the Robertsbridge Fragment.\n\nAccording to Grocheio, the fiddle was the supreme instrument of the period, and the stantipes, together with the cantus coronatus and ductia, were the principal forms played on fiddles before the wealthy in their celebration .\n\nThe estampie is the first known genre of medieval era dance music which continues to exist today. The estampie can be monophonic (a single musical line) or polyphonic (producing many sounds). The melody is monophonic and is heard as the most prominent melody. However, the melody becomes polyphonic when accompanied by instrumentalists around the one written melody . The estampie was performed in a lively triple meter, a primary division of three beats to the bar. During polyphonic arrangements, the lines do not cross one another. The top line is in the soprano/alto range, using an instrument such as a recorder. The bottom line is in the tenor range using an instrument such as the crumhorn . According to Parisian musical theorist Johannes de Grocheio, when estampies were played as entertainment for the wealthy during their feasts, only the greatest vielle players performed. Grocheio explains the difference between a vocal and instrumental estampie is in the refrain (to repeat). Refrains within the instrumental estampie are the notes that are automatically repeated with each puntum (section). In a vocal estampie, the words carry the refrain and do not repeat, therefore, the last punctum is sung twice . Grocheio has described the differing lengths of puncta as irregular and complicated. He further states that this difficulty captivates the attention of both the players and listeners and diverts the minds of the rich from wicked thoughts . These differences in puncta, i.e. different phrase lengths, lack percussive measure relating to the rhythmic sounds common to all the instruments. The length of percussive measure is equal in a ductia, however is unequal in length in the estampie .\n\nAccording to the \"OED\", the name comes from the Provençal \"estampida\", feminine of \"estampit\", the past participle of \"estampir\" \"to resound\" .\n\nBULLET::::- Willi Apel. \"Harvard Dictionary of Music\" (1970) Heinemann Educational Books Ltd.\nBULLET::::- Pierre Aubry. \"Estampies et danses royales\" (1906) .\nBULLET::::- L. Hibberd. \"Estampie and Stantipes\". \"Speculum\" XIX, 1944, 222 ff.\nBULLET::::- .\nBULLET::::- C. Schima. \"Die Estampie\" (1995) . See also Estampie Schima\n"}
{"id": "10176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10176", "title": "Experimental cancer treatment", "text": "Experimental cancer treatment\n\nExperimental cancer treatments are non-medical therapies intended to treat cancer by improving on, supplementing or replacing conventional methods (surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and immunotherapy). Experimental cancer treatments cannot make medical claims. The term experimental cancer treatment could thus be substituted for \"non FDA approved cancer treatment.\"\n\nThe entries listed below vary between theoretical therapies to unproven controversial therapies. Many of these treatments are alleged to help against only specific forms of cancer. It is not a list of treatments widely available at hospitals.\n\nThe twin goals of research are to determine whether the treatment actually works (called efficacy) and whether it is sufficiently safe. Regulatory processes attempt to balance the potential benefits with the potential harms, so that people given the treatment are more likely to benefit from it than to be harmed by it.\n\nMedical research for cancer begins much like research for any disease. In organized studies of new treatments for cancer, the pre-clinical development of drugs, devices, and techniques begins in laboratories, either with isolated cells or in small animals, most commonly rats or mice. In other cases, the proposed treatment for cancer is already in use for some other medical condition, in which case more is known about its safety and potential efficacy.\n\nClinical Trials are the study of treatments in humans. The first-in-human tests of a potential treatment are called Phase I studies. Early clinical trials typically enroll a very small number of patients, and the purpose is to identify major safety issues and the \"maximum tolerated dose\", which is the highest dose that does not produce serious or fatal adverse effects. The dose given in these trials may be far too small to produce any useful effect. In most research, these early trials may involve healthy people, but cancer studies normally enroll only people with relatively severe forms of the disease in this stage of testing. On average, 95% of the participants in these early trials receive no benefit, but all are exposed to the risk of adverse effects. Most participants show signs of optimism bias (the irrational belief that they will beat the odds).\n\nLater studies, called Phase II and Phase III studies, enroll more people, and the goal is to determine whether the treatment actually works. Phase III studies are frequently randomized controlled trials, with the experimental treatment being compared to the current best available treatment rather than to a placebo. In some cases, the Phase III trial provides the best available treatment to all participants, in addition to some of the patients receiving the experimental treatment.\n\nChemotherapeutic drugs have a hard time penetrating tumors to kill them at their core because these cells may lack a good blood supply . Researchers have been using anaerobic bacteria, such as \"Clostridium novyi\", to consume the interior of oxygen-poor tumours. These should then die when they come in contact with the tumor's oxygenated sides, meaning they would be harmless to the rest of the body. A major problem has been that bacteria do not consume all parts of the malignant tissue. However, combining the therapy with chemotheraputic treatments can help to solve this problem.\n\nAnother strategy is to use anaerobic bacteria that have been transformed with an enzyme that can convert a non-toxic prodrug into a toxic drug. With the proliferation of the bacteria in the necrotic and hypoxic areas of the tumor, the enzyme is expressed solely in the tumor. Thus, a systemically applied prodrug is metabolised to the toxic drug only in the tumor. This has been demonstrated to be effective with the nonpathogenic anaerobe \"Clostridium sporogenes\".\n\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells) is a molecular complex derived from human breast milk that kills tumor cells by a process resembling programmed cell death (apoptosis). It has been tested in humans with skin papillomas and bladder cancer.\n\nDichloroacetate (DCA) has been found to shrink tumors \"in vivo\" in rats, and has a plausible scientific mechanism: DCA appears to reactivate suppressed mitochondria in some types of oxygen-starved tumor cells, and thus promotes apoptosis. Because it was tested for other conditions, DCA is known to be relatively safe, available, and inexpensive, and it can be taken by mouth as a pill, which is convenient. Five patients with brain cancer have been treated with DCA in a clinical trial, and the authors say that the lives of four were 'probably' extended. However, without a large controlled trial it is impossible to say whether the drug is truly effective against cancer.\n\nQuercetin is a principal flavonoid compound and an excellent free-radical-scavenging antioxidant that promotes apoptosis. In vitro it shows some antitumor activity in oral cancer and leukemia. Cultured skin and prostate cancer cells showed significant mortality (compared to nonmalignant cells) when treated with a combination of quercetin and ultrasound. Note that ultrasound also promotes topical absorption by up to 1,000 times, making the use of topical quercetin and ultrasound wands an interesting proposition.\n\nHigh dietary intake of fruits and vegetables is associated with reduction in cancer, and some scientists, such as Gian Luigi Russo at the Institute of Food Sciences in Italy, suspect quercetin may be partly responsible. Research shows that quercetin influences cellular mechanisms in vitro and in animal studies. According to the American Cancer society, \"there is no reliable clinical evidence that quercetin can prevent or treat cancer in humans\".\n\nInsulin potentiation therapy is practice of injecting insulin, usually alongside conventional cancer drugs, in the belief that this improves the overall effect of the treatment. Quackwatch state: \"Insulin Potentiation Therapy (IPT) is one of several unproven, dangerous treatments that is promoted by a small group of practitioners without trustworthy evidence that it works.\"\n\nSeveral drug therapies are being developed based on p53, the tumour suppressor gene that protects the cell in response to damage and stress. It is analogous to deciding what to do with a damaged car: p53 brings everything to a halt, and then decides whether to fix the cell or, if the cell is beyond repair, to destroy the cell. This protective function of p53 is disabled in most cancer cells, allowing them to multiply without check. Restoration of p53 activity in tumours (where possible) has been shown to inhibit tumour growth and can even shrink the tumour.\n\nAs p53 protein levels are usually kept low, one could block its degradation and allow large amounts of p53 to accumulate, thus stimulating p53 activity and its antitumour effects. Drugs that utilize this mechanism include nutlin and MI-219, which are both in phase I clinical trials. There are also other drugs that are still in the preclinical stage of testing, such as RITA and MITA.\n\nBI811283 is a small molecule inhibitor of the aurora B kinase protein being developed by Boehringer Ingelheim for use as an anti-cancer agent. BI 811283 is currently in the early stages of clinical development and is undergoing first-in-human trials in patients with solid tumors and Acute Myeloid Leukaemia.\n\nIntroduction of tumor suppressor genes into rapidly dividing cells has been thought to slow down or arrest tumor growth. Adenoviruses are a commonly utilized vector for this purpose. Much research has focused on the use of adenoviruses that cannot reproduce, or reproduce only to a limited extent, within the patient to ensure safety via the avoidance of cytolytic destruction of noncancerous cells infected with the vector. However, new studies focus on adenoviruses that can be permitted to reproduce, and destroy cancerous cells in the process, since the adenoviruses' ability to infect normal cells is substantially impaired, potentially resulting in a far more effective treatment.\nAnother use of gene therapy is the introduction of enzymes into these cells that make them susceptible to particular chemotherapy agents; studies with introducing thymidine kinase in gliomas, making them susceptible to aciclovir, are in their experimental stage.\n\nEpigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the DNA sequence, often a result of environmental or dietary damage to the histone receptors within the cell. Current research has shown that epigenetic pharmaceuticals could be a putative replacement or adjuvant therapy for currently accepted treatment methods such as radiation and chemotherapy, or could enhance the effects of these current treatments. It has been shown that the epigenetic control of the proto-onco regions and the tumor suppressor sequences by conformational changes in histones directly affects the formation and progression of cancer. Epigenetics also has the factor of reversibility, a characteristic that other cancer treatments do not offer.\n\nSome investigators, like Randy Jirtle, PhD, of Duke University Medical Center, think epigenetics may ultimately turn out to have a greater role in disease than genetics.\n\nBecause most malignant cells rely on the activity of the protein telomerase for their immortality, it has been proposed that a drug that inactivates telomerase might be effective against a broad spectrum of malignancies. At the same time, most healthy tissues in the body express little if any telomerase, and would function normally in its absence. Currently, inositol hexaphosphate, which is available over-the-counter, is undergoing testing in cancer research due to its telomerase-inhibiting abilities.\n\nA number of research groups have experimented with the use of telomerase inhibitors in animal models, and as of 2005 and 2006 phase I and II human clinical trials are underway. Geron Corporation is currently conducting two clinical trials involving telomerase inhibitors. One uses a vaccine (GRNVAC1) and the other uses a lipidated oligonucleotide (GRN163L).\n\nPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is generally a non-invasive treatment using a combination of light and a photosensitive drug, such as 5-ALA, Foscan, Metvix, Tookad, WST09, WST11, Photofrin, or Visudyne. The drug is triggered by light of a specific wavelength.\n\nLocalized and whole-body application of heat has been proposed as a technique for the treatment of malignant tumours. Intense heating will cause denaturation and coagulation of cellular proteins, rapidly killing cells within a tumour.\n\nMore prolonged moderate heating to temperatures just a few degrees above normal (39.5 °C) can cause more subtle changes. A mild heat treatment combined with other stresses can cause cell death by apoptosis. There are many biochemical consequences to the heat shock response within the cell, including slowed cell division and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation therapy. The purpose of overheating the tumor cells is to create a lack of oxygen so that the heated cells become overacidified, which leads to a lack of nutrients in the tumor. This in turn disrupts the metabolism of the cells so that cell death (apoptosis) can set in. In certain cases chemotherapy or radiation that has previously not had any effect can be made effective. Hyperthermia alters the cell walls by means of so-called heat shock proteins. The cancer cells then react very much more effectively to the cytostatics and radiation. If hyperthermia is used conscientiously it has no serious side effects.\n\nThere are many techniques by which heat may be delivered. Some of the most common involve the use of focused ultrasound (FUS or HIFU), microwave heating, induction heating, magnetic hyperthermia, and direct application of heat through the use of heated saline pumped through catheters. Experiments with carbon nanotubes that selectively bind to cancer cells have been performed. Lasers are then used that pass harmlessly through the body, but heat the nanotubes, causing the death of the cancer cells. Similar results have also been achieved with other types of nanoparticles, including gold-coated nanoshells and nanorods that exhibit certain degrees of 'tunability' of the absorption properties of the nanoparticles to the wavelength of light for irradiation. The success of this approach to cancer treatment rests on the existence of an 'optical window' in which biological tissue (i.e., healthy cells) are completely transparent at the wavelength of the laser light, while nanoparticles are highly absorbing at the same wavelength. Such a 'window' exists in the so-called near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In this way, the laser light can pass through the system without harming healthy tissue, and only diseased cells, where the nanoparticles reside, get hot and are killed.\n\nMagnetic Hyperthermia makes use of magnetic nanoparticles, which can be injected into tumours and then generate heat when subjected to an alternating magnetic field.\n\nOne of the challenges in thermal therapy is delivering the appropriate amount of heat to the correct part of the patient's body. A great deal of current research focuses on precisely positioning heat delivery devices (catheters, microwave, and ultrasound applicators, etc.) using ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging, as well as of developing new types of nanoparticles that make them particularly efficient absorbers while offering little or no concerns about toxicity to the circulation system. Clinicians also hope to use advanced imaging techniques to monitor heat treatments in real time—heat-induced changes in tissue are sometimes perceptible using these imaging instruments. In magnetic hyperthermia or magnetic fluid hyperthermia method, it will be easier to control temperature distribution by controlling the velocity of ferrofluid injection and size of magnetic nanoparticles.\n\nHeat treatment involves using radio waves to heat up tiny metals that are implanted in cancerous tissue. Gold nanoparticles or carbon nanotubes are the most likely candidate. Promising preclinical trials have been conducted, although clinical trials may not be held for another few years.\n\nAnother method that is entirely non-invasive referred to as Tumor Treating Fields has already reached clinical trial stage in many countries. The concept applies an electric field through a tumour region using electrodes external to the body. Successful trials have shown the process effectiveness to be greater than chemotherapy and there are no side-effects and only negligible time spent away from normal daily activities. This treatment is still in very early development stages for many types of cancer.\n\nHigh-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is still in investigatory phases in many places around the world. In China it has CFDA approval and over 180 treatment centres have been established in China, Hong Kong, and Korea. HIFU has been successfully used to treat cancer to destroy tumours of the bone, brain, breast, liver, pancreas, rectum, kidney, testes, and prostate. Several thousand patients have been treated with various types of tumours. HIFU has CE approval for palliative care for bone metastasis. Experimentally, palliative care has been provided for cases of advanced pancreatic cancer. High-energy therapeutic ultrasound could increase higher-density anti-cancer drug load and nanomedicines to target tumor sites by 20x fold higher than traditional target cancer therapy.\n\nCold atmospheric plasma or CAP for short is an emerging modality for the treatment of solid tumors Recently, cold atmospheric plasma (CAP) indicated promising anti-neoplastic effects on several tumors, e.g. melanoma, glioma, and pancreatic cancer cells [5, 6, 7], and therefore could be an efficient method for anti-cancer treatment in clinical urology in the future. One example of an experimental technology utilizing Cold Atmospheric plasma is Theraphi\n\nTumor Treating Fields is a novel FDA-approved cancer treatment therapy that uses alternating electric field to disturb the rapid cell division exhibited by cancer cells.\n\nComplementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments are the diverse group of medical and healthcare systems, practices, and products that are not part of conventional medicine and have not been proven to be effective. \"Complementary medicine\" usually refers to methods and substances used along with conventional medicine, while \"alternative medicine\" refers to compounds used instead of conventional medicine. CAM use is common among people with cancer.\n\nMost complementary and alternative medicines for cancer have not been rigorously studied or tested. Some alternative treatments that have been proven ineffective continue to be marketed and promoted.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Questionable Cancer Therapies\"\nBULLET::::- clinicaltrials.gov\n"}
{"id": "10181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10181", "title": "Emission", "text": "Emission\n\nEmission may refer to:\nBULLET::::- Emission of air pollutants, notably:\nBULLET::::- Flue gas, gas exiting to the atmosphere via a flue\nBULLET::::- Exhaust gas, flue gas generated by fuel combustion\nBULLET::::- Emission of greenhouse gases, which absorb and emit radiant energy within the thermal infrared range\nBULLET::::- Emission standards, limits on pollutants that can be released into the environment\nBULLET::::- Emissions trading, a market-based approach to pollution control\n\nBULLET::::- Emission spectrum, the frequencies of electromagnetic radiation emitted due to a molecule making a transition from a high to a lower energy state\nBULLET::::- List of light sources, including both natural and artificial processes that emit light\nBULLET::::- Emission (radiocommunications), a radio signal (usually modulated) emitted from a radio transmitter\nBULLET::::- Emission coefficient, a coefficient in the power output per unit time of an electromagnetic source\nBULLET::::- Emission line, or \"spectral line\", a dark or bright line in an otherwise uniform and continuous spectrum\nBULLET::::- Emission nebula, a cloud of ionized gas emitting light of various colors\nBULLET::::- Emission theory, a competing theory for the special theory of relativity, explaining the results of the Michelson-Morley experiment\nBULLET::::- Emission theory (vision), the proposal that visual perception is accomplished by rays of light emitted by the eyes\n\nBULLET::::- Thermionic emission, the flow of charged particles called thermions from a charged metal or a charged metal oxide surface, archaically known as the Edison effect\nBULLET::::- Ejaculation, the ejection of semen from the penis; also, specifically:\nBULLET::::- Nocturnal emission, ejaculation experienced during sleep\nBULLET::::- Noise, emission\nBULLET::::- Exhalation of air, especially in the context of musical instruments\n\nBULLET::::- Emissions control (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Emitter (disambiguation)\nBULLET::::- Emit (disambiguation)\n"}
{"id": "10183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10183", "title": "Environmental movement in the United States", "text": "Environmental movement in the United States\n\nIn the United States today, the organized environmental movement is represented by a wide range of organizations sometimes called non-governmental organizations or NGOs. These organizations exist on local, national, and international scales. Environmental NGOs vary widely in political views and in the amount they seek to influence the environmental policy of the United States and other governments. The environmental movement today consists of both large national groups and also many smaller local groups with local concerns. Some resemble the old U.S. conservation movement - whose modern expression is The Nature Conservancy, Audubon Society and National Geographic Society - American organizations with a worldwide influence.\n\nBULLET::::- The early Conservation movement, which began in the late 19th century, included fisheries and wildlife management, water, soil conservation and sustainable forestry. Today it includes sustainable yield of natural resources, preservation of wilderness areas and biodiversity.\nBULLET::::- The modern Environmental movement, which began in the 1960s with concern about air and water pollution, became broader in scope to including all landscapes and human activities. See List of environmental issues.\nBULLET::::- Environmental health movement dating at least to Progressive Era (1890s - 1920s) urban reforms including clean water supply, more efficient removal of raw sewage and reduction in crowded and unsanitary living conditions. Today Environmental health is more related to nutrition, preventive medicine, aging well and other concerns specific to the human body's well-being.\nBULLET::::- Sustainability movement which started in the 1980s focused on Gaia theory, value of Earth and other interrelations between human sciences and human responsibilities. Its spinoff deep ecology was more spiritual but often claimed to be science.\nBULLET::::- Environmental justice is a movement that began in the U.S. in the 1980s and seeks an end to environmental racism. Often, low-income and minority communities are located close to highways, garbage dumps, and factories, where they are exposed to greater pollution and environmental health risk than the rest of the population. The Environmental Justice movement seeks to link \"social\" and \"ecological\" environmental concerns, while at the same time keeping environmentalists conscious of the dynamics in their own movement, i.e. racism, sexism, homophobia, classicism, and other malaises of dominant culture.\n\nAs public awareness and the environmental sciences have improved in recent years, environmental issues have broadened to include key concepts such as \"sustainability\" and also new emerging concerns such as ozone depletion, global warming, acid rain, land use and biogenetic pollution.\n\nEnvironmental movements often interact or are linked with other social movements, e.g. for peace, human rights, and animal rights; and against nuclear weapons and/or nuclear power, endemic diseases, poverty, hunger, etc.\n\nSome US colleges are now going green by signing the \"President's Climate Commitment,\" a document that a college President can sign to enable said colleges to practice environmentalism by switching to solar power, etc.\n\n+ Membership of selected US environmental organizations (thousands)\n! !! 1971 !! 1981 !! 1992 !! 1997 !! 2004\n\nEarly European settlers came to the United States brought from Europe the concept of the commons. In the colonial era, access to natural resources was allocated by individual towns, and disputes over fisheries or land use were resolved at the local level. Changing technologies, however, strained traditional ways of resolving disputes of resource use, and local governments had limited control over powerful special interests. For example, the damming of rivers for mills cut off upriver towns from fisheries; logging and clearing of forest in watersheds harmed local fisheries downstream. In New England, many farmers became uneasy as they noticed clearing of forest changed stream flows and a decrease in bird population which helped control insects and other pests. These concerns become widely known with the publication of Man and Nature (1864) by George Perkins Marsh. The environmental impact method of analysis is generally the main mode for determining what issues the environmental movement is involved in. This model is used to determine how to proceed in situations that are detrimental to the environment by choosing the way that is least damaging and has the fewest lasting implications.\n\nConservation first became a national issue during the progressive era's conservation movement (1890s - 1920s). The early national conservation movement shifted emphasis to scientific management which favored larger enterprises and control began to shift from local governments to the states and the federal government.(Judd) Some writers credit sportsmen, hunters and fishermen with the increasing influence of the conservation movement. In the 1870s sportsman magazines such as American Sportsmen, Forest and Stream, and Field and Stream are seen as leading to the growth of the conservation movement.(Reiger) This conservation movement also urged the establishment of state and national parks and forests, wildlife refuges, and national monuments intended to preserve noteworthy natural features.\nConservation groups focus primarily on an issue that's origins are routed in general expansion. As Industrialization became more prominent as well as the increasing trend towards Urbanization the conservative environmental movement began. Contrary to popular belief conservation groups are not against expansion in general, instead they are concerned with efficiency with resources and land development.\n\nTheodore Roosevelt and his close ally George Bird Grinnell, were motivated by the wanton waste that was taking place at the hand of market hunting. This practice resulted in placing a large number of North American game species on the edge of extinction. Roosevelt recognized that the laissez-faire approach of the U.S. Government was too wasteful and inefficient. In any case, they noted, most of the natural resources in the western states were already owned by the federal government. The best course of action, they argued, was a long-term plan devised by national experts to maximize the long-term economic benefits of natural resources. To accomplish the mission, Roosevelt and Grinnell formed the Boone and Crockett Club in 1887. The Club was made up of the best minds and influential men of the day. The Boone and Crockett Club's contingency of conservationists, scientists, politicians, and intellectuals became Roosevelt's closest advisers during his march to preserve wildlife and habitat across North America. As president, Theodore Roosevelt became a prominent conservationist, putting the issue high on the national agenda. He worked with all the major figures of the movement, especially his chief advisor on the matter, Gifford Pinchot. Roosevelt was deeply committed to conserving natural resources, and is considered to be the nation's first conservation President. He encouraged the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902 to promote federal construction of dams to irrigate small farms and placed 230 million acres (360,000 mi² or 930,000 km²) under federal protection. Roosevelt set aside more Federal land for national parks and nature preserves than all of his predecessors combined.\n\nRoosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 Bird Reserves, four Game Preserves, and 150 National Forests, including Shoshone National Forest, the nation's first. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately .\n\nGifford Pinchot had been appointed by McKinley as chief of Division of Forestry in the Department of Agriculture. In 1905, his department gained control of the national forest reserves. Pinchot promoted private use (for a fee) under federal supervision. In 1907, Roosevelt designated 16 million acres (65,000 km²) of new national forests just minutes before a deadline.\n\nIn May 1908, Roosevelt sponsored the Conference of Governors held in the White House, with a focus on natural resources and their most efficient use. Roosevelt delivered the opening address: \"Conservation as a National Duty.\"\n\nIn 1903 Roosevelt toured the Yosemite Valley with John Muir, who had a very different view of conservation, and tried to minimize commercial use of water resources and forests. Working through the Sierra Club he founded, Muir succeeded in 1905 in having Congress transfer the Mariposa Grove and Yosemite Valley to the National Park Service. While Muir wanted nature preserved for the sake of pure beauty, Roosevelt subscribed to Pinchot's formulation, \"to make the forest produce the largest amount of whatever crop or service will be most useful, and keep on producing it for generation after generation of men and trees.\" Muir and the Sierra Club vehemently opposed the damming of the Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite in order to provide water to the city of San Francisco. Roosevelt and Pinchot supported the dam, as did President Woodrow Wilson. The Hetch Hetchy dam was finished in 1923 and is still in operation, but the Sierra Club still wants to tear it down.\n\nOther influential conservationists of the Progressive Era included George Bird Grinnell (a prominent sportsmen who founded the Boone and Crockett Club), the Izaak Walton League and John Muir, the founder of the Sierra Club in 1892. Conservationists organized the National Parks Conservation Association, the Audubon Society, and other groups that still remain active.\n\nFranklin Delano Roosevelt (1933–45), like his cousin Theodore Roosevelt, was an ardent conservationist. He used numerous programs of the departments of Agriculture and Interior to end wasteful land-use, mitigate the effects of the Dust Bowl, and efficiently develop natural resources in the West. One of the most popular of all New Deal programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps (1933–1943), which sent two million poor young men to work in rural and wilderness areas, primarily on conservation projects.\n\nAfter World War II increasing encroachment on wilderness land evoked the continued resistance of conservationists, who succeeded in blocking a number of projects in the 1950s and 1960s, including the proposed Bridge Canyon Dam that would have backed up the waters of the Colorado River into the Grand Canyon National Park.\n\nThe Inter-American Conference on the Conservation of Renewable Natural Resources met in 1948 as a collection of nearly 200 scientists from all over the Americans forming the trusteeship principle that:\n\n\"No generation can exclusively own the renewable resources by which it lives. We hold the commonwealth in trust for prosperity, and to lessen or destroy it is to commit treason against the future\"\n\nDuring the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, several events occurred which raised the public awareness of harm to the environment caused by man. In 1954, the 23 man crew of the Japanese fishing vessel \"Lucky Dragon\" was exposed to radioactive fallout from a hydrogen bomb test at Bikini Atoll, in 1969, an ecologically catastrophic oil spill from an offshore well in California's Santa Barbara Channel, Barry Commoner's protest against nuclear testing, Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring, Paul R. Ehrlich's The Population Bomb all added anxiety about the environment. Pictures of Earth from space emphasized that the earth was small and fragile. \n\nAs the public became more aware of environmental issues, concern about air pollution, water pollution, solid waste disposal, dwindling energy resources, radiation, pesticide poisoning (particularly as described in Rachel Carson's influential Silent Spring, 1962), noise pollution, and other environmental problems engaged a broadening number of sympathizers. That public support for environmental concerns was widespread became clear in the Earth Day demonstrations of 1970.\n\nIn the modern wilderness preservation movement, important philosophical roles are played by the writings of John Muir who had been activist in the late 19th and early 20th century. Along with Muir perhaps most influential in the modern movement is Henry David Thoreau who published Walden in 1854. Also important was forester and ecologist Aldo Leopold, one of the founders of the Wilderness Society in 1935, who wrote a classic of nature observation and ethical philosophy, \"A Sand County Almanac\", published in 1949. Other philosophical foundations were established by Ralph Waldo Emerson and Thomas Jefferson.\n\nThere is also a growing movement of campers and other people who enjoy outdoor recreation activities to help preserve the environment while spending time in the wilderness.\n\nThe anti-nuclear movement in the United States consists of more than 80 anti-nuclear groups that have acted to oppose nuclear power or nuclear weapons, or both, in the United States. These groups include the Abalone Alliance, Clamshell Alliance, Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, Nuclear Information and Resource Service, and Physicians for Social Responsibility. The anti-nuclear movement has delayed construction or halted commitments to build some new nuclear plants, and has pressured the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to enforce and strengthen the safety regulations for nuclear power plants.\n\nAnti-nuclear protests reached a peak in the 1970s and 1980s and grew out of the environmental movement. Campaigns which captured national public attention involved the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Seabrook Station Nuclear Power Plant, Diablo Canyon Power Plant, Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, and Three Mile Island. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the cold war arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history. International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983 at 50 sites across the United States.\nThere were many Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s.\n\nMore recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has related to several nuclear power plants including the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant, Indian Point Energy Center, Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station, Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station, Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant. There have also been campaigns relating to the Y-12 Nuclear Weapons Plant, the Idaho National Laboratory, proposed Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository, the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and transportation of nuclear waste from the Los Alamos National Laboratory.\n\nSome scientists and engineers have expressed reservations about nuclear power, including: Barry Commoner, S. David Freeman, John Gofman, Arnold Gundersen, Mark Z. Jacobson, Amory Lovins, Arjun Makhijani, Gregory Minor, Joseph Romm and Benjamin K. Sovacool. Scientists who have opposed nuclear weapons include Linus Pauling and Eugene Rabinowitch.\n\nAntitoxics groups are a subgroup that is affiliated with the Environmental Movement in the United States, that is primarily concerned with the effects that cities and their by products have on humans. This aspect of the movement is a self-proclaimed \"movement of housewives\". Concern around the issues of ground water contamination and air pollution rose in the early 1980s and individuals involved in antitoxics groups claim that they are concerned for the health of their families.\nA prominent case can be seen in the Love Canal Homeowner's association (LCHA); in this case a housing development was built on a site that had been used for toxic dumping by the Hooker Chemical Company. As a result of this dumping the residents had symptoms of skin irritation, Lois Gibbs, a resident of the development, started a grassroots campaign for reparations. Eventual success led to the government having to purchase homes that were sold in the development.\n\nPrior to the 1970s the protection of basic air and water supplies was a matter mainly left to each state. During the 1970s, primary responsibility for clean air and water shifted to the federal government. Growing concerns, both environmental and economic, from cities and towns as well as sportsman and other local groups, and senators such as Maine's Edmund S. Muskie, led to passage of extensive legislation, notably the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. Other legislation included the 1970 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), which established the Council on Environmental Quality; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972; the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1977, which became known as the Clean Water Act, and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as the Superfund Act (1980). These laws regulated public drinking water systems, toxic substances, pesticides, and ocean dumping; and protected wildlife, wilderness, and wild and scenic rivers. Moreover, the new laws provide for pollution research, standard setting, contaminated site cleanup, monitoring, and enforcement.\n\nThe creation of these laws led to a major shift in the environmental movement. Groups such as the Sierra Club shifted focus from local issues to becoming a lobby in Washington and new groups, for example, the Natural Resources Defense Council and Environmental Defense, arose to influence politics as well. (Larson)\n\nIn the 1980s President Ronald Reagan sought to curtail scope of environmental protection taking steps such as appointing James G. Watt who was called one of the most \"blatantly anti-environmental political appointees\". The major environmental groups responded with mass mailings which led to increased membership and donations. The large environmental organization increasingly relied on ties within Washington, D.C. to advance their environmental agenda. At the same time membership in environmental groups became more suburban and urban. Groups such as animal rights, and the gun control lobby became linked with environmentalism while sportsmen, farmers and ranchers were no longer influential in the movement.\n\nWhen industry groups lobbied to weaken regulation and a backlash against environmental regulations, the so-called wise use movement gained importance and influence. The wise use movement and anti-environmental groups were able to portray environmentalist as out of touch with mainstream values. (Larson)\n\nIn 2004, with the environmental movement seemingly stalled, some environmentalists started questioning whether \"environmentalism\" was even a useful political framework. According to a controversial essay titled \"The Death of Environmentalism \" (Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus, 2004) American environmentalism has been remarkably successful in protecting the air, water, and large stretches of wilderness in North America and Europe, but these environmentalists have stagnated as a vital force for cultural and political change.\n\nShellenberger and Nordhaus wrote, \"Today environmentalism is just another special interest. Evidence for this can be found in its concepts, its proposals, and its reasoning. What stands out is how arbitrary environmental leaders are about what gets counted and what doesn't as 'environmental.' Most of the movement's leading thinkers, funders, and advocates do not question their most basic assumptions about who we are, what we stand for, and what it is that we should be doing.\" Their essay was followed by a speech in San Francisco called \"Is Environmentalism Dead?\" by former Sierra Club President, Adam Werbach, who argued for the evolution of environmentalism into a more expansive, relevant and powerful progressive politics. Werbach endorsed building an environmental movement that is more relevant to average Americans, and controversially chose to lead Wal-Mart's effort to take sustainability mainstream.\n\nThese \"post-environmental movement\" thinkers argue that the ecological crises the human species faces in the 21st century are qualitatively different from the problems the environmental movement was created to address in the 1960s and 1970s. They argue that climate change and habitat destruction are global and more complex, therefore demanding far deeper transformations of the economy, the culture and political life. The consequence of environmentalism's outdated and arbitrary definition, they argue, is political irrelevancy.\n\nThese \"politically neutral\" groups tend to avoid global conflicts and view the settlement of inter-human conflict as separate from regard for nature – in direct contradiction to the ecology movement and peace movement which have increasingly close links: while Green Parties, Greenpeace, and groups like the ACTivist Magazine regard ecology, biodiversity, and an end to non-human extinction as an absolute basis for peace, the local groups may not, and see a high degree of global competition and conflict as justifiable if it lets them preserve their own local uniqueness. However, such groups tend not to \"burn out\" and to sustain for long periods, even generations, protecting the same local treasures.\n\nLocal groups increasingly find that they benefit from collaboration, e.g. on consensus decision making methods, or making simultaneous policy, or relying on common legal resources, or even sometimes a common glossary. However, the differences between the various groups that make up the modern environmental movement tend to outweigh such similarities, and they rarely co-operate directly except on a few major global questions. In a notable exception, over 1,000 local groups from around the country united for a single day of action as part of the Step It Up 2007 campaign for real solutions to global warming.\n\nGroups such as The Bioregional Revolution are calling on the need to bridge these differences, as the converging problems of the 21st century they claim compel the people to unite and to take decisive action. They promote bioregionalism, permaculture, and local economies as solutions to these problems, overpopulation, global warming, global epidemics, and water scarcity, but most notably to \"peak oil\" – the prediction that the country is likely to reach a maximum in global oil production which could spell drastic changes in many aspects of the residents' everyday lives.\n\nMany environmental lawsuits turn on the question of who has standing; are the legal issues limited to property owners, or does the general public have a right to intervene? Christopher D. Stone's 1972 essay, \"Should trees have standing?\" seriously addressed the question of whether natural objects themselves should have legal rights, including the right to participate in lawsuits. Stone suggested that there was nothing absurd in this view, and noted that many entities now regarded as having legal rights were, in the past, regarded as \"things\" that were regarded as legally rightless; for example, aliens, children and women. His essay is sometimes regarded as an example of the fallacy of hypostatization.\n\nOne of the earliest lawsuits to establish that citizens may sue for environmental and aesthetic harms was Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission, decided in 1965 by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. The case helped halt the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York State. See also United States environmental law and David Sive, an attorney who was involved in the case.\n\nConservation biology is an important and rapidly developing field.\n\nOne way to avoid the stigma of an \"ism\" was to evolve early anti-nuclear groups into the more scientific Green Parties, sprout new NGOs such as Greenpeace and Earth Action, and devoted groups to protecting global biodiversity and preventing global warming and climate change. But in the process, much of the emotional appeal, and many of the original aesthetic goals were lost. Nonetheless, these groups have well-defined ethical and political views, backed by science.\n\nSome people are skeptical of the environmental movement and feel that it is more deeply rooted in politics than science. Although there have been serious debates about climate change and effects of some pesticides and herbicides that mimic animal sex steroids, science has shown that some of the claims of environmentalists have credence.\n\nClaims made by environmentalists may be perceived as veiled attacks on industry and globalization rather than legitimate environmental concerns. Detractors note that a significant number of environmental theories and predictions have been inaccurate and suggest that the regulations recommended by environmentalists will more likely harm society rather than help nature.\n\nSpecific examples include when Rachel Carson, in her book \"Silent Spring\", suggested that the pesticide DDT caused cancer and drastically harmed ecosystems. DDT is highly toxic to aquatic life, including crawfish, daphnids, sea shrimp and many species of fish. However, DDT is also used to control malaria.\n\nProminent novelist and Harvard Medical School graduate Michael Crichton appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works to address such concerns and recommended the employment of double-blind experimentation in environmental research. Crichton suggested that because environmental issues are so political in nature, policy makers need neutral, conclusive data to base their decisions on, rather than conjecture and rhetoric, and double-blind experiments are the most efficient way to achieve that aim.\n\nA consistent theme acknowledged by both supporters and critics (though more commonly vocalized by critics) of the environmental movement is that we know very little about the Earth we live in. Most fields of environmental studies are relatively new, and therefore what research we have is limited and does not date far enough back for us to completely understand long-term environmental trends. This has led a number of environmentalists to support the use of the precautionary principle in policy making, which ultimately asserts that we don't know how certain actions may affect the environment, and because there is reason to believe they may cause more harm than good we should refrain from such actions.\n\nIn the December 1994 \"Wild Forest Review,\" Alexander Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair wrote \"The mainstream environmental movement was elitist, highly paid, detached from the people, indifferent to the working class, and a firm ally of big government.…The environmental movement is now accurately perceived as just another well-financed and cynical special interest group, its rancid infrastructure supported by Democratic Party operatives and millions in grants from corporate foundations.\"\n\nHistorian and President of the American Historical Association William Cronon has criticized the modern environmental movement for having a romantic idealizations of wilderness. Cronon writes \"wilderness serves as the unexamined foundation on which so many of the quasi-religious values of modern environmentalism rest.\" Cronon claims that \"to the extent that we live in an urban-industrial civilization but at the same time pretend to ourselves that our real home is in the wilderness, to just that extent we give ourselves permission to evade responsibility for the lives we actually lead.\"\n\nSimilarly Michael Pollan has argued that the wilderness ethic leads people to dismiss areas whose wildness is less than absolute. In his book Second Nature, Pollan writes that \"once a landscape is no longer 'virgin' it is typically written off as fallen, lost to nature, irredeemable.\"\n\nWithin the environmental movement an ideological debate has taken place between those with an ecocentric view point and an anthropocentric view point. The anthropocentric view has been seen as the conservationist approach to the environment with nature viewed, at least in part, as resource to be used by man. In contrast to the conservationist approach the ecocentric view, associated with John Muir, Henry David Thoreau and William Wordsworth referred to as the preservationist movement. This approach sees nature in a more spiritual way. Many environmental historians consider the split between John Muir and Gifford Pinchot. During the preservation / conservation debate the term preservationist become to be seen as a pejorative term.\n\nWhile the ecocentric view focused on biodiversity and wilderness protection the anthropocentric view focus on urban pollution and social justice. Some environmental writers, for example William Cronon have criticized the ecocentric view as have a dualist view as man being separate from nature. Critics of the anthropocentric view point contend that the environmental movement has been taken over by so-called leftist with an agenda beyond environmental protection.\n\nSeveral books after the middle of the 20th century contributed to the rise of American environmentalism (as distinct from the longer-established conservation movement), especially among college and university students and the more literate public. One was the publication of the first textbook on ecology, \"Fundamentals of Ecology,\" by Eugene Odum and Howard Odum, in 1953. Another was the appearance of the best-seller \"Silent Spring\" by Rachel Carson, in 1962. Her book brought about a whole new interpretation on pesticides by exposing their harmful effects in nature. From this book many began referring to Carson as the \"mother of the environmental movement\". Another influential development was a 1965 lawsuit, Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission, opposing the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain, which is said to have given birth to modern United States environmental law. The wide popularity of \"The Whole Earth Catalogs\", starting in 1968, was quite influential among the younger, hands-on, activist generation of the 1960s and 1970s. Recently, in addition to opposing environmental degradation and protecting wilderness, an increased focus on coexisting with natural biodiversity has appeared, a strain that is apparent in the movement for sustainable agriculture and in the concept of Reconciliation Ecology.\n\nEnvironmentalists became much more influential in American politics after the creation or strengthening of numerous US environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act and the formation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970. These successes were followed by the enactment of a whole series of laws regulating waste (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act), toxic substances (Toxic Substances Control Act), pesticides (FIFRA: Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act), clean-up of polluted sites (Superfund), protection of endangered species (Endangered Species Act), and more.\n\nFewer environmental laws have been passed in the last decade as corporations and other conservative interests have increased their influence over American politics. Corporate cooperation against environmental lobbyists has been organized by the Wise Use group. At the same time, many environmentalists have been turning toward other means of persuasion, such as working with business, community, and other partners to promote sustainable development.\n\nMuch environmental activism is directed towards conservation as well as the prevention or elimination of pollution. However, conservation movements, ecology movements, peace movements, green parties, green- and eco-anarchists often subscribe to very different ideologies, while supporting the same goals as those who call themselves \"environmentalists\". To outsiders, these groups or factions can appear to be indistinguishable.\n\nAs human population and industrial activity continue to increase, environmentalists often find themselves in serious conflict with those who believe that human and industrial activities should not be overly regulated or restricted, such as some libertarians.\n\nEnvironmentalists often clash with others, particularly \"corporate interests,\" over issues of the management of natural resources, like in the case of the atmosphere as a \"carbon dump\", the focus of climate change, and global warming controversy. They usually seek to protect commonly owned or unowned resources for future generations.\n\nWhile most environmentalists are mainstream and peaceful, a small minority are more radical in their approach. Adherents of radical environmentalism and ecological anarchism are involved in direct action campaigns to protect the environment. Some campaigns have employed controversial tactics including sabotage, blockades, and arson, while most use peaceful protests such as marches, tree-sitting, and the like. There is substantial debate within the environmental movement as to the acceptability of these tactics, but almost all environmentalists condemn violent actions that can harm humans.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Earth Days\", a 2009 documentary feature film about the start of the environmental movement in the United States.\nBULLET::::- Environmentalism (Critique of George W. Bush's politics)\nBULLET::::- Environmental issues in the United States\nBULLET::::- Environmental racism\nBULLET::::- List of American non-fiction environmental writers\nBULLET::::- List of anti-nuclear protests in the United States\nBULLET::::- Sex ecology\n\nBULLET::::- Bosso, Christopher. \"Environment, Inc.: From Grassroots to Beltway\". Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2005\nBULLET::::- Bosso, Christopher, and Deborah Guber. \"Maintaining Presence: Environmental Advocacy and the Permanent Campaign.\" pp. 78–99 in \"Environmental Policy: New Directions for the Twenty First Century\", 6th ed., eds. Norman Vig and Michael Kraft. Washington, DC: CQ Press, 2006\nBULLET::::- Brinkley, Douglas. \"The Wilderness Warrior: Theodore Roosevelt and the Crusade for America\" (2009)\nBULLET::::- Carter, Neil. \"The Politics of the Environment: Ideas, Activism, Policy\", 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007\nBULLET::::- Davies, Kate. (2013). \"The Rise of the U.S. Environmental Health Movement\". Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield\nBULLET::::- Hays, Samuel P. \"Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency\" (Harvard University Press, 1959).\nBULLET::::- Hays, Samuel P. \"Beauty, Health, and Permanence: Environmental Politics in the United States, 1955-1985\" (1989)\nBULLET::::- Hays, Samuel P. 'A History of Environmental Politics Since 1945\" (2000), abridged version\nBULLET::::- Judd, Richard W. \"Common Lands and Common People: The Origins of Conservation in Northern New England\" (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997).\nBULLET::::- Kline, Benjamin. \"First Along the River: A brief history of the U.S. environmental movement\" (4th ed. 2011)\nBULLET::::- Reiger, John F. \"American Sportsmen and the Origins of Conservation\" (2000)\nBULLET::::- Tresner, Erin. 2009. Factors Affecting States' Ranking on the 2007 Forbes List of America's Greenest States. Applied Research Project, Texas State University. http://ecommons.txstate.edu/arp/293/\n\nBULLET::::- The Emerging Environmental Majority by Christina Larson\nBULLET::::- The Illusion of Preservation. Harvard Forestry\nBULLET::::- State of Denial\nBULLET::::- The Unlikely Environmentalists\nBULLET::::- Worldchanging - Leading online magazine about environmental sustainability\nBULLET::::- \"Dictionary of the History of Ideas\": Environment\nBULLET::::- Essays on environmental teachings of major religions\nBULLET::::- The State of the Environmental Movement Thoreau Institute\nBULLET::::- \"History of the environmental movement\" - Jeremiah Hall\nBULLET::::- \"A Fierce Green Fire: The Battle for a Living Planet\" - Documentary film directed and written by Mark Kitchell. Explores 50 years of environmental activism in the USA. Inspired by the book of the same name by Philip Shabecoff.\n"}
{"id": "10184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10184", "title": "Environmentalist", "text": "Environmentalist\n\nAn environmentalist is a supporter of the goals of the environmental movement, \"a political and ethical movement that seeks to improve and protect the quality of the natural environment through changes to environmentally harmful human activities\". An environmentalist is engaged in or believes in the philosophy of environmentalism.\n\nEnvironmentalists are sometimes referred to using informal or derogatory terms such as \"greenie\" and \"tree-hugger\".\n\nSome of the notable environmentalists who have been active in lobbying for environmental protection and conservation include:\nBULLET::::- Edward Abbey (writer, activist, philosopher)\nBULLET::::- Bayarjargal Agvaantseren (Mongolian conservationist)\nBULLET::::- Ansel Adams (photographer, writer, activist)\nBULLET::::- Qazi Kholiquzzaman Ahmad (environmental activist and economist of Bangladesh)\nBULLET::::- David Attenborough (broadcaster, naturalist)\nBULLET::::- Sundarlal Bahuguna (environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Patriarch Bartholomew I (priest)\nBULLET::::- David Bellamy (botanist)\nBULLET::::- Wendell Berry (farmer, philosopher)\nBULLET::::- Chandi Prasad Bhatt (Gandhian environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Murray Bookchin (anarchist, philosopher, social ecologist)\nBULLET::::- Wendy Bowman, Australian environmental activist\nBULLET::::- Stewart Brand (writer, founder of Whole Earth Catalog)\nBULLET::::- David Brower (writer, activist)\nBULLET::::- Lester Brown (environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Kevin Buzzacott (Aboriginal activist)\nBULLET::::- Helen Caldicott (medical doctor)\nBULLET::::- Joan Carling (Filipino human rights defender)\nBULLET::::- Rachel Carson (biologist, writer)\nBULLET::::- Chevy Chase (comedian)\nBULLET::::- Charles, Prince of Wales\nBULLET::::- Barry Commoner (biologist, politician)\nBULLET::::- Jacques-Yves Cousteau (explorer, ecologist)\nBULLET::::- Leonardo DiCaprio (actor)\nBULLET::::- Rolf Disch (environmentalist and solar energy pioneer)\nBULLET::::- René Dubos (microbiologist)\nBULLET::::- Paul R. Ehrlich (population biologist)\nBULLET::::- Hans-Josef Fell (German Green Party member)\nBULLET::::- Jane Fonda (actor)\nBULLET::::- Mizuho Fukushima (politician, activist)\nBULLET::::- Rolf Gardiner (rural revivalist)\nBULLET::::- Peter Garrett (musician, politician)\nBULLET::::- Al Gore (politician, former Vice President of the United States)\nBULLET::::- James Hansen (scientist)\nBULLET::::- Tom Hanks (actor)\nBULLET::::- Denis Hayes (environmentalist and solar power advocate)\nBULLET::::- Daniel Hooper, AKA Swampy (environmental activist)\nBULLET::::- Nicolas Hulot (journalist and writer)\nBULLET::::- Tetsunari Iida (sustainable energy advocate)\nBULLET::::- John James Audubon (naturalist)\nBULLET::::- Jorian Jenks (English farmer)\nBULLET::::- Naomi Klein (writer, activist)\nBULLET::::- Winona LaDuke (environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Aldo Leopold (ecologist)\nBULLET::::- A. Carl Leopold (plant physiologist)\nBULLET::::- Charles Lindbergh (aviator)\nBULLET::::- James Lovelock (scientist)\nBULLET::::- Amory Lovins (energy policy analyst)\nBULLET::::- Hunter Lovins (environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Caroline Lucas (politician)\nBULLET::::- Mark Lynas (journalist, activist)\nBULLET::::- Kaveh Madani (scientist, activist)\nBULLET::::- Xiuhtezcatl Martinez (activist)\nBULLET::::- Peter Max (graphic designer)\nBULLET::::- Michael McCarthy (naturalist, newspaper journalist, newspaper columnist, and author)\nBULLET::::- Bill McKibben (writer, activist)\nBULLET::::- David McTaggart (activist)\nBULLET::::- Mahesh Chandra Mehta (lawyer, environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Chico Mendes (activist)\nBULLET::::- George Monbiot (journalist)\nBULLET::::- John Muir (naturalist, activist)\nBULLET::::- Luke Mullen (actor, filmmaker, environmentalist/activist)\nBULLET::::- Hilda Murrell (botanist, activist)\nBULLET::::- Ralph Nader (activist)\nBULLET::::- Gaylord Nelson (politician)\nBULLET::::- Eugene Pandala (architect, environmentalist, natural and cultural heritage conservator)\nBULLET::::- Medha Patkar (activist)\nBULLET::::- Alan Pears (environmental consultant and energy efficiency pioneer)\nBULLET::::- River Phoenix (actor, musician, activist)\nBULLET::::- Jonathon Porritt (politician)\nBULLET::::- Phil Radford (environmental, clean energy and democracy advocate, Greenpeace Executive Director)\nBULLET::::- Matthew Richardson (Canadian author)\nBULLET::::- Bonnie Raitt (musician)\nBULLET::::- Theodore Roosevelt (former President of the United States)\nBULLET::::- Ken Saro-Wiwa (writer, television producer, activist)\nBULLET::::- E. F. Schumacher (author of \"Small is Beautiful\")\nBULLET::::- Shimon Schwarzschild (writer, activist)\nBULLET::::- Vandana Shiva (environmental activist)\nBULLET::::- Gary Snyder (poet)\nBULLET::::- Jill Stein (Presidential candidate)\nBULLET::::- Swami Sundaranand (yogi, photographer, author and mountaineer)\nBULLET::::- David Suzuki (scientist, broadcaster)\nBULLET::::- Candice Swanepoel (model)\nBULLET::::- Shōzō Tanaka (politician and activist)\nBULLET::::- Henry David Thoreau (writer, philosopher)\nBULLET::::- Greta Thunberg (activist)\nBULLET::::- J. R. R. Tolkien (writer)\nBULLET::::- Jo Valentine (politician and activist)\nBULLET::::- Dominique Voynet (politician and environmentalist)\nBULLET::::- Harvey Wasserman (journalist, activist)\nBULLET::::- Paul Watson (activist and lecturer)\nBULLET::::- Robert K. Watson (environmental advocate, founder of Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)\nBULLET::::- Franz Weber (environmentalist and animal welfare activist)\nBULLET::::- Henry Williamson (naturalist, writer)\nBULLET::::- Shailene Woodley (actress)\n\nIn recent years, there are not only environmentalist for natural environment but also environmentalist for human environment. For instance, the activists who call for \"mental green space\" by getting rid of disadvantages of internet, cable TV, and smartphones have been called \"info-environmentalists\".\n\nBULLET::::- Environmentalism\nBULLET::::- Global 500 Roll of Honour\nBULLET::::- Grantham Prize for Excellence in Reporting on the Environment\nBULLET::::- Heroes of the Environment\nBULLET::::- Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement\nBULLET::::- Conservationist\nBULLET::::- Conservation movement\nBULLET::::- Conservation ethic\nBULLET::::- Ecology movement\nBULLET::::- Goldman Environmental Prize\nBULLET::::- Green libertarianism\nBULLET::::- Ecofascism\nBULLET::::- Green conservatism\nBULLET::::- List of peace activists\nBULLET::::- List of people associated with renewable energy\nBULLET::::- List of pro-nuclear environmentalists\nBULLET::::- Greenpeace\nBULLET::::- School strike for climate\n"}
{"id": "10186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10186", "title": "Eastern Orthodox Church", "text": "Eastern Orthodox Church\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, officially the Orthodox Catholic Church, is the second-largest Christian church, with approximately 260 million baptised members. It operates as a communion of autocephalous churches, each governed by its bishops in local synods. Roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in Russia. The church has no central doctrinal or governmental authority analogous to the Bishop of Rome, but the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople is recognised by all as \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") of the bishops. As one of the oldest surviving religious institutions in the world, the Eastern Orthodox Church has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern and Southeastern Europe, the Caucasus, and the Near East.\n\nEastern Orthodox theology is based on the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed (known simply as the Nicene Creed). The church teaches that it is the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic church established by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles. It maintains that it practices the original Christian faith, as passed down by holy tradition. Its patriarchates, reminiscent of the pentarchy, and autocephalous and autonomous churches reflect a variety of hierarchical organisation. It recognises seven major sacraments, of which the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in synaxis. The church teaches that through consecration invoked by a priest, the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. The Virgin Mary is venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as the God-bearer, honoured in devotions.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church shared communion with the Roman Catholic Church until the East–West Schism in 1054, disputing particularly the authority of the Pope. Before the Council of Ephesus in AD 431 the Church of the East also shared in this communion, as did the Oriental Orthodox churches before the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, all separating primarily over differences in Christology.\n\nThe majority of Eastern Orthodox Christians live mainly in Southeast and Eastern Europe, Cyprus, Georgia and other communities in the Caucasus region, and communities in Siberia reaching the Russian Far East. There are also smaller communities in the former Byzantine regions of Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean, and in the Middle East where it is decreasing due to forced migration because of increased religious persecution in recent years. There are also many in other parts of the world, formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.\nIn keeping with the church's teaching on universality and with the Nicene Creed, Orthodox authorities such as Saint Raphael of Brooklyn have insisted that the full name of the church has always included the term \"Catholic\", as in \"Holy Orthodox Catholic Apostolic Church\". The official name of the Eastern Orthodox Church is the \"Orthodox Catholic Church\". It is the name by which the church refers to itself in its liturgical or canonical texts, in official publications, and in official contexts or administrative documents. Orthodox teachers refer to the church as Catholic. This name and longer variants containing \"Catholic\" are also recognised and referenced in other books and publications by secular or non-Orthodox writers.\n\nThe common name of the church, \"Eastern Orthodox Church\", is a shortened practicality that helps to avoid confusions in casual use. From ancient times through the first millennium, Greek was the most prevalent shared language in the demographic regions where the Byzantine Empire flourished, and Greek, being the language in which the New Testament was written, was the primary liturgical language of the church. For this reason, the eastern churches were sometimes identified as \"Greek\" (in contrast to the \"Roman\" or \"Latin\" church, which used a Latin translation of the Bible), even before the Great Schism of 1054. After 1054, \"Greek Orthodox\" or \"Greek Catholic\" marked a church as being in communion with Constantinople, much as \"Catholic\" did for communion with Rome. This identification with Greek, however, became increasingly confusing with time. Missionaries brought Orthodoxy to many regions without ethnic Greeks, where the Greek language was not spoken. In addition, struggles between Rome and Constantinople to control parts of Southeastern Europe resulted in the conversion of some churches to Rome, which then also used \"Greek Catholic\" to indicate their continued use of the Byzantine rites. Today, many of those same churches remain, while a very large number of Orthodox are not of Greek national origin, and do not use Greek as the language of worship. \"Eastern\", then, indicates the geographical element in the Church's origin and development, while \"Orthodox\" indicates the faith, as well as communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. There are additional Christian churches in the east that are in communion with neither Rome nor Constantinople, who tend to be distinguished by the category named \"Oriental Orthodox\". While the church continues officially to call itself \"Catholic\", for reasons of universality, the common title of \"Eastern Orthodox Church\" avoids casual confusion with the Roman Catholic Church.\n\nThe first known use of the phrase \"the catholic Church\" (\"he katholike ekklesia\") occurred in a letter written about 110 AD from one Greek church to another (Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans). The letter states: \"Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church.\" Thus, almost from the very beginning, Christians referred to the Church as the \"One, Holy, Catholic (from the Greek καθολική, or \"according to the whole, universal\") and Apostolic Church\". The Eastern Orthodox Church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same early Church.\n\nA number of other Christian churches also make a similar claim: the Roman Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, the Assyrian Church and the Oriental Orthodox. In the Eastern Orthodox view, the Assyrians and Orientals left the Orthodox Church in the years following the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431) and the Fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon (451), respectively, in their refusal to accept those councils' Christological definitions. Similarly, the churches in Rome and Constantinople separated in an event known as the East–West Schism, traditionally dated to the year 1054, although it was more a gradual process than a sudden break. The Church of England separated from the Catholic Church, not directly from the Eastern Orthodox Church, for the first time in the 1530s (and, after a brief reunion in 1555, again finally in 1558). Thus, though it was united to Orthodoxy when established through the work of Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the early 7th century, its separation from Orthodoxy came about indirectly through the See of Rome.\n\nTo all these churches, the claim to catholicity (universality, oneness with the ancient Church) is important for multiple doctrinal reasons that have more bearing internally in each church than in their relation to the others, now separated in faith. The meaning of holding to a faith that is true is the primary reason why anyone's statement of which church split off from which other has any significance at all; the issues go as deep as the schisms. The depth of this meaning in the Eastern Orthodox Church is registered first in its use of the word \"Orthodox\" itself, a union of Greek \"orthos\" (\"straight\", \"correct\", \"true\", \"right\") and \"doxa\" (\"common belief\", from the ancient verb δοκέω-δοκῶ which is translated \"to believe\", \"to think\", \"to consider\", \"to imagine\", \"to assume\").\n\nThe dual meanings of \"doxa\", with \"glory\" or \"glorification\" (of God by the Church and of the Church by God), especially in worship, yield the pair \"correct belief\" and \"true worship\". Together, these express the core of a fundamental teaching about the inseparability of belief and worship and their role in drawing the church together with Christ. The Bulgarian and all the Slavic churches use the title \"Pravoslavie\" (Cyrillic: Православие), meaning \"correctness of glorification\", to denote what is in English \"Orthodoxy\", while the Georgians use the title \"Martlmadidebeli\". Several other churches in Europe, Asia, and Africa also came to use \"Orthodox\" in their titles, but are still distinct from the Eastern Orthodox Church as described in this article.\n\nThe term \"Eastern Church\" (the geographic east in the East–West Schism) has been used to distinguish it from western Christendom (the geographic West, which at first came to designate the Catholic communion, later also the various Protestant and Anglican branches). \"Eastern\" is used to indicate that the highest concentrations of the Eastern Orthodox Church presence remain in the eastern part of the Christian world, although it is growing worldwide. Orthodox Christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles, or more inclusively, the title \"Eastern Orthodox\", \"Orthodox Catholic\", or simply \"Orthodox\".\n\nWhat unites Orthodox Christians is the catholic faith as carried through holy tradition. That faith is expressed most fundamentally in scripture and worship, and the latter most essentially through baptism and in the Divine Liturgy. Orthodox Christians proclaim the faith lives and breathes by God's energies in communion with the church. Inter-communion is the litmus test by which all can see that two churches share the same faith; lack of inter-communion (excommunication, literally \"out of communion\") is the sign of different faiths, even though some central theological points may be shared. The sharing of beliefs can be highly significant, but it is not the full measure of the faith according to the Orthodox.\n\nThe lines of even this test can blur, however, when differences that arise are not due to doctrine, but to recognition of jurisdiction. As the Eastern Orthodox Church has spread into the west and over the world, the church as a whole has yet to sort out all the inter-jurisdictional issues that have arisen in the expansion, leaving some areas of doubt about what is proper church governance. And as in the ancient church persecutions, the aftermath of persecutions of Christians in communist nations has left behind both some governance and some faith issues that have yet to be completely resolved.\n\nAll members of the Eastern Orthodox Church profess the same faith, regardless of race or nationality, jurisdiction or local custom, or century of birth. Holy tradition encompasses the understandings and means by which that unity of faith is transmitted across boundaries of time, geography, and culture. It is a continuity that exists only inasmuch as it lives within Christians themselves. It is not static, nor an observation of rules, but rather a sharing of observations that spring both from within and also in keeping with others, even others who lived lives long past. The church proclaims the Holy Spirit maintains the unity and consistency of holy tradition to preserve the integrity of the faith within the church, as given in the scriptural promises.\n\nThe shared beliefs of Orthodoxy, and its theology, exist within Holy Tradition and cannot be separated from it, for their meaning is not expressed in mere words alone. Doctrine cannot be understood unless it is prayed. Doctrine must also be lived in order to be prayed, for without action, the prayer is idle and empty, a mere vanity, and therefore the theology of demons. According to these teachings of the ancient Church, no superficial belief can ever be orthodox. Similarly, reconciliation and unity are not superficial, but are prayed and lived out.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers itself to be both orthodox and catholic. The doctrine of the Catholicity of the Church, as derived from the Nicene Creed, is essential to Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology. The term \"Catholicity of the Church\" (Greek ) is used in its original sense, as a designation for the Universality of the Church, centered around Christ. Therefore, the Eastern Orthodox notion of catholicity is not centered around any singular see, unlike Catholicism, that has one earthly center.\n\nDue to the influence of the Catholic Church in the west, where the English language itself developed, the words \"catholic\" and \"catholicity\" are sometimes used to refer to that church specifically. However, the more prominent dictionary sense given for general use is still the one shared by other languages, implying breadth and universality, reflecting comprehensive scope. In a Christian context, the Christian Church, as identified with the original Church founded by Christ and his apostles, is said to be catholic (or universal) in regard to its union with Christ in faith. Just as Christ is indivisible, so are union with him and faith in him, whereby the Church is \"universal\", unseparated, and comprehensive, including all who share that faith. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware has called that \"simple Christianity\". That is the sense of early and patristic usage wherein the church usually refers to itself as the \"Catholic Church\", whose faith is the \"Orthodox faith\". It is also the sense within the phrase \"One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church\", found in the Nicene Creed, and referred to in Orthodox worship, e.g. in the litany of the catechumens in the Divine Liturgy.\n\nWith the mutual excommunications of the East–West Schism in 1054, the churches in Rome and Constantinople each viewed the other as having departed from the true Church, leaving a smaller but still-catholic church in place. Each retained the \"Catholic\" part of its title, the \"\"Roman\" Catholic Church\" (or Catholic Church) on the one hand, and the \"\"Orthodox\" Catholic Church\" on the other, each of which was defined in terms of inter-communion with either Rome or Constantinople. While the Eastern Orthodox Church recognises what it shares in common with other churches, including the Catholic Church, it sees catholicity in terms of complete union in communion and faith, with the Church throughout all time, and the sharing remains incomplete when not shared fully.\n\nThe religious authority for Eastern Orthodoxy is not a patriarch or the Bishop of Rome as in Catholicism, nor the Bible as in Protestantism, but the scriptures as interpreted by the seven ecumenical councils of the Imperial Roman Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church is a fellowship of \"autocephalous\" (Greek for self-headed) churches, with the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople being the only autocephalous head who holds the title \"primus inter pares\", meaning \"first among equals\" in Latin. The Patriarch of Constantinople has the honor of primacy, but his title is only first among equals and has no real authority over churches other than the Constantinopolitan, though at times the office of the Ecumenical Patriarch has been accused of Constantinopolitan or Eastern papism. The Eastern Orthodox Church considers Jesus Christ to be the head of the church and the church to be his body. It is believed that authority and the grace of God is directly passed down to Orthodox bishops and clergy through the laying on of hands—a practice started by the apostles, and that this unbroken historical and physical link is an essential element of the true Church (Acts 8:17, 1 Tim 4:14, Heb 6:2). The Orthodox Church asserts that apostolic succession requires apostolic faith, and bishops without apostolic faith, who are in heresy, forfeit their claim to apostolic succession.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox communion is organised into several regional churches, which are either autocephalous (\"self-headed\") or lower ranking autonomous (the Greek term for \"self-lawed\") church bodies unified in theology and worship. These include the fourteen autocephalous churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Georgia, Cyprus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, Greece, Poland, Romania, Albania, and the Czech Republic and Slovakia, which were officially invited to the Pan-Orthodox Council of 2016, the Orthodox Church in America formed in 1970, the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine created in 2019, as well as a number of autonomous churches. Each church has a ruling bishop and a holy synod to administer its jurisdiction and to lead the Orthodox Church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices.\n\nEach bishop has a territory (see) over which he governs. His main duty is to make sure the traditions and practices of the Orthodox Church are preserved. Bishops are equal in authority and cannot interfere in the jurisdiction of another bishop. Administratively, these bishops and their territories are organised into various autocephalous groups or synods of bishops who gather together at least twice a year to discuss the state of affairs within their respective sees. While bishops and their autocephalous synods have the ability to administer guidance in individual cases, their actions do not usually set precedents that affect the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. Bishops are almost always chosen from the monastic ranks and must remain unmarried.\n\nThere have been a number of times when alternative theological ideas arose to challenge the Orthodox faith. At such times the Orthodox communion deemed it necessary to convene a general or \"great\" council of all available bishops throughout the world. The Orthodox Church holds that seven ecumenical councils, held between the 4th and the 8th centuries, are authoritative.\n\nThe ecumenical councils followed a democratic form, with each bishop having one vote. Though present and allowed to speak before the council, members of the Imperial Roman/Byzantine court, abbots, priests, deacons, monks and laymen were not allowed to vote. The primary goal of these great synods was to verify and confirm the fundamental beliefs of the Great Christian Church as truth, and to remove as heresy any false teachings that would threaten the Church. The Pope of Rome at that time held the position of \"Primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") and, while he was not present at any of the councils, he continued to hold this title until the East–West Schism of 1054.\n\nOther councils have helped to define the Eastern Orthodox position, specifically the Quinisext Council, the Synods of Constantinople, 879–880, 1341, 1347, 1351, 1583, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Jassy (Iași), 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem, 1672; the Pan-Orthodox Council, held in Greece in 2016, was the only such Eastern Orthodox council in modern times.\n\nAccording to Orthodox teaching the position of \"first among equals\" gives no additional power or authority to the bishop that holds it, but rather that this person sits as organizational head of a council of equals (like a president). His words and opinions carry no more insight or wisdom than any other bishop. It is believed that the Holy Spirit guides the Eastern Orthodox Church through the decisions of the entire council, not one individual. Additionally it is understood that even the council's decisions must be accepted by the entire Orthodox Church in order for them to be valid.\n\nOne of the decisions made by the First Council of Constantinople (the second ecumenical council, meeting in 381) and supported by later such councils was that the Patriarch of Constantinople should be given equal honor to the Pope of Rome since Constantinople was considered to be the \"New Rome\". According to the third canon of the second ecumenical council: \"Because it is new Rome, the bishop of Constantinople is to enjoy the privileges of honor \"after\" the bishop of Rome.\" This means that both enjoy the same privileges because they are both bishops of the imperial capitals, but the bishop of Rome will precede the bishop of Constantinople since Old Rome precedes New Rome.\n\nThe 28th canon of the fourth ecumenical council clarified this point by stating: \"For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of Old Rome because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops (i.e. the second ecumenical council in 381) actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome, justly judging that the city which is honoured with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is.\"\n\nBecause of the schism the Eastern Orthodox no longer recognise the primacy of the Pope of Rome. The Patriarch of Constantinople therefore, like the Pope before him, now enjoys the title of \"first among equals\".\n\nPolitics, wars, persecutions, oppressions, and related potential threats can make precise counts of Orthodox membership difficult to obtain at best in some regions. Historically, forced migrations have also altered demographics in relatively short periods of time. The most reliable estimates currently available number Orthodox adherents at around 200 million worldwide, making Eastern Orthodoxy the second largest Christian communion in the world after the Catholic Church. The numerous Protestant groups in the world, if taken all together, outnumber the Eastern Orthodox, but they differ theologically and do not form a single communion. According to the 2015 Yearbook of International Religious Demography, the Eastern Orthodox population in 2010 decreased to 4% of the global population from 7.1% of the global population in 1910. According to the same source, in terms of the total Christian population, the relative percentages were 12.2% and 20.4% respectively. According to the Pew Research Center, the Eastern Orthodox share of the world's total Christian population was 12% in 2011.\n\nMost members today are concentrated in Eastern Europe and Asian Russia, in addition to significant minorities in Central Asia and the Levant, although Eastern Orthodoxy has spread into a global religion towards Western Europe and the New World, with churches in most countries and major cities. The adherents constitute the largest single religious faith in the world's largest country—Russia, where roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live. They are the majority religion in Ukraine, Romania, Belarus, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Moldova, Georgia, North Macedonia, Cyprus, and Montenegro; they also dominate in the disputed territories of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria. Significant minorities of Eastern Orthodox are present in Bosnia and Herzegovina (absolute majority in Republika Srpska), Latvia, Estonia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Albania, Syria, and many other countries.\n\nThe percentage of Christians in Turkey fell from 19 percent in 1914 to 2.5 percent in 1927, predominantly due to persecution, including the Armenian Holocaust, the Greek genocide and subsequent population exchange between Greece and Turkey, population exchanges between Bulgaria and Turkey, and associated emigration of Christians to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas). Today there are more than 160,000 people (about 0.2%) of different Christian denominations.\n\nThrough mostly labor migration from Eastern Europe and some conversion, Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religious grouping in certain Western countries, for example in the Republic of Ireland, but Orthodoxy is not \"a central marker of minority identity\" for the migrants. While in the United States, the number of Orthodox parishes is growing.\n\nOrthodox Christians believe in the Trinity, three distinct, divine persons (\"hypostases\"), without overlap or modality among them, who each have one divine essence (\"ousia\" Greek οὐσία)—uncreated, immaterial and eternal. These three persons are typically distinguished by their relation to each other. The Father is eternal and not begotten and does not proceed from any, the Son is eternal and begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit is eternal and proceeds from the Father. Orthodox doctrine regarding the Trinity is summarised in the Nicene Creed.\n\nIn discussing God's relationship to his creation, Orthodox theology distinguishes between God's eternal essence, which is totally transcendent, and his \"uncreated energies\", which is how he reaches humanity. The God who is transcendent and the God who touches mankind are one and the same. That is, these energies are not something that proceed from God or that God produces, but rather they are God himself: distinct, yet inseparable from God's inner being.\n\nIn understanding the Trinity as \"one God in three persons\", \"three persons\" is not to be emphasised more than \"one God\", and vice versa. While the three persons are distinct, they are united in one divine essence, and their oneness is expressed in community and action so completely that they cannot be considered separately. For example, their salvation of mankind is an activity engaged in common: \"Christ became man by the good will of the Father and by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Christ sends the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit forms Christ in our hearts, and thus God the Father is glorified.\" Their \"communion of essence\" is \"indivisible\". Trinitarian terminology—essence, hypostasis, etc.—are used \"philosophically\", \"to answer the ideas of the heretics\", and \"to place the terms where they separate error and truth.\" The words do what they can do, but the nature of the Trinity in its fullness is believed to remain beyond man's comprehension and expression, a holy mystery that can only be experienced.\n\nAccording to the Eastern Orthodox faith, at some point in the beginnings of human existence, humanity was faced with a choice: to learn the difference between good and evil through observation or through participation. The biblical story of Adam and Eve relates this choice by mankind to participate in evil, accomplished through disobedience to God's command. Both the intent and the action were separate from God's will; it is that separation that defines and marks any operation as sin. The separation from God caused the loss of (fall from) his grace, a severing of mankind from his creator and the source of his life. The end result was the diminishment of human nature and its subjection to death and corruption, an event commonly referred to as the \"fall of man\".\n\nWhen Orthodox Christians refer to fallen nature they are not saying that human nature has become evil in itself. Human nature is still formed in the image of God; humans are still God's creation, and God has never created anything evil, but fallen nature remains open to evil intents and actions. It is sometimes said among Orthodox that humans are \"inclined to sin\"; that is, people find some sinful things attractive. It is the nature of temptation to make sinful things seem the more attractive, and it is the fallen nature of humans that seeks or succumbs to the attraction. Orthodox Christians reject the Augustinian position that the descendants of Adam and Eve are actually guilty of the original sin of their ancestors. But just as any species begets its own kind, so fallen humans beget fallen humans, and from the beginning of humanity's existence people lie open to sinning by their own choice.\n\nSince the fall of man, then, it has been mankind's dilemma that no human can restore his nature to union with God's grace; it was necessary for God to effect another change in human nature. Orthodox Christians believe that Christ Jesus was both God and Man absolutely and completely, having two natures indivisibly: eternally begotten of the Father in his divinity, he was born in his humanity of a woman, Mary, by her consent, through descent of the Holy Spirit. He lived on earth, in time and history, as a man. As a man he also died, and went to the place of the dead, which is Hades. But being God, neither death nor Hades could contain him, and he rose to life again, in his humanity, by the power of the Holy Spirit, thus destroying the power of Hades and of death itself. Through God's participation in humanity, Christ's human nature, perfected and unified with his divine nature, ascended into heaven, there to reign in communion with the Father and Holy Spirit.\n\nBy these acts of salvation, Christ provided fallen mankind with the path to escape its fallen nature. The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that through baptism into Christ's death, and a person's death unto sin in repentance, with God's help mankind can also rise with Christ into heaven, healed of the breach of man's fallen nature and restored to God's grace. To Orthodox Christians, this process is what is meant by \"salvation,\" which consists of the Christian life. The ultimate goal is theosis an even closer union with God and closer likeness to God than existed in the Garden of Eden. This process is called Deification or \"God became man that man might become 'god'\". However, it must be emphasised that Orthodox Christians do not believe that man becomes God in his essence, or a god in his own nature. More accurately, Christ's salvific work enables man in his human nature to become \"partakers of the Divine nature\" (2 Peter 1:4); that is to say, man is united to God in Christ.\n\nThrough Christ's destruction of Hades' power to hold humanity hostage, he made the path to salvation effective for all the righteous who had died from the beginning of time—saving many, including Adam and Eve, who are remembered in the Church as saints.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox reject the idea that Christ died to give God \"satisfaction\" as taught by Anselm, or as a punitive substitute as taught by the Reformers. Sin (separation from God, who is the source of all life) is its own punishment, capable of imprisoning the soul in an existence without life, without anything good, and without hope: hell by any measure. Life on earth is God's gift, to give humankind opportunity to make their choice real: separation or union.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church understands the death and resurrection of Jesus to be real historical events, as described in the gospels of the New Testament. Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is believed to, according to Orthodox teaching, in his humanity be (that is, in history) crucified, and died, descending into Hades (Sheol), the place of the dead, as all humans do. But he, alone among humans, has two natures, one human, one divine, which are indivisible and inseparable from each other through the mystery of the incarnation. Hades could not restrain the infinite God. Christ in his divine nature captured the keys of Hades and broke the bonds which had imprisoned the human souls who had been held there through their separation from God.\n\nNeither could death contain the Son of God, the Fountain of Life, who arose from death even in his human nature. Not only this, but he opened the gates of Hades to all the righteous dead of past ages, rescuing them from their fallen human nature and restoring them to a nature of grace with God, bringing them back to life, this time in God's heavenly kingdom. And this path he opened to all who choose to follow him in time yet to come, thus saving the human race. Thus the Eastern Orthodox proclaim each year at the time of Pascha (Easter), that Christ \"trampled down death by death, and on those in the tombs bestowed life.\"\n\nThe celebration of the Resurrection of Christ at Pascha is the central event in the liturgical year of the Eastern Orthodox Church. According to Orthodox tradition, each human being may partake of this immortality, which would have been impossible without the Resurrection; it is the main promise held out by God in the New Testament. Every holy day of the Eastern Orthodox liturgical year relates to the Resurrection directly or indirectly. Every Sunday is especially dedicated to celebrating the Resurrection and the triune God, representing a mini-Pascha. In the liturgical commemorations of the Passion of Christ during Holy Week there are frequent allusions to the ultimate victory at its completion.\n\nChurch teaching is that Orthodox Christians, through baptism, enter a new life of salvation through repentance whose purpose is to share in the life of God through the work of the Holy Spirit. The Eastern Orthodox Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage in which each person, through the imitation of Christ and \"hesychasm\", cultivates the practice of unceasing prayer. Each life occurs within the life of the church as a member of the body of Christ. It is then through the fire of God's love in the action of the Holy Spirit that each member becomes more holy, more wholly unified with Christ, starting in this life and continuing in the next. The church teaches that everyone, being born in God's image, is called to theosis, fulfillment of the image in likeness to God. God the creator, having divinity by nature, offers each person participation in divinity by cooperatively accepting His gift of grace.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, in understanding itself to be the Body of Christ, and similarly in understanding the Christian life to lead to the unification in Christ of all members of his body, views the church as embracing all Christ's members, those now living on earth, and also all those through the ages who have passed on to the heavenly life. The church includes the Christian saints from all times, and also judges, prophets and righteous Jews of the first covenant, Adam and Eve, even the angels and heavenly hosts. In Orthodox services, the earthly members together with the heavenly members worship God as one community in Christ, in a union that transcends time and space and joins heaven to earth. This unity of the Church is sometimes called the \"communion of the saints\".\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural—a result of the Fall of Man. They also hold that the congregation of the church comprises both the living and the dead. All persons currently in heaven are considered to be saints, whether their names are known or not. There are, however, those saints of distinction whom God has revealed as particularly good examples. When a saint is revealed and ultimately recognised by a large portion of the church a service of official recognition (canonization) is celebrated.\n\nThis does not \"make\" the person a saint; it merely recognises the fact and announces it to the rest of the church. A day is prescribed for the saint's celebration, hymns composed and icons created. Numerous saints are celebrated on each day of the year. They are venerated (shown great respect and love) but not worshipped, for worship is due God alone (this view is also held by the Oriental Orthodox and Catholic Churches). In showing the saints this love and requesting their prayers, the Eastern Orthodox manifest their belief that the saints thus assist in the process of salvation for others.\n\nPre-eminent among the saints is the Virgin Mary (commonly referred to as \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\") (\"Mother of God\"). In Orthodox theology, the Mother of God is the fulfillment of the Old Testament archetypes revealed in the Ark of the Covenant (because she carried the New Covenant in the person of Christ) and the burning bush that appeared before Moses (symbolizing the Mother of God's carrying of God without being consumed). Accordingly, the Eastern Orthodox consider Mary to be the Ark of the New Covenant and give her the respect and reverence as such. The Theotokos, in Orthodox teaching, was chosen by God and she freely co-operated in that choice to be the Mother of Jesus Christ, the God-man.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that Christ, from the moment of his conception, was both fully God and fully human. Mary is thus called the \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\" as an affirmation of the divinity of the one to whom she gave birth. It is also believed that her virginity was not compromised in conceiving God-incarnate, that she was not harmed and that she remained forever a virgin. Scriptural references to \"brothers\" of Christ are interpreted as kin, given that the word \"brother\" was used in multiple ways, as was the term \"father\". Due to her unique place in salvation history, Mary is honoured above all other saints and especially venerated for the great work that God accomplished through her.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church regards the bodies of all saints as holy, made such by participation in the holy mysteries, especially the communion of Christ's holy body and blood, and by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within the church. Indeed, that persons and physical things can be made holy is a cornerstone of the doctrine of the Incarnation, made manifest also directly by God in Old Testament times through his dwelling in the Ark of the Covenant. Thus, physical items connected with saints are also regarded as holy, through their participation in the earthly works of those saints. According to church teaching and tradition, God himself bears witness to this holiness of saints' relics through the many miracles connected with them that have been reported throughout history since Biblical times, often including healing from disease and injury.\n\nOrthodox Christians believe that when a person dies the soul is temporarily separated from the body. Though it may linger for a short period on Earth, it is ultimately escorted either to paradise (Abraham's bosom) or the darkness of Hades, following the Temporary Judgment. Orthodox do not accept the doctrine of Purgatory, which is held by Catholicism. The soul's experience of either of these states is only a \"foretaste\"—being experienced only by the soul—until the Final Judgment, when the soul and body will be reunited.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that the state of the soul in Hades can be affected by the love and prayers of the righteous up until the Last Judgment. For this reason the Church offers a special prayer for the dead on the third day, ninth day, fortieth day, and the one-year anniversary after the death of an Orthodox Christian. There are also several days throughout the year that are set aside for general commemoration of the departed, sometimes including nonbelievers. These days usually fall on a Saturday, since it was on a Saturday that Christ lay in the Tomb.\n\nWhile the Eastern Orthodox consider the text of the Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) to be a part of Scripture, it is also regarded to be a holy mystery. Speculation on the contents of Revelation are minimal and it is never read as part of the regular order of services. Those theologians who have delved into its pages tend to be amillennialist in their eschatology, believing that the \"thousand years\" spoken of in biblical prophecy refers to the present time: from the Crucifixion of Christ until the Second Coming.\n\nWhile it is not usually taught in church it is often used as a reminder of God's promise to those who love him, and of the benefits of avoiding sinful passions. Iconographic depictions of the Final Judgment are often portrayed on the back (western) wall of the church building to remind the departing faithful to be vigilant in their struggle against sin. Likewise it is often painted on the walls of the Trapeza (refectory) in a monastery where monks may be inspired to sobriety and detachment from worldly things while they eat.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that Hell, though often described in metaphor as punishment inflicted by God, is in reality the soul's rejection of God's infinite love which is offered freely and abundantly to everyone.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that after the Final Judgment:\nBULLET::::- All souls will be reunited with their resurrected bodies.\nBULLET::::- All souls will fully experience their spiritual state.\nBULLET::::- Having been perfected, the saints will forever progress towards a deeper and fuller love of God, which equates with eternal happiness.\n\nThe official Bible of the Eastern Orthodox Church contains the Septuagint text of the Old Testament, with the Book of Daniel given in the translation by Theodotion. The Patriarchal Text is used for the New Testament. Orthodox Christians hold that the Bible is a verbal icon of Christ, as proclaimed by the 7th ecumenical council. They refer to the Bible as Holy Scripture, meaning writings containing the foundational truths of the Christian faith as revealed by Christ and the Holy Spirit to its divinely inspired human authors. Holy Scripture forms the primary and authoritative written witness of Holy Tradition and is essential as the basis for all Orthodox teaching and belief. The Bible provides the only texts held to be suitable for reading in Orthodox worship services. Through the many scriptural quotations embedded in the worship service texts themselves, it is often said that the Eastern Orthodox pray the Bible as well as read it.\nSt. Jerome completed the well-known Vulgate Latin translation only in the early 5th century, around the time the accepted lists of scripture were resolved in the west. The east took up to a century longer to resolve the lists in use there, and ended by accepting a few additional writings from the Septuagint that did not appear in the lists of the west. The differences were small and were not considered to compromise the unity of the faith shared between east and west. They did not play a role in the eventual schism in the 11th century that separated the See of Rome and the West from the See of Constantinople and the other apostolic Orthodox churches, and remained as defined essentially without controversy in the East or West for at least one thousand years. It was only in the 16th century that Reformation Protestants challenged the lists, proclaiming a canon that rejected those Old Testament books that did not appear in the 3rd-century Hebrew Bible. In response, the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches reaffirmed their accepted scriptural lists in more formal canons of their own.\n\nOnce established as Holy Scripture, there has never been any question that the Eastern Orthodox Church holds the full list of books to be venerable and beneficial for reading and study, even though it informally holds some books in higher esteem than others, the four gospels highest of all. Of the subgroups significant enough to be named, the \"Anagignoskomena\" (ἀναγιγνωσκόμενα, \"things that are read\") comprises ten of the Old Testament books rejected in the Protestant canon, but deemed by the Eastern Orthodox worthy to be read in worship services, even though they carry a lesser esteem than the 39 books of the Hebrew canon. The lowest tier contains the remaining books not accepted by either Protestants or Catholics, among them, Psalm 151. Though it is a psalm, and is in the book of psalms, it is not classified as being within the Psalter (the first 150 psalms), and hence does not participate in the various liturgical and prayer uses of the Psalter.\n\nIn a very strict sense, it is not entirely orthodox to call the Holy Scriptures the \"Word of God\". That is a title the Eastern Orthodox Church reserves for Christ, as supported in the scriptures themselves, most explicitly in the first chapter of the gospel of John. God's Word is not hollow, like human words. \"God said, 'let there be light'; and there was light.\" This is the Word which spoke the universe into being, and resonates in creation without diminution throughout all history, a Word of divine power.\n\nAs much as the Eastern Orthodox Church reveres and depends on the scriptures, they cannot compare to the Word of God's manifest action. But the Eastern Orthodox do believe that the Holy Scriptures testify to God's manifest actions in history, and that through its divine inspiration God's Word is manifested both in the scriptures themselves and in the cooperative human participation that composed them. It is in that sense that the Eastern Orthodox refer to the scriptures as \"God's Word\".\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church does not subscribe to the Protestant doctrine of \"sola scriptura\". The church has defined what Scripture is; it also interprets what its meaning is. Christ promised: \"When He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth\". The Holy Spirit, then, is the infallible guide for the church to the interpretation of Scripture. The church depends upon those saints who, by lives lived in imitation of Christ, achieving theosis, can serve as reliable witnesses to the Holy Spirit's guidance. Individual interpretation occurs within the church and is informed by the church. It is rational and reasoned, but is not arrived at only by means of deductive reasoning.\n\nScriptures are understood to contain historical fact, poetry, idiom, metaphor, simile, moral fable, parable, prophecy and wisdom literature, and each bears its own consideration in its interpretation. While divinely inspired, the text stills consists of words in human languages, arranged in humanly recognizable forms. The Eastern Orthodox Church does not oppose honest critical and historical study of the Bible. In biblical interpretation, it does not use speculations, suggestive theories, or incomplete indications, not going beyond what is fully known.\n\n\"That faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all\", the faith taught by Jesus to the apostles, given life by the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, and passed down to future generations without additions and without subtractions, is known as holy tradition. Holy tradition does not change in the Eastern Orthodox Church because it encompasses those things that do not change: the nature of the one God in Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the history of God's interactions with his peoples, the Law as given to the Israelites, all Christ's teaching as given to the disciples and Jews and recorded in scripture, including the parables, the prophecies, the miracles, and his own example to humanity in his extreme humility. It encompasses also the worship of the church, which grew out of the worship of the synagogue and temple and was extended by Christ at the last supper, and the relationship between God and his people which that worship expresses, which is also evidenced between Christ and his disciples. It includes the authority that Christ bestowed on his disciples when he made them apostles, for the preserving and teaching of the faith, and for governing the organization and conduct of the church (in its administration by bishops).\n\nHoly tradition is firm, even unyielding, but not rigid or legalistic; instead, it lives and breathes within the church. For example, the New Testament was entirely written by the early church (mostly the apostles). The whole Bible was accepted as scripture by means of holy tradition practiced within the early church. The writing and acceptance took five centuries, by which time the Holy Scriptures themselves had become in their entirety a part of holy tradition. But holy tradition did not change, because \"that faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all\" remained consistent, without additions, and without subtractions. The historical development of the Divine Liturgy and other worship services and devotional practices of the church provide a similar example of extension and growth \"without change\".\n\nThe continuity and stability of Orthodox worship throughout the centuries is one means by which holy tradition expresses the unity of the whole church throughout time. Not only can the Eastern Orthodox of today visit a church in a place that speaks a language unknown to the visitors yet have the service remain familiar and understandable to them, but the same would hold true were any able to visit past eras. The church strives to preserve holy tradition \"unchanging\" that it may express the one unchanging faith for all time to come as well.\n\nBesides these, holy tradition includes the doctrinal definitions and statements of faith of the seven ecumenical councils, including the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, and some later local councils, patristic writings, canon law, and icons. Not all portions of holy tradition are held to be equally strong. Some, the Holy Scriptures foremost, certain aspects of worship, especially in the Divine Liturgy, the doctrines of the ecumenical councils, the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, possess a verified authority that endures forever, irrevocably. However, with local councils and patristic writings, the church applies a selective judgement. Some councils and writers have occasionally fallen into error, and some contradict each other.\n\nIn other cases, opinions differ, no consensus is forthcoming, and all are free to choose. With agreement among the Church Fathers, though, the authority of interpretation grows, and full patristic consensus is very strong. With canon law (which tends to be highly rigorous and very strict, especially with clergy) an unalterable validity also does not apply, since canons deal with living on earth, where conditions are always changing and each case is subject to almost infinite variation from the next. Even when and where they were once used with full strictness, their application was not absolute, and was carried out for individuals under the pastoral care of their bishop, who had the authority to decide when individual discipline had been satisfied. This too is a part of the holy tradition.\n\nBy tradition, the Eastern Orthodox Church, when faced with issues that are larger than a single bishop can resolve, holds a local council. The bishops and such others as may attend convene (as St. Paul called the Corinthians to do) to seek the \"mind of the church\". A council's declarations or edicts then reflect its consensus (if one can be found). An ecumencial council is only called for issues of such import or difficulty or pervasiveness that smaller councils are insufficient to address them. Ecumenical councils' declarations and canons carry binding weight by virtue of their representation across the whole church, by which the mind of the church can be readily seen. However, not all issues are so difficult as to require an ecumenical council to resolve. Some doctrines or decisions, not defined in a formal statement or proclaimed officially, nevertheless are held by the church unshakably and unanimously without internal disturbance, and these, also reflecting the mind of the church, are just as firmly irrevocable as a formal declaration of an ecumenical council. Lack of formality does not imply lack of authority within holy tradition. An example of such unanimity can be found in the acceptance in the 5th century of the lists of books that comprise Holy Scripture, a true canon without official stamp.\n\nDuring the course of the early church, there were numerous followers who attached themselves to the Christ and his mission here on Earth, as well as followers who retained the distinct duty of being commissioned with preserving the quality of life and lessons revealed through the experience of Jesus living, dying, resurrecting and ascending among them. As a matter of practical distinction and logistics, people of varying gifts were accorded stations within the community structure— ranging from the host of agape meals (shared with brotherly and fatherly love), to prophecy and the reading of Scripture, to preaching and interpretations and giving aid to the sick and the poor. Sometime after Pentecost the Church grew to a point where it was no longer possible for the Apostles to minister alone. Overseers (bishops) and assistants (deacons and deaconesses) were appointed to further the mission of the Church.\n\nThe church recognised the gathering of these early church communities as being greatest in areas of the known world that were famous for their significance on the world stage—either as hotbeds of intellectual discourse, high volumes of trade, or proximity to the original sacred sites. These locations were targeted by the early apostles, who recognised the need for humanitarian efforts in these large urban centers and sought to bring as many people as possible into the church—such a life was seen as a form of deliverance from the decadent lifestyles promoted throughout the eastern and western Roman empires.\n\nAs the church increased in size through the centuries, the logistic dynamics of operating such large entities shifted: patriarchs, metropolitans, archimandrites, abbots and abbesses, all rose up to cover certain points of administration.\n\nAs a result of heightened exposure and popularity of the philosophical schools (haereseis) of Greco-Roman society and education, synods and councils were forced to engage such schools that sought to co-opt the language and pretext of the Christian faith in order to gain power and popularity for their own political and cultural expansion. As a result, ecumenical councils were held to attempt to rebuild solidarity by using the strength of distant orthodox witnesses to dampen the intense local effects of particular philosophical schools within a given area.\n\nWhile originally intended to serve as an internal check and balance for the defense of the doctrine developed and spread by the apostles to the various sees against faulty local doctrine, at times the church found its own bishops and emperors falling prey to local conventions. At these crucial moments in the history of the church, it found itself able to rebuild on the basis of the faith as it was kept and maintained by monastic communities, who subsisted without reliance on the community of the state or popular culture and were generally unaffected by the materialism and rhetoric that often dominated and threatened the integrity and stability of the urban churches.\n\nIn this sense, the aim of the councils was not to expand or fuel a popular need for a clearer or relevant picture of the original apostolic teaching. Rather, the theologians spoke to address the issues of external schools of thought who wished to distort the simplicity and neutrality of the apostolic teaching for personal or political gain. The consistency of the Eastern Orthodox faith is entirely dependent on the Holy Tradition of the accepted corpus of belief–the decisions ratified by the fathers of the seven ecumenical councils, and this is only done at the beginning of a consecutive council so that the effects of the decisions of the prior council can be audited and verified as being both conceptually sound and pragmatically feasible and beneficial for the church as a whole.\n\nThe minority of autocephalous Orthodox churches, but the majority of the members of the Eastern Orthodox Church, follow the Julian calendar. The majority of Orthodox autocephalous churches follow the Revised Julian calendar. The autonomous Church of Finland of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, as well as parts of the Church of the Czech Lands and Slovakia, use the Gregorian calendar. Many church traditions, including the schedules of services, feasts, and fasts, are structured by the church's calendar, which provides a strictly observed intermingled set of cycles of varying lengths. The fixed annual cycle begins on 1 September and establishes the times for all annual observances that are fixed by date, such as Christmas. The annual Paschal cycle is established relative to the varying date of Pascha each year and affects the times for such observances as Pascha itself, Great Lent, Holy Week, and the feasts of Ascension and Pentecost.\n\nLesser cycles also run in tandem with the annual ones. A weekly cycle of days prescribes a specific focus for each day in addition to others that may be observed.\n\nThe services of the church are conducted each day according to the church calendar. Parts of each service remain fixed, while others change depending on the observances prescribed for the specific day in the various cycles, ever providing a flow of constancy within variation. Services are conducted in the church and involve both the clergy and faithful. Services cannot properly be conducted by a single person, but must have at least one other person present (i.e. a priest cannot celebrate alone, but must have at least a chanter present and participating).\n\nUsually, all of the services are conducted on a daily basis only in monasteries and cathedrals, while parish churches might only do the services on the weekend and major feast days. On certain Great Feasts (and, according to some traditions, every Sunday) a special All-Night Vigil (\"Agrypnia\") will be celebrated from late at night on the eve of the feast until early the next morning. Because of its festal nature it is usually followed by a breakfast feast shared together by the congregation.\n\nServices, especially the Divine Liturgy, may only be celebrated once a day on a single altar (some churches have multiple altars in order to accommodate large congregations). Each priest may only celebrate the Divine Liturgy once a day.\n\nFrom its Jewish roots, the liturgical day begins at sundown. The traditional daily cycle of services is as follows:\nBULLET::::- Vespers – (Greek \"Hesperinos\") Sundown, the beginning of the liturgical day.\nBULLET::::- Compline (Greek \"Apodeipnon\", lit. \"After-supper\") – After the evening meal, and before sleeping.\nBULLET::::- Midnight Office – Usually served only in monasteries.\nBULLET::::- Matins (Greek \"Orthros\") – First service of the morning. Prescribed to start before sunrise.\nBULLET::::- Hours – First, Third, Sixth, and Ninth – Sung either at their appropriate times, or in aggregate at other customary times of convenience. If the latter, The First Hour is sung immediately following Orthros, the Third and Sixth before the Divine Liturgy, and the Ninth before Vespers.\nBULLET::::- Divine Liturgy – The Eucharistic service. (Called Holy Mass in the Western Rite)\nThe Divine Liturgy is the celebration of the Eucharist. Although it is usually celebrated between the Sixth and Ninth Hours, it is not considered to be part of the daily cycle of services, as it occurs outside the normal time of the world. The Divine Liturgy is not celebrated on weekdays during Great Lent, and in some places during the lesser fasting seasons either; however, reserve communion is prepared on Sundays and is distributed during the week at the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.\n\nOther items brought to the altar during the Divine Liturgy include a gold or silver chalice with red wine, a small metallic urn of warm water, a metallic communion spoon, a little metallic spear, a sponge, a metal disk with cut pieces of bread upon it, and a star, which is a star-shaped piece of metal over which the priest places a cloth covering when transporting the holy gifts to and from the altar. Also found on the altar table is the antimins. The antimins is a silk cloth, signed by the appropriate diocesan bishop, upon which the sanctification of the holy gifts takes place during each Divine Liturgy. The antimins contain the relics of a saint. When a church is consecrated by a bishop, there is a formal service or prayers and sanctification in the name of the saint that the church is named after. The bishop will also often present a small relic of a saint to place in or on the altar as part of the consecration of a new church.\n\nThe book containing liturgically read portions of the four gospels is permanently \"enthroned\" on the altar table. Eastern Orthodox bishops, priests, deacons and readers sing/chant specific verses from this Gospel Book on each different day of the year.\n\nThis daily cycle services is conceived of as both the sanctification of time (\"chronos\", the specific times during which they are celebrated), and entry into eternity (\"kairos\"). They consist to a large degree of litanies asking for God's mercy on the living and the dead, readings from the Psalter with introductory prayers, troparia, and other prayers and hymns surrounding them. The Psalms are so arranged that when all the services are celebrated the entire Psalter is read through in their course once a week, and twice a week during Great Lent when the services are celebrated in an extended form.\n\nOrthodox services are sung nearly in their entirety. Services consist in part of a dialogue between the clergy and the people (often represented by the choir or the Psaltis Cantor). In each case the prayers are sung or chanted following a prescribed musical form. Almost nothing is read in a normal speaking voice, with the exception of the homily if one is given.\n\nBecause the human voice is seen as the most perfect instrument of praise, musical instruments (organs, etc.) are not generally used to accompany the choir.\n\nThe church has developed eight modes or tones (see Octoechos) within which a chant may be set, depending on the time of year, feast day, or other considerations of the Typikon. There are numerous versions and styles that are traditional and acceptable and these vary a great deal between cultures. It is common, especially in the United States, for a choir to learn many different styles and to mix them, singing one response in Greek, then English, then Russian, etc.\n\nIn the Russian tradition there have been some famous composers of \"unaccompanied\" church music, such as Tchaikovsky (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 41, 1878, and All-Night Vigil, op. 52, 1882) and Rachmaninoff (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 31, 1910, and All-Night Vigil, op. 37, 1915); and many church tones can likewise be heard influencing their music.\n\nAs part of the legacy handed down from its Judaic roots, incense is used during all services in the Eastern Orthodox Church as an offering of worship to God as it was done in the Jewish First and Second Temples in Jerusalem (Exodus chapter 30). Incense is also prophesied in the book of as a \"pure offering\" in the glorification of God by the Gentiles in \"every place\" where the name of God is regarded as \"great\". Traditionally, the base of the incense used is the resin of Boswellia sacra, also known as frankincense, but the resin of fir trees has been used as well. It is usually mixed with various floral essential oils giving it a sweet smell.\n\nIncense represents the sweetness of the prayers of the saints rising up to God (, , ). The incense is burned in an ornate golden censer that hangs at the end of three chains representing the Trinity. Two chains represent the human and Godly nature of the Son, one chain for the Father and one chain for the Holy Spirit. The lower cup represents the earth and the upper cup the heaven. In the Greek, Slavic, and Syrian traditions there are 12 bells hung along these chains representing the 12 apostles. There are also 72 links representing 72 evangelists.\n\nThe charcoal represents the sinners. Fire signifies the Holy Spirit and frankincense the good deeds. The incense also represents the grace of the Trinity. The censer is used (swung back and forth) by the priest/deacon to venerate all four sides of the altar, the holy gifts, the clergy, the icons, the congregation, and the church structure itself. Incense is also used in the home where the individual will go around the house and \"cross\" all of the icons saying in Greek: Ἅγιος ὁ Θεός, Ἅγιος ἰσχυρός, Ἅγιος ἀθάνατος, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, or in English: Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.\n\nThe number of fast days varies from year to year, but in general the Eastern Orthodox Christian can expect to spend a little over half the year fasting at some level of strictness. There are spiritual, symbolic, and even practical reasons for fasting. In the Fall from Paradise mankind became possessed by a carnal nature; that is to say, became inclined towards the passions. Through fasting, Orthodox Christians attempt to return to the relationship of love and obedience to God enjoyed by Adam and Eve in Paradise in their own lives, by refraining from carnal practices, by bridling the tongue (), confession of sins, prayer and almsgiving.\n\nFasting is seen as purification and the regaining of innocence. It is a practice of learning to temper the body's primary desire for food. By learning to temper this basic desire of the body, the practitioner can more readily temper other worldly desires, and thus, become better enabled to draw closer to God in the hope of becoming more Christ-like. Through obedience to the church and its ascetic practices the Eastern Orthodox Christian seeks to rid himself or herself of the \"passions\" (The desires of our fallen carnal nature). All Orthodox Christians are provided with a prescribed set of guidelines. They do not view fasting as a hardship, but rather as a privilege and joy. The teaching of the Church provides both the time and the amount of fasting that is expected as a minimum for every member who chooses to participate. For greater ascesis, some may choose to go without food entirely for a short period of time. A complete three-day fast at the beginning and end of a fasting period is not unusual, and some fast for even longer periods, though this is usually practiced only in monasteries.\n\nIn general, fasting means abstaining from meat and meat products, dairy (eggs and cheese) and dairy products, fish, olive oil, and wine. Wine and oil—and, less frequently, fish—are allowed on certain feast days when they happen to fall on a day of fasting; but animal products and dairy are forbidden on fast days, with the exception of \"Cheese Fare\" week which precedes Great Lent, during which dairy products are allowed. Wine and oil are usually also allowed on Saturdays and Sundays during periods of fast. In some Orthodox traditions, caviar is permitted on Lazarus Saturday, the Saturday before Palm Sunday, although the day is otherwise a fast day. Married couples also abstain from sexual activity on fast days so that they may devote themselves fulsomely to prayer ().\n\nWhile it may seem that fasting in the manner set forth by the Church is a strict rule, there are circumstances where a person's spiritual guide may allow an Economy because of some physical necessity (e.g. those who are pregnant or infirm, the very young and the elderly, or those who have no control over their diet, such as prisoners or soldiers).\n\nThe time and type of fast is generally uniform for all Orthodox Christians; the times of fasting are part of the ecclesiastical calendar, and the method of fasting is set by canon law and holy tradition. There are four major fasting periods during the year: Nativity Fast, Great Lent, Apostles' Fast, and the Dormition Fast. In addition to these fasting seasons, Orthodox Christians fast on every Wednesday (in commemoration of Christ's betrayal by Judas Iscariot), and Friday (in commemoration of Christ's Crucifixion) throughout the year. Monastics often fast on Mondays.\n\nOrthodox Christians who are preparing to receive the Eucharist do not eat or drink at all from vespers (sunset) until after taking Holy Communion. A similar total fast is expected to be kept on the Eve of Nativity, the Eve of Theophany (Epiphany), Great Friday and Holy Saturday for those who can do so. There are other individual days observed as fasts (though not as days of total fasting) no matter what day of the week they fall on, such as the Beheading of St. John the Baptist on 29 August and the Exaltation of the Holy Cross on 14 September.\n\nAlmsgiving, more comprehensively described as \"acts of mercy\", refers to any giving of oneself in charity to someone who has a need, such as material resources, work, assistance, counsel, support, or kindness. Along with prayer and fasting, it is considered a pillar of the personal spiritual practices of the Eastern Orthodox Christian tradition. Almsgiving is particularly important during periods of fasting, when the Eastern Orthodox believer is expected to share with those in need the monetary savings from his or her decreased consumption. As with fasting, mentioning to others one's own virtuous deeds tends to reflect a sinful pride, and may also be considered extremely rude.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church places heavy emphasis and awards a high level of prestige to traditions of monasticism and asceticism with roots in Early Christianity in the Near East and Byzantine Anatolia. The most important centres of Christian Orthodox monasticism are Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula (Egypt) and Mount Athos in Northern Greece.\n\nAll Orthodox Christians are expected to participate in at least some ascetic works, in response to the commandment of Christ to \"come, take up the cross, and follow me.\" (Mark 10:21 and elsewhere) They are therefore all called to imitate, in one way or another, Christ himself who denied himself to the extent of literally taking up the cross on the way to his voluntary self-sacrifice. However, laypeople are not expected to live in extreme asceticism since this is close to impossible while undertaking the normal responsibilities of worldly life.\n\nThose who wish to do this therefore separate themselves from the world and live as monastics: monks and nuns. As ascetics \"par excellence\", using the allegorical weapons of prayer and fasting in spiritual warfare against their passions, monastics hold a very special and important place in the Church. This kind of life is often seen as incompatible with any kind of worldly activity including that which is normally regarded as virtuous. Social work, school teaching, and other such work is therefore usually left to laypeople. Ascetics of the Eastern Orthodox Church are recognised by their long hair, and in case of male monks, long beards.\n\nThere are three main types of monastics. Those who live in monasteries under a common rule are \"coenobitic\". Each monastery may formulate its own rule, and although there are no religious orders in Orthodoxy some respected monastic centers such as Mount Athos are highly influential. \"Eremitic\" monks, or hermits, are those who live solitary lives. It is the yearning of many who enter the monastic life to eventually become solitary hermits. This most austere life is only granted to the most advanced monastics and only when their superiors feel they are ready for it.\n\nHermits are usually associated with a larger monastery but live in seclusion some distance from the main compound. Their local monastery will see to their physical needs, supplying them with simple foods while disturbing them as little as possible. In between are those in \"semi-eremitic\" communities, or \"sketes\", where one or two monks share each of a group of nearby dwellings under their own rules and only gather together in the central chapel, or \"katholikon\", for liturgical observances.\n\nThe spiritual insight gained from their ascetic struggles make monastics preferred for missionary activity. Bishops are almost always chosen from among monks, and those who are not generally receive the monastic tonsure before their consecrations.\n\nMany (but not all) Orthodox seminaries are attached to monasteries, combining academic preparation for ordination with participation in the community's life of prayer. Monks who have been ordained to the priesthood are called \"hieromonk\" (priest-monk); monks who have been ordained to the diaconate are called \"hierodeacon\" (deacon-monk). Not all monks live in monasteries, some hieromonks serve as priests in parish churches thus practicing \"monasticism in the world\".\n\nCultural practices differ slightly, but in general \"Father\" is the correct form of address for monks who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as \"Brother\". Similarly, \"Mother\" is the correct form of address for nuns who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as \"Sister\". Nuns live identical ascetic lives to their male counterparts and are therefore also called \"monachoi\" (monastics) or the feminine plural form in Greek, \"monachai\", and their common living space is called a monastery.\n\nEverything in the Eastern Orthodox Church has a purpose and a meaning revealing God's revelation to man. At the front, or eastern end of the church, is a raised dais with an icon-covered screen or wall (iconostasis or templon) separating the nave from the sanctuary. In the center of this wall is the entrance to the altar known as the \"Royal Doors\" through which only the clergy may pass.\n\nThere is a right and left side door on the front of the iconostasis, one depicting the archangel, Michael and the other Gabriel. The priest and altar boys enter and exit through these doors during appropriate parts of the Divine Liturgy. Immediately to the right of the main gate you will always find an icon of Jesus Christ, on the left, an icon of the Theotokos (Mother of God). Other icons depicted on the iconostasis are Saint John the Forerunner and the Saint after which the church is named.\n\nIn front of the iconostasis is the bishop's chair, a place of honor where a visiting bishop or metropolitan will often sit when visiting the church. An Orthodox priest, when standing at the altar during the Divine Liturgy, faces toward the altar (typically facing east) and properly leads his congregation while together they perform the mystical sacrifice and pray to God.\n\nThe sanctuary contains the Holy Altar, representing the place where Orthodox Christians believe that Christ was born of the virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, laid in the tomb, descended into hell, rose from the dead on the third day, ascended into heaven, and will return again at his second coming. A free-standing cross, bearing the body of Christ, may stand behind the altar. On the altar are a cloth covering, a large book containing the gospel readings performed during services, an ark containing presanctified divine gifts (bread and wine) distributed by the deacon or priest to those who cannot come to the church to receive them, and several white beeswax candles.\n\nThe term 'icon' comes from the Greek word \"eikon\", which simply means image. The Eastern Orthodox believe that the first icons of Christ and the Virgin Mary were painted by Luke the Evangelist. Icons are filled with symbolism designed to convey information about the person or event depicted. For this reason, icons tend to be formulaic, following a prescribed methodology for how a particular person should be depicted, including hair style, body position, clothing, and background details.\n\nIcon painting, in general, is not an opportunity for artistic expression, though each iconographer brings a vision to the piece. It is far more common for an icon to be copied from an older model, though with the recognition of a new saint in the church, a new icon must be created and approved. The personal and creative traditions of Catholic religious art were largely lacking in Orthodox icon painting before the 17th century, when Russian icons began to be strongly influenced by religious paintings and engravings from both Protestant and Catholic Europe. Greek icons also began to take on a strong western influence for a period and the difference between some Orthodox icons and western religious art began to vanish. More recently there has been a trend of returning to the more traditional and symbolic representations.\n\nAspects of the iconography borrow from the pre-Christian Roman and Hellenistic art. Henry Chadwick wrote, \"In this instinct there was a measure of truth. The representations of Christ as the Almighty Lord on his judgment throne owed something to pictures of Zeus. Portraits of the Mother of God were not wholly independent of a pagan past of venerated mother-goddesses. In the popular mind the saints had come to fill a role that had been played by heroes and deities.\"\n\nLarge free-standing statues (three-dimensional depictions) are almost non-existent in the Eastern Orthodox Church. This is partly because cult images of the Greek gods were a focus of the ancient Greek religion and its Roman equivalent, and much criticised by Early Christian writers, and partly because icons are meant to show the spiritual nature of man, not the sensual earthly body. Reliefs, however, were used in Byzantine art.\n\nIcons are not considered by the Eastern Orthodox to be idols or objects of worship. The parameters of their usage were clearly spelled out by the 7th ecumenical council. Justification for their usage utilises the following logic: before God took human form in Christ, no material depiction was possible and therefore blasphemous even to contemplate. Once God became incarnate, depiction was possible.\n\nAs Christ is believed to be God, it is justified to hold in one's mind the image of God-incarnate. Likewise, when one venerates an icon, it is not the wood or paint that are venerated but rather the individual shown, just as it is not the paper one loves when one might kiss the photograph of a loved one. As Saint Basil famously proclaimed, honour or veneration of the icon always passes to its archetype. Following this reasoning, the veneration of the glorified human saint made in God's image, is always a veneration of the divine image, and hence God as foundational archetype.\n\nIcons can be found adorning the walls of churches and often cover the inside structure completely. Most Orthodox homes have an area set aside for family prayer, usually an eastern facing wall, where are hung many icons. Icons have been part of Orthodox Christianity since the beginning of the church.\n\nIcons are often illuminated by a candle or oil lamp (beeswax for candles and olive oil for lamps are preferred because they are natural and burn cleanly). Besides the practical purpose of making icons visible in an otherwise dark church, both candles and oil lamps symbolise the Light of the World, who is Christ.\n\nTales of miraculous icons are not uncommon, though it has always been considered that the message of such an event was for the immediate faithful involved and therefore does not usually attract crowds. Some miraculous icons whose reputations span long periods of time nevertheless become objects of pilgrimage along with the places where they are kept. As several Orthodox theologians and saints have explored in the past, the icon's miraculous nature is found not in the material, but in the glory of the saint who is depicted. The icon is a window, in the words of Paul Florensky, that actually participates in the glory of what it represents.\n\nAn \"iconostasis\", also called the \"templon\", is a wall of icons and religious paintings, separating the nave from the sanctuary in a church. \"Iconostasis\" also refers to a portable icon stand that can be placed anywhere within a church. The modern iconostasis evolved from the Byzantine templon in the 11th century. The evolution of the iconostasis probably owes a great deal to 14th-century Hesychast mysticism and the wood-carving genius of the Russian Orthodox Church.\n\nThe first ceiling-high, five-leveled Russian iconostasis was designed by Andrey Rublyov in the cathedral of the Dormition in Vladimir in 1408. The separation between sanctuary and nave accomplished by the iconostasis is not mandatory, though it is common practice. Depending on circumstance, the role of the iconostasis can be played by masonry, carved panels, screens, curtains, railings, a cord or rope, plain icons on stands, steps, or nothing at all.\n\nDepictions of the cross within the Eastern Orthodox Church are numerous and often highly ornamented, but its use does not extend to all Orthodox traditions. Some carry special significance. The Tri-Bar Cross, popular in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, but common throughout the Eastern Orthodox world, seen to the left, has three bars. Its origins are in the early Byzantine Church of the 4th century AD.\n\nThe small top crossbar represents the sign that Pontius Pilate nailed above Christ's head. It often is inscribed with an acronym, \"INRI\", Latin, meaning \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews\" or \"INBI\", Greek, \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews\"; however, it is often replaced or amplified by the phrase \"The King of Glory\" in order to answer Pilate's statement with Christ's affirmation, \"My Kingdom is not of this world\".\n\nThere is also a bottom slanting bar which has several explanations. Claims of evidence indicate that there was a small wooden platform for the crucified to stand on in order to support his weight; in Jesus' case his feet were nailed side by side to this platform with one nail each in order to prolong the torture of the cross.\n\nImplied evidence for this comes mainly from two sources, namely, the Bible (in order to cause the victim to die faster, his legs were broken so they could not support his weight and he would suffocate) and iconography (all early depictions of the crucifixion show this arrangement, not the later with feet on top with single nail). It has also been pointed out by some experts that the nailed hands of a body crucified in the manner often shown in modern secular art would not support the weight of the body and would tear through. A platform for the feet would relieve this problem.\n\nThat the bottom bar is slanted has two explanations, to represent the very real agony which Christ experienced on the cross (a refutation of Docetism) and to signify that the thief on Christ's right chose the right path while the thief on the left did not.\n\nOther crosses associated with the Eastern Orthodox Church are the more traditional single-bar crosses, budded designs, the Greek cross, the Latin cross, the Jerusalem cross (cross pattée), Celtic crosses, and others. A common symbolism of the slanted foot stool is The foot-rest points up, toward Heaven, on Christ's right hand-side, and downward, to Hades, on Christ's left. \"Between two thieves Thy Cross did prove to be a balance of\nrighteousness: wherefore one of them was dragged down to Hades by the\nweight of his blasphemy \"[the balance points downward],\" whereas the other was lightened of his transgressions unto the comprehension of theology \"[the balance points upward].\" O Christ God, glory to Thee.\" Another Orthodox cross which is worn in gold is an outer budded cross with an inner Three Bar Cross. The inscription Jesus Christ in Greek: IC (Iesous) on the left side bar and XC (Xhristos) on the right side bar, with a sun on the top of the cross. There is also typically an inscription on the back in Church Slavonic: \"спаси и сохрани\", \"\"Spasi i Sokhrani\"\", \"\"Save and Protect\"\". This cross is known as the Saint Olga Cross.\n\nThe church building has many symbolic meanings; perhaps the oldest and most prominent is the concept that the church is the Ark (as in Noah's) in which the world is saved from the flood of temptations; therefore, most Orthodox churches are rectangular in design. Another popular configuration, especially for churches with large choirs is cruciform or cross-shaped or what is called the \"Greek-cross.\"\n\nArchitectural patterns vary in shape and complexity, with chapels sometimes added around the main church, or triple altars; but in general, the symbolic layout of the church remains the same. Each church is created with specified qualifications based on what the apostles said in the Bible. These qualifications include how big the temple should be.\nThe church building is divided into three main parts: the narthex (vestibule), the nave and the sanctuary (also called the \"altar\" or \"holy place\"). The narthex is where catechumens and non-Orthodox visitors were traditionally asked to stand during services. It is separated from the nave by \"The Royal Gate\". On each side of this gate are candle stands (menalia) representing the pillars of fire that went before the Hebrew people escaping from Egypt.\n\nThe nave is where most of the congregation stand during services. Traditionally, men stand on the right and women on the left. This is for a number of reasons: (1) Considering the family unit of past centuries the husband was dominant; thus, standing the same distance from the altar, equality is emphasised. (2) The idea of separating the sexes was inherited from the Jewish tradition of doing so within synagogues (3) Separation of sexes also followed the practice of choirs in which different levels of voice are placed in groups to facilitate harmony.\n\nIn general, men and women dress respectfully, typically wearing their \"Sunday best\" to enter the church. Often, women cover their heads as prescribed by Paul (1 Cor. 11:13). Children are considered full members of the church and stand attentively and quietly during services. There is often a choir area at the side or in a loft in back. In addition to the choir, a chanter is always present at the front of the church to chant responses and hymns that are part of the Divine Liturgy offered by the priest. There is usually a dome in the ceiling with an icon of Christ depicted as Ruler of the Universe (Pantocrator).\n\nThe Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on New York City's Upper East Side is the largest Orthodox Christian church in the Western Hemisphere.\n\nApart from the icons, the Eastern Orthodox churches and monasteries are often decorated with frescos and mosaics.\n\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church also has many associated traditions (sometimes referred to simply as customs), compatible with its life and function, but not necessarily tied so closely to the faith itself. These are not generally regarded as a part of Holy Tradition, though no strict dividing line is drawn. As long as compatibility is maintained, general practice often tends to the permissive rather than the restrictive, with the local priest or bishop resolving questions.\n\nMany of these customs are local or cultural, and some are not even especially religious, but form a part of the church's relationship with the people in the time and place where it exists. Where outside customs affect church practices such as worship, a closer watch is kept for guarding the integrity of worship, but suitable local differences are welcomed and celebrated joyfully. The local church customs, especially liturgical ones, are referred to as differences in typica (Style).\n\nLocality is also expressed in regional terms of churchly jurisdiction, which is often also drawn along national lines. Many Orthodox churches adopt a national title (e.g. Albanian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox, Antiochian Orthodox, Georgian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Montenegrin Orthodox, Romanian Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, etc.) and this title can identify which language is used in services, which bishops preside, and which of the typica is followed by specific congregations. In the Middle East, Orthodox Christians are usually referred to as \"Rum\" (\"Roman\") Orthodox, because of their historical connection with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\n\nDifferences in \"praxis\" (\"practice\") tend to be slight, involving things such as the order in which a particular set of hymns are sung or what time a particular service is celebrated. But observances of the saints' days of local saints are more often celebrated in special services within a locality, as are certain national holidays, like Greek Independence Day. In North America, observances of Thanksgiving Day are increasing.\n\nMembers of the church are fully united in faith and the sacred mysteries with all Orthodox congregations, regardless of nationality or location. In general, Orthodox Christians could travel the globe and feel familiar with the services even if they did not know the language being used.\n\nIn the Levant, Christian Orthodox services and identity often combine both the Byzantine Greek and indigenous (Arabic and Aramaic) traditions. Other Orthodox communities can identify with two Eastern Orthodox churches simultaneously, for example Caucasus Greeks and Pontic Greeks in Russia often identify with both the Greek Orthodox Church and Russian Orthodox Church, as a result of centuries of assimilation and intermarriage with ethnic Russians and other Christian Orthodox communities in mainly southern Russia.\n\nAccording to Orthodox theology, the purpose of the Christian life is to attain \"theosis\", the mystical union of mankind with God. This union is understood as both collective and individual. St. Athanasius of Alexandria wrote concerning the Incarnation that, \"He (Jesus) was made man that we might be made god (θεοποιηθῶμεν).\" See , , . The entire life of the church is oriented towards making this possible and facilitating it.\n\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church the terms \"mystery\" or \"the mysteries\" refer to the process of \"theosis\". While it is understood that God theoretically can do anything instantly and invisibly, it is also understood that he generally chooses to use material substance as a medium in order to reach people. The limitations are those of mankind, not God. Matter is not considered to be evil by the Eastern Orthodox. Water, oil, bread, wine, etc., all are means by which God reaches out to allow people to draw closer to him. How this process works is a \"mystery\" and cannot be defined in human terms. These mysteries are surrounded by prayer and symbolism so that their true meaning will not be forgotten.\n\nThose things which in the West are often termed sacraments or sacramentals are known among the Eastern Orthodox as the \"sacred mysteries\". While the Roman Catholic Church numbers seven sacraments, and many Protestant groups list two (baptism and the Eucharist) or even none, the Eastern Orthodox do not limit the number. However, for the sake of convenience, catechisms will often speak of the seven great mysteries. Among these are Holy Communion (the most direct connection), baptism, Chrismation, confession, unction, matrimony, and ordination. But the term also properly applies to other sacred actions such as monastic tonsure or the blessing of holy water, and involves fasting, almsgiving, or an act as simple as lighting a candle, burning incense, praying or asking God's blessing on food.\n\nBaptism is the mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one; the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. Through baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming a member of the Orthodox Church. During the service, water is blessed. The catechumen is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the \"old man\" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection. Properly a new name is given, which becomes the person's name.\n\nChildren of Orthodox families are normally baptised shortly after birth. Converts to Orthodoxy are usually formally baptised into the Orthodox Church, though exceptions are sometimes made. Those who have left Orthodoxy and adopted a new religion, if they return to their Orthodox roots, are usually received back into the church through the mystery of Chrismation.\n\nProperly, the mystery of baptism is administered by bishops and priests; however, in emergencies any Orthodox Christian can baptise. In such cases, should the person survive the emergency, it is likely that the person will be properly baptised by a priest at some later date. This is not considered to be a second baptism, nor is it imagined that the person is not already Orthodox, but rather it is a fulfillment of the proper form.\n\nThe service of Baptism used in Orthodox churches has remained largely unchanged for over 1500 years. This fact is witnessed to by St. Cyril of Jerusalem (d. 386), who, in his \"Discourse on the Sacrament of Baptism\", describes the service in much the same way as is currently in use.\n\nChrismation (sometimes called confirmation) is the mystery by which a baptised person is granted the gift of the Holy Spirit through anointing with Holy Chrism. It is normally given immediately after baptism as part of the same service, but is also used to receive lapsed members of the Orthodox Church. As baptism is a person's participation in the death and resurrection of Christ, so Chrismation is a person's participation in the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.\n\nA baptised and chrismated Orthodox Christian is a full member of the church and may receive the Eucharist regardless of age.\n\nThe creation of Chrism may be accomplished by any bishop at any time, but usually is done only once a year, often when a synod of bishops convenes for its annual meeting. (Some autocephalous churches get their chrism from others.) Anointing with it substitutes for the laying-on of hands described in the New Testament, even when an instrument such as a brush is used.\n\nThe Eucharist is at the center of Orthodox Christianity. In practice, it is the partaking of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the midst of the Divine Liturgy with the rest of the church. The bread and wine are believed to become the genuine body and blood of the Christ Jesus through the operation of the Holy Spirit. The Orthodox Church has never described exactly how this occurs, or gone into the detail that the Catholic Church has in the West.\n\nCommunion is given only to baptised and chrismated Orthodox Christians who have prepared by fasting, prayer and confession. The priest will administer the gifts with a spoon, called a \"cochlear\", directly into the recipient's mouth from the chalice. From baptism young infants and children are carried to the chalice to receive holy communion.\n\nBecause of the Orthodox understanding of mankind's fallen nature in general those who wish to commune prepare themselves in a way that reflects mankind in paradise. First, they prepare by having their confession heard and the prayer of repentance read over them by a priest. They will increase their prayer rule, adding the prescribed prayers in preparation for communing. Finally, they will fast completely from food and drink from the evening of the previous day (usually sunset on Saturday if communing on Sunday).\n\nOrthodox Christians who have committed sins but repent of them, and who wish to reconcile themselves to God and renew the purity of their original baptisms, confess their sins to God before a spiritual guide who offers advice and direction to assist the individual in overcoming their sin. Parish priests commonly function as spiritual guides, but such guides can be any person, male or female (not commonly a layperson but in these cases monks or nuns), who has been given a blessing to hear confessions. Spiritual guides are chosen very carefully as this is a mandate that once chosen must be obeyed. Having confessed, the penitent then has his or her parish priest read the prayer of absolution over them.\n\nSin is not viewed by the Orthodox as a stain on the soul that needs to be wiped out, or a legal transgression that must be set right by a punitive sentence, but rather as a mistake made by the individual with the opportunity for spiritual growth and development. An act of penance (\"epitemia\"), if the spiritual guide requires it, is never formulaic, but rather is directed toward the individual and their particular problem, as a means of establishing a deeper understanding of the mistake made, and how to effect its cure. Because full participatory membership is granted to infants, it is not unusual for even small children to confess; though the scope of their culpability is far less than an older child, still their opportunity for spiritual growth remains the same.\n\nFrom the Orthodox perspective, marriage is one of the holy mysteries or sacraments. As well as in many other Christian traditions, for example in Catholicism, it serves to unite a woman and a man in eternal union and love before God, with the purpose of following Christ and his Gospel and raising up a faithful, holy family through their holy union. The church understands marriage to be the union of one man and one woman, and certain Orthodox leaders have spoken out strongly in opposition to the civil institution of same-sex marriage.\n\nJesus said that \"when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven\" (Mk 12:25). For the Orthodox Christian this passage should not be understood to imply that Christian marriage will not remain a reality in the Kingdom, but points to the fact that relations will not be \"fleshy\", but \"spiritual\". Love between wife and husband, as an icon of relationship between Christ and Church, is eternal.\n\nThe church does recognise that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate, but there is no official recognition of civil divorces. For the Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offense resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the church towards sinful man. Ecclesiastically divorced Orthodox (not civilly divorced only) are usually allowed to remarry in the Orthodox Church, though there is usually imposed on them a fairly severe penance by their bishop and the services for a second marriage in this case are more penitential than joyful. Widows are permitted to remarry without repercussion and their second marriage is considered just as valid as the first. One exception to this rule is the clergy and their wives. Should a married priest die, it is normal that his wife will retire to a monastery once their children are out of the house. Widowed priests are not allowed to remarry (no priest may be married after his ordination) and also frequently end up in monasteries.\n\nThe service of marriage in the Orthodox Church has two distinct parts: the betrothal (engagement) and the crowning. There is no exchange of vows. There is a set expectation of the obligations incumbent on a married couple, and whatever promises they may have privately to each other are their responsibility to keep.\n\nSince its founding, the church spread to different places and its leaders in each region came to be known as \"episkopoi\" (\"overseers\", plural of \"episkopos\", overseer—Gr. ἐπίσκοπος), which became \"bishop\" in English. The other ordained roles are \"presbyter\" (Gr. , elder), which became \"prester\" and then \"priest\" in English, and \"diakonos\" (Gr. , servant), which became \"deacon\" in English (see also subdeacon). There are numerous administrative positions among the clergy that carry additional titles.\n\nIn the Greek tradition, bishops who occupy an ancient see are called metropolitans, while the lead bishop in Greece is the archbishop. (In the Russian tradition, however, the usage of the terms \"metropolitan\" and \"archbishop\" is reversed.) Priests can be archpriests, archimandrites or protopresbyters. Deacons can also be archdeacons or protodeacons. The position of deacon is often occupied for life. The deacon also acts as an assistant to a bishop.\n\nWith the exception of bishops, who remain celibate, the Orthodox Church has always allowed priests and deacons to be married, provided the marriage takes place before ordination. In general it is considered preferable for parish priests to be married as they often act as counsel to married couples and thus can draw on their own experience. Unmarried priests are usually monks and live in monasteries, though there are occasions when, because of a lack of married priests, a monk-priest is temporarily assigned to a parish.\n\nWidowed priests and deacons may not remarry and it is common for such members of the clergy to retire to a monastery (see clerical celibacy). This is also true of widowed wives of clergy, who do not remarry and become nuns when their children are grown. Only men are allowed to receive holy orders, although deaconesses had both liturgical and pastoral functions within the church. However, it has fallen out of practice (the last deaconess was ordained in the 19th century).\n\nIn 2017, Patriarch Theodoros II and the Holy Synod of the Patriarchate of Alexandria decided to reinstate the order of deaconesses in the Greek Orthodox Church. In February, he appointed six nuns to be subdeacons within the church.\n\nAnointing with oil, often called \"unction\", is one of the mysteries administered by the Orthodox Church and is not reserved only for the dying or terminally ill, but for all in need of spiritual or bodily healing. In Greece, during the Ottoman occupation, it became the custom to administer this mystery annually on Great Wednesday to all believers; in recent decades, this custom has spread to many other locations. It is often distributed on major feast days, or any time the clergy believe it necessary for the spiritual welfare of its congregation.\n\nAccording to Orthodox teaching unction is based on the Epistle of James:\n\nIs anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith will save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up. And if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.—\n\nFollowing Jesus Christ's Great Commission to the apostles, Christianity spread rapidly throughout the Roman Empire. Paul and the Apostles traveled extensively throughout the Empire, including Asia Minor, establishing Churches in major communities, with the first churches appearing in Jerusalem and the Holy Land, then in Antioch, Ethiopia, Egypt, Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Thessalonica, Illyricum, and Byzantium, which centuries later would become prominent as the New Rome. Christianity in the Roman Empire met with considerable resistance, as its adherents would refuse to comply with the Roman state (even at the threat of death) in offering sacrifice to the pagan gods. Despite persecutions, the Christian Church spread. The persecution dissipated upon the conversion of Emperor Constantine I in 312 AD.\n\nBy the 4th century Christianity had spread to numerous regions. A number of influential schools of thought had arisen, particularly the Alexandrian and Antiochian philosophical approaches. Other groups, such as the Arians, had also managed to gain influence. However, their positions caused theological conflicts within the Church, thus prompting the Emperor Constantine to call for a great ecumenical synod in order to define the Church's position against the growing, often widely diverging, philosophical and theological interpretations of Christianity. He made it possible for this council to meet not only by providing a location, but by offering to pay for the transportation of all the existing bishops of the Church. Most modern Christian Churches regard this synod, commonly called the First Council of Nicaea or more generally the First Ecumenical Council, as of major importance.\n\nSeveral doctrinal disputes from the 4th century onwards led to the calling of ecumenical councils. In the Orthodox Church, an ecumenical council is the supreme authority that can be invoked to resolve contested issues of the faith. As such, these councils have been held to resolve the most important theological matters that came to be disputed within the Christian Church. Many lesser disagreements were resolved through local councils in the areas where they arose, before they grew significant enough to require an ecumenical council.\n\nThere are seven councils authoritatively recognised as ecumenical:\nBULLET::::1. The First Ecumenical Council was convoked by the Roman Emperor Constantine at Nicaea in 325 and presided over by the Patriarch Alexander of Alexandria, with over 300 bishops condemning the view of Arius that the Son is a created being inferior to the Father.\nBULLET::::2. The Second Ecumenical Council was held at Constantinople in 381, presided over by the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, with 150 bishops, defining the nature of the Holy Spirit against those asserting His inequality with the other persons of the Trinity.\nBULLET::::3. The Third Ecumenical Council is that of Ephesus in 431, presided over by the Patriarch of Alexandria, with 250 bishops, which affirmed that Mary is truly \"Birthgiver\" or \"Mother\" of God (\"Theotokos\"), contrary to the teachings of Nestorius.\nBULLET::::4. The Fourth Ecumenical Council is that of Chalcedon in 451, Patriarch of Constantinople presiding, 500 bishops, affirmed that Jesus is truly God and truly man, without mixture of the two natures, contrary to Monophysite teaching.\nBULLET::::5. The Fifth Ecumenical Council is the second of Constantinople in 553, interpreting the decrees of Chalcedon and further explaining the relationship of the two natures of Jesus; it also condemned the alleged teachings of Origen on the pre-existence of the soul, etc.\nBULLET::::6. The Sixth Ecumenical Council is the third of Constantinople in 681; it declared that Christ has two wills of his two natures, human and divine, contrary to the teachings of the Monothelites.\nBULLET::::7. The Seventh Ecumenical Council was called under the Empress Regent Irene of Athens in 787, known as the second of Nicaea. It supports the veneration of icons while forbidding their worship. It is often referred to as \"The Triumph of Orthodoxy\".\n\nThere are also two other councils which are considered ecumenical by some Orthodox. All Orthodox agree that the decisions of these further councils are valid; the disagreement is only whether they carry sufficient importance to be considered truly e\"cumenical:\"\n\nIn addition to these councils there have been a number of other significant councils meant to further define the Orthodox position. They are the Synods of Constantinople, in 1484, 1583, 1755, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Jassy (Iași) in 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. Another council convened in June 2016 to discuss many modern phenomena including Modernism, other Christian confessions, Orthodoxy's relation with other religions and fasting disciplines.\n\nEastern Christian culture reached its golden age during the high point of the Byzantine Empire and continued to flourish in Ukraine and Russia, after the fall of Constantinople. Numerous autocephalous churches were established in Europe: Greece, Georgia, Ukraine, as well as in Russia and Asia.\n\nIn the 530s the Church of the Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) was built in Constantinople under Emperor Justinian I.\n\nThere are the \"Nestorian\" churches resulted from the reaction of the Council of Ephesus (431), which are the earliest surviving Eastern Christian churches that keep the faith of only the first two ecumenical councils, i.e., the First Council of Nicaea (325) and the First Council of Constantinople (381) as legitimate. \"Nestorian\" is an outsider's term for a tradition that predated the influence of Nestorius, the origin of which might lay in certain sections of the School of Antioch or via Nestorius' teachers Theodore of Mopsuestia or Diodore of Tarsus. The modern incarnation of the \"Nestorian Church\" is commonly referred to as \"the Assyrian Church\" or fully as the Assyrian Church of the East.\n\nThe church in Egypt (Patriarchate of Alexandria) split into two groups following the Council of Chalcedon (451), over a dispute about the relation between the divine and human natures of Jesus. Eventually this led to each group anathematizing the other. Those that remained in communion with the other patriarchs (by accepting the Council of Chalcedon) are known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, where the adjective \"Greek\" refers to their ties to the Greek-speaking culture of the Byzantine Empire. However, those who disagreed with the findings of the Council of Chalcedon were the majority in Egypt, and today they are known as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, having maintained a separate patriarchate. The Coptic Orthodox Church is currently the largest Christian church in Egypt and in the whole Middle East. There was also a similar, albeit smaller scale, split in Syria (Patriarchate of Antioch), which resulted in the separation of the Syriac Orthodox Church from the Byzantine Patriarchate of Antioch.\n\nThose who disagreed with the Council of Chalcedon are sometimes called \"Oriental Orthodox\" to distinguish them from the \"Eastern Orthodox\", who accepted the Council of Chalcedon. Oriental Orthodox are also sometimes referred to as \"non-Chalcedonians\", or \"anti-Chalcedonians\". The Oriental Orthodox Church denies that it is monophysite and prefers the term \"miaphysite\", to denote the \"united\" nature of Jesus (two natures united into one) consistent with St. Cyril's theology: \"The term union...signifies the concurrence in one reality of those things which are understood to be united\" and \"the Word who is ineffably united with it in a manner beyond all description\" (St. Cyril of Alexandria, \"On the Unity of Christ\"). Both the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches formally believe themselves to be the continuation of the true church, although over the last several decades there has been considerable reconciliation and the prospect of reunification has been discussed.\n\nIn the 9th and 10th centuries, Christianity made great inroads into pagan Europe, including Bulgaria (864) and later Kievan Rus' (988). This work was made possible by the work of the Byzantine-era saints Cyril and Methodius. When king Rastislav of Moravia asked Byzantium for teachers who could minister to the Moravians in their own language, Byzantine emperor Michael III chose these two brothers. Cyril and Methodius translated the Bible and many of the prayer books. With time, as the translations prepared by them were copied by speakers of other dialects, the hybrid literary language Church Slavonic was created. Originally sent to convert the Slavs of Great Moravia, Cyril and Methodius were forced to compete with Frankish missionaries from the Roman diocese. Their disciples were driven out of Great Moravia in AD 886 and emigrated to Bulgaria.\n\nAfter the Christianization of Bulgaria in 864, the disciples of saints Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, the most important being Saint Clement of Ohrid and Saint Naum of Preslav, were of great importance to the Orthodox faith in the First Bulgarian Empire. In a short time they managed to prepare and instruct the future Bulgarian clergy into the biblical texts and in AD 870 the Fourth Council of Constantinople granted the Bulgarians the right to have the oldest organised autocephalous Slavic Orthodox Church that little later, from autonomous Bulgarian archbishopric, became Patriarchate. The success of the conversion of the Bulgarians facilitated the conversion of East Slavic peoples, most notably the Rus', predecessors of Belarusians, Russians, and Ukrainians. Major event is the development of the Cyrillic script in Bulgaria at the Preslav Literary School in the 9th century. The Cyrillic script and the liturgy in Old Church Slavonic, also called Old Bulgarian, were declared official in Bulgaria in 893.\n\nThe work of the Thessaloniki brothers Cyril and Methodius and their disciples had a major impact to Serbs as well. However, they accepted Christianity collectively by families and by tribes (in the process between the 7th and the 9th century). In commemoration of their baptisms, each Serbian family or tribe began to celebrate an exclusively Serbian custom called Slava (patron saint) in a special way to honor the Saint on whose day they received the sacrament of Holy Baptism. It is the most solemn day of the year for all Serbs of the Orthodox faith and has played a role of vital importance in the history of the Serbian people. Slava is actually the celebration of the spiritual birthday of the Serbian people which the Church blessed and proclaimed it a Church institution.\n\nThe missionaries to the East and South Slavs had great success in part because they used the people's native language rather than Greek, the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire or Latin as the Roman priests did. Today the Russian Orthodox Church is the largest of the Orthodox Churches followed by the Romanian Orthodox Church.\n\nIn the 11th century what was recognised as the Great Schism took place between Rome and Constantinople, which led to separation between the Church of the West, the Catholic Church, and the Eastern Byzantine Churches, now the Orthodox. There were doctrinal issues like the filioque clause and the authority of the Roman Pope involved in the split, but these were greatly exacerbated by political factors of both Church and state, and by cultural and linguistic differences between Latins and Greeks. Regarding papal supremacy, the Eastern half grew disillusioned with the Pope's centralization of power, as well as his blatant attempts of excluding the Eastern half in regard to papal approvals. It used to be that the emperor would at least have say when a new Pope would be elected, but towards the high Middle Ages, the Christians in Rome were slowly consolidating power and removing Byzantine influence. However, even before this exclusionary tendency from the West, well before 1054, the Eastern and Western halves of the Church were in perpetual conflict, particularly during the periods of Eastern iconoclasm and the Photian schism.\n\nThe final breach is often considered to have arisen after the capture and sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204; the final break with Rome occurred circa 1450. The sacking of Church of Holy Wisdom and establishment of the Latin Empire as a seeming attempt to supplant the Orthodox Byzantine Empire in 1204 is viewed with some rancour to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204, which was importantly also strongly condemned by the Pope at the time (Innocent III, see reference at end of paragraph); the apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople. Many things that were stolen during this time—holy relics, riches, and many other items—were not returned and are still held in various European cities, particularly Venice.\n\nReunion was attempted twice, at the 1274 Second Council of Lyon and the 1439 Council of Florence. The Council of Florence briefly reestablished communion between East and West, which lasted until after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. In each case, however, the councils were rejected by the Orthodox people as a whole, and the union of Florence also became very politically difficult after Constantinople came under Ottoman rule. Some local Eastern churches have, however, renewed union with Rome in time since (see Eastern Catholic Churches). Recent decades have seen a renewal of ecumenical spirit and dialogue between the Churches.\n\nIn 1453, the Byzantine Empire fell to the Ottoman Empire. By this time Egypt had been under Muslim control for some seven centuries, but Orthodoxy was very strong in Russia which had recently acquired an autocephalous status; and thus Moscow called itself the Third Rome, as the cultural heir of Constantinople.\n\nUnder Ottoman rule, the Greek Orthodox Church acquired substantial power as an autonomous \"millet\". The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and administrative ruler of the Rûm (Ottoman administrative unit meaning \"Roman\"), which encompassed all the Orthodox subjects of the Empire.\n\nUp until 1666, when Patriarch Nikon was deposed by the tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church had been independent of the State. In 1721 the first Russian Emperor, Peter I abolished completely the patriarchate and so the church effectively became a department of the government, ruled by a most holy synod composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Emperor himself. From 1721 until the Bolsheviks' October Revolution of 1917, the Russian Orthodox Church was essentially transformed into a governmental agency, a tool used to various degrees by the tsars in the imperial campaigns of Russification. The church was allowed by the State to levy taxes on the peasants. Therefore, the church, along with the imperial regime, to which it belonged, came to be presented as an enemy of the people by the Bolsheviks and the other Russian revolutionaries.\n\nAfter the October revolution of 1917, part of the clergy of the Russian Church escaped the Bolshevik persecutions by fleeing abroad, where they founded an independent church in exile, reunified with the Russian one in 2007. The Orthodox Church clergy in Russia were seen as sympathetic with the cause of the White Army in the Civil War after the Revolution, and occasionally collaborated with it; Patriarch Tikhon's declared position was vehemently anti-Bolshevik in 1918. This may have further strengthened the Bolshevik animus against the church. The Soviet government confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in schools. Actions toward particular religions, however, were determined by state interests, and most organised religions were never outlawed. Some actions against Orthodox priests and believers along with execution included torture, being sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals. In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.\n\nAfter Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. However, in 1959, Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced the closure of about 12,000 churches. It is estimated that 50,000 clergy had been executed between the revolution and the end of the Khrushchev era. Members of the church hierarchy were jailed or forced out, their places taken by docile clergy, many of whom had ties with the KGB. By 1985 fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.\n\nHowever, there is definitely marked return to Christian Orthodoxy in Russia. According to the Pew Research Religion & Public Life Project, between 1991 and 2008, the share of Russian adults identifying as Orthodox Christian rose from 31 percent to 72 percent, according to a new Pew Research Center analysis of three waves of data (1991, 1998 and 2008) from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) – a collaboration involving social scientists in about 50 countries.\n\nAlbania was the only state to have declared itself officially fully atheist. In some other Communist states such as Romania, the Romanian Orthodox Church as an organization enjoyed relative freedom and even prospered, albeit under strict secret police control. That, however, did not rule out demolishing churches and monasteries as part of broader systematization (urban planning), and state persecution of individual believers. As an example of the latter, Romania stands out as a country which ran a specialised institution where many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions. However, this was only supported by one faction within the regime, and lasted only three years. The Communist authorities closed down the prison in 1952, and punished many of those responsible for abuses (twenty of them were sentenced to death).\n\nEastern Orthodoxy represents the majority of Eastern Christianity. The Orthodox trace their bishops back to the apostles through apostolic succession, and continue the ancient Christian practices of veneration of saints, especially Mary as the Theotokos, prayers for the dead, and monasticism. Orthodoxy does not openly promote statuary, although it is not expressly condemned, instead limiting itself primarily to two-dimensional iconography. Western theological concepts of original sin, substitutionary atonement, predestination, purgatory and particular judgment are generally rejected by traditional Orthodox theologians.\n\nThe Orthodox believe themselves to be the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, that is, the true Church established by Jesus Christ and placed into the care of the apostles. As almost all other Christian groups are in indirect schism with the Orthodox Church, mostly as a result of the Great Schism with the Catholic Church at the turn of the second Christian millennium (before the schisms of the Protestant Reformation), these other groups are viewed as being Christian, but who, to varying degrees, lack full theological orthodoxy and orthopraxy. As such, all groups outside of the Orthodox Church are not seen as being members of the church proper, but rather separated brethren who have failed to retain the fullness of the Christian faith and theology. These deviations from orthodoxy have traditionally been called heresy, but due to the term's perceived pejorative connotations, some prefer the more technical designation of the term heterodoxy.\n\nIn 1920, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, published an encyclical \"addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations\". This gesture was instrumental in the foundation of the World Council of Churches (WCC); as such, almost all Eastern Orthodox churches are members of the WCC and \"Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees\". Kallistos Ware, a British metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox Church, has stated that ecumenism \"is important for Orthodoxy: it has helped to force the various Orthodox churches out of their comparative isolation, making them meet one another and enter into a living contact with non-Orthodox Christians.\"\n\nHilarion Alfeyev, Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Protestant Christians share the same positions on \"such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage\" and desire \"vigorous grassroots engagement\" between the two Christian communions on such issues.\n\nIn that regard, the differences between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions have not been improved in any relevant way. Dogmatic and liturgical polarities have been significant, even and especially in recent times. A pertinent point of contention between the monarchically papal, administratively centralised Catholic Church and the decentralised confederation of Orthodox churches is the theological significance of the Virgin Mary. Even during a visit by Pope Francis to Georgia in October 2016, the leader of the Catholics was snubbed by most Orthodox Christians when he was holding mass in front of the practically empty Mikheil Meskhi Stadium in Tbilisi.\n\nThe Oriental Orthodox churches are not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, despite their similar names. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two churches began in the mid-20th century, and, notably, in the 19th century, when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time; he left his church under the guidance of the Coptic Pope Cyril IV of Alexandria.\n\nHistorically, the Orthodox Church and the non-Chalcedonians were among the first peoples to have contact with Islam, which conquered Roman/Byzantine Syria-Palestine and Egypt in the 7th century, and fought many battles against Islamic conquests. The Qur'an itself records its concurrent observations regarding the Roman world in Surah al-Rum. The main contact with Islam however, came after the conquest of the Seljuk Turks of Roman/Byzantine Anatolia in the 13th century.\n\nChristians who were under Islamic rule were denied equality of rights and were forced to pay the Jizya poll tax.\n\nIn Russia, Metropolitan Alfeyev stated belief in the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity as the two religions have never had religious wars in Russia.\n\nThe various autocephalous and autonomous synods of the Orthodox Church are distinct in terms of administration and local culture, but for the most part exist in full communion with one another. Presently, there are two communions that reject each other and, in addition, some schismatic churches not in any communion, with all three groups identifying as Eastern Orthodox.\n\nThe main traditional historical communion is divided into two groups—those who use the Revised Julian calendar for calculating fixed feasts and the Julian calendar for calculating movable feasts, and those who use the Julian calendar for all purposes. This second group may include congregations whose church allows them to choose, with the proviso that the choice remains in effect at least until the end of the church year. Also in communion are the Estonian and Finnish Orthodox churches who have a dispensation to use the Gregorian calendar for all purposes. Another group is referred to as True Orthodoxy (or Old Calendarists); they are those who, without authority from their parent churches, have continued to use the old Julian calendar, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contravention of the ecumenical councils. Similarly, another group called the Old Believers, separated in 1666 from the official Russian Orthodox Church as a protest against church rite reforms introduced by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow. As Eastern Orthodox Christianity is both collegial and local in structure, there is no single organization called the \"True Orthodox Church\" nor is there official recognition among the \"True Orthodox\" as to who is properly included among them. While some unions have taken place even up to the present, the majority of True Orthodox are only secondarily concerned with reunion as opposed to preservation of Eastern Orthodox teaching.\n\nThe calendar question reflects the dispute between those who wish to use a calendar which is reformed yet not Gregorian (effectively gaining the perceived benefits of the Gregorian calendar without disregarding the three anathemas issued against it in the sixteenth century), something which opponents consider unnecessary and damaging to continuity, and those who wish to maintain the traditional ecclesiastical calendar (which happens to be based on the Julian calendar), arguing that such a modern change goes against 1900 years of church tradition and was in fact perpetrated without an ecumenical council, which would surely have rejected the idea.\n\nThe dispute has led to much acrimony, and sometimes even to violence. Following canonical precepts, some adherents of the old calendar have chosen to abstain from clerical inter-communion with those synods which have embraced the new calendar until the conflict is resolved. The monastic communities on Mount Athos have provided the strongest opposition to the new calendar, and to modernism in general, while still maintaining communion with their mother church.\n\nThe Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) has recently united with the Moscow Patriarchate; these two branches of the Russian Orthodox Church had separated from each other in the 1920s due to the subjection of the latter to the hostile Soviet regime (see Act of Canonical Communion).\n\nThe Orthodox Church is a communion of 14 autocephalous (that is, administratively completely independent) regional churches, plus the Orthodox Church in America and then-recently the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. The Orthodox Church in America is recognised as autocephalous only by the Russian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Polish and Czech-Slovak churches. In December 2018, representatives of two former non-canonical but then-recent mildly recognised Ukraine Orthodox churches, along with two metropolitans of the canonical, but not autocephalous Ukraine Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate, proclaimed the formation of the unified Orthodox Church of Ukraine. On 5 January 2019 it received the tomos of autocephaly (decree which defines the conditions of a church's independence) from the Ecumenical Patriarchate and thus received the place in the diptych.\n\nEach church has defined geographical boundaries of its jurisdiction and is ruled by its council of bishops or synod presided by a senior bishop–its primate (or first hierarch). The primate may carry the honorary title of patriarch, metropolitan (in the Slavic tradition) or archbishop (in the Greek tradition).\n\nEach regional church consists of constituent eparchies (or, dioceses) ruled by a bishop. Some churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies varying degrees of autonomy (self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a tomos or other document of autonomy.\n\nBelow is a list of the 14 autocephalous Orthodox churches forming the main body of Orthodox Christianity, all of which are titled equal to each other, but the Ecumenical Patriarchate is titled the \"first among equals\". Based on the definitions, the list is in the order of precedence and alphabetical order where necessary, with some of their constituent autonomous churches and exarchates listed as well. The liturgical title of the primate is in italics.\nBULLET::::- Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople (\"Archbishop of Constantinople-New Rome and First Among Equals Patriarch\")\nBULLET::::- Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy (\"His Eminence Orthodox Archbishop of Italy and Malta\")\nBULLET::::- Autonomous Orthodox Church of Finland (\"Archbishop of Helsinki and All Finland\", formerly \"Archbishop of Karelia and All Finland\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Orthodox Church of Crete (\"Archbishop of Crete\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Monastic Community of Mount Athos\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Orthodox Church of Korea (\"Metropolitan of Seoul and All Korea\")\nBULLET::::- Eparchy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada\nBULLET::::- Eparchy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the USA\nBULLET::::- Eparchy of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America\nBULLET::::- Eparchy of the Exarchate of the Philippines\nBULLET::::- Eparchy of the American Carpatho-Russian Orthodox Diocese\nBULLET::::- Patriarchate of Alexandria (\"His Most Divine Beatitude the Pope and Patriarch of the Great City of Alexandria, Libya, Pentapolis, Ethiopia, all the land of Egypt, and all Africa, Father of Fathers, Shepherd of Shepherds, Prelate of Prelates, Thirteenth of the Apostles, and Judge of the Œcumene\")\nBULLET::::- Patriarchate of Antioch (\"Patriarch of Antioch and all the East\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America (\"Archbishop of New York and Metropolitan of All North America\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, New Zealand, and All Oceania (\"Metropolitan Archbishop of Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines\")\nBULLET::::- Patriarchate of Jerusalem (\"Patriarch of the Holy City of Jerusalem and all Holy Land, Syria, Arabia, beyond the Jordan River, Cana of Galilee, and Sacred Zion\")\nBULLET::::- Autonomous Church of Mount Sinai (\"Archbishop of Choreb, Sinai, and Raitha\")\nBULLET::::- Russian Orthodox Church (\"Patriarch of Moscow and all Russia\")\nBULLET::::- Autonomous Orthodox Church in Japan (\"Archbishop of Tokyo and Metropolitan of All Japan\")\nBULLET::::- Exarchate of Belarus (\"Metropolitan of Minsk and Slutsk, Patriarchal Exarch of All Belarus\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (\"Metropolitan of Eastern America and New York, First Hierarch of the Russian church abroad\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Orthodox Church of Moldova (\"Metropolitan of Chişinău and all Moldova\")\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Orthodox Church of Latvia (\"Metropolitan of Riga and all Latvia\")\nBULLET::::- Serbian Orthodox Church (\"Archbishop of Peć, Metropolitan of Belgrade and Karlovci, and Serbian Patriarch\")\nBULLET::::- Autonomous Orthodox Ohrid Archbishopric (\"Archbishop of Ohrid and Metropolitan of Skopje\")\nBULLET::::- Bulgarian Orthodox Church (\"Metropolitan of Sofia and Patriarch of All Bulgaria\")\nBULLET::::- Romanian Orthodox Church (\"Archbishop of Bucharest, Metropolitan of Muntenia and Dobrudja, Locum Tenens of the Throne of Caesarea of Cappadocia, and Patriarch of Romania\")\nBULLET::::- Georgian Orthodox Church (\"Catholicos-Patriarch of All Georgia, the Archbishop of Mtskheta-Tbilisi and Metropolitan bishop of Abkhazia and Pitsunda\")\nBULLET::::- Church of Cyprus (\"Archbishop of New Justiniana and all Cyprus\")\nBULLET::::- Church of Greece (\"Archbishop of Athens and all Greece\")\nBULLET::::- Orthodox Church of Albania (\"Archbishop of Tirana, Durres and all Albania\")\nBULLET::::- Polish Orthodox Church (\"Metropolitan of Warsaw and all Poland\" or \"Archbishop of Warsaw and Metropolitan of All Poland)\"\nBULLET::::- Orthodox Church of the Czech lands and Slovakia (\"Archbishop of Prague, the Metropolitan of Czech lands and Slovakia or the Archbishop of Presov, the Metropolitan of Czech lands and Slovakia\")\nWithin the main body of Eastern Orthodoxy there are unresolved internal issues as to the autonomous or autocephalous status or legitimacy of the following Orthodox churches, particularly between those stemming from the Russian Orthodox or Constantinopolitan churches:\nBULLET::::- Orthodox Church in America (\"Archbishop of Washington, Metropolitan of All America and Canada\") – Not recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate.\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Metropolis of Bessarabia of the Romanian Orthodox Church – Territory is claimed by the Russian Orthodox Church.\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church (\"Metropolitan of Tallinn and all Estonia\") – Recognised only by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, opposed only by the Russian Orthodox Church.\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Estonian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate (\"Metropolitan of Tallinn and all Estonia\") – Not recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate.\nBULLET::::- Self-governing Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) (\"Metropolitan of Kiev and all Ukraine\") – Not recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, Church of Greece, and Patriarchate of Alexandria, as of November 2019.\nBULLET::::- Orthodox Church of Ukraine (\"Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine\") – Recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, Church of Greece, and Patriarchate of Alexandria as of November 2019, opposed by the Russian, Antiochian, Czech and Slovak, Serbian and Polish Orthodox Churches.\nTrue Orthodoxy separated from the mainstream communion over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform since the 1920s. The movement rejects the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Moscow Patriarchate, and those churches in communion with them, accusing them of heresy and placing themselves under bishops who do the same. They adhere to the use of the old Julian calendar since antiquity, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contravention of the ecumenical councils. True Orthodox writers have argued that in missionary areas such as the United States, Orthodox (SCOBA) membership numbers may be overstated, with the comparative number of True Orthodox as up to 15% of the Orthodox population, in Russia, it has been claimed by some clergy that up to a million Russians may be True Orthodox of different jurisdictions, though the total number is often cited at 1.7–2 million together.\n\nThere is no official communion of traditionalists. They often are local groups and are limited to a specific bishop or locality. The following is a list of the most prominent True Orthodox churches:\n\nOld Believers are groups that do not accept liturgical reforms carried out in the Russian Orthodox Church by Patriarch Nikon in the 17th century. Although all Old Believers groups emerged as a result of opposition to the Nikonian reform, they do not constitute a single monolithic body. Despite the emphasis on invariable adherence to the pre-Nikonian traditions, the Old Believers feature a great diversity of groups that profess different interpretations of the church tradition and often are not in communion with each other (some groups even practise re-baptism before admitting a member of another group into their midst).\n\nChurches with irregular or unresolved canonical status are entities that have carried out episcopal consecrations outside of the norms of canon law or whose bishops have been excommunicated by one of the 14 autocephalous churches. These include nationalist and other schismatic bodies such as the Abkhazian Orthodox Church, Evangelical Orthodox Church, and Russian True Orthodox Church.\n\nBULLET::::- Byzantine art\nBULLET::::- Byzantine literature\nBULLET::::- Byzantine dress\nBULLET::::- Byzantine music\nBULLET::::- Chalcedonian Christianity\nBULLET::::- Christianization of Bulgaria\nBULLET::::- Ecclesiastical differences between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church\nBULLET::::- Emanation (Eastern Orthodoxy)\nBULLET::::- Greek Orthodox Christianity in Lebanon\nBULLET::::- History of Eastern Orthodox Christian theology\nBULLET::::- Interparliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy\nBULLET::::- List of Orthodox Churches\nBULLET::::- Schism of 2018\nBULLET::::- Theological differences between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church\nBULLET::::- Timeline of Orthodoxy in Greece (33–717)\n\nBULLET::::- (Introduction by C. S. Lewis)\n\nBULLET::::- Krindatch, Alexei D. ed., \"Atlas of American Orthodox Christian Churches\" (Holy Cross Orthodox Press, 2011) online.\nBULLET::::- Scouteris, Constantine, \"A Brief Outline of the Orthodox Church, Ἐκκλησιαστικός Φάρος, 65 (2004), pp. 60–75.\"\nBULLET::::- An Online Orthodox Catechism published by the Russian Orthodox Church\nBULLET::::- Orthodox Dictionary at Kursk Root Hermitage of the Birth of the Most Holy Theotokos\nBULLET::::- Orthodox books – Lives of Holy People at skete.com\nBULLET::::- An Orthodox View of Salvation\nBULLET::::- IV Pre-Conciliar Pan-Orthodox Conference\nBULLET::::- Orthodox Icons and Paintings\nBULLET::::- Prologue from Ohrid – (Saints of the Orthodox Church Calendar)\nBULLET::::- A repository with scientific papers on various aspects of the Byzantine Orthodox Church in English and in German\nBULLET::::- IOCC: Gaza’s Orthodox Community Struggles to Endure\n\nBULLET::::- Pope Benedict XIV, \"Allatae Sunt\" (\"On the observance of Oriental Rites\"), Encyclical, 1755\nBULLET::::- \"Orientale Lumen\" – Apostolic Letter of Pope John Paul II on the Eastern Churches, 1995\nBULLET::::- Common Declaration of Pope Benedict XVI and the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, 2006\n"}
{"id": "10190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10190", "title": "Eusebius of Nicomedia", "text": "Eusebius of Nicomedia\n\nEusebius of Nicomedia (died 341) was the man who baptised Constantine the Great. He was a bishop of Berytus (modern-day Beirut) in Phoenicia. He was later made the Bishop of Nicomedia, where the imperial court resided. He lived finally in Constantinople from 338 up to his death.\n\nDistantly related to the imperial family of Constantine, he owed his progression from a less significant Levantine bishopric to the most important episcopal see to his influence at court, and the great power he wielded in the church was derived from that source. In fact, during his time in the imperial court, the Eastern court and the major positions in the Eastern Church were held by Arians or Arian sympathizers. With the exception of a short period of eclipse, he enjoyed the confidence both of Constantine and Constantius II. He also served as the tutor of the later Emperor Julian the Apostate; and it was he who baptized Constantine the Great on May 22, 337 owing to his familial relationship with the emperor. Also during his time in the imperial court, Arianism became more popular with the royal family. It can be logically surmised that Eusebius had a huge hand in the acceptance of Arianism in the Constantinian household. The Arian influence grew so strong during his tenure in the imperial court that it was not until the end of the Constantinian dynasty and the appointment of Theodosius I that Arianism lost its influence in the empire.\n\nIt was of particular interest that Eusebius was nearly persecuted because of his close relationship to the Emperor Licinius while serving as Bishop of Nicomedia during Licinius' reign.\n\nLike Arius, he was a pupil of Lucian of Antioch, and it is probable that he held the same views as Arius from the very beginning; he was also one of Arius' most fervent supporters who encouraged Arius. It was also because of this relationship that he was the first person whom Arius contacted after the latter was excommunicated from Alexandria by Alexander I of Alexandria in 321. Apparently, Arius and Eusebius were close enough and Eusebius powerful enough that Arius was able to put his theology down in writing. He afterward modified his ideas somewhat, or perhaps he only yielded to the pressure of circumstances; but he was, if not the teacher, at all events the leader and organizer, of the Arian council.\n\nAt the First Council of Nicaea, 325, he signed the Confession, but only after a long and desperate opposition in which he \"subscribe with hand only, not heart\" according to ancient sources. It was a huge blow to the Arian party since it was surmised that the participants in the First Council of Nicaea were evenly split between non-Arians and Arians.\nHis defense of Arius angered the emperor, and a few months after the council\nhe was sent into exile due to his continual contacts with Arius and his followers. After the lapse of three years, he succeeded in regaining the imperial favor by convincing Constantine that Arius and his views do not conflict with the proclaimed Nicene Creed. After his return in 329 he brought the whole machinery of the state government into action in order to impose his views upon the Church.\n\nIn complement to his theological interests, Eusebius was a skilled politician. Upon his return, he regained the lost ground resulted from the First Council of Nicaea, established alliances with other groups such as the Melitians and expelled many opponents.\n\nHe was described by modern historians as an \"ambitious intriguer\" and a \"consummate political player\". He was also described by ancient sources as a high-handed person who was also aggressive in his dealings.; he also used his allies to spy on his opponents.\n\nHe was able to dislodge and exile three key opponents who espoused the First Council of Nicaea: Eustathius of Antioch in 330, Athanasius of Alexandria in 335 and Marcellus of Ancyra in 336. This was no small feat since Athanasius was regarded as a \"man of God\" by Constantine. and both Eustathius and Athanasius held top positions in the church.\n\nAnother major feat was his appointment as the Patriarch of Constantinople by expelling Paul I of Constantinople; Paul would eventually return as Patriarch after Eusebius' death.\n\nEven outside the empire, Eusebius had great influence. He brought Ulfilas into the Arian priesthood and sent the latter to convert the heathen Goths.\n\nEusebius baptised Constantine the Great in his villa in Nicomedia, on May 22, 337 just before the death of the Emperor.\n\nHe died at the height of his power in the year 341.\n\nHe was so influential that even after his death, Constantius II heeded his and Eudoxus of Constantinople's advice to attempt to convert the Roman Empire to Arianism by creating Arian Councils and official Arian Doctrines.\n\nIt was because of Eusebius that \"On the whole, Constantine and his successors made life pretty miserable for Church leaders committed to the Nicene decision and its Trinitarian formula.\"\n\nEusebius of Nicomedia is not to be confused with his contemporary Eusebius of Caesarea, the author of a well-known early book of Church History.\n\n\nCorrespondence of Eusebius of Nicomedia:\nBULLET::::- Arius to Eusebius\nBULLET::::- Eusebius to Arius\nBULLET::::- Eusebius to Paulinus of Tyre\nBULLET::::- Eusebius to the Council of Nicaea\nBULLET::::- Constantine on Eusebius' deposition\nBULLET::::- Eusebius' confession of faith\n"}
{"id": "10191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10191", "title": "Edo", "text": "Edo\n\n, also romanized as Jedo, Yedo or Yeddo, is the former name of Tokyo. It was the seat of power for the Tokugawa shogunate, which ruled Japan from 1603 to 1868. During this period, it grew to become one of the largest cities in the world and home to an urban culture centered on the notion of a \"floating world\".\n\nFrom the establishment of the Tokugawa \"bakufu\" headquarters at Edo, the town became the \"de facto\" capital and center of political power, although Kyoto remained the formal capital of the country. Edo grew from what had been a small, little-known fishing village in 1457 into the largest metropolis in the world with an estimated population of 1,000,000 by 1721.\nEdo was repeatedly devastated by fires, with the Great fire of Meireki in 1657 being the most disastrous. An estimated 100,000 people died in the fire. During the Edo period, there were about 100 fires mostly begun by accident and often quickly escalating and spreading through neighborhoods of wooden \"machiya\" which were heated with charcoal fires. Between 1600 and 1945, Edo/Tokyo was leveled every 25–50 years or so by fire, earthquakes, or war.\nIn 1868, when the shogunate came to an end, the city was renamed \"Tokyo\" (\"eastern capital\"). The emperor moved his residence to Tokyo, making the city the formal capital of Japan:\nBULLET::::- \"Keiō 4\": On the 17th day of the 7th month (September 3, 1868), Edo was renamed Tokyo.\nBULLET::::- \"Keiō 4\": On the 27th day of the 8th month (October 12, 1868), Emperor Meiji was crowned in the \"Shishin-den\" in Kyoto.\nBULLET::::- \"Keiō 4\": On the eighth day of the ninth month (October 23, 1868), the nengō was formally changed from \"Keiō\" to \"Meiji\" and a general amnesty was granted.\nBULLET::::- \"Meiji 2\": On the 23rd day of the 10th month (1868), the emperor went to Tokyo and Edo castle became an imperial palace.\n\nIshimaru Sadatsuga was the magistrate of Edo in 1661.\n\nDuring the Edo period, Roju were senior officials that looked over the entire Shogunate government. Machi-bugyō (City Commissioners) were in charge of protecting the citizens and merchants of Edo, and Kanjō-bugyō (finance commissioners) were responsible for the financial matters of the Shogunate. \n\nThe city was laid out as a castle town around Edo Castle. The area surrounding the castle known as \"Yamanote\" consisted largely of \"daimyō\" mansions, whose families lived in Edo as part of the \"sankin kōtai\" system; the \"daimyō\" made journeys in alternating years to Edo, and used the mansions for their entourages. It was this extensive samurai class which defined the character of Edo, particularly in contrast to the two major cities of Kyoto and Osaka neither of which were ruled by a \"daimyō\" or had a significant samurai population. Kyoto's character was defined by the Imperial Court, the court nobles, its Buddhist temples and its history; Osaka was the country's commercial center, dominated by the \"chōnin\" or the merchant class.\n\nAreas further from the center were the domain of the \"chōnin\" (町人, \"townsfolk\"). The area known as Shitamachi (下町, \"lower town\" or \"downtown\"), northeast of the castle, was a center of urban culture. The ancient Buddhist temple of Sensō-ji still stands in Asakusa, marking the center of an area of traditional Shitamachi culture. Some shops in the streets near the temple have existed continuously in the same location since the Edo period.\n\nThe Sumida River, then called the Great River (大川, \"Ōkawa\"), ran along the eastern edge of the city. The shogunate's official rice-storage warehouses, other official buildings and some of the city's best-known restaurants were located here.\nThe \"Japan Bridge\" (日本橋, \"Nihon-bashi\") marked the center of the city's commercial center, an area also known as \"Kuramae\" (蔵前, \"in front of the storehouses\"). Fishermen, craftsmen and other producers and retailers operated here. Shippers managed ships known as \"tarubune\" to and from Osaka and other cities, bringing goods into the city or transferring them from sea routes to river barges or land routes such as the Tōkaidō. This area remains the center of Tokyo's financial and business district.\n\nThe northeastern corner of the city was considered a dangerous direction in traditional \"onmyōdō\" (cosmology), and is protected from evil by a number of temples including Sensō-ji and Kan'ei-ji. Beyond this were the districts of the \"eta\" or outcasts, who performed \"unclean\" work and were separated from the main parts of the city. A path and a canal, a short distance north of the \"eta\" districts, extended west from the riverbank leading along the northern edge of the city to the Yoshiwara pleasure districts. Previously located near Ningyocho, the districts were rebuilt in this more-remote location after the Great Fire of Meireki in 1657, as the city expanded.\n\n\"See Tokyo for photographs of the modern city.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Edo period\nBULLET::::- Edo society\nBULLET::::- Fires in Edo\nBULLET::::- 1703 Genroku earthquake\nBULLET::::- Edokko (native of Edo)\nBULLET::::- History of Tokyo\nBULLET::::- Iki (a Japanese aesthetic ideal)\nBULLET::::- Asakusa\n\nBULLET::::- Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2014). \"100 Famous Views of Edo\". Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN: B00HR3RHUY\nBULLET::::- Gordon, Andrew. (2003). \"A Modern History of Japan from Tokugawa Times to the Present.\" Oxford: Oxford University Press. / (cloth); /.\nBULLET::::- Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1956). \"Kyoto: the Old Capital, 794–1869.\" Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society.\nBULLET::::- Sansom, George. (1963). \"A History of Japan: 1615–1867\". Stanford: Stanford University Press. /.\nBULLET::::- Akira Naito (Author), Kazuo Hozumi. \"Edo, the City that Became Tokyo: An Illustrated History\". Kodansha International, Tokyo (2003).\nBULLET::::- Alternate spelling from 1911 \"Encyclopædia Britannica\" article.\n\nBULLET::::- A Trip to Old Edo\nBULLET::::- Fukagawa Edo Museum\n\nBULLET::::- Map of Bushū Toshima District, Edo from 1682\n"}
{"id": "10192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10192", "title": "Explosive", "text": "Explosive\n\nAn explosive (or explosive material) is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly, usually accompanied by the production of light, heat, sound, and pressure. An explosive charge is a measured quantity of explosive material, which may either be composed solely of one ingredient or be a mixture containing at least two substances.\n\nThe potential energy stored in an explosive material may, for example, be\nBULLET::::- chemical energy, such as nitroglycerin or grain dust\nBULLET::::- pressurized gas, such as a gas cylinder or aerosol can\nBULLET::::- nuclear energy, such as in the fissile isotopes uranium-235 and plutonium-239\n\nExplosive materials may be categorized by the speed at which they expand. Materials that detonate (the front of the chemical reaction moves faster through the material than the speed of sound) are said to be \"high explosives\" and materials that deflagrate are said to be \"low explosives\". Explosives may also be categorized by their sensitivity. Sensitive materials that can be initiated by a relatively small amount of heat or pressure are primary explosives and materials that are relatively insensitive are secondary or tertiary explosives.\n\nA wide variety of chemicals can explode; a smaller number are manufactured specifically for the purpose of being used as explosives. The remainder are too dangerous, sensitive, toxic, expensive, unstable, or prone to decomposition or degradation over short time spans.\n\nIn contrast, some materials are merely combustible or flammable if they burn without exploding.\n\nThe distinction, however, is not razor-sharp. Certain materials—dusts, powders, gases, or volatile organic liquids—may be simply combustible or flammable under ordinary conditions, but become explosive in specific situations or forms, such as dispersed airborne clouds, or confinement or sudden release.\n\nAt its root, the history of chemical explosives lies in the history of gunpowder. During the Tang Dynasty in the 9th century, Taoist Chinese alchemists were eagerly trying to find the elixir of immortality. In the process, they stumbled upon the explosive invention of gunpowder made from coal, saltpeter, and sulfur in 1044. Gunpowder was the first form of chemical explosives and by 1161, the Chinese were using explosives for the first time in warfare. The Chinese would incorporate explosives fired from bamboo or bronze tubes known as bamboo fire crackers. The Chinese also used inserted rats from inside the bamboo fire crackers to fire toward the enemy, creating great psychological ramifications—scaring enemy soldiers away and causing cavalry units to go wild.\n\nThough early thermal weapons, such as Greek fire, have existed since ancient times, the first widely used explosive in warfare and mining was black powder, invented in 9th century in China by Song Chinese alchemists. This material was sensitive to water, and it produced copious amounts of dark smoke. The first useful explosive stronger than black powder was nitroglycerin, developed in 1847. Since nitroglycerin is a liquid and highly unstable, it was replaced by nitrocellulose, trinitrotoluene (TNT) in 1863, smokeless powder, dynamite in 1867 and gelignite (the latter two being sophisticated stabilized preparations of nitroglycerin rather than chemical alternatives, both invented by Alfred Nobel). World War I saw the adoption of TNT in artillery shells. World War II saw an extensive use of new explosives (see List of explosives used during World War II). In turn, these have largely been replaced by more powerful explosives such as C-4 and PETN. However, C-4 and PETN react with metal and catch fire easily, yet unlike TNT, C-4 and PETN are waterproof and malleable.\n\nThe largest commercial application of explosives is mining. Whether the mine is on the surface or is buried underground, the detonation or deflagration of either a high or low explosive in a confined space can be used to liberate a fairly specific sub-volume of a brittle material in a much larger volume of the same or similar material. The mining industry tends to use nitrate-based explosives such as emulsions of fuel oil and ammonium nitrate solutions, mixtures of ammonium nitrate prills (fertilizer pellets) and fuel oil (ANFO) and gelatinous suspensions or slurries of ammonium nitrate and combustible fuels.\n\nIn Materials Science and Engineering, explosives are used in cladding (explosion welding). A thin plate of some material is placed atop a thick layer of a different material, both layers typically of metal. Atop the thin layer is placed an explosive. At one end of the layer of explosive, the explosion is initiated. The two metallic layers are forced together at high speed and with great force. The explosion spreads from the initiation site throughout the explosive. Ideally, this produces a metallurgical bond between the two layers.\nAs the length of time the shock wave spends at any point is small, we can see mixing of the two metals and their surface chemistries, through some fraction of the depth, and they tend to be mixed in some way. It is possible that some fraction of the surface material from either layer eventually gets ejected when the end of material is reached. Hence, the mass of the now \"welded\" bilayer, may be less than the sum of the masses of the two initial layers.\n\nThere are applications where a shock wave, and electrostatics, can result in high velocity projectiles.\n\nAn explosion is a type of spontaneous chemical reaction that, once initiated, is driven by both a large exothermic change (great release of heat) and a large positive entropy change (great quantities of gases are released) in going from reactants to products, thereby constituting a thermodynamically favorable process in addition to one that propagates very rapidly. Thus, explosives are substances that contain a large amount of energy stored in chemical bonds. The energetic stability of the gaseous products and hence their generation comes from the formation of strongly bonded species like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and (di)nitrogen, which contain strong double and triple bonds having bond strengths of nearly 1 MJ/mole. Consequently, most commercial explosives are organic compounds containing -NO, -ONO and -NHNO groups that, when detonated, release gases like the aforementioned (e.g., nitroglycerin, TNT, HMX, PETN, nitrocellulose).\n\nAn explosive is classified as a low or high explosive according to its rate of combustion: low explosives burn rapidly (or deflagrate), while high explosives detonate. While these definitions are distinct, the problem of precisely measuring rapid decomposition makes practical classification of explosives difficult.\n\nTraditional explosives mechanics is based on the shock-sensitive rapid oxidation of carbon and hydrogen to carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and water in the form of steam. Nitrates typically provide the required oxygen to burn the carbon and hydrogen fuel. High explosives tend to have the oxygen, carbon and hydrogen contained in one organic molecule, and less sensitive explosives like ANFO are combinations of fuel (carbon and hydrogen fuel oil) and ammonium nitrate. A sensitizer such as powdered aluminum may be added to an explosive to increase the energy of the detonation. Once detonated, the nitrogen portion of the explosive formulation emerges as nitrogen gas and toxic nitric oxides.\n\nThe chemical decomposition of an explosive may take years, days, hours, or a fraction of a second. The slower processes of decomposition take place in storage and are of interest only from a stability standpoint. Of more interest are the other two rapid forms besides decomposition: deflagration and detonation.\n\nIn deflagration, decomposition of the explosive material is propagated by a flame front which moves slowly through the explosive material at speeds less than the speed of sound within the substance (usually below 1000 m/s) in contrast to detonation, which occurs at speeds greater than the speed of sound. Deflagration is a characteristic of low explosive material.\n\nThis term is used to describe an explosive phenomenon whereby the decomposition is propagated by an explosive shock wave traversing the explosive material at speeds greater than the speed of sound within the substance. The shock front is capable of passing through the high explosive material at supersonic speeds, typically thousands of metres per second.\n\nIn addition to chemical explosives, there are a number of more exotic explosive materials, and exotic methods of causing explosions. Examples include nuclear explosives, and abruptly heating a substance to a plasma state with a high-intensity laser or electric arc.\n\nLaser- and arc-heating are used in laser detonators, exploding-bridgewire detonators, and exploding foil initiators, where a shock wave and then detonation in conventional chemical explosive material is created by laser- or electric-arc heating. Laser and electric energy are not currently used in practice to generate most of the required energy, but only to initiate reactions.\n\nTo determine the suitability of an explosive substance for a particular use, its physical properties must first be known. The usefulness of an explosive can only be appreciated when the properties and the factors affecting them are fully understood. Some of the more important characteristics are listed below:\n\nSensitivity refers to the ease with which an explosive can be ignited or detonated, i.e., the amount and intensity of shock, friction, or heat that is required. When the term sensitivity is used, care must be taken to clarify what kind of sensitivity is under discussion. The relative sensitivity of a given explosive to impact may vary greatly from its sensitivity to friction or heat. Some of the test methods used to determine sensitivity relate to:\nBULLET::::- Impact – Sensitivity is expressed in terms of the distance through which a standard weight must be dropped onto the material to cause it to explode.\nBULLET::::- Friction – Sensitivity is expressed in terms of the amount of pressure applied to the material in order to create enough friction to cause a reaction.\nBULLET::::- Heat – Sensitivity is expressed in terms of the temperature at which decomposition of the material occurs.\n\nSpecific explosives (usually but not always highly sensitive on one or more of the three above axes) may be idiosyncratically sensitive to such factors as pressure drop, acceleration, the presence of sharp edges or rough surfaces, incompatible materials, or even—in rare cases—nuclear or electromagnetic radiation. These factors present special hazards that may rule out any practical utility.\n\nSensitivity is an important consideration in selecting an explosive for a particular purpose. The explosive in an armor-piercing projectile must be relatively insensitive, or the shock of impact would cause it to detonate before it penetrated to the point desired. The explosive lenses around nuclear charges are also designed to be highly insensitive, to minimize the risk of accidental detonation.\n\nThe index of the capacity of an explosive to be initiated into detonation in a sustained manner. It is defined by the power of the detonator which is certain to prime the explosive to a sustained and continuous detonation. Reference is made to the Sellier-Bellot scale that consists of a series of 10 detonators, from n. 1 to n. 10, each of which corresponds to an increasing charge weight. In practice, most of the explosives on the market today are sensitive to an n. 8 detonator, where the charge corresponds to 2 grams of mercury fulminate.\n\nThe velocity with which the reaction process propagates in the mass of the explosive. Most commercial mining explosives have detonation velocities ranging from 1800 m/s to 8000 m/s. Today, velocity of detonation can be measured with accuracy. Together with density it is an important element influencing the yield of the energy transmitted for both atmospheric over-pressure and ground acceleration. By definition, a \"low explosive\", such as black powder, or smokeless gunpowder has a burn rate of 171–631 m/s. In contrast, a \"high explosive\", whether a primary, such as detonating cord, or a secondary, such as TNT or C-4 has a significantly higher burn rate.\n\nStability is the ability of an explosive to be stored without deterioration.\n\nThe following factors affect the stability of an explosive:\nBULLET::::- Chemical constitution. In the strictest technical sense, the word \"stability\" is a thermodynamic term referring to the energy of a substance relative to a reference state or to some other substance. However, in the context of explosives, stability commonly refers to ease of detonation, which is concerned with kinetics (i.e., rate of decomposition). It is perhaps best, then, to differentiate between the terms thermodynamically stable and kinetically stable by referring to the former as \"inert.\" Contrarily, a kinetically unstable substance is said to be \"labile.\" It is generally recognized that certain groups like nitro (–NO), nitrate (–ONO), and azide (–N), are intrinsically labile. Kinetically, there exists a low activation barrier to the decomposition reaction. Consequently, these compounds exhibit high sensitivity to flame or mechanical shock. The chemical bonding in these compounds is characterized as predominantly covalent and thus they are not thermodynamically stabilized by a high ionic-lattice energy. Furthermore, they generally have positive enthalpies of formation and there is little mechanistic hindrance to internal molecular rearrangement to yield the more thermodynamically stable (more strongly bonded) decomposition products. For example, in lead azide, Pb(N), the nitrogen atoms are already bonded to one another, so decomposition into Pb and N is relatively easy.\nBULLET::::- Temperature of storage. The rate of decomposition of explosives increases at higher temperatures. All standard military explosives may be considered to have a high degree of stability at temperatures from –10 to +35 °C, but each has a high temperature at which its rate of decomposition rapidly accelerates and stability is reduced. As a rule of thumb, most explosives become dangerously unstable at temperatures above 70 °C.\nBULLET::::- Exposure to sunlight. When exposed to the ultraviolet rays of sunlight, many explosive compounds containing nitrogen groups rapidly decompose, affecting their stability.\nBULLET::::- Electrical discharge. Electrostatic or spark sensitivity to initiation is common in a number of explosives. Static or other electrical discharge may be sufficient to cause a reaction, even detonation, under some circumstances. As a result, safe handling of explosives and pyrotechnics usually requires proper electrical grounding of the operator.\n\nThe term power or performance as applied to an explosive refers to its ability to do work. In practice it is defined as the explosive's ability to accomplish what is intended in the way of energy delivery (i.e., fragment projection, air blast, high-velocity jet, underwater shock and bubble energy, etc.). Explosive power or performance is evaluated by a tailored series of tests to assess the material for its intended use. Of the tests listed below, cylinder expansion and air-blast tests are common to most testing programs, and the others support specific applications.\nBULLET::::- Cylinder expansion test. A standard amount of explosive is loaded into a long hollow cylinder, usually of copper, and detonated at one end. Data is collected concerning the rate of radial expansion of the cylinder and the maximum cylinder wall velocity. This also establishes the Gurney energy or 2\"E\".\nBULLET::::- Cylinder fragmentation. A standard steel cylinder is loaded with explosive and detonated in a sawdust pit. The fragments are collected and the size distribution analyzed.\nBULLET::::- Detonation pressure (Chapman–Jouguet condition). Detonation pressure data derived from measurements of shock waves transmitted into water by the detonation of cylindrical explosive charges of a standard size.\nBULLET::::- Determination of critical diameter. This test establishes the minimum physical size a charge of a specific explosive must be to sustain its own detonation wave. The procedure involves the detonation of a series of charges of different diameters until difficulty in detonation wave propagation is observed.\nBULLET::::- Massive-diameter detonation velocity. Detonation velocity is dependent on loading density (c), charge diameter, and grain size. The hydrodynamic theory of detonation used in predicting explosive phenomena does not include the diameter of the charge, and therefore a detonation velocity, for a massive diameter. This procedure requires the firing of a series of charges of the same density and physical structure, but different diameters, and the extrapolation of the resulting detonation velocities to predict the detonation velocity of a charge of a massive diameter.\nBULLET::::- Pressure versus scaled distance. A charge of a specific size is detonated and its pressure effects measured at a standard distance. The values obtained are compared with those for TNT.\nBULLET::::- Impulse versus scaled distance. A charge of a specific size is detonated and its impulse (the area under the pressure-time curve) measured as a function of distance. The results are tabulated and expressed as TNT equivalents.\nBULLET::::- Relative bubble energy (RBE). A 5 to 50 kg charge is detonated in water and piezoelectric gauges measure peak pressure, time constant, impulse, and energy.\n\nIn addition to strength, explosives display a second characteristic, which is their shattering effect or brisance (from the French meaning to \"break\"), which is distinguished and separate from their total work capacity. This characteristic is of practical importance in determining the effectiveness of an explosion in fragmenting shells, bomb casings, grenades, and the like. The rapidity with which an explosive reaches its peak pressure (power) is a measure of its brisance. Brisance values are primarily employed in France and Russia.\n\nThe sand crush test is commonly employed to determine the relative brisance in comparison to TNT. No test is capable of directly comparing the explosive properties of two or more compounds; it is important to examine the data from several such tests (sand crush, trauzl, and so forth) in order to gauge relative brisance. True values for comparison require field experiments.\n\nDensity of loading refers to the mass of an explosive per unit volume. Several methods of loading are available, including pellet loading, cast loading, and press loading, the choice being determined by the characteristics of the explosive. Dependent upon the method employed, an average density of the loaded charge can be obtained that is within 80–99% of the theoretical maximum density of the explosive. High load density can reduce sensitivity by making the mass more resistant to internal friction. However, if density is increased to the extent that individual crystals are crushed, the explosive may become more sensitive. Increased load density also permits the use of more explosive, thereby increasing the power of the warhead. It is possible to compress an explosive beyond a point of sensitivity, known also as \"dead-pressing\", in which the material is no longer capable of being reliably initiated, if at all.\n\nVolatility is the readiness with which a substance vaporizes. Excessive volatility often results in the development of pressure within rounds of ammunition and separation of mixtures into their constituents. Volatility affects the chemical composition of the explosive such that a marked reduction in stability may occur, which results in an increase in the danger of handling.\n\nThe introduction of water into an explosive is highly undesirable since it reduces the sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation of the explosive. Hygroscopicity is a measure of a material's moisture-absorbing tendencies. Moisture affects explosives adversely by acting as an inert material that absorbs heat when vaporized, and by acting as a solvent medium that can cause undesired chemical reactions. Sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation are reduced by inert materials that reduce the continuity of the explosive mass. When the moisture content evaporates during detonation, cooling occurs, which reduces the temperature of reaction. Stability is also affected by the presence of moisture since moisture promotes decomposition of the explosive and, in addition, causes corrosion of the explosive's metal container.\n\nExplosives considerably differ from one another as to their behavior in the presence of water. Gelatin dynamites containing nitroglycerine have a degree of water resistance. Explosives based on ammonium nitrate have little or no water resistance as ammonium nitrate is highly soluble in water and is hygroscopic.\n\nMany explosives are toxic to some extent. Manufacturing inputs can also be organic compounds or hazardous materials that require special handing due to risks (such as carcinogens). The decomposition products, residual solids, or gases of some explosives can be toxic, whereas others are harmless, such as carbon dioxide and water.\n\nExamples of harmful by-products are:\nBULLET::::- Heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, and barium from primers (observed in high-volume firing ranges)\nBULLET::::- Nitric oxides from TNT\nBULLET::::- Perchlorates when used in large quantities\n\n\"Green explosives\" seek to reduce environment and health impacts. An example of such is the lead-free primary explosive copper(I) 5-nitrotetrazolate, an alternative to lead azide. One variety of a green explosive is CDP explosives, whose synthesis does not involve any toxic ingredients, consumes carbon dioxide while detonating and does not release any nitric oxides into the atmosphere when used.\n\nExplosive material may be incorporated in the explosive train of a device or system. An example is a pyrotechnic lead igniting a booster, which causes the main charge to detonate.\n\nThe most widely used explosives are condensed liquids or solids converted to gaseous products by explosive chemical reactions and the energy released by those reactions. The gaseous products of complete reaction are typically carbon dioxide, steam, and nitrogen. Gaseous volumes computed by the ideal gas law tend to be too large at high pressures characteristic of explosions. Ultimate volume expansion may be estimated at three orders of magnitude, or one liter per gram of explosive. Explosives with an oxygen deficit will generate soot or gases like carbon monoxide and hydrogen, which may react with surrounding materials such as atmospheric oxygen. Attempts to obtain more precise volume estimates must consider the possibility of such side reactions, condensation of steam, and aqueous solubility of gases like carbon dioxide.\n\nBy comparison, CDP detonation is based on the rapid reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon with the abundant release of energy. Rather than produce typical waste gases like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen and nitric oxides, CDP is different. Instead, the highly energetic reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon vaporizes and pressurizes excess dry ice at the wave front, which is the only gas released from the detonation. The velocity of detonation for CDP formulations can therefore be customized by adjusting the weight percentage of reducing agent and dry ice. CDP detonations produce a large amount of solid materials that can have great commercial value as an abrasive:\n\nExample – CDP Detonation Reaction with Magnesium: XCO + 2Mg → 2MgO + C + (X-1)CO\n\nThe products of detonation in this example are magnesium oxide, carbon in various phases including diamond, and vaporized excess carbon dioxide that was not consumed by the amount of magnesium in the explosive formulation.\n\nOxygen balance is an expression that is used to indicate the degree to which an explosive can be oxidized. If an explosive molecule contains just enough oxygen to convert all of its carbon to carbon dioxide, all of its hydrogen to water, and all of its metal to metal oxide with no excess, the molecule is said to have a zero oxygen balance. The molecule is said to have a positive oxygen balance if it contains more oxygen than is needed and a negative oxygen balance if it contains less oxygen than is needed. The sensitivity, strength, and brisance of an explosive are all somewhat dependent upon oxygen balance and tend to approach their maxima as oxygen balance approaches zero.\n\nOxygen balance applies to traditional explosives mechanics with the assumption that carbon is oxidized to carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide during detonation. In what seems like a paradox to an explosives expert, Cold Detonation Physics uses carbon in its most highly oxidized state as the source of oxygen in the form of carbon dioxide. Oxygen balance, therefore, either does not apply to a CDP formulation or must be calculated without including the carbon in the carbon dioxide.\n\nA chemical explosive may consist of either a chemically pure compound, such as nitroglycerin, or a mixture of a fuel and an oxidizer, such as black powder or grain dust and air.\n\nSome chemical compounds are unstable in that, when shocked, they react, possibly to the point of detonation. Each molecule of the compound dissociates into two or more new molecules (generally gases) with the release of energy.\nBULLET::::- Nitroglycerin: A highly unstable and sensitive liquid\nBULLET::::- Acetone peroxide: A very unstable white organic peroxide\nBULLET::::- TNT: Yellow insensitive crystals that can be melted and cast without detonation\nBULLET::::- Cellulose nitrate: A nitrated polymer which can be a high or low explosive depending on nitration level and conditions\nBULLET::::- RDX, PETN, HMX: Very powerful explosives which can be used pure or in plastic explosives\nBULLET::::- C-4 (or Composition C-4): An RDX plastic explosive plasticized to be adhesive and malleable\n\nThe above compositions may describe most of the explosive material, but a practical explosive will often include small percentages of other substances. For example, dynamite is a mixture of highly sensitive nitroglycerin with sawdust, powdered silica, or most commonly diatomaceous earth, which act as stabilizers. Plastics and polymers may be added to bind powders of explosive compounds; waxes may be incorporated to make them safer to handle; aluminium powder may be introduced to increase total energy and blast effects. Explosive compounds are also often \"alloyed\": HMX or RDX powders may be mixed (typically by melt-casting) with TNT to form Octol or Cyclotol.\n\nAn oxidizer is a pure substance (molecule) that in a chemical reaction can contribute some atoms of one or more oxidizing elements, in which the fuel component of the explosive burns. On the simplest level, the oxidizer may itself be an oxidizing element, such as gaseous or liquid oxygen.\nBULLET::::- Black powder: Potassium nitrate, charcoal and sulfur\nBULLET::::- Flash powder: Fine metal powder (usually aluminium or magnesium) and a strong oxidizer (e.g. potassium chlorate or perchlorate)\nBULLET::::- Ammonal: Ammonium nitrate and aluminium powder\nBULLET::::- Armstrong's mixture: Potassium chlorate and red phosphorus. This is a very sensitive mixture. It is a primary high explosive in which sulfur is substituted for some or all of the phosphorus to slightly decrease sensitivity.\nBULLET::::- Cold Detonation Physics: Combinations of carbon dioxide in the form of dry ice (an untraditional oxygen source), and powdered reducing agents (fuel) like magnesium and aluminum.\nBULLET::::- Sprengel explosives: A very general class incorporating any strong oxidizer and highly reactive fuel, although in practice the name was most commonly applied to mixtures of chlorates and nitroaromatics.\nBULLET::::- ANFO: Ammonium nitrate and fuel oil\nBULLET::::- Cheddites: Chlorates or perchlorates and oil\nBULLET::::- Oxyliquits: Mixtures of organic materials and liquid oxygen\nBULLET::::- Panclastites: Mixtures of organic materials and dinitrogen tetroxide\n\nThe availability and cost of explosives are determined by the availability of the raw materials and the cost, complexity, and safety of the manufacturing operations.\n\nA primary explosive is an explosive that is extremely sensitive to stimuli such as impact, friction, heat, static electricity, or electromagnetic radiation. Some primary explosives are also known as contact explosives. A relatively small amount of energy is required for initiation. As a very general rule, primary explosives are considered to be those compounds that are more sensitive than PETN. As a practical measure, primary explosives are sufficiently sensitive that they can be reliably initiated with a blow from a hammer; however, PETN can also usually be initiated in this manner, so this is only a very broad guideline. Additionally, several compounds, such as nitrogen triiodide, are so sensitive that they cannot even be handled without detonating. Nitrogen triiodide is so sensitive that it can be reliably detonated by exposure to alpha radiation; it is the only explosive for which this is true. \n\nPrimary explosives are often used in detonators or to trigger larger charges of less sensitive secondary explosives. Primary explosives are commonly used in blasting caps and percussion caps to translate a physical shock signal. In other situations, different signals such as electrical or physical shock, or, in the case of laser detonation systems, light, are used to initiate an action, i.e., an explosion. A small quantity, usually milligrams, is sufficient to initiate a larger charge of explosive that is usually safer to handle.\n\nExamples of primary high explosives are:\n\nBULLET::::- Acetone peroxide\nBULLET::::- Alkali metal ozonides\nBULLET::::- Ammonium permanganate\nBULLET::::- Ammonium chlorate\nBULLET::::- Azidotetrazolates\nBULLET::::- Azoclathrates\nBULLET::::- Benzoyl peroxide\nBULLET::::- Benzvalene\nBULLET::::- 3,5-Bis(trinitromethyl)tetrazole\nBULLET::::- Chlorine oxides\nBULLET::::- Copper(I) acetylide\nBULLET::::- Copper(II) azide\nBULLET::::- Cumene hydroperoxide\nBULLET::::- CXP CycloProp(-2-)enyl Nitrate (or CPN)\nBULLET::::- Cyanogen azide\nBULLET::::- Cyanuric triazide\nBULLET::::- Diacetyl peroxide\nBULLET::::- 1-Diazidocarbamoyl-5-azidotetrazole\nBULLET::::- Diazodinitrophenol\nBULLET::::- Diazomethane\nBULLET::::- Diethyl ether peroxide\nBULLET::::- 4-Dimethylaminophenylpentazole\nBULLET::::- Disulfur dinitride\nBULLET::::- Ethyl azide\nBULLET::::- Explosive antimony\nBULLET::::- Fluorine perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Fulminic acid\nBULLET::::- Halogen azides:\nBULLET::::- Fluorine azide\nBULLET::::- Chlorine azide\nBULLET::::- Bromine azide\nBULLET::::- Hexamethylene triperoxide diamine\nBULLET::::- Hydrazoic acid\nBULLET::::- Hypofluorous acid\nBULLET::::- Lead azide\nBULLET::::- Lead styphnate\nBULLET::::- Lead picrate\nBULLET::::- Manganese heptoxide\nBULLET::::- Mercury(II) fulminate\nBULLET::::- Mercury nitride\nBULLET::::- Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide\nBULLET::::- Nickel hydrazine nitrate\nBULLET::::- Nickel hydrazine perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Nitrogen trihalides:\nBULLET::::- Nitrogen trichloride\nBULLET::::- Nitrogen tribromide\nBULLET::::- Nitrogen triiodide\nBULLET::::- Nitroglycerin\nBULLET::::- Nitronium perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Nitrosyl perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Nitrotetrazolate-\"N\"-oxides\nBULLET::::- Octaazacubane\nBULLET::::- Pentazenium hexafluoroarsenate\nBULLET::::- Peroxy acids\nBULLET::::- Peroxymonosulfuric acid\nBULLET::::- Selenium tetraazide\nBULLET::::- Silicon tetraazide\nBULLET::::- Silver azide\nBULLET::::- Silver acetylide\nBULLET::::- Silver fulminate\nBULLET::::- Silver nitride\nBULLET::::- Tellurium tetraazide\nBULLET::::- \"tert\"-Butyl hydroperoxide\nBULLET::::- Tetraamine copper complexes\nBULLET::::- Tetraazidomethane\nBULLET::::- Tetrazene explosive\nBULLET::::- Tetranitratoxycarbon\nBULLET::::- Tetrazoles\nBULLET::::- Titanium tetraazide\nBULLET::::- Triazidomethane\nBULLET::::- Oxides of xenon:\nBULLET::::- Xenon dioxide\nBULLET::::- Xenon oxytetrafluoride\nBULLET::::- Xenon tetroxide\nBULLET::::- Xenon trioxide\nA secondary explosive is less sensitive than a primary explosive and requires substantially more energy to be initiated. Because they are less sensitive, they are usable in a wider variety of applications and are safer to handle and store. Secondary explosives are used in larger quantities in an explosive train and are usually initiated by a smaller quantity of a primary explosive.\n\nExamples of secondary explosives include TNT and RDX.\n\nTertiary explosives, also called blasting agents, are so insensitive to shock that they cannot be reliably detonated by practical quantities of primary explosive, and instead require an intermediate explosive booster of secondary explosive. These are often used for safety and the typically lower costs of material and handling. The largest consumers are large-scale mining and construction operations.\n\nMost tertiaries include a fuel and an oxidizer. ANFO can be a tertiary explosive if its reaction rate is slow.\n\nLow explosives are compounds where the rate of decomposition proceeds through the material at less than the speed of sound. The decomposition is propagated by a flame front (deflagration) which travels much more slowly through the explosive material than a shock wave of a high explosive. Under normal conditions, low explosives undergo deflagration at rates that vary from a few centimetres per second to approximately 400 metres per second. It is possible for them to deflagrate very quickly, producing an effect similar to a detonation. This can happen under higher pressure or temperature, which usually occurs when ignited in a confined space.\n\nA low explosive is usually a mixture of a combustible substance and an oxidant that decomposes rapidly (deflagration); however, they burn more slowly than a high explosive, which has an extremely fast burn rate.\n\nLow explosives are normally employed as propellants. Included in this group are petroleum products such as propane and gasoline, gunpowder (including smokeless powder), and light pyrotechnics, such as flares and fireworks, but can replace high explosives in certain applications, see gas pressure blasting.\n\nHigh explosives (HE) are explosive materials that detonate, meaning that the explosive shock front passes through the material at a supersonic speed. High explosives detonate with explosive velocity ranging from 3 to 9 km/s. For instance, TNT has a detonation (burn) rate of approximately 5.8 km/s (19,000 feet per second), detonating cord of 6.7 km/s (22,000 feet per second), and C-4 about 8.5 km/s (29,000 feet per second). They are normally employed in mining, demolition, and military applications. They can be divided into two explosives classes differentiated by sensitivity: primary explosive and secondary explosive. The term \"high explosive\" is in contrast with the term \"low explosive\", which explodes (deflagrates) at a lower rate.\n\nCountless high-explosive compounds are chemically possible, but commercially and militarily important ones have included NG, TNT, TNX, RDX, HMX, PETN, TATB, and HNS.\n\nPriming compositions are primary explosives mixed with other compositions to control (lessen) the sensitivity of the mixture to the desired property.\n\nFor example, primary explosives are so sensitive that they need to be stored and shipped in a wet state to prevent accidental initiation.\n\nExplosives are often characterized by the physical form that the explosives are produced or used in. These use forms are commonly categorized as:\nBULLET::::- Pressings\nBULLET::::- Castings\nBULLET::::- Plastic or polymer bonded\nBULLET::::- Plastic explosives, a.k.a. putties\nBULLET::::- Rubberized\nBULLET::::- Extrudable\nBULLET::::- Binary\nBULLET::::- Blasting agents\nBULLET::::- Slurries and gels\nBULLET::::- Dynamites\n\nShipping labels and tags may include both United Nations and national markings.\n\nUnited Nations markings include numbered Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) codes and alphabetic Compatibility Group codes. Though the two are related, they are separate and distinct. Any Compatibility Group designator can be assigned to any Hazard Class and Division. An example of this hybrid marking would be a consumer firework, which is labeled as 1.4G or 1.4S.\n\nExamples of national markings would include United States Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) codes.\n\nThe Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) is a numeric designator within a hazard class indicating the character, predominance of associated hazards, and potential for causing personnel casualties and property damage. It is an internationally accepted system that communicates using the minimum amount of markings the primary hazard associated with a substance.\n\nListed below are the Divisions for Class 1 (Explosives):\nBULLET::::- 1.1 Mass Detonation Hazard. With HC/D 1.1, it is expected that if one item in a container or pallet inadvertently detonates, the explosion will sympathetically detonate the surrounding items. The explosion could propagate to all or the majority of the items stored together, causing a mass detonation. There will also be fragments from the item's casing and/or structures in the blast area.\nBULLET::::- 1.2 Non-mass explosion, fragment-producing. HC/D 1.2 is further divided into three subdivisions, HC/D 1.2.1, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3, to account for the magnitude of the effects of an explosion.\nBULLET::::- 1.3 Mass fire, minor blast or fragment hazard. Propellants and many pyrotechnic items fall into this category. If one item in a package or stack initiates, it will usually propagate to the other items, creating a mass fire.\nBULLET::::- 1.4 Moderate fire, no blast or fragment. HC/D 1.4 items are listed in the table as explosives with no significant hazard. Most small arms ammunition (including loaded weapons) and some pyrotechnic items fall into this category. If the energetic material in these items inadvertently initiates, most of the energy and fragments will be contained within the storage structure or the item containers themselves.\nBULLET::::- 1.5 mass detonation hazard, very insensitive.\nBULLET::::- 1.6 detonation hazard without mass detonation hazard, extremely insensitive.\n\nTo see an entire UNO Table, browse Paragraphs 3-8 and 3-9 of NAVSEA OP 5, Vol. 1, Chapter 3.\n\nCompatibility Group codes are used to indicate storage compatibility for HC/D Class 1 (explosive) materials. Letters are used to designate 13 compatibility groups as follows.\nBULLET::::- A: Primary explosive substance (1.1A).\nBULLET::::- B: An article containing a primary explosive substance and not containing two or more effective protective features. Some articles, such as detonator assemblies for blasting and primers, cap-type, are included. (1.1B, 1.2B, 1.4B).\nBULLET::::- C: Propellant explosive substance or other deflagrating explosive substance or article containing such explosive substance (1.1C, 1.2C, 1.3C, 1.4C). These are bulk propellants, propelling charges, and devices containing propellants with or without means of ignition. Examples include single-based propellant, double-based propellant, triple-based propellant, and composite propellants, solid propellant rocket motors and ammunition with inert projectiles.\nBULLET::::- D: Secondary detonating explosive substance or black powder or article containing a secondary detonating explosive substance, in each case without means of initiation and without a propelling charge, or article containing a primary explosive substance and containing two or more effective protective features. (1.1D, 1.2D, 1.4D, 1.5D).\nBULLET::::- E: Article containing a secondary detonating explosive substance without means of initiation, with a propelling charge (other than one containing flammable liquid, gel or hypergolic liquid) (1.1E, 1.2E, 1.4E).\nBULLET::::- F containing a secondary detonating explosive substance with its means of initiation, with a propelling charge (other than one containing flammable liquid, gel or hypergolic liquid) or without a propelling charge (1.1F, 1.2F, 1.3F, 1.4F).\nBULLET::::- G: Pyrotechnic substance or article containing a pyrotechnic substance, or article containing both an explosive substance and an illuminating, incendiary, tear-producing or smoke-producing substance (other than a water-activated article or one containing white phosphorus, phosphide or flammable liquid or gel or hypergolic liquid) (1.1G, 1.2G, 1.3G, 1.4G). Examples include Flares, signals, incendiary or illuminating ammunition and other smoke and tear producing devices.\nBULLET::::- H: Article containing both an explosive substance and white phosphorus (1.2H, 1.3H). These articles will spontaneously combust when exposed to the atmosphere.\nBULLET::::- J: Article containing both an explosive substance and flammable liquid or gel (1.1J, 1.2J, 1.3J). This excludes liquids or gels which are spontaneously flammable when exposed to water or the atmosphere, which belong in group H. Examples include liquid or gel filled incendiary ammunition, fuel-air explosive (FAE) devices, and flammable liquid fueled missiles.\nBULLET::::- K: Article containing both an explosive substance and a toxic chemical agent (1.2K, 1.3K)\nBULLET::::- L Explosive substance or article containing an explosive substance and presenting a special risk (e.g., due to water-activation or presence of hypergolic liquids, phosphides, or pyrophoric substances) needing isolation of each type (1.1L, 1.2L, 1.3L). Damaged or suspect ammunition of any group belongs in this group.\nBULLET::::- N: Articles containing only extremely insensitive detonating substances (1.6N).\nBULLET::::- S: Substance or article so packed or designed that any hazardous effects arising from accidental functioning are limited to the extent that they do not significantly hinder or prohibit fire fighting or other emergency response efforts in the immediate vicinity of the package (1.4S).\n\nThe legality of possessing or using explosives varies by jurisdiction. Various countries around the world have enacted explosives law and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, possess explosives or ingredients.\n\nIn the Netherlands, the civil and commercial use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet explosieven voor civiel gebruik\" (explosives for civil use Act), in accordance with EU directive nr. 93/15/EEG (Dutch). The illegal use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet Wapens en Munitie\" (Weapons and Munition Act) (Dutch).\n\nThe new Explosives Regulations 2014 (ER 2014) came into force on 1 October 2014 and defines \"explosive\" as:\n\n\"a)any explosive article or explosive substance which would —\n\n(i)if packaged for transport, be classified in accordance with the United Nations Recommendations as falling within Class 1; or\n\n(ii)be classified in accordance with the United Nations Recommendations as —\n\n(aa)being unduly sensitive or so reactive as to be subject to spontaneous reaction and accordingly too dangerous to transport, and\n\n(bb)falling within Class 1; or\n\n(b)a desensitised explosive,\n\nbut it does not include an explosive substance produced as part of a manufacturing process which thereafter reprocesses it in order to produce a substance or preparation which is not an explosive substance\"\n\n\"Anyone who wishes to acquire and or keep relevant explosives needs to contact their local police explosives liaison officer.  All explosives are relevant explosives apart from those listed under Schedule 2 of Explosives Regulations 2014.\"\n\nDuring World War I, numerous laws were created to regulate war related industries and increase security within the United States. In 1917, the 65th United States Congress created many laws, including the \"Espionage Act of 1917\" and \"Explosives Act of 1917\".\n\nThe \"Explosives Act of 1917\" (session 1, chapter 83, ) was signed on 6 October 1917 and went into effect on 16 November 1917. The legal summary is \"An Act to prohibit the manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession in time of war of explosives, providing regulations for the safe manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession of the same, and for other purposes\". This was the first federal regulation of licensing explosives purchases. The act was deactivated after World War I ended.\n\nAfter the United States entered World War II, the Explosives Act of 1917 was reactivated. In 1947, the act was deactivated by President Truman.\n\nThe \"Organized Crime Control Act of 1970\" () transferred many explosives regulations to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) of the Department of Treasury. The bill became effective in 1971.\n\nCurrently, regulations are governed by Title 18 of the United States Code and Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations:\nBULLET::::- \"Importation, Manufacture, Distribution and Storage of Explosive Materials\" (18 U.S.C. Chapter 40).\nBULLET::::- \"Commerce in Explosives\" (27 C.F.R. Chapter II, Part 555).\n\nBULLET::::- Alabama Code Title 8 Chapter 17 Article 9\nBULLET::::- Alaska State Code Chapter 11.61.240 & 11.61.250\nBULLET::::- Arizona State Code Title 13 Chapter 31 Articles 01 through 19\nBULLET::::- Arkansas State Code Title 5 Chapter 73 Article 108\nBULLET::::- California Penal Code Title 2 Division 5\nBULLET::::- Colorado (Colorado statutes are copyrighted and require purchase before reading.)\nBULLET::::- Connecticut Statutes Volume 9 Title 29 Chapters 343-355\nBULLET::::- Delaware Code Title 16 Part VI Chapters 70 & 71\nBULLET::::- Florida Statutes Title XXXIII Chapter 552\nBULLET::::- Georgia Code Title 16 Chapter 7 Articles 64-97\nBULLET::::- Hawaii Administrative Rules Title 12 Subtitle 8 Part 1 Chapter 58 AND Hawaii Revised Statutes\nBULLET::::- Idaho\nBULLET::::- Illinois Explosives Act 225 ILCS 210\nBULLET::::- Indiana\nBULLET::::- Iowa\nBULLET::::- Kansas\nBULLET::::- Kentucky\nBULLET::::- Louisiana\nBULLET::::- Maine\nBULLET::::- Maryland\nBULLET::::- Massachusetts\nBULLET::::- Michigan Penal Code Chapter XXXIII Section 750.200 – 750.212a\nBULLET::::- Minnesota\nBULLET::::- Mississippi Code Title 45 Chapter 13 Article 3 Section 101–109\nBULLET::::- Montana\nBULLET::::- Nebraska\nBULLET::::- Nevada\nBULLET::::- New Hampshire\nBULLET::::- New Jersey\nBULLET::::- New Mexico\nBULLET::::- New York: Health and safety regulations restrict the quantity of black powder a person may store and transport.\nBULLET::::- North Carolina\nBULLET::::- North Dakota\nBULLET::::- Ohio\nBULLET::::- Oklahoma\nBULLET::::- Oregon\nBULLET::::- Pennsylvania\nBULLET::::- Rhode Island\nBULLET::::- South Carolina\nBULLET::::- South Dakota\nBULLET::::- Tennessee\nBULLET::::- Texas\nBULLET::::- Utah\nBULLET::::- Vermont\nBULLET::::- Virginia\nBULLET::::- Washington\nBULLET::::- West Virginia\nBULLET::::- Wisconsin Chapter 941 Subchapter 4-31\nBULLET::::- Wyoming\n\nBULLET::::- CUA, DCA, AGA\n\nBULLET::::- HF, AUF, HGF, PTF, KF, AGF\n\nBULLET::::- MonoNitro: NGA, NE, NM, NP, NS, NU\nBULLET::::- DiNitro: DDNP, DNB, DNEU, DNN, DNP, DNPA, DNPH, DNR, DNPD, DNPA, DNC, DPS, DPA, EDNP, KDNBF, BEAF\nBULLET::::- TriNitro: RDX, DATB, TATB, PBS, PBP, TNAL, TNAS, TNB, TNBA, TNC, MC, TNEF, TNOC, TNOF, TNP, TNT, TNN, TNPG, TNR, BTNEN, BTNEC, SA, API, TNS\nBULLET::::- TetraNitro: Tetryl\nBULLET::::- OctaNitro: ONC\n\nBULLET::::- Mononitrates: AN, BAN, CAN, MAN, NAN, UN\nBULLET::::- Dinitrates: DEGDN, EDDN, EDNA, EGDN, HDN, TEGDN, TAOM\nBULLET::::- Trinitrates: BTTN, TMOTN, NG\nBULLET::::- Tetranitrates: ETEN, PETN, TNOC\nBULLET::::- Pentanitrates: XPN\nBULLET::::- Hexanitrates: CHN, MHN\n\nBULLET::::- Tertiary Amines: NTBR, NTCL, NTI, NTS, SEN, AGN\nBULLET::::- Diamines: DSDN\nBULLET::::- Azides: CNA, CYA, CLA, CUA, EA, FA, HA, PBA, AGA, NAA, RBA, SEA, SIA, TEA, TAM, TIA\nBULLET::::- Tetramines: TZE, TZO, AA\nBULLET::::- Pentamines: PZ\nBULLET::::- Octamines: OAC, ATA\n\nBULLET::::- AP (TATP), CHP, DAP, DBP, DEP, HMTD, MEKP, TBHP\n\nBULLET::::- XOTF, XDIO, XTRO, XTEO\n\nBULLET::::- Alkali metal Ozonides\nBULLET::::- Ammonium chlorate\nBULLET::::- Ammonium perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Ammonium permaganate\nBULLET::::- Azidotetrazolates\nBULLET::::- Azoclathrates\nBULLET::::- Benzvalene\nBULLET::::- Chlorine oxides\nBULLET::::- DMAPP\nBULLET::::- Fluorine perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Fulminating gold\nBULLET::::- Fulminating silver (several substances)\nBULLET::::- Hexafluoroarsenate\nBULLET::::- Hypofluorous acid\nBULLET::::- Manganese heptoxide\nBULLET::::- Mercury nitride\nBULLET::::- Nitronium perchlorate\nBULLET::::- Nitrotetrazolate-N-Oxides\nBULLET::::- Peroxy acids\nBULLET::::- Peroxymonosulfuric acid\nBULLET::::- Tetramine copper complexes\nBULLET::::- Tetrasulfur tetranitride\n\nBULLET::::- Aluminum Orphorite, Amatex, Amatol, Armstrong's mixture, ANFO, ANNMAL\nBULLET::::- Baranol, Baratol, Blackpowder, Blasting gelatin, Butyl tetryl\nBULLET::::- Composition A, Composition B, Composition C, Composition 1, Composition 2, Composition 3, Composition 4, Composition 5, Cyclotol\nBULLET::::- CDP Formulations\nBULLET::::- Detonating cord, Dynamite\nBULLET::::- Ednatol\nBULLET::::- Flash powder\nBULLET::::- Hydromite 600\nBULLET::::- Schneiderite, Semtex\nBULLET::::- Tannerit simply, Tannerite, Tovex, Tritonal\n\nBULLET::::- Alkaline earth metals\nBULLET::::- Explosive antimony\nBULLET::::- Plutonium-239\nBULLET::::- Uranium-235\n\nBULLET::::- Binary explosive\nBULLET::::- Blast injury\nBULLET::::- Detection dog\nBULLET::::- Detonation velocity\nBULLET::::- Fireworks\nBULLET::::- Flame speed\nBULLET::::- Gunpowder\nBULLET::::- Improvised explosive device\nBULLET::::- Insensitive munition\nBULLET::::- Largest artificial non-nuclear explosions\nBULLET::::- Nuclear weapon\nBULLET::::- Orica; largest supplier of commercial explosives\nBULLET::::- Pyrotechnics\nBULLET::::- Relative effectiveness factor\nBULLET::::- U.S. Government\nBULLET::::- \"Explosives and Demolitions\" FM 5-250; U.S. Department of the Army; 274 pp.; 1992.\nBULLET::::- \"Military Explosives\" TM 9-1300-214; U.S. Department of the Army; 355 pp.; 1984.\nBULLET::::- \"Explosives and Blasting Procedures Manual\"; U.S. Department of Interior; 128 pp.; 1982.\nBULLET::::- \"Safety and Performance Tests for Qualification of Explosives\"; Commander, Naval Ordnance Systems Command; NAVORD OD 44811. Washington, DC: GPO, 1972.\nBULLET::::- \"Weapons Systems Fundamentals\"; Commander, Naval Ordnance Systems Command. NAVORD OP 3000, vol. 2, 1st rev. Washington, DC: GPO, 1971.\nBULLET::::- \"Elements of Armament Engineering – Part One\"; Army Research Office. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Army Materiel Command, 1964.\nBULLET::::- Hazardous Materials Transportation Plaecards; USDOT.\n\nBULLET::::- Institute of Makers of Explosives\nBULLET::::- \"Safety in the Handling and Use of Explosives\" SLP 17; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 66 pp.; 1932 / 1935 / 1940.\nBULLET::::- \"History of the Explosives Industry in America\"; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 37 pp.; 1927.\nBULLET::::- \"Clearing Land of Stumps\"; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 92 pp.; 1917.\nBULLET::::- \"The Use of Explosives for Agricultural and Other Purposes\"; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 190 pp.; 1917.\nBULLET::::- \"The Use of Explosives in making Ditches\"; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 80 pp.; 1917.\n\nBULLET::::- Other Historical\nBULLET::::- \"Farmers' Hand Book of Explosives\"; duPont; 113 pp.; 1920.\nBULLET::::- \"A Short Account of Explosives\"; Arthur Marshall; 119 pp.; 1917.\nBULLET::::- \"Historical Papers on Modern Explosives\"; George MacDonald; 216 pp.; 1912.\nBULLET::::- \"The Rise and Progress of the British Explosives Industry\"; International Congress of Pure and Applied Chemistry; 450 pp.; 1909.\nBULLET::::- \"Explosives and their Power\"; M. Berthelot; 592 pp.; 1892.\n\nBULLET::::- Class 1 Hazmat Placards\nBULLET::::- Blaster Exchange – Explosives Industry Portal\nBULLET::::- Explosives info\nBULLET::::- Journal of Energetic Materials\nBULLET::::- Military Explosives\nBULLET::::- The Explosives and Weapons Forum\nBULLET::::- Why high nitrogen density in explosives?\nBULLET::::- YouTube video demonstrating blast wave in slow motion\n"}
{"id": "10193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10193", "title": "Enter the Dragon", "text": "Enter the Dragon\n\nEnter the Dragon is a 1973 martial arts action film produced by and starring Bruce Lee. The film, which co-stars John Saxon and Jim Kelly, was directed by Robert Clouse. It would be Bruce Lee's final completed film appearance before his death on 20 July 1973 at age 32. A joint American and Hong Kong production, it premiered in Los Angeles on 19 August 1973, one month after Lee's death and went on to gross worldwide, equivalent to adjusted for inflation.\n\nEnter the Dragon is considered to be one of the greatest martial arts films of all time. In 2004, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Among the first films to combine martial arts action with the emerging Blaxploitation genre, its success led to a series of similar productions combining both genres.\nIts themes have also generated scholarly debate about how they reflect the changes taking place within post-colonial Asian societies following the end of World War II.\n\nLee, a highly proficient Shaolin martial artist and instructor from Hong Kong, is approached by Braithwaite, a British intelligence agent investigating the suspected crime lord Han. Lee is persuaded to attend a high-profile martial arts competition on Han's private island in order to gather evidence that will prove Han's involvement in drug trafficking and prostitution. Shortly before his departure, Lee also learns that his sister's killer, O'Hara, is working as Han's bodyguard on the island. Also fighting in the competition are Roper, an indebted gambling addict, and fellow Vietnam war veteran Williams.\n\nAt the end of the first day, Han gives strict orders to the competitors not to leave their rooms. Lee makes contact with undercover operative Mei Ling and sneaks into Han's compound, looking for evidence. He is discovered by several guards but manages to escape. The next morning, Han orders his giant guard Bolo to kill the guards in public for failing their duties. After the execution, Lee faces O'Hara in the competition and ends up killing him. With the day's competition over, Han confronts Williams, who had also left his room the previous night to exercise. Han believes Williams to be the intruder and beats him to death when he refuses to cooperate. Han then reveals his drug operation to Roper, hoping that he will join his organization. He also implicitly threatens to imprison Roper, along with all the other martial artists who joined Han's tournaments in the past, if Roper refuses. Despite being initially intrigued, Roper refuses after learning of Williams' fate.\n\nLee sneaks out again that night and manages to send a message to Braithwaite, but he is captured after a prolonged battle with the guards. The next morning, Han arranges for Roper to fight Lee, but Roper refuses. As a punishment, Roper has to fight Bolo instead, whom he manages to overpower and beat after a grueling encounter. Enraged by the unexpected failure, Han commands his remaining men to kill Lee and Roper. Facing insurmountable odds, they are soon aided by the island's prisoners, who had been freed by Mei Ling. Han escapes and is pursued by Lee, who finally corners him in his museum. After a brutal fight, Han runs away into a hidden mirror room. The mirrors give Han an advantage, but Lee breaks all the room's mirrors to reveal Han's location, and eventually kills him. Lee returns outside to the main battle, which is now over. A bruised and bloodied Roper sits victorious while the military finally arrive to take control of the island.\n\nBULLET::::- Bruce Lee as Lee\nBULLET::::- John Saxon as Roper\nBULLET::::- Jim Kelly as Williams\nBULLET::::- Ahna Capri as Tania\nBULLET::::- Shih Kien as Han (voice dubbed by Keye Luke)\nBULLET::::- Robert Wall as O'Hara (as Bob Wall)\nBULLET::::- Angela Mao as Su Lin, Lee's sister (as Angela Mao Ying)\nBULLET::::- Betty Chung as Mei Ling\nBULLET::::- Geoffrey Weeks as Braithwaite\nBULLET::::- Bolo Yeung as Bolo (as Yang Sze)\nBULLET::::- Peter Archer as Parsons\nBULLET::::- Ho Lee Yan as Old Man\nBULLET::::- Marlene Clark as Secretary\nBULLET::::- Allan Kent as Golfer\nBULLET::::- William Keller as L.A. Cop\nBULLET::::- Mickey Caruso as L.A. Cop\nBULLET::::- Pat E. Johnson as Hood\nBULLET::::- Darnell Garcia as Hood\nBULLET::::- Mike Bissell as Hood\nBULLET::::- Jackie Chan as Han's henchman\nBULLET::::- Sammo Hung as Shaolin fighter\nBULLET::::- Roy Chiao as Shaolin Abbott\nBULLET::::- Paul Heller as Radio Operator\nBULLET::::- Lam Ching Ying\nBULLET::::- Tony Liu as Tournament fighter\nBULLET::::- Alan Chui Chung-San as Tournament fighter\nBULLET::::- Yuen Biao as Tournament fighter\nBULLET::::- Antone Pagan as Young Shaolin Monk\nBULLET::::- Yuen Wah as Tournament fighter\nBULLET::::- Hidy Ochiai\nBULLET::::- Wei Tung as Lao\nBULLET::::- Tadashi Yamashita\nBULLET::::- Mars as Guard\nBULLET::::- Mang Hoi as Ship's mate\nDue to the success with his earlier films, Warner Bros began helping Bruce Lee with the film in 1972. They brought in producers Fred Weintraub and Paul Heller.\n\nThe screenplay title was originally named \"Blood and Steel\". The story features Asian, White and Black heroic protagonists because the producers wanted a film that would appeal to the widest possible international audiences.\nThe scene in which Lee states that his style is \"Fighting Without Fighting\" is based upon a famous anecdote involving the 16th century samurai Tsukahara Bokuden.\n\nJohn Saxon is a black belt in Judo and Shotokan Karate, who studied under grandmaster Hidetaka Nishiyama for three years. In negotiations, his agent told the film's producers that if they wanted him they would have to change the story so that the character of Williams would be killed, not Roper. They agreed and the script was changed.\n\nRockne Tarkington was originally cast in the role of Williams. However, he unexpectedly dropped out days before the production was about to begin in Hong Kong. Producer Fred Weintraub knew that karate world champion, Jim Kelly had a training dojo in Crenshaw, Los Angeles so he hastily arranged a meeting. Weintraub was immediately impressed, and Kelly was cast in the film. The success of Kelly's appearance launched his career as a star: after \"Enter the Dragon\", he signed a three-film deal with Warner Bros and went on to make several martial arts-themed blaxploitation films in the 1970s.\n\nJackie Chan appears as a guard during the underground lair battle scene and gets his neck snapped by Lee. He also performed several stunts for the film, including the scene where Lee's character quickly climbs a rooftop at night. However, Yuen Wah was Lee's main stunt double for the film.\n\nSammo Hung appears in a brief fight scene against Lee at the start of the film.\n\nAn urban legend surrounding the making of \"Enter The Dragon\" claims that actor Bob Wall did not like Bruce Lee and that their fight scenes were not choreographed. However, Wall has denied this stating he and Lee were actually good friends.\n\nThe film was shot on location in Hong Kong. All scenes were filmed without sound: dialogue and sound effects were added or dubbed in during post-production. Bruce Lee, after he had been goaded or challenged, fought several real fights with the film's extras and some set intruders during filming. The scenes of Han's Island were filmed at a residence known as Palm Villa near the coastal town of Stanley.\n\nArgentinian musician Lalo Schifrin composed the film's musical score. While Schifrin was widely known at the time for his jazz scores, he also incorporated funk and traditional film score elements into the film's soundtrack. He composed the score by sampling sounds from China, Korea, and Japan. The soundtrack has sold over 500,000 copies, earning a gold record.\n\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was heavily advertised in the United States before its release. The budget for advertising was over $1,000,000. It was unlike any promotional campaign that had been seen before, and was extremely comprehensive. In order to advertise the film, the studio offered free Karate classes, produced thousands of illustrated flip books, comic books, posters, photographs, and organized dozens of news releases, interviews, and public appearances for the stars. \"Esquire\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"Time\", and \"Newsweek\" all wrote stories on the film.\n\nThe filmed earned a profit of in the United States, against a tight budget of $850,000. It was one of the most successful films of 1973. In Hong Kong, the film grossed HK$3,307,536—huge business for the time, but substantially less than Lee's \"Fist of Fury\" and \"Way of the Dragon\".\n\nIn Japan, the film grossed . In India, the movie was released in 1975 and opened to full houses, including a packed 32-week run in Bombay. In France, it was one of the top five highest-grossing films of 1974 (above two other Lee films, \"Way of the Dragon\" at #8 and \"Fist of Fury\" at #12), with 4,444,582 box office admissions. In Germany, it was one of the top ten highest-grossing films of 1974, with 1.7million box office admissions.\n\nWorldwide, the film grossed , including in international markets outside of the United States. The film's worldwide gross is equivalent to when adjusted for inflation.\n\nThe film was well received by critics and is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1973. Critics have referred to \"Enter the Dragon\" as \"a low-rent James Bond thriller\", a \"remake of \"Dr. No\"\" with elements of Fu Manchu. J.C. Maçek III of PopMatters wrote, \"Of course the real showcase here is the obvious star here, Bruce Lee, whose performance as an actor and a fighter are the most enhanced by the perfect sound and video transfer. While Kelly was a famous martial artist and a surprisingly good actor and Saxon was a famous actor and a surprisingly good martial artist, Lee proves to be a master of both fields.\"\n\nMany acclaimed newspapers and magazines reviewed the film. \"Variety\" described it as \"rich in the atmosphere\", the music score as \"a strong asset\" and the photography as \"interesting\". Additionally, The \"New York Times\" gave the film a rave review. The review stated \"The picture is expertly made and well-meshed; it moves like lightning and brims with color. It is also the most savagely murderous and numbing hand-hacker (not a gun in it) you will ever see anywhere.\"\n\nThe film currently holds a 94% approval rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, with 47 reviews counted and an average rating of 7.8/10. In 2004, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\n\nThe film also ranks No. 474 on \"Empire\" magazine's 2008 list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\n\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has remained one of the most popular martial arts films since its premiere and has been released numerous times worldwide on every home video format. For almost three decades, many theatrical and home video versions were censored for violence, especially in the West. Since 2001, the film has been released uncut in the UK and most other territories.\n\nMost DVDs and Blu-rays come with a wide range of extra features in the form of documentaries, interviews, etc. In 2013, a second, remastered HD transfer appeared on Blu-ray, billed as the \"40th Anniversary Edition\".\n\nThe film has been parodied and referenced in places such as the 1976 film \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\", the satirical publication \"The Onion\", the Japanese game-show \"Takeshi's Castle\", and the 1977 John Landis comedy anthology film \"Kentucky Fried Movie\" (in its lengthy \"A Fistful of Yen\" sequence, basically a comedic, note for note remake of \"Dragon\") and also in the film \"Balls of Fury\". It was also parodied on television in \"That '70s Show\" during the episode \"Jackie Moves On\" with regular character Fez taking on the Bruce Lee role. Several clips from the film are comically used during the theatre scene in \"The Last Dragon\".\n\nThe little-known 1985 Nintendo arcade game \"Arm Wrestling\" contains voice leftovers from the film, as well as their original counterparts. \n\nThe \"Dragon Ball\" manga and anime franchise was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", which \"Dragon Ball\" creator Akira Toriyama was a fan of. The title \"Dragon Ball\" was also inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", and the piercing eyes of Goku's Super Saiyan transformation was based on Bruce Lee's paralyzing glare.\n\nThe popular 1980s martial arts video game \"Double Dragon\" features two enemies named Roper and Williams, a reference to the two characters Roper and Williams from \"Enter the Dragon\". The sequel includes opponents named Bolo and Oharra. The popular video game \"Mortal Kombat\" borrows multiple plot elements from \"Enter the Dragon\".\n\nIn August 2007, the now defunct Warner Independent Pictures announced that television producer Kurt Sutter would be remaking the film as a noir-style thriller entitled \"Awaken the Dragon\" with Korean singer-actor Rain starring. It was announced in September 2014 that Spike Lee would work on the remake. In March 2015, Brett Ratner revealed that he wanted to make the remake. In July 2018, David Leitch is in early talks to direct the remake.\n\nLee's martial arts films were broadly lampooned in the recurring \"Almost Live!\" sketch \"Mind Your Manners with\" \"Billy Quan\".\n\n"}
{"id": "10201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10201", "title": "Exothermic process", "text": "Exothermic process\n\nIn thermodynamics, the term exothermic process (exo- : \"outside\") describes a process or reaction that releases energy from the system to its surroundings, usually in the form of heat, but also in a form of light (e.g. a spark, flame, or flash), electricity (e.g. a battery), or sound (e.g. explosion heard when burning hydrogen). Its etymology stems from the Greek prefix \"έξω\" (exō, which means \"outwards\") and the Greek word \"θερμικός\" (thermikόs, which means \"thermal\"). The term \"exothermic\" was first coined by Marcellin Berthelot. The opposite of an exothermic process is an endothermic process, one that absorbs energy in the form of heat.\n\nThe concept is frequently applied in the physical sciences to chemical reactions, where as in chemical bond energy that will be converted to thermal energy (heat).\n\nExothermic (and endothermic) describe two types of chemical reactions or systems found in nature, as follows.\n\nSimply stated, after an exothermic reaction, more energy has been released to the surroundings than was absorbed to initiate and maintain the reaction. An example would be the burning of a candle, wherein the sum of calories produced by combustion (found by looking at radiant heating of the surroundings and visible light produced, including increase in temperature of the fuel (wax) itself, which with oxygen, have become hot CO and water vapor,) exceeds the number of calories absorbed initially in lighting the flame and in the flame maintaining itself. (i.e. some energy produced by combustion is reabsorbed and used in melting, then vaporizing the wax, etc. but is (far) outstripped by the energy produced in breaking carbon-hydrogen bonds and combination of oxygen with the resulting carbon and hydrogen).\n\nOn the other hand, in an endothermic reaction or system, energy is taken from the surroundings in the course of the reaction. An example of an endothermic reaction is a first aid cold pack, in which the reaction of two chemicals, or dissolving of one in another, requires calories from the surroundings, and the reaction cools the pouch and surroundings by absorbing heat from them. An endothermic system is seen in the production of wood: trees absorb radiant energy, from the sun, use it in endothermic reactions such as taking apart CO and HO and combining the carbon and hydrogen generated to produce cellulose and other organic chemicals. These products, in the form of wood, say, may later be burned in a fireplace, exothermically, producing CO and water, and releasing energy in the form of heat and light to their surroundings, e.g., to a home's interior and chimney gasses.\n\nExothermic refers to a transformation in which a system releases energy (heat) to the surroundings, expressed by\n\nWhen the transformation occurs at constant pressure, one has for the enthalpy\n\nand constant volume, one has for the internal energy\n\nIn an adiabatic system (i.e. a system that does not exchange heat with the surroundings), an exothermic process results in an increase in temperature of the system.\n\nIn exothermic chemical reactions, the heat that is released by the reaction takes the form of electromagnetic energy. The transition of electrons from one quantum energy level to another causes light to be released. This light is equivalent in energy to the stabilization energy of the energy for the chemical reaction, i.e. the bond energy. This light that is released can be absorbed by other molecules in solution to give rise to molecular vibrations or rotations, which gives rise to the classical understanding of heat. In contrast, when endothermic reactions occur, energy is absorbed to place an electron in a higher energy state, such that the electron can associate with another atom to form a chemical complex. Net energy is absorbed by an endothermic reaction. In an exothermic reaction, the energy needed to start the reaction is less than el energy that is subsequently released, so there is a net release of energy. This is the physical understanding of exothermic and endothermic reactions.\n\nSome examples of exothermic processes are:\nBULLET::::- Combustion of fuels such as wood, coal and oil petroleum\nBULLET::::- Thermite reaction\nBULLET::::- Reaction of alkali metals and other highly electropositive metals with water\nBULLET::::- Condensation of rain from water vapor\nBULLET::::- Mixing water and strong acids or strong bases\nBULLET::::- Mixing acids and bases\nBULLET::::- Dehydration of carbohydrates by sulfuric acid\nBULLET::::- The setting of cement and concrete\nBULLET::::- Some polymerisation reactions such as the setting of epoxy resin\nBULLET::::- Reaction of most metals with halogens or oxygen\nBULLET::::- Nuclear fusion in hydrogen bombs and in stellar cores (to iron)\nBULLET::::- Nuclear fission of heavy elements\n\nChemical exothermic reactions are generally more spontaneous than their counterparts, endothermic reactions. \n\nIn a thermochemical reaction that is exothermic, the heat may be listed among the products of the reaction.\n\nBecause of historical accident, students encounter a source of possible confusion between the terminology of physics and biology. Whereas the thermodynamic terms \"exothermic\" and \"endothermic\" respectively refer to processes that give out heat energy and processes that absorb heat energy, in biology the sense is effectively inverted. The metabolic terms \"ectothermic\" and \"endothermic\" respectively refer to organisms that rely largely on external heat to achieve a full working temperature, and to organisms that produce heat from within as a major factor in controlling their bodily temperature.\n\nBULLET::::- Calorimetry\nBULLET::::- Chemical thermodynamics\nBULLET::::- Differential scanning calorimetry\nBULLET::::- Endergonic\nBULLET::::- Endergonic reaction\nBULLET::::- Exergonic\nBULLET::::- Exergonic reaction\nBULLET::::- Endothermic reaction\n\nBULLET::::- http://chemistry.about.com/b/a/184556.htm Observe exothermic reactions in a simple experiment\n"}
{"id": "10204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10204", "title": "Elihu Yale", "text": "Elihu Yale\n\nElihu Yale (5 April 1649 – 8 July 1721) was an American merchant, slave trader, President of the East India Company settlement in Fort St. George, at Madras, and a benefactor of the Collegiate School in the Colony of Connecticut, which in 1718 was renamed Yale College in his honour.\n\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts, to David Yale (1613–1690) and Ursula, he was the grandson of Ann Lloyd (1591–1659), who after the death of her first husband, Thomas Yale (1587–1619) in Chester, Cheshire, England, married Governor Theophilus Eaton (1590–1658) of New Haven Colony.\n\nThe Yale family left Boston and returned to England when Elihu was three years old and he grew up going to school in London.\n\nFor 20 years Yale served the Honourable East India Company. In 1684 he became the first president of Fort St. George, the company's post at Madras (now Chennai), India. He succeeded a number of agents from Andrew Cogan to William Gyfford. Yale was instrumental in the development of the Government General Hospital, housed at Fort St. George.\n\nYale amassed a fortune while working for the company, largely through secret contracts with Madras merchants, against the East India Company's directive. By 1692, his repeated flouting of East India Company regulations and growing embarrassment at his illegal profiteering resulted in his being relieved of the post of governor.\nYale returned to Britain in 1699. He spent the rest of his life at 'Plas Grono', a mansion bought by his father, or at his house in London, spending liberally the considerable wealth he had accumulated.\n\nYale's ancestry can be traced back to the family estate at Plas yn Iâl near the village of Llandegla.\n\nYale married Catherine Hynmers, a widow, in 1680. The wedding took place at St. Mary's Church, at Fort St. George, where Yale was a vestryman and treasurer. The marriage was the first registered at the church.\n\nElihu Yale was re-appointed as president of the administration of Fort St George on 26 July 1687. He then implemented an order dated 14 January 1685 which required the English at Fort St George to make all attempts at procurement of the town of St Thome on lease. To this effect, Chinna Venkatadri was sent to negotiate with the local governor on 4 August 1687. The mission was successful and Chinna Venkatadri assumed sovereignty over St Thome for a period of three years. Notwithstanding the vehement protests of the Portuguese inhabitants of St Thome, the English gained absolute control over all lands up to St Thomas Mount for a period of three years.\n\nIn September 1688, the Mughal Emperor Aurangazeb took Golconda after a prolonged battle. The Mughals took Sultan of Golconda prisoner and annexed the state. The newly designated Mughal Subedar of the province immediately sent a letter to the British authorities at Fort St George demanding that the English at Madras acknowledge the overlordship of the Mughal Emperor. The English complied willingly. Aurangazeb guaranteed the independence of Madras, but in return demanded that the English supply troops in the event of a war against the Marathas. It was around this time that Yale's three-year-old son David Yale died and was interred in the Madras cemetery.\n\nThe records of this period mention a flourishing slave trade in Madras, a trade in which Yale participated and from which he profited. He enforced a law that at least ten slaves should be carried on every ship bound for Europe. In his capacity as judge he also on several occasions sentenced so-called \"black criminals\" to whipping and enslavement. When the demand began to increase rapidly, the English merchants even began to kidnap young children and deport them to distant parts of the world, very much against their will. At a time when profits from the slave trade were dwindling and pressure from the Mughal government to stop the enslavement was mounting, the administration of Fort St George eventually stepped in and introduced laws to curb enslavement.\n\nDuring Yale's presidency, a plan for setting up a corporation in Madras was conceived by Josiah Child, the Governor of the East India Company, in a letter addressed to the factors at Madras on 28 September 1687. Three months later, Josiah Child and his deputy had an audience with James II, and as per the ensuing discussions, a Charter was issued by the king on 30 December 1687 which established the Corporation of Madras. The charter came into effect on 29 September 1688, and a Corporation was established comprising a Mayor, 12 Aldermen, 60-100 Burgesses and sergeants. Nathaniel Higginson, who was then the second member of the Council of Fort St George took office as the Mayor of Madras.\n\nIn August 1689, a French fleet appeared near the coast of Ceylon compelling the Governor of Pulicat Lawrence Pitt who was on high seas to seek protection within the bastions of Fort St George. Throughout the year 1690, French naval ships from Pondicherry ravaged the coast in order to drive the English and the Dutch out of the East Indies but were unsuccessful. They eventually withdrew from their enterprise when faced with heavy losses. It was also during this time that the English purchased the town of Tegnapatnam from the Marathas.\n\nAs president of Fort St. George, Yale purchased territory for private purposes with East India Company funds, including a fort at Devanampattinam (now Cuddalore). Yale imposed high taxes for the maintenance of the colonial garrison and town, resulting in an unpopular regime and several revolts by Indians, brutally quelled by garrison soldiers. Yale was also notorious for arresting and trying Indians on his own private authority, including the hanging of a stable boy who had absconded with a Company horse.\n\nCharges of corruption were brought against Elihu Yale in the last years of his Presidency. He was eventually removed in 1692 and replaced with Nathaniel Higginson as the President of Madras.\n\nYale died on 8 July 1721 in London, but was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of St. Giles. His tomb is inscribed with these lines:\n\nIn Boston, Massachusetts, a tablet to Yale was erected in 1927 at Scollay Square, near the site of Yale's birth. Yale president Arthur Twining Hadley penned the inscription, which reads: \"On Pemberton Hill, 255 Feet North of This Spot, Was Born on April Fifth 1649 Elihu Yale, Governor of Madras, Whose Permanent Memorial in His Native Land is the College That Bears His Name.\"\n\nIn 1718, Cotton Mather contacted Yale and asked for his help. Mather represented a small institution of learning that had been founded in 1701 in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, as the Collegiate School of Connecticut, which needed money for a new building. Yale sent Mather 417 books, a portrait of King George I, and nine bales of goods. These last were sold by the school for £800 pound sterling. In gratitude, officials named the new building Yale; eventually the entire institution became Yale College.\n\nYale was also a vestryman and treasurer of St. Mary's Church at Fort St. George. On 6 October 1968, the 250th anniversary of the naming of Yale College for Elihu Yale, the classmates of Chester Bowles, then the American ambassador to India and a graduate of Yale (1924), donated money for lasting improvements to the church and erected a plaque to commemorate the occasion. In 1970 a portrait of him, \"Elihu Yale seated at table with the Second Duke of Devonshire and Lord James Cavendish\" was donated to the Yale Center for British Art from Chatsworth House.\n\nOn 5 April 1999, Yale University recognized the 350th anniversary of Yale's birthday. An article that year in \"American Heritage\" magazine rated Elihu Yale the \"most overrated philanthropist\" in American history, arguing that the college that became Yale University was successful largely because of the generosity of a man named Jeremiah Dummer, but that the trustees of the school did not want it known by the name \"Dummer College\".\n\nIn her article for \"The Atlantic\" about Skull and Bones, a secret society at Yale University, Alexandra Robbins alleges that Yale's headstone was stolen years ago from its proper setting in Wrexham. She further alleges that the tombstone is now displayed in a glass case in a room with purple walls.\n\nBULLET::::- \"Elihu\" later became the name of a \"senior society\" founded in 1903 at Yale.\nBULLET::::- Tom Wolfe, who earned a Ph.D. in American Studies from Yale, named the African-American Atlanta police chief in \"A Man in Full\" Elihu Yale.\nBULLET::::- Yale College, a former college in Wrexham, Wales, which since merged with Coleg Cambria, was also named after Elihu Yale.\nBULLET::::- Elihu Yale is the name given to a JD Wetherspoons pub in the town of Wrexham.\nBULLET::::- Theodore Roosevelt's son Quentin kept a \"Hyacinth macaw\" named Eli Yale.\nBULLET::::- A Yale University student or alumnus is known informally as either an Eli or a Yalie.\nBULLET::::- In The Simpsons Season 8, Episode 9 \"The Mysterious Voyage of Our Homer,\" Montgomery Burns is seen preparing chili in a stall named \"Old Elihu's Yale Style Saltpeter Chili.\"\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "10207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10207", "title": "Émile Baudot", "text": "Émile Baudot\n\nJean-Maurice-Émile Baudot (; 11 September 1845 – 28 March 1903), French telegraph engineer and inventor of the first means of digital communication Baudot code, was one of the pioneers of telecommunications. He invented a multiplexed printing telegraph system that used his code and allowed multiple transmissions over a single line. The baud unit was named after him.\n\nBaudot was born in Magneux, Haute-Marne, France, the son of farmer Pierre Emile Baudot, who later became the mayor of Magneux. His only formal education was at his local primary school, after which he carried out agricultural work on his father's farm before joining the French Post & Telegraph Administration as an apprentice operator in 1869. \n\nThe telegraph service trained him in the Morse telegraph and also sent him on a four-month course of instruction on the Hughes printing telegraph system, which was later to inspire his own system.\n\nAfter serving briefly during the Franco-Prussian War, he returned to civilian duties in Paris in 1872. \n\nThe Telegraph Service encouraged Baudot to develop—on his own time—a system for time-multiplexing several telegraph messages using Hughes teleprinters. He realised that with most printing telegraphs of the period the line is idle for most of the time, apart from the brief intervals when a character is transmitted. Baudot devised one of the first applications of time-division multiplexing in telegraphy. Using synchronized clockwork-powered switches at the transmitting and receiving ends, he was able to transmit five messages simultaneously; the system was officially adopted by the French Post & Telegraph Administration five years later.\n\nBaudot invented his telegraph code in 1870 and patented it in 1874. It was a 5-bit code, with equal on and off intervals, which allowed telegraph transmission of the Roman alphabet, punctuation and control signals. By 1874 or 1875 (various sources give both dates) he had also perfected the electromechanical hardware to transmit his code. His inventions were based on the printing mechanism from Hughes' instrument, a distributor invented by Bernard Meyer in 1871, and the five-unit code devised by Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber. Baudot combined these, together with original ideas of his own, to produce a complete multiplex system.\n\nOn 17 June 1874 Baudot patented his first printing telegraph (Patent no. 103,898 \"Système de télégraphie rapide\"), in which the signals were translated automatically into typographic characters. Baudot's hardware had three main parts: the keyboard, the distributor, and a paper tape.\n\nEach operator - there were as many as four - was allocated a single sector. The keyboard had just five piano type keys, operated with two fingers of the left hand and three fingers of the right hand. The five unit code was designed to be easy to remember. Once the keys had been pressed they were locked down until the contacts again passed over the sector connected to that particular keyboard, when the keyboard was unlocked ready for the next character to be entered, with an audible click (known as the \"cadence signal\") to warn the operator. Operators had to maintain a steady rhythm, and the usual speed of operation was 30 words per minute. \n\nThe receiver was also connected to the distributor. The signals from the telegraph line were temporarily stored on a set of five electromagnets, before being decoded to print the corresponding character on paper tape.\n\nAccurate operation of this system depended on the distributor at the transmitting end keeping in synchronization with the one at the receiving end and operators only sending characters when the contacts passed over their allocated sector. This could be achieved at a speed of 30 wpm by strictly observing the \"cadence\" of rhythm of the system when the distributor gave the operator the use of the line.\n\nThe Baudot system was accepted by the French Telegraph Administration in 1875, with the first online tests of his system occurring between Paris and Bordeaux on 12 November 1877. At the end of 1877, the Paris-Rome line, which was about , began operating a duplex Baudot.\n\nThe Baudot apparatus was shown at the Paris Exposition Universelle (1878) and won him the Exposition's gold medal, as well as bringing his system to worldwide notice.\n\nAfter the first success of his system, Baudot was promoted to Controller in 1880, and was named Inspector-Engineer in 1882.\n\nIn July 1887 he conducted successful tests on the Atlantic telegraph cable between Weston-super-Mare and Waterville, Nova Scotia operated by the Commercial Company, with a double Baudot installed in duplex, the Baudot transmitters and receivers substituted for the recorder.\n\nOn 8 August 1890 he established communications between Paris, Vannes, and Lorient over a single wire. On 3 January 1894 he installed a triplex apparatus on the telegraph between Paris and Bordeaux that had previously been operating with some difficulty on the Hughes telegraph system. On 27 April 1894 he established communications between the Paris stock exchange and the Milan stock exchange, again over a single wire, using his new invention, the retransmitter.\n\nIn 1897 the Baudot system was improved by switching to punched tape, which was prepared offline like the Morse tape used with the Wheatstone and Creed systems. A tape reader, controlled by the Baudot distributor, then replaced the manual keyboard. The tape had five rows of holes for the code, with a sixth row of smaller holes for transporting the tape through the reader mechanism. Baudot’s code was later standardised as International Telegraph Alphabet Number One.\n\nBaudot received little help from the French Telegraph Administration for his system, and often had to fund his own research, even having to sell the gold medal awarded by the 1878 Exposition Universelle in 1880.\n\nThe Baudot telegraph system was employed progressively in France, and then was adopted in other countries, Italy being the first to introduce it, in its inland service, in 1887. The Netherlands followed in 1895, Switzerland in 1896, and Austria and Brazil in 1897. The British Post Office adopted it for a simplex circuit between London and Paris during 1897, then used it for more general purposes from 1898. In 1900 it was adopted by Germany, by Russia in 1904, the British West Indies in 1905, Spain in 1906, Belgium in 1909, Argentina in 1912, and Romania in 1913.\n\nBaudot married Marie Josephine Adelaide Langrognet on 15 January 1890. She died only three months later, on 9 April 1890.\n\nSoon after starting work with the telegraph service, Baudot began to suffer physical discomfort and was frequently absent from work for this reason, for as long as a month on one occasion. His condition affected him for the rest of his life, until he died on 28 March 1903, at Sceaux, Hauts-de-Seine, near Paris, at the age of 57.\n\nIn 1874, French telegraph operator Louis Victor Mimault patented a telegraph system using five separate lines to transmit. After his patent was rejected by the Telegraph Administration, Mimault modified his device to incorporate features from the Meyer telegraph and obtained a new patent which was also rejected. In the meantime, Baudot had patented his prototype telegraph a few weeks earlier.\n\nMimault claimed priority of invention over Baudot and brought a patent suit against him in 1877. The Tribunal Civil de la Seine, which reviewed testimony from three experts unconnected with the Telegraph Administration, found in favor of Mimault and accorded him priority of invention of the Baudot code and ruled that Baudot's patents were simply improvements of Mimault's. Neither inventor was satisfied with this judgment, which was eventually rescinded with Mimault being ordered to pay all legal costs.\n\nMimault became unnerved because of the decision, and after an incident where he shot at and wounded two students of the École Polytechnique (charges for which were dropped), he demanded a special act to prolong the duration of his patents, 100,000 Francs, and election to the Légion d'honneur. A commission directed by Jules Raynaud (head of telegraph research) rejected his demands. Upon hearing the decision, Mimault shot and killed Raynaud, and was sentenced to 10 years forced labour and 20 years of exile. \n\nBULLET::::- 1881 - Diploma of Honor from the International Electrical Exposition.\nBULLET::::- 1882 - Gold medal from the Société d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale (SEIN)\nBULLET::::- 1889 - Ampere Medal from SEIN\nBULLET::::- 1878 - Knight's Cross of the Légion d'honneur\nBULLET::::- 1882 - Knight of the Order of Leopold\nBULLET::::- 1884 - Knight of the Order of Franz Joseph of Austria.\nBULLET::::- 1891 - Cross of the Order of the Crown of Italy\nBULLET::::- 1898 - Promoted to Officier of the Légion d'honneur\nBULLET::::- 1900 - Knight of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus (Italy)\nBULLET::::- 1901 - Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy\nBULLET::::- A street in the 17th arrondissement of Paris was named after Baudot, but it no longer exists.\nBULLET::::- In 1926 the International Telegraph Communications Advisory Committee of the International Telecommunication Union met in Berlin and immortalized Baudot by designating the baud - shortened from his name - as the unit of telegraph transmission speed.\nBULLET::::- In 1949, the French Post Office issued a series of stamps with his portrait. By mistake, the year of his birth was given as 1848, not the correct 1845. The stamp was corrected and reprinted with a different color. However, the erroneous stamps still circulate among philatelists and have greater value than the corrected stamps.\n\nBULLET::::- Baudot code\n\nBULLET::::- ITU historical figures listing\nBULLET::::- http://ecoledemagneux.pagesperso-orange.fr/page5.html\nBULLET::::- http://www.utc.fr/~tthomass/Themes/Unites/Hommes/bau/Emile%20Baudot.pdf\nBULLET::::- http://www.hallikainen.org/cuesta/et153/StudentPapers/Baudot/Jung.html\nBULLET::::- http://www.history-computer.com/Dreamers/Baudot.html\n"}
{"id": "10211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10211", "title": "Economic security", "text": "Economic security\n\nEconomic security or financial security is the condition of having stable income or other resources to support a standard of living now and in the foreseeable future. It includes:\nBULLET::::- probable continued solvency\nBULLET::::- predictability of the future cash flow of a person or other economic entity, such as a country\nBULLET::::- employment security or job security\n\nFinancial security more often refers to individual and family money management and savings. Economic security tends to include the broader effect of a society's production levels and monetary support for non-working citizens.\n\nIn the United States, children's economic security is indicated by the income level and employment security of their families or organizations. Economic security of people over 50 years old is based on Social Security benefits, pensions and savings, earnings and employment, and health insurance coverage.\n\nIn 1972, the state legislature of Arizona formed a Department of Economic Security with a mission to promote \"the safety, well-being, and self sufficiency of children, adults, and families\". This department combines state government activities previously managed by the Employment Security Commission, the State Department of Public Welfare, the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, the State Office of Economic Opportunity, the Apprenticeship Council, the State Office of Manpower Planning, and the State Department of Mental Retardation. The State Department of Mental Retardation (renamed the Division of Developmental Disabilities, House Bill 2213) joined the Department in 1974 . The purpose in creating the Department was to provide an integration of direct services to people in such a way as to reduce duplication of administrative efforts, services and expenditures. Family Connections became a part of the Department in January 2007.\n\nThe Minnesota Department of Economic Security was formed in 1977 from the departments of Employment Services and Vocational Rehabilitation, the Governor's Manpower Office, and the Economic Opportunity Office, which administered anti-poverty programs. In 1985, State Services for the Blind was included in this department. In 2003, the Minnesota Department of Economic Security and Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development were merged to form The Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development.\n\nEconomic security, in the context of politics and international relations, is the ability of a nation-state to follow its choice of policies to develop the national economy in the manner desired. Historically, conquest of nations have made conquerors rich through plunder, access to new resources and enlarged trade through controlling of the conquered nations'economy. In today's complex system of international trade, characterised by multi-national agreements, mutual inter-dependence and availability of natural resources etc., economic security today forms, arguably, as important a part of national security as military policy.\n\nEconomic security has been proposed as a key determinant of international relations, particularly in the geopolitics of petroleum in American foreign policy after September 11, 2001.\n\nIn Canada, threats to the country's overall economic security are considered economic espionage, which is \"illegal, clandestine or coercive activity by a foreign government in order to gain unauthorized access to economic intelligence, such as proprietary information or technology, for economic advantage.\"\n\nIt is widely believed that there is a tradeoff between economic security and economic opportunity.\n"}
{"id": "10213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10213", "title": "Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution", "text": "Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution\n\nEnhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE) (also known as Enhanced GPRS (EGPRS), IMT Single Carrier (IMT-SC), or Enhanced Data rates for Global Evolution) is a digital mobile phone technology that allows improved data transmission rates as a backward-compatible extension of GSM. EDGE is considered a pre-3G radio technology and is part of ITU's 3G definition. EDGE was deployed on GSM networks beginning in 2003 – initially by Cingular (now AT&T) in the United States.\n\nEDGE is standardized also by 3GPP as part of the GSM family. A variant, so called Compact-EDGE, was developed for use in a portion of Digital AMPS network spectrum.\n\nThrough the introduction of sophisticated methods of coding and transmitting data, EDGE delivers higher bit-rates per radio channel, resulting in a threefold increase in capacity and performance compared with an ordinary GSM/GPRS connection.\n\nEDGE can be used for any packet switched application, such as an Internet connection.\n\nEvolved EDGE continues in Release 7 of the 3GPP standard providing reduced latency and more than doubled performance e.g. to complement High-Speed Packet Access (HSPA). Peak bit-rates of up to 1 Mbit/s and typical bit-rates of 400 kbit/s can be expected.\n\nEDGE/EGPRS is implemented as a bolt-on enhancement for 2.5G GSM/GPRS networks, making it easier for existing GSM carriers to upgrade to it. EDGE is a superset to GPRS and can function on any network with GPRS deployed on it, provided the carrier implements the necessary upgrade.\nEDGE requires no hardware or software changes to be made in GSM core networks. EDGE-compatible transceiver units must be installed and the base station subsystem needs to be upgraded to support EDGE. If the operator already has this in place, which is often the case today, the network can be upgraded to EDGE by activating an optional software feature. Today EDGE is supported by all major chip vendors for both GSM and WCDMA/HSPA.\n\nIn addition to Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK), EDGE uses higher-order PSK/8 phase shift keying (8PSK) for the upper five of its nine modulation and coding schemes. EDGE produces a 3-bit word for every change in carrier phase. This effectively triples the gross data rate offered by GSM. EDGE, like GPRS, uses a rate adaptation algorithm that adapts the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) according to the quality of the radio channel, and thus the bit rate and robustness of data transmission. It introduces a new technology not found in GPRS, Incremental Redundancy, which, instead of retransmitting disturbed packets, sends more redundancy information to be combined in the receiver. This increases the probability of correct decoding.\n\nEDGE can carry a bandwidth up to 236 kbit/s (with end-to-end latency of less than 150 ms) for 4 timeslots (theoretical maximum is 473.6 kbit/s for 8 timeslots) in packet mode. This means it can handle four times as much traffic as standard GPRS. EDGE meets the International Telecommunications Union's requirement for a 3G network, and has been accepted by the ITU as part of the IMT-2000 family of 3G standards. It also enhances the circuit data mode called HSCSD, increasing the data rate of this service.\n\nThe channel encoding process in GPRS as well as EGPRS/EDGE consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly punctured convolutional code. In GPRS, the Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In GPRS Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2, i.e. each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In GPRS Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied.\n\nIn EGPRS/EDGE, the Modulation and Coding Schemes MCS-1 to MCS-9 take the place of the Coding Schemes of GPRS, and additionally specify which modulation scheme is used, GMSK or 8PSK. MCS-1 through MCS-4 use GMSK and have performance similar (but not equal) to GPRS, while MCS-5 through MCS-9 use 8PSK. In all EGPRS Modulation and Coding Schemes, a convolutional code of rate 1/3 is used, and puncturing is used to achieve the desired code rate. In contrast to GPRS, the Radio Link Control (RLC) and Media Access Control (MAC) headers and the payload data are coded separately in EGPRS. The headers are coded more robustly than the data.\n\n! GPRSCoding scheme\n! Bitrate including RLC/MAC overhead(kbit/s/slot)\n! Bitrate excluding RLC/MAC overhead(kbit/s/slot)\n! Modulation\n! Code rate\n\n! EDGE Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS)\n! Bitrate including RLC/MAC overhead(kbit/s/slot)\n! Bitrate excluding RLC/MAC overhead(kbit/s/slot)\n! Modulation\n! Datacode rate\n! Headercode rate\n\nEvolved EDGE, also called EDGE Evolution, is a bolt-on extension to the GSM mobile telephony standard, which improves on EDGE in a number of ways. Latencies are reduced by lowering the Transmission Time Interval by half (from 20 ms to 10 ms). Bit rates are increased up to 1 Mbit/s peak bandwidth and latencies down to 80 ms using dual carrier, higher symbol rate and higher-order modulation (32QAM and 16QAM instead of 8PSK), and turbo codes to improve error correction. This results in real world downlink speeds of up to 600kbit/s. Further the signal quality is improved using dual antennas improving average bit-rates and spectrum efficiency.\n\nThe main intention of increasing the existing EDGE throughput is that many operators would like to upgrade their existing infrastructure rather than invest on new network infrastructure. Mobile operators have invested billions in GSM networks, many of which are already capable of supporting EDGE data speeds up to 236.8 kbit/s. With a software upgrade and a new device compliant with Evolved EDGE (like an Evolved EDGE smartphone) for the user, these data rates can be boosted to speeds approaching 1 Mbit/s (i.e. 98.6 kbit/s per timeslot for 32QAM). Many service providers may not invest in a completely new technology like 3G networks.\n\nConsiderable research and development happened throughout the world for this new technology. A successful trial by Nokia Siemens and \"one of China's leading operators\" has been achieved in a live environment. With the introduction for more advanced wireless technologies like UMTS and LTE, which also focus on a network coverage layer on low frequencies and the upcoming phase-out and shutdown of 2G mobile networks, it is very unlikely that Evolved EDGE will ever see any deployment on live networks. Up to now (as of 2016) there are no commercial networks which support the Evolved EDGE standard (3GPP Rel-7).\n\nWith Evolved EDGE come three major features designed to reduce latency over the air interface.\n\nIn EDGE, a single RLC data block (ranging from 23 to 148 bytes of data) is transmitted over four frames, using a single time slot. On average, this requires 20 ms for one way transmission. Under the RTTI scheme, one data block is transmitted over two frames in two timeslots, reducing the latency of the air interface to 10 ms.\n\nIn addition, Reduced Latency also implies support of Piggy-backed ACK/NACK (PAN), in which a bitmap of blocks not received is included in normal data blocks. Using the PAN field, the receiver may report missing data blocks immediately, rather than waiting to send a dedicated PAN message.\n\nA final enhancement is RLC-non persistent mode. With EDGE, the RLC interface could operate in either acknowledged mode, or unacknowledged mode. In unacknowledged mode, there is no retransmission of missing data blocks, so a single corrupt block would cause an entire upper-layer IP packet to be lost. With non-persistent mode, an RLC data block may be retransmitted if it is less than a certain age. Once this time expires, it is considered lost, and subsequent data blocks may then be forwarded to upper layers.\n\nWith Downlink Dual Carrier, the handheld is able to receive on two different frequency channels at the same time, doubling the downlink throughput. In addition, if second receiver is present then the handheld is able to receive on an additional timeslot in single-carrier mode, because it may overlap the tuning of one receiver with other tasks.\n\nBoth uplink and downlink throughput is improved by using 16 or 32 QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation), along with turbo codes and higher symbol rates.\n\nThe Global mobile Suppliers Association (GSA) states that, as of May 2013, there were 604 GSM/EDGE networks in 213 countries, from a total of 606 mobile network operator commitments in 213 countries.\n\nBULLET::::- Broadband Internet access\nBULLET::::- CDMA2000\nBULLET::::- Evolution-Data Optimized\nBULLET::::- List of device bandwidths\nBULLET::::- Mobile broadband\nBULLET::::- Spectral efficiency comparison table\nBULLET::::- UMTS\nBULLET::::- WiFi\nBULLET::::- Comparison of mobile phone standards including LTE\nBULLET::::- Comparison of wireless data standards including WiMAX and HSPA+\n\nBULLET::::- The Global mobile Suppliers Association\nBULLET::::- Evolved EDGE as an alternative to 3G\nBULLET::::- A technical document by the 3G Americas association\nBULLET::::- An opinion on evolved EDGE by Martin Sauter\nBULLET::::- An EDGE Evolution report by Visant Strategies\n"}
{"id": "10216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10216", "title": "Eth", "text": "Eth\n\nEth (, uppercase: Ð, lowercase: ð; also spelled edh or eð) is a letter used in Old English, Middle English, Icelandic, Faroese (in which it is called \"edd\"), and Elfdalian. It was also used in Scandinavia during the Middle Ages but was subsequently replaced with \"dh\" and later \"d\". It is often transliterated as \"d\". The lowercase version has been adopted to represent a voiced dental fricative in the International Phonetic Alphabet.\n\nIn Old English, \"ð\" (called \"\" by the Anglo-Saxons) was used interchangeably with \"þ\" to represent the Old English dental fricative phoneme or its allophone , which exist in modern English phonology as the voiced and voiceless dental fricatives now spelled \"th\".\n\nUnlike the runic letter þ, ð is a modified Roman letter. ð was not found in the earliest records of Old English. A study of Mercian royal diplomas found that ð (along with đ) began to emerge in the early 8th century, with ð becoming strongly preferred by the 780s. Another source indicates that the letter is \"derived from Irish writing\".\n\nThe lowercase version has retained the curved shape of a medieval scribe's \"d\", which \"d\" itself in general has not. \"ð\" was used throughout the Anglo-Saxon era but gradually fell out of use in Middle English, practically disappearing altogether by 1300; \"þ\" survived longer, ultimately being replaced by the digraph \"th\".\n\nIn Icelandic, \"ð\" represents a voiced dental fricative , which is the same as the \"th\" in English \"that\", but it never appears as the first letter of a word, where \"þ\" is used in its stead. The name of the letter is pronounced in isolation (and before words beginning with a voiceless consonant) as and therefore with a voiceless rather than voiced fricative.\n\nIn Faroese, \"ð\" is not assigned to any particular phoneme and appears mostly for etymological reasons; however, it does show where most of the Faroese glides are; when \"ð\" appears before \"r\", it is, in a few words, pronounced . In the Icelandic and Faroese alphabets, \"ð\" follows \"d\".\n\nIn Olav Jakobsen Høyem's version of based on , \"ð\" was always silent and was introduced for etymological reasons.\n\n\"Ð\" has also been used by some in written Welsh to represent , which is normally represented as \"dd\".\n\nThe Faroese and Icelandic keyboard layouts have a dedicated button for eth.\n\nOn Microsoft Windows, eth can be typed using the alt code +() for lowercase or +() for uppercase, or by typing using the US International keyboard layout.\n\nOn macOS, eth can be typed by activating the ABC Extended keyboard layout and typing .\n\nUsing the compose key (\"multi key\") which is popular on Linux, eth can be typed by typing for lowercase or for capital letters.\n\nOn Chrome OS, holding Alt Gr and pressing the D key will result in ð being written. Holding shift or putting Caps Lock on will result in Ð.\n\n! System !! Uppercase !! Lowercase\n!Unicode\n!HTML\ncodice_1codice_2\n!TeX/LaTeX\ncodice_3codice_4\n!GTK+\n!Vim\n\nBULLET::::- The letter \"ð\" is sometimes used in mathematics and engineering textbooks as a symbol for a spin-weighted partial derivative. This operator gives rise to spin-weighted spherical harmonics.\nBULLET::::- A capital eth is used as the currency symbol for Dogecoin.\n\nBULLET::::- Thorn\nBULLET::::- D with stroke\nBULLET::::- African D\nBULLET::::- Insular script\n\n\n"}
{"id": "10217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10217", "title": "Eth, Nord", "text": "Eth, Nord\n\nEth is a commune in the Nord department in northern France.\n\nIt is about east-southeast of Valenciennes. Residents are called Ethois (feminine plural Ethoises).\n\nBULLET::::- Communes of the Nord department\n\nBULLET::::- INSEE commune file\n"}
{"id": "10221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10221", "title": "Euphrates", "text": "Euphrates\n\nThe Euphrates (; Sumerian: \"Buranuna\"; \"Purattu\"; ; \"Pǝrāt\"; : \"Yeprat\"; \"Perat\"; ; ) is the longest and one of the most historically important rivers of Western Asia. Together with the Tigris, it is one of the two defining rivers of Mesopotamia (the \"Land between the Rivers\"). Originating in the Armenian Highlands (eastern Turkey), the Euphrates flows through Syria and Iraq to join the Tigris in the Shatt al-Arab, which empties into the Persian Gulf.\n\nThe Ancient Greek form \"Euphrátēs\" (, as if from Greek εὖ \"good\" and ϕράζω \"I announce or declare\") was adapted from Old Persian 𐎢𐎳𐎼𐎠𐎬𐎢 \"Ufrātu\", itself from Elamite 𒌑𒅁𒊏𒌅𒅖 \"ú-ip-ra-tu-iš\". The Elamite name is ultimately derived from a name spelt in cuneiform as 𒌓𒄒𒉣 , which read as Sumerian language is \"Buranuna\" and read as Akkadian language is \"Purattu\"; many cuneiform signs have a Sumerian pronunciation and an Akkadian pronunciation, taken from a Sumerian word and an Akkadian word that mean the same. In Akkadian the river was called \"Purattu\", which has been perpetuated in Semitic languages (cf. Syriac \"P(ə)rāṯ\", Arabic \"al-Furāt\") and in other nearby languages of the time (cf. Hurrian \"Puranti\", Sabarian \"Uruttu\"). The Elamite, Akkadian, and possibly Sumerian forms are suggested to be from an unrecorded substrate language. Tamaz V. Gamkrelidze and Vyacheslav Ivanov suggest the Proto-Sumerian *burudu \"copper\" (Sumerian \"urudu\") as an origin, with an explanation that Euphrates was the river by which the copper ore was transported in rafts, since Mesopotamia was the center of copper metallurgy during the period.\n\nThe earliest references to the Euphrates come from cuneiform texts found in Shuruppak and pre-Sargonic Nippur in southern Iraq and date to the mid-3rd millennium BCE. In these texts, written in Sumerian, the Euphrates is called \"Buranuna\" (logographic: UD.KIB.NUN). The name could also be written KIB.NUN.(NA) or KIB.NUN, with the prefix \"\" indicating that the river was a divinity. In Sumerian, the name of the city of Sippar in modern-day Iraq was also written UD.KIB.NUN, indicating a historically strong relationship between the city and the river.\n\nThe Euphrates is the longest river of Western Asia. It emerges from the confluence of the Kara Su or Western Euphrates () and the Murat Su or Eastern Euphrates () upstream from the town of Keban in southeastern Turkey. Daoudy and Frenken put the length of the Euphrates from the source of the Murat River to the confluence with the Tigris at , of which is in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. The same figures are given by Isaev and Mikhailova. The length of the Shatt al-Arab, which connects the Euphrates and the Tigris with the Persian Gulf, is given by various sources as .\n\nBoth the Kara Su and the Murat Su rise northwest from Lake Van at elevations of and amsl, respectively. At the location of the Keban Dam, the two rivers, now combined into the Euphrates, have dropped to an elevation of amsl. From Keban to the Syrian–Turkish border, the river drops another over a distance of less than . Once the Euphrates enters the Upper Mesopotamian plains, its grade drops significantly; within Syria the river falls while over the last stretch between Hīt and the Shatt al-Arab the river drops only .\n\nThe Euphrates receives most of its water in the form of rainfall and melting snow, resulting in peak volumes during the months April through May. Discharge in these two months accounts for 36 percent of the total annual discharge of the Euphrates, or even 60–70 percent according to one source, while low runoff occurs in summer and autumn. The average natural annual flow of the Euphrates has been determined from early- and mid-twentieth century records as at Keban, at Hīt and at Hindiya. However, these averages mask the high inter-annual variability in discharge; at Birecik, just north of the Syro–Turkish border, annual discharges have been measured that ranged from a low volume of in 1961 to a high of in 1963.\n\nThe discharge regime of the Euphrates has changed dramatically since the construction of the first dams in the 1970s. Data on Euphrates discharge collected after 1990 show the impact of the construction of the numerous dams in the Euphrates and of the increased withdrawal of water for irrigation. Average discharge at Hīt after 1990 has dropped to per second ( per year). The seasonal variability has equally changed. The pre-1990 peak volume recorded at Hīt was per second, while after 1990 it is only per second. The minimum volume at Hīt remained relatively unchanged, rising from per second before 1990 to per second afterward.\n\nIn Syria, three rivers add their water to the Euphrates; the Sajur, the Balikh and the Khabur. These rivers rise in the foothills of the Taurus Mountains along the Syro–Turkish border and add comparatively little water to the Euphrates. The Sajur is the smallest of these tributaries; emerging from two streams near Gaziantep and draining the plain around Manbij before emptying into the reservoir of the Tishrin Dam. The Balikh receives most of its water from a karstic spring near 'Ayn al-'Arus and flows due south until it reaches the Euphrates at the city of Raqqa. In terms of length, drainage basin and discharge, the Khabur is the largest of these three. Its main karstic springs are located around Ra's al-'Ayn, from where the Khabur flows southeast past Al-Hasakah, where the river turns south and drains into the Euphrates near Busayrah. Once the Euphrates enters Iraq, there are no more natural tributaries to the Euphrates, although canals connecting the Euphrates basin with the Tigris basin exist.\n\n! Name\n! Length\n! Watershed size\n! Discharge\n! Bank\nKara Su\nMurat River\nSajur River\nBalikh River\nLeft\nKhabur River\nLeft\n\nThe drainage basins of the Kara Su and the Murat River cover an area of and , respectively. Estimates of the area of the Euphrates drainage basin vary widely; from a low to a high . Recent estimates put the basin area at , and . The greater part of the Euphrates basin is located in Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. According to both Daoudy and Frenken, Turkey's share is 28 percent, Syria's is 17 percent and that of Iraq is 40 percent. Isaev and Mikhailova estimate the percentages of the drainage basin lying within Turkey, Syria and Iraq at 33, 20 and 47 percent respectively. Some sources estimate that approximately 15 percent of the drainage basin is located within Saudi Arabia, while a small part falls inside the borders of Kuwait. Finally, some sources also include Jordan in the drainage basin of the Euphrates; a small part of the eastern desert () drains toward the east rather than to the west.\n\nThe Euphrates flows through a number of distinct vegetation zones. Although millennia-long human occupation in most parts of the Euphrates basin has significantly degraded the landscape, patches of original vegetation remain. The steady drop in annual rainfall from the sources of the Euphrates toward the Persian Gulf is a strong determinant for the vegetation that can be supported. In its upper reaches the Euphrates flows through the mountains of Southeast Turkey and their southern foothills which support a xeric woodland. Plant species in the moister parts of this zone include various oaks, pistachio trees, and \"Rosaceae\" (rose/plum family). The drier parts of the xeric woodland zone supports less dense oak forest and \"Rosaceae\". Here can also be found the wild variants of many cereals, including einkorn wheat, emmer wheat, oat and rye. South of this zone lies a zone of mixed woodland-steppe vegetation. Between Raqqa and the Syro–Iraqi border the Euphrates flows through a steppe landscape. This steppe is characterised by white wormwood (\"Artemisia herba-alba\") and \"Chenopodiaceae\". Throughout history, this zone has been heavily overgrazed due to the practicing of sheep and goat pastoralism by its inhabitants. Southeast of the border between Syria and Iraq starts true desert. This zone supports either no vegetation at all or small pockets of \"Chenopodiaceae\" or \"Poa sinaica\". Although today nothing of it survives due to human interference, research suggests that the Euphrates Valley would have supported a riverine forest. Species characteristic of this type of forest include the Oriental plane, the Euphrates poplar, the tamarisk, the ash and various wetland plants.\n\nAmong the fish species in the Tigris–Euphrates basin, the family of the Cyprinidae are the most common, with 34 species out of 52 in total. Among the Cyprinids, the mangar has good sport fishing qualities, leading the British to nickname it \"Tigris salmon.\" The \"Rafetus euphraticus\" is an endangered soft-shelled turtle that is limited to the Tigris–Euphrates river system.\n\nThe Neo-Assyrian palace reliefs from the 1st millennium BCE depict lion and bull hunts in fertile landscapes. Sixteenth to nineteenth century European travellers in the Syrian Euphrates basin reported on an abundance of animals living in the area, many of which have become rare or even extinct. Species like gazelle, onager and the now-extinct Arabian ostrich lived in the steppe bordering the Euphrates valley, while the valley itself was home to the wild boar. Carnivorous species include the gray wolf, the golden jackal, the red fox, the leopard and the lion. The Syrian brown bear can be found in the mountains of Southeast Turkey. The presence of European beaver has been attested in the bone assemblage of the prehistoric site of Abu Hureyra in Syria, but the beaver has never been sighted in historical times.\n\nThe Hindiya Barrage on the Iraqi Euphrates, based on plans by British civil engineer William Willcocks and finished in 1913, was the first modern water diversion structure built in the Tigris–Euphrates river system. The Hindiya Barrage was followed in the 1950s by the Ramadi Barrage and the nearby Abu Dibbis Regulator, which serve to regulate the flow regime of the Euphrates and to discharge excess flood water into the depression that is now Lake Habbaniyah. Iraq's largest dam on the Euphrates is the Haditha Dam; a earth-fill dam creating Lake Qadisiyah. Syria and Turkey built their first dams in the Euphrates in the 1970s. The Tabqa Dam in Syria was completed in 1973 while Turkey finished the Keban Dam, a prelude to the immense Southeastern Anatolia Project, in 1974. Since then, Syria has built two more dams in the Euphrates, the Baath Dam and the Tishrin Dam, and plans to build a fourth dam – the Halabiye Dam – between Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. The Tabqa Dam is Syria's largest dam and its reservoir (Lake Assad) is an important source of irrigation and drinking water. It was planned that should be irrigated from Lake Assad, but in 2000 only had been realized. Syria also built three smaller dams on the Khabur and its tributaries.\n\nWith the implementation of the Southeastern Anatolia Project (\"\", or \"GAP\") in the 1970s, Turkey launched an ambitious plan to harness the waters of the Tigris and the Euphrates for irrigation and hydroelectricity production and provide an economic stimulus to its southeastern provinces. GAP affects a total area of and approximately 7 million people; representing about 10 percent of Turkey's total surface area and population, respectively. When completed, GAP will consist of 22 dams – including the Keban Dam – and 19 power plants and provide irrigation water to of agricultural land, which is about 20 percent of the irrigable land in Turkey. C. of this irrigated land is located in the Euphrates basin. By far the largest dam in GAP is the Atatürk Dam, located c. northwest of Şanlıurfa. This and dam was completed in 1992; thereby creating a reservoir that is the third-largest lake in Turkey. With a maximum capacity of , the Atatürk Dam reservoir is large enough to hold the entire annual discharge of the Euphrates. Completion of GAP was scheduled for 2010 but has been delayed because the World Bank has withheld funding due to the lack of an official agreement on water sharing between Turkey and the downstream states on the Euphrates and the Tigris.\n\nApart from barrages and dams, Iraq has also created an intricate network of canals connecting the Euphrates with Lake Habbaniyah, Lake Tharthar, and Abu Dibbis reservoir; all of which can be used to store excess floodwater. Via the Shatt al-Hayy, the Euphrates is connected with the Tigris. The largest canal in this network is the Main Outfall Drain or so-called \"Third River;\" constructed between 1953 and 1992. This canal is intended to drain the area between the Euphrates and the Tigris south of Baghdad to prevent soil salinization from irrigation. It also allows large freight barges to navigate up to Baghdad.\n\nThe construction of the dams and irrigation schemes on the Euphrates has had a significant impact on the environment and society of each riparian country. The dams constructed as part of GAP – in both the Euphrates and the Tigris basins – have affected 382 villages and almost 200,000 people have been resettled elsewhere. The largest number of people was displaced by the building of the Atatürk Dam, which alone affected 55,300 people. A survey among those who were displaced showed that the majority were unhappy with their new situation and that the compensation they had received was considered insufficient. The flooding of Lake Assad led to the forced displacement of c. 4,000 families, who were resettled in other parts of northern Syria as part of a now abandoned plan to create an \"Arab belt\" along the borders with Turkey and Iraq.\n\nApart from the changes in the discharge regime of the river, the numerous dams and irrigation projects have also had other effects on the environment. The creation of reservoirs with large surfaces in countries with high average temperatures has led to increased evaporation; thereby reducing the total amount of water that is available for human use. Annual evaporation from reservoirs has been estimated at in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. Water quality in the Iraqi Euphrates is low because irrigation water tapped in Turkey and Syria flows back into the river, together with dissolved fertilizer chemicals used on the fields. The salinity of Euphrates water in Iraq has increased as a result of upstream dam construction, leading to lower suitability as drinking water. The many dams and irrigation schemes, and the associated large-scale water abstraction, have also had a detrimental effect on the ecologically already fragile Mesopotamian Marshes and on freshwater fish habitats in Iraq.\n\nThe inundation of large parts of the Euphrates valley, especially in Turkey and Syria, has led to the flooding of many archaeological sites and other places of cultural significance. Although concerted efforts have been made to record or save as much of the endangered cultural heritage as possible, many sites are probably lost forever. The combined GAP projects on the Turkish Euphrates have led to major international efforts to document the archaeological and cultural heritage of the endangered parts of the valley. Especially the flooding of Zeugma with its unique Roman mosaics by the reservoir of the Birecik Dam has generated much controversy in both the Turkish and international press. The construction of the Tabqa Dam in Syria led to a large international campaign coordinated by UNESCO to document the heritage that would disappear under the waters of Lake Assad. Archaeologists from numerous countries excavated sites ranging in date from the Natufian to the Abbasid period, and two minarets were dismantled and rebuilt outside the flood zone. Important sites that have been flooded or affected by the rising waters of Lake Assad include Mureybet, Emar and Abu Hureyra. A similar international effort was made when the Tishrin Dam was constructed, which led, among others, to the flooding of the important Pre-Pottery Neolithic B site of Jerf el-Ahmar. An archaeological survey and rescue excavations were also carried out in the area flooded by Lake Qadisiya in Iraq. Parts of the flooded area have recently become accessible again due to the drying up of the lake, resulting not only in new possibilities for archaeologists to do more research, but also providing opportunities for looting, which has been rampant elsewhere in Iraq in the wake of the 2003 invasion.\n\nThe early occupation of the Euphrates basin was limited to its upper reaches; that is, the area that is popularly known as the Fertile Crescent. Acheulean stone artifacts have been found in the Sajur basin and in the El Kowm oasis in the central Syrian steppe; the latter together with remains of \"Homo erectus\" that were dated to 450,000 years old. In the Taurus Mountains and the upper part of the Syrian Euphrates valley, early permanent villages such as Abu Hureyra – at first occupied by hunter-gatherers but later by some of the earliest farmers, Jerf el-Ahmar, Mureybet and Nevalı Çori became established from the eleventh millennium BCE onward. In the absence of irrigation, these early farming communities were limited to areas where rainfed agriculture was possible, that is, the upper parts of the Syrian Euphrates as well as Turkey. Late Neolithic villages, characterized by the introduction of pottery in the early 7th millennium BCE, are known throughout this area. Occupation of lower Mesopotamia started in the 6th millennium and is generally associated with the introduction of irrigation, as rainfall in this area is insufficient for dry agriculture. Evidence for irrigation has been found at several sites dating to this period, including Tell es-Sawwan. During the 5th millennium BCE, or late Ubaid period, northeastern Syria was dotted by small villages, although some of them grew to a size of over . In Iraq, sites like Eridu and Ur were already occupied during the Ubaid period. Clay boat models found at Tell Mashnaqa along the Khabur indicate that riverine transport was already practiced during this period. The Uruk period, roughly coinciding with the 4th millennium BCE, saw the emergence of truly urban settlements across Mesopotamia. Cities like Tell Brak and Uruk grew to over in size and displayed monumental architecture. The spread of southern Mesopotamian pottery, architecture and sealings far into Turkey and Iran has generally been interpreted as the material reflection of a widespread trade system aimed at providing the Mesopotamian cities with raw materials. Habuba Kabira on the Syrian Euphrates is a prominent example of a settlement that is interpreted as an Uruk colony.\n\nDuring the Jemdet Nasr (3600–3100 BCE) and Early Dynastic periods (3100–2350 BCE), southern Mesopotamia experienced a growth in the number and size of settlements, suggesting strong population growth. These settlements, including Sumero-Akkadian sites like Sippar, Uruk, Adab and Kish, were organized in competing city-states. Many of these cities were located along canals of the Euphrates and the Tigris that have since dried up, but that can still be identified from remote sensing imagery. A similar development took place in Upper Mesopotamia, Subartu and Assyria, although only from the mid 3rd millennium and on a smaller scale than in Lower Mesopotamia. Sites like Ebla, Mari and Tell Leilan grew to prominence for the first time during this period.\n\nLarge parts of the Euphrates basin were for the first time united under a single ruler during the Akkadian Empire (2335–2154 BC) and Ur III empires, which controlled – either directly or indirectly through vassals – large parts of modern-day Iraq and northeastern Syria. Following their collapse, the Old Assyrian Empire (1975–1750 BCE) and Mari asserted their power over northeast Syria and northern Mesopotamia, while southern Mesopotamia was controlled by city-states like Isin, Kish and Larsa before their territories were absorbed by the newly emerged state of Babylonia under Hammurabi in the early to mid 18th century BCE.\n\nIn the second half of the 2nd millennium BCE, the Euphrates basin was divided between Kassite Babylon in the south and Mitanni, Assyria and the Hittite Empire in the north, with the Middle Assyrian Empire (1365–1020 BC) eventually eclipsing the Hittites, Mitanni and Kassite Babylonians. Following the end of the Middle Assyrian Empire in the late 11th century BCE, struggles broke out between Babylonia and Assyria over the control of the Iraqi Euphrates basin. The Neo-Assyrian Empire (935–605 BC) eventually emerged victorious out of this conflict and also succeeded in gaining control of the northern Euphrates basin in the first half of the 1st millennium BCE.\n\nIn the centuries to come, control of the wider Euphrates basin shifted from the Neo-Assyrian Empire (which collapsed between 612 and 599 BC) to the short lived Median Empire (612–546 BC) and equally brief Neo-Babylonian Empire (612–539 BC) in the last years of the 7th century BC, and eventually to the Achaemenid Empire (539–333 BC). The Achaemenid Empire was in turn overrun by Alexander the Great, who defeated the last king Darius III and died in Babylon in 323 BCE.\n\nSubsequent to this, the region came under the control of the Seleucid Empire (312–150 BC), Parthian Empire (150–226 AD) (during which several Neo-Assyrian states such as Adiabene came to rule certain regions of the Euphrates), and was fought over by the Roman Empire, its succeeding Byzantine Empire and the Sassanid Empire (226–638 AD), until the Islamic conquest of the mid 7th century AD. The Battle of Karbala took place near the banks of this river in 680 AD.\n\nIn the north, the river served as a border between Greater Armenia (331 BC–428 AD) and Lesser Armenia (the latter became a Roman province in the 1st century BC).\n\nAfter World War I, the borders in Southwest Asia were redrawn in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), when the Ottoman Empire was partitioned. Clause 109 of the treaty stipulated that the three riparian states of the Euphrates (at that time Turkey, France for its Syrian mandate and the United Kingdom for its mandate of Iraq) had to reach a mutual agreement on the use of its water and on the construction of any hydraulic installation. An agreement between Turkey and Iraq signed in 1946 required Turkey to report to Iraq on any hydraulic changes it made on the Tigris–Euphrates river system, and allowed Iraq to construct dams on Turkish territory to manage the flow of the Euphrates.\nThe river featured on the coat of arms of Iraq from 1932-1959.\nTurkey and Syria completed their first dams on the Euphrates – the Keban Dam and the Tabqa Dam, respectively – within one year of each other and filling of the reservoirs commenced in 1975. At the same time, the area was hit by severe drought and river flow toward Iraq was reduced from in 1973 to in 1975. This led to an international crisis during which Iraq threatened to bomb the Tabqa Dam. An agreement was eventually reached between Syria and Iraq after intervention by Saudi Arabia and the Soviet Union. A similar crisis, although not escalating to the point of military threats, occurred in 1981 when the Keban Dam reservoir had to be refilled after it had been almost emptied to temporarily increase Turkey's hydroelectricity production. In 1984, Turkey unilaterally declared that it would ensure a flow of at least per second, or per year, into Syria, and in 1987 a bilateral treaty to that effect was signed between the two countries. Another bilateral agreement from 1989 between Syria and Iraq settles the amount of water flowing into Iraq at 60 percent of the amount that Syria receives from Turkey. In 2008, Turkey, Syria and Iraq instigated the Joint Trilateral Committee (JTC) on the management of the water in the Tigris–Euphrates basin and on 3 September 2009 a further agreement was signed to this effect.\nOn April 15, 2014, Turkey began to reduce the flow of the Euphrates into Syria and Iraq. The flow was cut off completely on May 16, 2014 resulting in the Euphrates terminating at the Turkish–Syrian border. This was in violation of an agreement reached in 1987 in which Turkey committed to releasing a minimum of of water per second at the Turkish–Syrian border.\n\nThroughout history, the Euphrates has been of vital importance to those living along its course. With the construction of large hydropower stations, irrigation schemes, and pipelines capable of transporting water over large distances, many more people now depend on the river for basic amenities such as electricity and drinking water than in the past. Syria's Lake Assad is the most important source of drinking water for the city of Aleppo, to the west of the river valley. The lake also supports a modest state-operated fishing industry. Through a newly restored power line, the Haditha Dam in Iraq provides electricity to Baghdad.\n"}
{"id": "10223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10223", "title": "Estonian language", "text": "Estonian language\n\nThe Estonian language ( ) is a Uralic language of the Finnic branch spoken in Estonia. It is the official language of Estonia, spoken natively by about 1.1 million people; 922,000 people in Estonia and 160,000 outside Estonia. It is a Southern Finnic language and is the second-most-spoken language among all the Finnic languages.\n\nEstonian is closely related to Finnish and belongs to the Finnic branch of the Uralic language family. Alongside Finnish, Hungarian, and Maltese, Estonian is one of the four official languages of European Union that is not of an Indo-European origin. Despite some overlaps in the vocabulary due to borrowings, in terms of its origin, Estonian and Finnish are not related to their nearest geographical neighbours, Swedish, Latvian, and Russian, which are all Indo-European languages.\n\nAlthough the Estonian and Germanic languages are of very different origins, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and German, for example. This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of , and High German (including Standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22–25 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent. Swedish and Russian are the other two important sources of borrowings.\n\nEstonian is a predominantly agglutinative language, but unlike Finnish, it has lost vowel harmony, the front vowels occurring exclusively on the first or stressed syllable, although in older texts and in South Estonian dialects the vowel harmony can still be recognized. Furthermore, the loss of word-final sounds is extensive, and this has made its inflectional morphology markedly more fusional, especially with respect to noun and adjective inflection. The transitional form from an agglutinating to a fusional language is a common feature of Estonian typologically over the course of history with the development of a rich morphological system.\n\nWord order is considerably more flexible than English, but the basic order is subject–verb–object.\n\nThe two different historical Estonian languages (sometimes considered dialects), the North and South Estonian languages, are based on the ancestors of modern Estonians' migration into the territory of Estonia in at least two different waves, both groups speaking considerably different Finnic vernaculars. Modern standard Estonian has evolved on the basis of the dialects of Northern Estonia.\nThe oldest written records of the Finnic languages of Estonia date from the 13th century. \"Originates Livoniae\" in Chronicle of Henry of Livonia contains Estonian place names, words and fragments of sentences.\n\nThe earliest extant samples of connected (north) Estonian are the so-called Kullamaa prayers dating from 1524 and 1528. In 1525 the first book published in the Estonian language was printed. The book was a Lutheran manuscript, which never reached the reader and was destroyed immediately after publication.\n\nThe first extant Estonian book is a bilingual German-Estonian translation of the Lutheran catechism by S.Wanradt and J.Koell dating to 1535, during the Protestant Reformation period. An Estonian grammar book to be used by priests was printed in German in 1637. The New Testament was translated into southern Estonian in 1686 (northern Estonian, 1715). The two languages were united based on northern Estonian by Anton thor Helle.\n\nWritings in Estonian became more significant in the 19th century during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750–1840).\n\nThe birth of native Estonian literature was in 1810 to 1820 when the patriotic and philosophical poems by Kristjan Jaak Peterson were published. Peterson, who was the first student at the then German-language University of Dorpat to acknowledge his Estonian origin, is commonly regarded as a herald of Estonian national literature and considered the founder of modern Estonian poetry. His birthday, March 14, is celebrated in Estonia as Mother Tongue Day. A fragment from Peterson's poem \"Kuu\" expresses the claim reestablishing the birthright of the Estonian language:\n\nIn English:\nIn the period from 1525 to 1917, 14,503 titles were published in Estonian; by comparison, between 1918 and 1940, 23,868 titles were published.\n\nIn modern times Jaan Kross and Jaan Kaplinski remain as two of Estonia's best known and most translated writers.\n\nWritings in Estonian became significant only in the 19th century with the spread of the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment, during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750–1840). Although Baltic Germans at large regarded the future of Estonians as being a fusion with themselves, the Estophile educated class admired the ancient culture of the Estonians and their era of freedom before the conquests by Danes and Germans in the 13th century.\n\nAfter the Estonian War of Independence in 1919, the Estonian language became the state language of the newly independent country. In 1945, 97.3% of Estonia considered itself ethnic Estonian and spoke the language.\n\nWhen Estonia was invaded and occupied by the Soviet Union in World War II, the status of the Estonian language changed to the first of two official languages (Russian being the other one). As with Latvia many immigrants entered Estonia under Soviet encouragement. In the second half of the 1970s, the pressure of bilingualism (for Estonians) intensified, resulting in widespread knowledge of Russian throughout the country. The Russian language was termed as ‘the language of friendship of nations’ and was taught to Estonian children, sometimes as early as in kindergarten. Although teaching Estonian to non-Estonians in schools was compulsory, in practice learning the language was often considered unnecessary.\n\nDuring the Perestroika era, The Law on the Status of the Estonian Language was adopted in January 1989. The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union led to the restoration of the Republic of Estonia's independence. Estonian went back to being the only state language in Estonia which in practice meant that use of Estonian was promoted while the use of Russian was discouraged.\n\nThe return of Soviet immigrants to their countries of origin has brought the proportion of Estonians in Estonia back above 70%. And again as in Latvia, today many of the remnant non-Estonians in Estonia have adopted the Estonian language; about 40% at the 2000 census.\n\nThe Estonian dialects are divided into two groups – the northern and southern dialects, historically associated with the cities of Tallinn in the north and Tartu in the south, in addition to a distinct \"kirderanniku\" dialect, Northeastern coastal Estonian.\n\nThe northern group consists of the \"keskmurre\" or central dialect that is also the basis for the standard language, the \"läänemurre\" or western dialect, roughly corresponding to Lääne County and Pärnu County, the \"saarte murre\" (islands') dialect of Saaremaa and Hiiumaa and the \"idamurre\" or eastern dialect on the northwestern shore of Lake Peipus.\n\nSouth Estonian consists of the Tartu, Mulgi, Võro and Seto varieties. These are sometimes considered either variants of South Estonian or separate languages altogether. Also, Seto and Võro distinguish themselves from each other less by language and more by their culture and their respective Christian confession.\n\nEstonian employs the Latin script as the basis for its alphabet, which adds the letters \"ä\", \"ö\", \"ü\", and \"õ\", plus the later additions \"š\" and \"ž\". The letters \"c\", \"q\", \"w\", \"x\" and \"y\" are limited to proper names of foreign origin, and \"f\", \"z\", \"š\", and \"ž\" appear in loanwords and foreign names only. \"Ö\" and \"ü\" are pronounced similarly to their equivalents in Swedish and German. Unlike in standard German but like Finnish and Swedish (when followed by 'r'), \"Ä\" is pronounced [æ], as in English \"mat\". The vowels Ä, Ö and Ü are clearly separate phonemes and inherent in Estonian, although the letter shapes come from German. The letter \"õ\" denotes , unrounded , or a close-mid back unrounded vowel. It is almost identical to the Bulgarian ъ and the Vietnamese ơ, and is also used to transcribe the Russian ы.\n\nAlthough the Estonian orthography is generally guided by phonemic principles, with each grapheme corresponding to one phoneme, there are some historical and morphological deviations from this: for example preservation of the morpheme in declension of the word (writing b, g, d in places where p, k, t is pronounced) and in the use of 'i' and 'j'. Where it is very impractical or impossible to type \"š\" and \"ž\", they are substituted with \"sh\" and \"zh\" in some written texts, although this is considered incorrect. Otherwise, the \"h\" in \"sh\" represents a voiceless glottal fricative, as in \"Pasha\" (\"pas-ha\"); this also applies to some foreign names.\n\nModern Estonian orthography is based on the \"Newer Orthography\" created by Eduard Ahrens in the second half of the 19thcentury based on Finnish orthography. The \"Older Orthography\" it replaced was created in the 17thcentury by Bengt Gottfried Forselius and Johann Hornung based on standard German orthography. Earlier writing in Estonian had by and large used an \"ad hoc\" orthography based on Latin and Middle Low German orthography. Some influences of the standard German orthography — for example, writing 'W'/'w' instead of 'V'/'v' — persisted well into the 1930s.\n\nEstonian words and names quoted in international publications from Soviet sources are often back-transliterations from the Russian transliteration. Examples are the use of \"ya\" for \"ä\" (e.g. Pyarnu instead of Pärnu), \"y\" instead of \"õ\" (e.g., Pylva instead of Põlva) and \"yu\" instead of \"ü\" (e.g., Pyussi instead of Püssi). Even in the \"Encyclopædia Britannica\" one can find \"ostrov Khiuma\", where \"ostrov\" means \"island\" in Russian and \"Khiuma\" is back-transliteration from Russian instead of \"Hiiumaa\" (\"Hiiumaa\" > Хийума(а) > \"Khiuma\").\n\nThere are 9 vowels and 36 diphthongs, 28 of which are native to Estonian. All nine vowels can appear as the first component of a diphthong, but only /ɑ e i o u/ occur as the second component. A vowel characteristic of Estonian is the unrounded back vowel /ɤ/, which may be close-mid back, close back, or close-mid central.\n! rowspan=\"2\" \n! colspan=\"2\" Front\n! colspan=\"2\" Back\n!Unrounded\n!Rounded\n!Unrounded\n!Rounded\n!Close\n\n!Mid\n\n!Open\n\nTypologically, Estonian represents a transitional form from an agglutinating language to a fusional language. The canonical word order is SVO (subject–verb–object).\n\nIn Estonian, nouns and pronouns do not have grammatical gender, but nouns and adjectives decline in fourteen cases: nominative, genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative, adessive, ablative, translative, terminative, essive, abessive, and comitative, with the case and number of the adjective(s) always agreeing with that of the noun (except in the terminative, essive, abessive and comitative, where there is agreement only for the number, the adjective being in the genitive form). Thus the illative for \"kollane maja\" (\"a yellow house\") is \"kollasesse majja\" (\"into a yellow house\"), but the terminative is \"kollase majani\" (\"as far as a yellow house\"). With respect to the Proto-Finnic language, elision has occurred; thus, the actual case marker may be absent, but the stem is changed, cf. \"maja – majja\" and the Ostrobothnia dialect of Finnish \"maja – majahan\".\n\nThe direct object of the verb appears either in the accusative (for total objects) or in the partitive (for partial objects). The accusative coincides with the genitive in the singular and with nominative in the plural. Accusative vs. partitive case opposition of the object used with transitive verbs creates a telicity contrast, just as in Finnish. This is a rough equivalent of the perfective vs. imperfective aspect opposition.\n\nThe verbal system lacks a distinctive future tense (the present tense serves here) and features special forms to express an action performed by an undetermined subject (the \"impersonal\").\n\nAlthough the Estonian and Germanic languages are of very different origins and the vocabulary is considered quite different from that of the Indo-European family, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and English, for example. This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of , and High German (including standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22–25 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent.\n\nOften 'b' & 'p' are interchangeable, for example 'baggage' becomes 'pagas', 'lob' (to throw) becomes 'loopima'. The initial letter 's' before another consonant is often dropped, for example 'skool' becomes 'kool', 'stool' becomes 'tool'.\n\nEstonian language planners such as Ado Grenzstein (a journalist active in Estonia in the 1870s–90s) tried to use formation \"ex nihilo\", Urschöpfung; i.e. they created new words out of nothing.\n\nThe most famous reformer of Estonian, Johannes Aavik (1880–1973), used creations \"ex nihilo\" (cf. ‘free constructions’, Tauli 1977), along with other sources of lexical enrichment such as derivations, compositions and loanwords (often from Finnish; cf. Saareste and Raun 1965: 76). In Aavik’s dictionary (1921), which lists approximately 4000 words, there are many words which were (allegedly) created \"ex nihilo\", many of which are in common use today. Examples are\nBULLET::::- \"ese\" ‘object’,\nBULLET::::- \"kolp\" ‘skull’,\nBULLET::::- \"liibuma\" ‘to cling’,\nBULLET::::- \"naasma\" ‘to return, come back’,\nBULLET::::- \"nõme\" 'stupid, dull.'\n\nMany of the coinages that have been considered (often by Aavik himself) as words concocted \"ex nihilo\" could well have been influenced by foreign lexical items, for example words from Russian, German, French, Finnish, English and Swedish. Aavik had a broad classical education and knew Ancient Greek, Latin and French. Consider \"roim\" ‘crime’ versus English \"crime\" or \"taunima\" ‘to condemn, disapprove’ versus Finnish \"tuomita\" ‘to condemn, to judge’ (these Aavikisms appear in Aavik’s 1921 dictionary). These words might be better regarded as a peculiar manifestation of morpho-phonemic adaptation of a foreign lexical item.\n\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Estonian:\n\nBULLET::::- The BABEL Speech Corpus\n\n\nBULLET::::- Estonica.org article\n"}
{"id": "10224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10224", "title": "E-Prime", "text": "E-Prime\n\nE-Prime (short for English-Prime or English Prime, sometimes denoted É or E′) is a version of the English language that excludes all forms of the verb \"to be\", including all conjugations, contractions and archaic forms.\n\nSome scholars advocate using E-Prime as a device to clarify thinking and strengthen writing. A number of other scholars have criticized E-Prime's utility.\n\nD. David Bourland Jr., who had studied under Alfred Korzybski, devised E-Prime as an addition to Korzybski's general semantics in the late 1940s. Bourland published the concept in a 1965 essay entitled \"A Linguistic Note: Writing in E-Prime\" (originally published in \"General Semantics Bulletin\"). The essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field, partly because practitioners of general semantics sometimes saw Bourland as attacking the verb \"to be\" as such, and not just certain usages.\n\nBourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation. The first (1991), co-edited by Paul Dennithorne Johnston, bore the title: \"To Be or Not: An E-Prime Anthology\".\nFor the second, \"More E-Prime: To Be or Not II\", published in 1994, he added a third editor, Jeremy Klein. Bourland and Johnston then edited a third book, \"E-Prime III: a third anthology\", published in 1997.\n\nIn the English language, the verb 'to be' (also known as the \"copula\") has several distinct functions:\nBULLET::::- identity, of the form \"\"noun\" \"copula\" \"definite-noun\"\" \"[The cat is my only pet]\"; \"[The cat is Garfield]\"\nBULLET::::- class membership, of the form \"\"definite-noun\" \"copula\" \"noun\"\" \"[Garfield is a cat]\"\nBULLET::::- class inclusion, of the form \"\"noun\" \"copula\" \"noun\"\" \"[A cat is an animal]\"\nBULLET::::- predication, of the form \"\"noun\" \"copula\" \"adjective\"\" \"[The cat is furry]\"\nBULLET::::- auxiliary, of the form \"\"noun\" \"copula\" \"verb\"\" \"[The cat is sleeping]\"; \"[The cat is being bitten by the dog]\". The examples illustrate two different uses of 'be' as an auxiliary. In the first, 'be' is part of the progressive aspect, used with \"-ing\" on the verb; in the second, it is part of the passive, as indicated by the perfect participle of a transitive verb.\nBULLET::::- existence, of the form \"there \"copula\" \"noun\"\" \"[There is a cat]\"\nBULLET::::- location, of the form \"\"noun\" \"copula\" \"place-phrase\"\" \"[The cat is on the mat]\"; \"[The cat is here]\"\n\nBourland sees specifically the \"identity\" and \"predication\" functions as pernicious, but advocates eliminating all forms for the sake of simplicity. In the case of the \"existence\" form (and less idiomatically, the \"location\" form), one might (for example) simply substitute the verb \"exists\". Other copula-substitutes in English include \"taste\", \"feel\", \"smell\", \"sound\", \"grow\", \"remain\", \"stay\", and \"turn\", among others a user of E-prime might use instead of \"to be\".\n\nWords not used in E-prime include: be, being, been, am, is, isn't, are, aren't, was, wasn't, were, and weren't.\n\nContractions formed from a pronoun and a form of \"to be\" are also not used, including: I'm, you're, we're, they're, he's, she's, it's, there's, here's, where's, how's, what's, who's, and that's. E-Prime also prohibits contractions of \"to be\" found in nonstandard dialects of English, such as \"ain't\".\n\nBourland and other advocates also suggest that use of E-Prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict.\n\nKellogg and Bourland describe misuse of the verb \"to be\" as creating a \"deity mode of speech\", allowing \"even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-like pronouncements on the nature of things\".\n\nWhile teaching at the University of Florida, Alfred Korzybski counseled his students to eliminate the infinitive and verb forms of \"to be\" from their vocabulary, whereas a second group continued to use \"I am,\" \"You are,\" \"They are\" statements as usual. For example, instead of saying, \"I am depressed,\" a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else, such as, \"I feel depressed when ...\" or \"I tend to make myself depressed about ...\"\n\nKorzybski observed improvement \"of one full letter grade\" by \"students who did not generalize by using that infinitive\".\n\nAlbert Ellis advocated the use of E-Prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary (see also Solution focused brief therapy) and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements. According to Ellis, rational emotive behavior therapy \"has favored E-Prime more than any other form of psychotherapy and I think it is still the only form of therapy that has some of its main books written in E-Prime\". However, Ellis did not always use E-Prime because he believed it interferes with readability.\n\n!Standard English\n!E-Prime\ncolspan=\"3\"\n\nBULLET::::- \"\", by Brentley Frazer\nBULLET::::- \"Worlds of Wonder: How to Write Science Fiction & Fantasy\" by David Gerrold has a chapter about (and written in) E-Prime\nBULLET::::- \"The New American Standard Bible in E-Prime\", composed by Dr. David F. Maas\nBULLET::::- \"Laws of Form\" by G. Spencer-Brown (except for one statement)\nBULLET::::- \"Quantum Psychology\", by Robert Anton Wilson (1990)\n\nMany authors have questioned E-Prime's effectiveness at improving readability and reducing prejudice (Lakoff, 1992; Murphy, 1992; Parkinson, 1992; Kenyon, 1992; French, 1992, 1993; Lohrey, 1993). These authors observed that a communication under the copula ban can remain extremely unclear and imply prejudice, while losing important speech patterns, such as identities and identification. Further, prejudices and judgments that are made are more difficult to notice or refute. James D. French, a computer programmer at the University of California, Berkeley, summarized ten arguments against E-Prime (in the context of general semantics) as follows:\n\nBULLET::::1. The elimination of a whole class of sentences results in fewer alternatives and is likely to make writing less, rather than more, interesting. One can improve bad writing more by reducing use of the verb 'to be' than by eliminating it.\nBULLET::::2. \"Effective writing techniques\" are not relevant to general semantics as a discipline, and therefore should not be promoted as general semantics practice.\nBULLET::::3. The context often ameliorates the possible harmful effects from the use of the is-of-identity and the is-of-predication, so it is not necessary to eliminate all such sentences. For example, \"George is a Judge\" in response to a question of what he does for a living would not be a questionable statement.\nBULLET::::4. \"To be\" statements do not only convey identity but also asymmetrical relations (\"X is higher than Y\"); negation (\"A is not B\"); location (\"Berlin is in Germany\"); auxiliary (\"I am going to the store\") etc., forms we would also have to sacrifice.\nBULLET::::5. Eliminating \"to be\" from English has little effect on eliminating identity. For example, a statement of apparently equal identification, \"The silly ban on copula continues,\" can be made without the copula assuming an identity rather than asserting it, consequently hampering our awareness of it.\nBULLET::::6. Identity-in-the-language is not the same thing as the far more important identity-in-reaction (identification). General semantics cuts the link between the two through the practice of silence on the objective levels, adopting a self-reflexive attitude, e.g., \"as I see it\" \"it seems to me\" etc., and by the use of quotation marks—without using E-Prime.\nBULLET::::7. The advocates of E-Prime have not proven that it is easier to eliminate the verb \"to be\" from the English language than it is to eliminate just the is-of-identity and the is-of-predication. It may well be easier to do the latter for many people.\nBULLET::::8. One of the best languages for time-binding is mathematics, which relies heavily on the notion of equivalence and equality. For the purposes of time-binding, it may be better to keep \"to be\" in the language while only cutting the link between identity-in-the-language and identification-in-our-reactions.\nBULLET::::9. E-Prime tends to make the expression of higher orders of abstraction more difficult, e.g. \"She is a student\" is rendered in E-Prime, e.g., as \"She attends classes at the university\".\nBULLET::::10. E-Prime makes no distinction between statements that cross the principles of general semantics and statements that do not. It lacks consistency with the other tenets of general semantics and should not be included into the discipline.\n\nAccording to an article (written in E-Prime and advocating a role for E-Prime in ESL and EFL programs) published by the Office of English Language Programs of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs in the State Department of the United States, \"Requiring students to avoid the verb to be on every assignment would deter students from developing other fundamental skills of fluent writing.\"\n\nBULLET::::- Constrained writing\nBULLET::::- English passive voice\nBULLET::::- General semantics\nBULLET::::- Grammatical voice\nBULLET::::- Linguistic prescription\nBULLET::::- Linguistic relativity\n\nBULLET::::- Bourland, D. David, Jr., Jeremy Klein, and Paul Dennithorne Johnstone, (editors) (1994) \"More E-Prime: To Be or Not II\". Concord, California: International Society for General Semantics.\nBULLET::::- French, James D. (1992) \"The Top Ten Arguments against E-Prime.\" ETC: A Review of General Semantics, v49 n2 p175-79\nBULLET::::- ________________ (1993) \" The Prime Problem with General Semantics.\" ETC: A Review of General Semantics, v50 n3 p326-35\nBULLET::::- Kenyon, Ralph (1992) \"E-Prime: The Spirit and the Letter.\"ETC: A Review of General Semantics, v49 n2 p185-88\nBULLET::::- Lakoff, Robin T. (1992) \"Not Ready for Prime Time.\" ETC: A Review of General Semantics, v49 n2 p142-45\nBULLET::::- Lohrey, Andrew (1993) \"E-Prime, E-Choice, E-Chosen.\" ETC: A Review of General Semantics, v50 n3 p346-50\nBULLET::::- Murphy, Cullen (1992) \"\"To Be\" in Their Bonnets: A Matter of Semantics.\" ETC: A Review of General Semantics, v49 n2 p125-30 Sum 1992\nBULLET::::- Murphy, Cullen (1992) \"'To Be' in Their Bonnets: A matter of semantics\" \"The Atlantic Monthly\" February 1992\n\nBULLET::::- Beyond Is: Creative Writing with English Prime by Brentley Frazer\nBULLET::::- E-Prime! – The Fundamentals, by D. David Bourland, Jr. Accessed: 8 December 2015.\nBULLET::::- Speaking in E-Prime - by E. W. Kellogg III. Accessed: 8 December 2015.\nBULLET::::- Can E-Prime make us better writers? - an article about style\nBULLET::::- Toward understanding E-prime\nBULLET::::- E-prime: The Spirit and the Letter, by Ralph E. Kenyon Jr.\nBULLET::::- Discovering E-Prime, by Elaine C. Johnson\nBULLET::::- E-Prime and Linguistic Revision, by C. A. Hilgartner\n"}
{"id": "10225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10225", "title": "Elliptic curve", "text": "Elliptic curve\n\nIn mathematics, an elliptic curve is a plane algebraic curve defined by an equation of the form\n\nwhich is non-singular; that is, the curve has no cusps or self-intersections. (When the coefficient field has characteristic 2 or 3, the above equation is not quite general enough to comprise all non-singular cubic curves; see below.)\n\nFormally, an elliptic curve is a smooth, projective, algebraic curve of genus one, on which there is a specified point \"O\". An elliptic curve is an abelian variety – that is, it has a multiplication defined algebraically, with respect to which it is an abelian group – and \"O\" serves as the identity element. Often the curve itself, without \"O\" specified, is called an elliptic curve; the point \"O\" is often taken to be the curve's \"point at infinity\" in the projective plane.\n\nIf \"y\" = \"P\"(\"x\"), where \"P\" is any polynomial of degree three in \"x\" with no repeated roots, the solution set is a nonsingular plane curve of genus one, an elliptic curve. If \"P\" has degree four and is square-free this equation again describes a plane curve of genus one; however, it has no natural choice of identity element. More generally, any algebraic curve of genus one, for example from the intersection of two quadric surfaces embedded in three-dimensional projective space, is called an elliptic curve, provided that it has at least one rational point to act as the identity.\n\nUsing the theory of elliptic functions, it can be shown that elliptic curves defined over the complex numbers correspond to embeddings of the torus into the complex projective plane. The torus is also an abelian group, and in fact this correspondence is also a group isomorphism.\n\nElliptic curves are especially important in number theory, and constitute a major area of current research; for example, they were used in the proof, by Andrew Wiles, of Fermat's Last Theorem. They also find applications in elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) and integer factorization.\n\nAn elliptic curve is \"not\" an ellipse: see elliptic integral for the origin of the term. Topologically, a complex elliptic curve is a torus.\n\nAlthough the formal definition of an elliptic curve is fairly technical and requires some background in algebraic geometry, it is possible to describe some features of elliptic curves over the real numbers using only introductory algebra and geometry.\n\nIn this context, an elliptic curve is a plane curve defined by an equation of the form\n\nwhere \"a\" and \"b\" are real numbers. This type of equation is called a Weierstrass equation.\n\nThe definition of elliptic curve also requires that the curve be non-singular. Geometrically, this means that the graph has no cusps, self-intersections, or isolated points. Algebraically, this holds if and only if the discriminant\n\nis not equal to zero. (Although the factor −16 is irrelevant to whether or not the curve is non-singular, this definition of the discriminant is useful in a more advanced study of elliptic curves.)\n\nThe (real) graph of a non-singular curve has \"two\" components if its discriminant is positive, and \"one\" component if it is negative. For example, in the graphs shown in figure to the right, the discriminant in the first case is 64, and in the second case is −368.\n\nWhen working in the projective plane, we can define a group structure on any smooth cubic curve. In Weierstrass normal form, such a curve will have an additional point at infinity, \"O\", at the homogeneous coordinates [0:1:0] which serves as the identity of the group.\n\nSince the curve is symmetrical about the x-axis, given any point \"P\", we can take −\"P\" to be the point opposite it. We take −\"O\" to be just \"O\".\n\nIf \"P\" and \"Q\" are two points on the curve, then we can uniquely describe a third point, \"P\" + \"Q\", in the following way. First, draw the line that intersects \"P\" and \"Q\". This will generally intersect the cubic at a third point, \"R\". We then take \"P\" + \"Q\" to be −\"R\", the point opposite \"R\".\n\nThis definition for addition works except in a few special cases related to the point at infinity and intersection multiplicity. The first is when one of the points is \"O\". Here, we define \"P\" + \"O\" = \"P\" = \"O\" + \"P\", making \"O\" the identity of the group. Next, if \"P\" and \"Q\" are opposites of each other, we define \"P\" + \"Q\" = \"O\". Lastly, if \"P\" = \"Q\" we only have one point, thus we can't define the line between them. In this case, we use the tangent line to the curve at this point as our line. In most cases, the tangent will intersect a second point \"R\" and we can take its opposite. However, if \"P\" happens to be an inflection point (a point where the concavity of the curve changes), we take \"R\" to be \"P\" itself and \"P\" + \"P\" is simply the point opposite itself.\n\nFor a cubic curve not in Weierstrass normal form, we can still define a group structure by designating one of its nine inflection points as the identity \"O\". In the projective plane, each line will intersect a cubic at three points when accounting for multiplicity. For a point \"P\", −\"P\" is defined as the unique third point on the line passing through \"O\" and \"P\". Then, for any \"P\" and \"Q\", \"P\" + \"Q\" is defined as −\"R\" where \"R\" is the unique third point on the line containing \"P\" and \"Q\".\n\nLet \"K\" be a field over which the curve is defined (i.e., the coefficients of the defining equation or equations of the curve are in \"K\") and denote the curve by \"E\". Then the \"K\"-rational points of \"E\" are the points on \"E\" whose coordinates all lie in \"K\", including the point at infinity. The set of \"K\"-rational points is denoted by \"E\"(\"K\"). It, too, forms a group, because properties of polynomial equations show that if \"P\" is in \"E\"(\"K\"), then −\"P\" is also in \"E\"(\"K\"), and if two of \"P\", \"Q\", and \"R\" are in \"E\"(\"K\"), then so is the third. Additionally, if \"K\" is a subfield of \"L\", then \"E\"(\"K\") is a subgroup of \"E\"(\"L\").\n\nThe above group can be described algebraically as well as geometrically. Given the curve \"y\" = \"x\" + \"ax\" + \"b\" over the field \"K\" (whose characteristic we assume to be neither 2 nor 3), and points \"P\" = (\"x\", \"y\") and \"Q\" = (\"x\", \"y\") on the curve, assume first that \"x\" ≠ \"x\" (first pane below). Let \"y = sx + d\" be the line that intersects \"P\" and \"Q\", which has the following slope:\n\nSince \"K\" is a field, \"s\" is well-defined. The line equation and the curve equation have an identical \"y\" in the points \"x\", \"x\", and \"x\".\n\nwhich is equivalent to formula_6. We know that this equation has its roots in exactly the same \"x\"-values as\n\nWe equate the coefficient for \"x\" and solve for \"x\". \"y\" follows from the line equation. This defines \"R\" = (\"x\", \"y\") = −(\"P\" + \"Q\") with\n\nIf \"x\" = \"x\", then there are two options: if \"y\" = −\"y\" (third and fourth panes below), including the case where \"y\" = \"y\" = 0 (fourth pane), then the sum is defined as 0; thus, the inverse of each point on the curve is found by reflecting it across the \"x\"-axis. If \"y\" = \"y\" ≠ 0, then \"Q\" = \"P\" and \"R\" = (\"x\", \"y\") = −(\"P\" + \"P\") = −2\"P\" = −2\"Q\" (second pane below with \"P\" shown for \"R\") is given by\n\nThe formulation of elliptic curves as the embedding of a torus in the complex projective plane follows naturally from a curious property of Weierstrass's elliptic functions. These functions and their first derivative are related by the formula\n\nHere, \"g\" and \"g\" are constants; formula_11 is the Weierstrass elliptic function and formula_12 its derivative. It should be clear that this relation is in the form of an elliptic curve (over the complex numbers). The Weierstrass functions are doubly periodic; that is, they are periodic with respect to a lattice Λ; in essence, the Weierstrass functions are naturally defined on a torus \"T\" = C/Λ. This torus may be embedded in the complex projective plane by means of the map\n\nThis map is a group isomorphism of the torus (considered with its natural group structure) with the chord-and-tangent group law on the cubic curve which is the image of this map. It is also an isomorphism of Riemann surfaces from the torus to the cubic curve, so topologically, an elliptic curve is a torus. If the lattice Λ is related by multiplication by a non-zero complex number \"c\" to a lattice \"c\"Λ, then the corresponding curves are isomorphic. Isomorphism classes of elliptic curves are specified by the j-invariant.\n\nThe isomorphism classes can be understood in a simpler way as well. The constants \"g\" and \"g\", called the modular invariants, are uniquely determined by the lattice, that is, by the structure of the torus. However, the complex numbers form the splitting field for polynomials with real coefficients, and so the elliptic curve may be written as\n\nOne finds that\n\nand\n\nso that the modular discriminant is\n\nHere, λ is sometimes called the modular lambda function.\n\nNote that the uniformization theorem implies that every compact Riemann surface of genus one can be represented as a torus.\n\nThis also allows an easy understanding of the torsion points on an elliptic curve: if the lattice Λ is spanned by the fundamental periods ω and ω, then the \"n\"-torsion points are the (equivalence classes of) points of the form\n\nfor \"a\" and \"b\" integers in the range from 0 to \"n\"−1.\n\nOver the complex numbers, every elliptic curve has nine inflection points. Every line through two of these points also passes through a third inflection point; the nine points and 12 lines formed in this way form a realization of the Hesse configuration.\n\nA curve \"E\" defined over the field of rational numbers is also defined over the field of real numbers. Therefore, the law of addition (of points with real coordinates) by the tangent and secant method can be applied to \"E\". The explicit formulae show that the sum of two points \"P\" and \"Q\" with rational coordinates has again rational coordinates, since the line joining \"P\" and \"Q\" has rational coefficients. This way, one shows that the set of rational points of \"E\" forms a subgroup of the group of real points of \"E\". As this group, it is an abelian group, that is, \"P\" + \"Q\" = \"Q\" + \"P\".\n\nThe most important result is that all points can be constructed by the method of tangents and secants starting with a \"finite\" number of points. More precisely the Mordell–Weil theorem states that the group \"E\"(Q) is a finitely generated (abelian) group. By the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups it is therefore a finite direct sum of copies of Z and finite cyclic groups.\n\nThe proof of that theorem rests on two ingredients: first, one shows that for any integer \"m\" > 1, the quotient group \"E\"(Q)/\"mE\"(Q) is finite (weak Mordell–Weil theorem). Second, introducing a height function \"h\" on the rational points \"E\"(Q) defined by \"h\"(\"P\") = 0 and if \"P\" (unequal to the point at infinity \"P\") has as abscissa the rational number \"x\" = \"p\"/\"q\" (with coprime \"p\" and \"q\"). This height function \"h\" has the property that \"h\"(\"mP\") grows roughly like the square of \"m\". Moreover, only finitely many rational points with height smaller than any constant exist on \"E\".\n\nThe proof of the theorem is thus a variant of the method of infinite descent and relies on the repeated application of Euclidean divisions on \"E\": let \"P\" ∈ \"E\"(Q) be a rational point on the curve, writing \"P\" as the sum 2\"P\" + \"Q\" where \"Q\" is a fixed representant of \"P\" in \"E\"(Q)/2\"E\"(Q), the height of \"P\" is about of the one of \"P\" (more generally, replacing 2 by any \"m\" > 1, and by ). Redoing the same with \"P\", that is to say \"P\" = 2\"P\" + \"Q\", then \"P\" = 2\"P\" + \"Q\", etc. finally expresses \"P\" as an integral linear combination of points \"Q\" and of points whose height is bounded by a fixed constant chosen in advance: by the weak Mordell–Weil theorem and the second property of the height function \"P\" is thus expressed as an integral linear combination of a finite number of fixed points.\n\nSo far, the theorem is not effective since there is no known general procedure for determining the representants of \"E\"(Q)/\"mE\"(Q).\n\nThe rank of \"E\"(Q), that is the number of copies of Z in \"E\"(Q) or, equivalently, the number of independent points of infinite order, is called the \"rank\" of \"E\". The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture is concerned with determining the rank. One conjectures that it can be arbitrarily large, even if only examples with relatively small rank are known. The elliptic curve with biggest exactly known rank is\n\nIt has rank 19, found by Noam Elkies in 2009. Curves of rank at least 28 are known, but their rank is not exactly known.\n\nAs for the groups constituting the torsion subgroup of \"E\"(Q), the following is known: the torsion subgroup of \"E\"(Q) is one of the 15 following groups (a theorem due to Barry Mazur): Z/\"NZ for \"N\" = 1, 2, ..., 10, or 12, or Z/2Z × Z/2\"NZ with \"N\" = 1, 2, 3, 4. Examples for every case are known. Moreover, elliptic curves whose Mordell–Weil groups over Q have the same torsion groups belong to a parametrized family.\n\nThe \"Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture\" (BSD) is one of the Millennium problems of the Clay Mathematics Institute. The conjecture relies on analytic and arithmetic objects defined by the elliptic curve in question.\n\nAt the analytic side, an important ingredient is a function of a complex variable, \"L\", the Hasse–Weil zeta function of \"E\" over Q. This function is a variant of the Riemann zeta function and Dirichlet L-functions. It is defined as an Euler product, with one factor for every prime number \"p\".\n\nFor a curve \"E\" over Q given by a minimal equation\n\nwith integral coefficients formula_20, reducing the coefficients modulo \"p\" defines an elliptic curve over the finite field F (except for a finite number of primes \"p\", where the reduced curve has a singularity and thus fails to be elliptic, in which case \"E\" is said to be of bad reduction at \"p\").\n\nThe zeta function of an elliptic curve over a finite field F is, in some sense, a generating function assembling the information of the number of points of \"E\" with values in the finite field extensions F of F. It is given by\n\nThe interior sum of the exponential resembles the development of the logarithm and, in fact, the so-defined zeta function is a rational function:\nwhere the 'trace of Frobenius' term formula_23 is defined to be the (negative of) the difference between the number of points on the elliptic curve formula_24 over formula_25 and the 'expected' number formula_26, viz.:\nThere are two points to note about this quantity. First, these formula_23 are not to be confused with the formula_20 in the definition of the curve formula_24 above: this is just an unfortunate clash of notation. Second, we may define the same quantities and functions over an arbitrary finite field of characteristic formula_31, with formula_32 replacing formula_31 everywhere.\n\nThe Hasse–Weil zeta function of \"E\" over Q is then defined by collecting this information together, for all primes \"p\". It is defined by\n\nwhere ε(\"p\") = 1 if \"E\" has good reduction at \"p\" and 0 otherwise (in which case \"a\" is defined differently from the method above: see Silverman (1986) below).\n\nThis product converges for Re(\"s\") > 3/2 only. Hasse's conjecture affirms that the \"L\"-function admits an analytic continuation to the whole complex plane and satisfies a functional equation relating, for any \"s\", \"L\"(\"E\", \"s\") to \"L\"(\"E\", 2 − \"s\"). In 1999 this was shown to be a consequence of the proof of the Shimura–Taniyama–Weil conjecture, which asserts that every elliptic curve over \"Q\" is a modular curve, which implies that its \"L\"-function is the \"L\"-function of a modular form whose analytic continuation is known.\n\nOne can therefore speak about the values of \"L\"(\"E\", \"s\") at any complex number \"s\". The Birch–Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture relates the arithmetic of the curve to the behavior of its \"L\"-function at \"s\" = 1. More precisely, it affirms that the order of the \"L\"-function at \"s\" = 1 equals the rank of \"E\" and predicts the leading term of the Laurent series of \"L\"(\"E\", \"s\") at that point in terms of several quantities attached to the elliptic curve.\n\nMuch like the Riemann hypothesis, this conjecture has multiple consequences, including the following two:\nBULLET::::- Let \"n\" be an odd square-free integer. Assuming the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, \"n\" is the area of a right triangle with rational side lengths (a congruent number) if and only if the number of triplets of integers (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") satisfying formula_35 is twice the number of triples satisfying formula_36. This statement, due to Tunnell, is related to the fact that \"n\" is a congruent number if and only if the elliptic curve formula_37 has a rational point of infinite order (thus, under the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, its \"L\"-function has a zero at 1). The interest in this statement is that the condition is easily verified.\nBULLET::::- In a different direction, certain analytic methods allow for an estimation of the order of zero in the center of the critical strip of families of \"L\"-functions. Admitting the BSD conjecture, these estimations correspond to information about the rank of families of elliptic curves in question. For example: assuming the generalized Riemann hypothesis and the BSD conjecture, the average rank of curves given by formula_38 is smaller than 2.\n\nThe modularity theorem, once known as the Taniyama–Shimura–Weil conjecture, states that every elliptic curve \"E\" over Q is a modular curve, that is to say, its Hasse–Weil zeta function is the \"L\"-function of a modular form of weight 2 and level \"N\", where \"N\" is the conductor of \"E\" (an integer divisible by the same prime numbers as the discriminant of \"E\", Δ(\"E\").) In other words, if, for Re(\"s\") > 3/2, one writes the \"L\"-function in the form\n\nthe expression\n\ndefines a parabolic modular newform of weight 2 and level \"N\". For prime numbers ℓ not dividing \"N\", the coefficient \"a\"(ℓ) of the form equals ℓ minus the number of solutions of the minimal equation of the curve modulo ℓ.\n\nFor example, to the elliptic curve formula_41 with discriminant (and conductor) 37, is associated the form\n\nFor prime numbers ℓ not equal to 37, one can verify the property about the coefficients. Thus, for ℓ = 3, there are 6 solutions of the equation modulo 3: (0, 0), (0, 1), (2, 0), (1, 0), (1, 1), (2, 1); thus \"a\"(3) = 3 − 6 = −3.\n\nThe conjecture, going back to the 1950s, was completely proven by 1999 using ideas of Andrew Wiles, who proved it in 1994 for a large family of elliptic curves.\n\nThere are several formulations of the conjecture. Showing that they are equivalent is difficult and was a main topic of number theory in the second half of the 20th century. The modularity of an elliptic curve \"E\" of conductor \"N\" can be expressed also by saying that there is a non-constant rational map defined over Q, from the modular curve \"X\"(\"N\") to \"E\". In particular, the points of \"E\" can be parametrized by modular functions.\n\nFor example, a modular parametrization of the curve formula_43 is given by\n\nwhere, as above, \"q\" = exp(2π\"iz\"). The functions \"x(z)\" and \"y(z)\" are modular of weight 0 and level 37; in other words they are meromorphic, defined on the upper half-plane Im(\"z\") > 0 and satisfy\n\nand likewise for \"y(z)\" for all integers \"a, b, c, d\" with \"ad\" − \"bc\" = 1 and 37\"c\".\n\nAnother formulation depends on the comparison of Galois representations attached on the one hand to elliptic curves, and on the other hand to modular forms. The latter formulation has been used in the proof the conjecture. Dealing with the level of the forms (and the connection to the conductor of the curve) is particularly delicate.\n\nThe most spectacular application of the conjecture is the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem (FLT). Suppose that for a prime \"p\" ≥ 5, the Fermat equation\n\nhas a solution with non-zero integers, hence a counter-example to FLT. Then as Yves Hellegouarch was the first to notice, the elliptic curve\n\nof discriminant\n\ncannot be modular. Thus, the proof of the Taniyama–Shimura–Weil conjecture for this family of elliptic curves (called Hellegouarch–Frey curves) implies FLT. The proof of the link between these two statements, based on an idea of Gerhard Frey (1985), is difficult and technical. It was established by Kenneth Ribet in 1987.\n\nThis section is concerned with points \"P\" = (\"x\", \"y\") of \"E\" such that \"x\" is an integer. The following theorem is due to C. L. Siegel: the set of points \"P\" = (\"x\", \"y\") of \"E\"(Q) such that \"x\" is an integer is finite. This theorem can be generalized to points whose \"x\" coordinate has a denominator divisible only by a fixed finite set of prime numbers.\n\nThe theorem can be formulated effectively. For example, if the Weierstrass equation of \"E\" has integer coefficients bounded by a constant \"H\", the coordinates (\"x\", \"y\") of a point of \"E\" with both \"x\" and \"y\" integer satisfy:\n\nThe Sato–Tate conjecture is a statement about how the error term formula_50 in Hasse's theorem varies with the different primes \"q\", if an elliptic curve E over Q is reduced modulo q. It was proven (for almost all such curves) in 2006 due to the results of Taylor, Harris and Shepherd-Barron, and says that the error terms are equidistributed.\n\nElliptic curves over finite fields are notably applied in cryptography and for the factorization of large integers. These algorithms often make use of the group structure on the points of \"E\". Algorithms that are applicable to general groups, for example the group of invertible elements in finite fields, F*, can thus be applied to the group of points on an elliptic curve. For example, the discrete logarithm is such an algorithm. The interest in this is that choosing an elliptic curve allows for more flexibility than choosing \"q\" (and thus the group of units in F). Also, the group structure of elliptic curves is generally more complicated.\nBULLET::::- Elliptic curve cryptography\n\nElliptic curves over finite fields are used in some cryptographic applications as well as for integer factorization. Typically, the general idea in these applications is that a known algorithm which makes use of certain finite groups is rewritten to use the groups of rational points of elliptic curves. For more see also:\nBULLET::::- Elliptic curve cryptography\nBULLET::::- Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman\nBULLET::::- Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm\nBULLET::::- EdDSA\nBULLET::::- Dual_EC_DRBG\nBULLET::::- Lenstra elliptic-curve factorization\nBULLET::::- Elliptic curve primality proving\nBULLET::::- Supersingular isogeny key exchange\n\nBULLET::::- Hessian curve\nBULLET::::- Edwards curve\nBULLET::::- Twisted curve\nBULLET::::- Twisted Hessian curve\nBULLET::::- Twisted Edwards curve\nBULLET::::- Doubling-oriented Doche–Icart–Kohel curve\nBULLET::::- Tripling-oriented Doche–Icart–Kohel curve\nBULLET::::- Jacobian curve\nBULLET::::- Montgomery curve\n\nBULLET::::- Riemann–Hurwitz formula\nBULLET::::- Nagell–Lutz theorem\nBULLET::::- Arithmetic dynamics\nBULLET::::- Elliptic surface\nBULLET::::- Comparison of computer algebra systems\nBULLET::::- j-line\nBULLET::::- Elliptic algebra\nBULLET::::- Complex multiplication\n\nSerge Lang, in the introduction to the book cited below, stated that \"It is possible to write endlessly on elliptic curves. (This is not a threat.)\" The following short list is thus at best a guide to the vast expository literature available on the theoretical, algorithmic, and cryptographic aspects of elliptic curves.\nBULLET::::- Chapter XXV\n\nBULLET::::- The Mathematical Atlas: 14H52 Elliptic Curves\nBULLET::::- The Arithmetic of elliptic curves from PlanetMath\nBULLET::::- , winner of the MAA writing prize the George Pólya Award\nBULLET::::- Matlab code for implicit function plotting – can be used to plot elliptic curves.\nBULLET::::- Interactive introduction to elliptic curves and elliptic curve cryptography with Sage by Maike Massierer and the CrypTool team\nBULLET::::- Geometric Elliptic Curve Model (Java applet drawing curves)\nBULLET::::- Interactive elliptic curve over R and over Zp – web application that requires HTML5 capable browser.\nBULLET::::- Comprehensive database of Elliptic Curves over Q\n"}
{"id": "10229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10229", "title": "Equidae", "text": "Equidae\n\nEquidae (sometimes known as the horse family) is the taxonomic family of horses and related animals, including the extant horses, donkeys, and zebras, and many other species known only from fossils. All extant species are in the genus \"Equus\". Equidae belongs to the order Perissodactyla, which includes the extant tapirs and rhinoceros, and several extinct families.\n\nThe term equid refers to any member of this family, including any equine.\n\nThe oldest known fossils assigned to Equidae date from the early Eocene, 54 million years ago. They used to be assigned to the genus \"Hyracotherium\", but the type species of that genus now is regarded to be not a member of this family. The other species have been split off into different genera. These early equids were fox-sized animals with three toes on the hind feet, and four on the front feet. They were herbivorous browsers on relatively soft plants, and already adapted for running. The complexity of their brains suggest that they already were alert and intelligent animals. Later species reduced the number of toes, and developed teeth more suited for grinding up grasses and other tough plant food.\n\nThe equids, like other perissodactyls, are hindgut fermenters. They have evolved specialized teeth that cut and shear tough plant matter to accommodate their fibrous diet. Their seemingly inefficient digestion strategy is a result of their size at the time of its evolution, as they would have already had to be relatively large mammals to be supported on such a strategy.\n\nThe family became relatively diverse during the Miocene, with many new species appearing. By this time, equids were more truly horse-like, having developed the typical body shape of the modern animals. Many of these species bore the main weight of their bodies on their central, third, toe, with the others becoming reduced, and barely touching the ground, if at all. The sole surviving genus, \"Equus\", had evolved by the early Pleistocene, and spread rapidly through the world.\n\nBULLET::::- Order Perissodactyla (In addition to Equidae, Perissodactyla includes four species of tapir in a single genus, as well as five living species (belonging to four genera) of rhinoceros.) † indicates extinct taxa.\nBULLET::::- Family Equidae\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Haringtonhippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Epihippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Haplohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Heptaconodon\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Eohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Minippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Orohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Pliolophus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Protorohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Sifrhippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Xenicohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Eurohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Propalaeotherium\"\nBULLET::::- Subfamily †Anchitheriinae\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Anchitherium\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Archaeohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Desmatippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Hypohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Kalobatippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Megahippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Mesohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Miohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Parahippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Sinohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Subfamily Equinae\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Merychippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Scaphohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Acritohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Tribe †Hipparionini\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Eurygnathohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Hipparion\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Hippotherium\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Nannippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Neohipparion\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Proboscidipparion\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Pseudhipparion\"\nBULLET::::- Tribe Equini\nBULLET::::- Subtribe Protohippina\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Calippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Protohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Astrohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Dinohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus \"Equus\" (22 species, 7 extant)\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Hippidion\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Onohippidium\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Pliohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Heteropliohippus\"\nBULLET::::- Genus †\"Parapliohippus\"\n"}
